To all that would know the Way to the KINGDOM, Whether they be in Forms,
with out Forms, or got above all Forms. A Direction to turn your minds
within, where the Voice of the true God is to be heard, whom you ignorantly
Worship as afar off, and to wait upon him for the true Wisdom. That you may
know Truth from Error, the Word from the Letter, the Power from Form, and the
true Prophets from the false.

Given forth by Geo. Fox.

A warning to all sorts of People who live in sin and uncleanness; For the
wicked must be turned into Hell, and all that forget God: And all who are
workers of iniquity are accursed from Christ; for says he, Go ye cursed, ye
workers of iniquity into utter darkness.
I Am the light of the world, and enlightens every one that comes into the
world: Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the world; thou that
loves that light, which Christ has enlightened thee withal, thou brings thy
works to the light, that thy deeds may be proved that they are wrought in God;
and he that walks in the light, there is no occasion of stumbling in him, it
teaches righteousness and holiness, it will keep thee from lying, and not let
thee lie, and keep thee in tenderness of conscience toward God and man, and
never let thee swear, it will check thee if thou do; the light will not let
thee take Gods name in vain, it will let thee see if thou do, thou must not
go unpunished; And will never let thee follow drunkenness, nor vain company,
for who lives in that nature, are without God, and shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God; therefore beware, this light will keep thee from Adultery and
Whoredom, for such will God judge; and the light will keep thee from theft,
quarrelling, and fighting, and abusing thy self with mankind, and envy, and
will keep thee in the fear of God, this light which is of God, and let thee see
all the works of the world, and draw thee out of the worships of the world, and
keep thee in the fear of God; where the true wisdom is made manifest, the pure
wisdom is made manifest to the pure, and put into the pure heart, and then thy
own wisdom thou will see with the light, arising out of the earthly part in
thee; which wisdom is sensual, and devilish, and earthly; for while there is
enviousnesse in thee, there lodges the man slayer, and all the wisdom is from
below, while that nature stands: there is Sects, and there is Opinions, amd
there is conceivings arises out of this earthly part, where lodges this
wisdom, and self-conceit, and pride, and by this wisdom the living God is not
known, and so all who dwells in this wisdom put the letter for the word, and
give meanings and expositions upon it, and so gathers together with the outward
letter, not having the power and life that gave it forth; so there is Castles
builded, and strong Holds, and fenced Cities and high Walls, as the Jews, who
had the outward form of that which was given forth from the power; the form
of the Prophets, and Moses, and David, and Abraham, who saw Christ, who lived
in the power; but the Pharisees and the Priests getting their words, knew not
Christ; so it is now with this Generation of the world; for you say, ye know
Christ; the Jews said, they were of Abraham, the same, so that had gotten the
letter, and others words which had the power, and all these are but imitations
and likenesses which are above, lifted up above the pure, and here lodges the
Serpent in this Earthly part; but as the eternal light which Christ has
enligtned you withal is loved, minded, and taken heed unto, this earthly part
is wrought out, the daily cross is taken up, the fear of the Lord grows, the
true wisdom increases, the errors of the wicked are discovered and made
manifest, the unjust comes to suffer, the just comes to reign, the wisdom of
the world comes to be confounded, then the Heathen begin to rage, then tumults
arise. And dwelling in the light, all Sects, and all Opinions, and Religions
are discovered, and stand naked before the Lord, and before all who are of God,
and seen with the eternal eye, which all arises out of the earthly part, and
the earth is but one, and all they do raise their ground from the letter, which
is given forth from the power. Now the power dwelling in it in the eternal
light, all Sects and Opinions come to be judged and overturned, and seen to be
chaff, and is for the fire to be burned with that which cannot be quenched, for
the light is but one, which is Christ, who enlightneth every one, and all are
enlightened with one light, every one taking heed to that light which Christ
has enlightened you withal; it leads you out of Sects, out of Form, out of
the beauty of the world, to live in life and power; and waiting in the light
which Christ has enlightened you withal, you come to be Disciples of Jesus
Christ, and servants to the truth, and not to serve the lusts, nor the desires,
nor pleasures, but the light it judges them, for serving the desires and the
lust, thou turns into the beastly nature into the world, and into the flesh,
and comes to be darkened and veiled, then thy throat is an open sepulcher, that
thou drinkest up iniquity as it were water; but dwelling in the light, it
judges all that, and all thy works, and actions come to be judged by that
light, and all walking in this light which Christ has enlightened you with, you
all walking in unity and oneness of mind, and say away all guile, sin, and
uncleanness, and all taught to fear the Lord God; and it will lead you to the
Church in God, from the Church in the world, and from your Teachers, to cease
from men, to be taught alone of God, who teaches eternal things eternally;
and leads the mind up out of external things; and dwelling in the light,
there is no occasion at all of stumbling, for all things are discovered with the
light; thou that loves it, here is thy teacher, when thou art walking abroad,
its present with thee in thy bosom, thou need not say, Lo here, or lo there,
and as thou lie in bed its present to teach thee, and judge thy wandering
mind which would wander abroad, and thy high thoughts and imaginations, and
makes them subject, for following thy thoughts thou art quickly lost; dwelling
in this light, it will discover to thee the body of sin, and thy corruptions,
and fallen Estate where thou art, and multitude of thoughts; in that light
which shows thee all this, stand: go neither to the right hand, nor to the
left; here is patience exercised, here is thy will subjected, here thou will see
the mercies of God made manifest in death: here thou will see the drinkings of
the Water of Shiloah, which run softly, and the promises of God fulfilled,
which are to the Seed, which Seed is Christ: here thou will find a Savior, and
the Election thou will come to know, and the Reprobation, and what is cast out
from God, and what enters: he that can own me here, and receive me into his
heart, the immortal seed is borne up, and thy own will thrust forth, for it is
not him that wills, nor him that runs, but the Election obtains it, and
God that shows mercy: for the first step of peace is to stand still in the
light, which discovers things contrary to it, for power and strength to stand
against that nature which the light discovers: here grace grows, here is God
alone glorified and exalted, and the unknown truth, unknown to the world, made
manifest, which draws up that which lies in the Prison, and refreshes it in
time, up to God out of time, through time. Whom God loves, he loves to the end,
where the eternal unity is, where is all Peace, all clean, no jarre, who are
all of one mind, hid from the worlds wisdom, knowledge, and comprehension,
and thoughts can never enter, as it is written, the World by wisdom knows not
God, and he is coming to comfound the wisdom of the wise. And the Church in
God, is not in imitation, gathered from the letter, and a high-flowne People in
their imaginations, but are them who are born again of the Immortal Seed, by
the Word of God, which lives and endures for ever, which the world knows not;
for the Word cuts asunder, hewes down all wickedness, corruption, pride, and
the honor of man, that all the honor and glory may be given alone to God; he
hewes down the first, that he may establish the second, and raise up the
second; and the Word of the Lord is a fire, burns up all the corruptions,
burns up all that it has hewn down, and as a hammer to beat down, that
nothing can stand it; and this is the word by which the Saints are borne again;
you are borne again by the immortal word, which lives and endures for ever,
and feeding upon the milk of the Word, which Word is God, which Word became
flesh, and dwelt among us; so he is the head of the Church, and they are lively
stones; but all you now, who put the letter of the word, and have gotten it in
your minds, and gather assemblies by it; this you cannot witness, and it is
blasphemy for you to say, the letter is not the Word, when the letter says,
God is the word; and it is a lie, to speak and say the Steeple-house is the
Church: or to say, them that are gathered by the Form of the letter, is the
Church of God: for the Church is the Pillar, and Ground of Truth, gathered by
the Eternal Power, before letter was; and all who are in this Church, as it is
called of the world, and live in the comprehension of the letter, and the
earthly part yet standing, there is devillishness in your minds, and
earthliness, and pride, and filth; and do but hearken to that in thy
conscience, and it will let thee see so: and while that is standing, such
sacrifice God accepts not; and praises, while the first nature is standing, God
accepts not, which is Cains, which God has no respect but to Abels: And God is
coming to judge the great Whore, all manner of Opinions, and all manner of
Sects and Fellowships, as you call them, and all manner of Forms, several, as
every one lives in, God is coming to overturn and overthrow, for they all
lodge in her; all the Foundation of them is in the Earth, and Earthly wisdom,
gathered in the Earthly nature, he will overturne them, that he may establish
his own truth, his own truth in righteousness, his own Kingdom. Now the
stone cut out of the mountain without hands, begins to strike at the Feet of
the Image, that the head of Gold begins to fall, and the breast of Silver, and
thighs of Brass, and Feet part Iron, and part Clay, and his Dominion is a
Dominion for ever, over all. And all who dwells not in this light which Christ
has enlightened you withal, you will be found too light, for he is coming to
weigh all things in his balance; and before him the Hills shall move, and the
mountains shall melt, and the rocks shall cleave, who measures the water in the
hollow of his hand, and his thunders begin to utter their Voices, that the
mysteries of God may be opened, and the carnal heart rent; great Earthquakes
shall be, the terrible day of the Lord draws need, the Beast shall be taken,
and the false Prophet, into the fire they must go, for the Beast and false
Prophet has gone together, that one has holden up the other. Now is the Lord
coming to sit as Judge, and reign as King, who is the Lawgiver which shall
go forth of Zion. Now shall Zion arise and thresh to beat the hills, and thresh
the mountains; now is the Sword drawn, which glitters, and is furbished, the
Sword of the Almighty, to hew down Baals Priests, corrupt Judges, corrupt
Justices, corrupt Lawyers, fruitless Trees which cumber the ground. Drunkard,
thou can not hide thy self; cursed speaker, thou can not hide thy self;
Whoremonger, thou can not hide thy self. Awake, awake all people every where
who live informs; see what ye possess: nothaving that eternal spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures, all your Formal Prayers, Formal Preaching, Formal
Singing will be found as the chafe, which is for the unquenchable fire; for
Christ is risen, the true light shines, the glory of the Lord appears, and you
are discovered to him, to be empty of that eternal spirit to be borne up in
your understandings, which gave forth the Scriptures, I am the light which
enl^ghtneth every one, that light you hate, and all who hate this light, set up
teachers without them; but all who loves this light, it is of God, and teaches
to God, which is a cross to all the world, and this light it is in every one,
waiting in it to receive Christ; and as many as receive Christ; to them he
gives power to become the sons of God, which are not born of the will of man,
nor by the will of man, but of the will of God; but these are them who are out
of immitations, and have no Images, nor no likeness of truth, but are in it,
and possess it; Glory, glory to the Lord God for ever, who governs his people,
and is the head of the Church; Christ is the head of the man, God is the head
of Christ; he that can receive this, if he had not known the letter, let him,
he is come before the letter was written. In the beginning was the Word.

To all you that hate the light, your deeds are evil: Christ says, He is the
light of the world, and enlightneth every one that comes into the world: The
one he loves the light, and brings his works to the light, and walks in it,
there is no occasion of stumbling in him: The other he hates the light, and
will not bring his works to the light to be made manifest, because his deeds
are evil, and the light will reprove him. Thou that says, this light is
natural, thou art a blasphemer; and thou that says, Christ does not enlighten
every one that comes into the world, thou art a liar, and denier of Christ's
words, and lies waste the Scripture; and thou that says this light is natural,
thou puts the letter for the light, which is natural, true it is darkness
cannot comprehend this light; but the light makes manifest darkness, and this
is the condemnation of the world, the light: thou that hate this light thou
have it. Christ says, Swear not at all, this light will say the same to thee,
in thee. Christ says, He that lusts after a Woman, commits adultery with
her in his heart: this light will tell thee the same, bringing thy works to it,
and loving it. Christ cried woe against the Pharisee, the hypocrite; this light
will let thee see the same. Christ will say, Go ye cursed workers of iniquity,
this light will say the same to thee, in thee, who art a worker of iniquity;
here shall thou be condemned with the light, and judged with the light, out of
thy own mouth; this light will let thee see all thy hard speeches, thy venomous
thoughts, thy evil intentions, and thy covetous desires which is Idolatry, and
all dissembling and deceit to be works of darkness, and let thee see that all
those things are evil; there thou have learned thy condemnation, there is thy
teacher, that would teach thee to know God, there is thy condemnation hating
that light, it will condemn thee from him: Thou will say, thou know in thy
conscience that drunkenness is sin, here thou love darkness rather than the
light that shows it thee, and lying, and swearing, and cursed speaking is
sin, and yet thou followest it, and pleasures, there thou love darkness,
rather than the light that shows thee them, because thy deeds are evil, and
there thou have learned thy condemnation, when Gods righteousness shall be
revealed in flames of fire, thou shall witness I speak truth. Thou know
theft is sin, and all unrighteousness God forbids, thou will see something in
thy conscience tells thee so; if thou hearken to that it will exercise thy
conscience, and bring thee to repentance. Christ says, I call sinners to
repentance, that in thee calls thee to repentance, and if thou hearkenest to
that, thou hearkens to Christ, and if thou hate that, thou hates Christ, and
God, then thou turns into the sorcery, into all uncleanness, and then God is
not in thy thoughts, and then thou art the disobedient one, which disobeys the
light, which God has enlightened thee with, and there the wrath of God abides
on thee, and the Prince of the Air rules in thee, as he does in all the
children of disobedience, who hates this light. Now do not think that I hold
free will here, man's free will speak of that which is contrary to man's will,
and loving the light it will keep your wills from running, and your wills from
willing any thing, and keeps it in subjection; but thou that hates this light,
and makes a profession of God and Christ, and says, the letter is the word,
and the four Books Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, is the Gospel, thou know
not Christ, which is glad tidings, the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of
the world; for the letter takes not away sin; and thou that say, thou had not
come to repentance, if thou had not known letter, thou deniest Christ, who
comes to call sinners to repentance before letter was, but it is he that calls
to repentance sinners, and not the letter; but the letter is a declaration of
the word, the husks, God is the word; and it is a declaration of the light,
Christ is the light, and a declaration of the Spirit; but the spirit is not in
it a declaration of power, but the power is not in it; the power, and the life,
and the light, was in them that spoke it forth, which ever the world hated;
therefore waiting in the light which Christ has enlightened you with, that is
Scripture within you, and that will open the Scriptures according as you grow
in the light, the Saints conditions, as you are sanctified, and as you are
cleansed and made free with the Son of God, for it is he that makes free; who
are made free from sin, from the world are made free by the Son of God; and
blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has raised him from the
dead, and by him raised up from the dead.

And to you that tempt God, and say, the Lord give us a sight of our sins,
Priests and People, does not the light which Christ has enlightened you with,
let you see your sin, that lying and swearing, cursed speaking, theft and
murder, and whoredom, and covetousness, and pride, and lust, and pleasures, all
these to be the works of the flesh, and fruits of darkness: this light within
you lets you see it, so you need not tempt God to give you a sight of your
sins, for ye know enough, and waiting in the light, power and strength will be
given to you; for they that wait upon the Lord their strength, shall be
renewed, and living in the light, and walking up to God, it will bring you to
true hunger and thirst after righteousness, that you may receive the blessing
from God, and give over tempting of God, to give you a sight of your sins. And
to all ye that say, God give us grace, and we shall refrain from our sin, there
ye have got a tempting customary word, for the free grace of God has appeared
to all men, and this is the grace of God which shows thee ungodliness and
worldly lusts: Now thou that live in ungodliness, lying, and swearing, and
theft, end murder, and drunkenness, and filthy pleasures and lusting after the
world, thou art he that turns the free grace of God into wantonness, and casts
his law behind thy back, and walk despightfully against the spirit of grace;
here the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, oh vain man, yet thou can say, God
is merciful; he is merciful and just, and that shall thou see, when destruction
comes upon thee; for thou can say God is merciful, yet lives in thy
wickedness, passing on thy time without fear of God, sporting thy self in thy
wickedness. Oh ye covetous proud Priests, which deceives the Nations, who mind
earthly things, whose God is your belly, who glory in your shame, enemies of
the Cross of Christ, your destruction is coming, that ye shall not make a prey
upon the people any longer, the Lord has spoken it.

Oh ye great men, and rich men of the earth, weep and howl for your misery is
coming, who heaps up treasures for the last day; your gold and silver shall
eat you up as the rust and the canker; the fire is kindled, the day of the Lord
is appearing, a day of howling will be amongst your Fat Bulls of Bashan, that
all the tall Cedars and strong Oaks must be hewn down, and all the loftiness
of men must be laid low, then shall the Lord alone be exalted.

The free grace of God is the Saints teacher, which teaches them to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live righteously and godly, like God, in this
evil present world, denying all the worlds lusts, and worlds ways, and worlds
teachers, and works of darkness, which grace is turned into wantonness, by
those who follow the course of the world; and the works of darkness,
drunkenness and uncleanness, and such are they who cannot abide sound doctrine,
which heap up teachers, having itching ears. And all who turn this grace of God
into wantonness, deny it to teach them, and they live in their worldly lusts
and ungodliness. Oh how does the Land mourn because of Oaths? Oaths are heard
in the streets openly belched forth. Oh how does the pride and haughtiness of
Men and Women abound, scarce know how to walk in the streets? Oh how does
oppression and tyranny rule, that the cries of the poor are entered into the
Ear of the Lord of Sabboths? Oh how does drunkenness and drunkards walk abroad
in the streets, which devours the creatures? The Lord is rising, and surely he
will be avenged of all his Adversaries: he is come to sweep the Land of evil
doers, that the earth shall yield her increase, and the Land enjoy her
Sabbaths: and he will sit as Judge, and righteousness shall run down our
streets, and God alone be magnified and glorified, to whom it alone belongs for
ever. Oh how does all the creation groan under this bondage of corruption? the
Lord is pouring out his spirit upon all flesh, that his sons and daughters may
prophecy up and down this great City, and none shall make them afraid, crying
for justice, crying for righteousness, crying for equity: for the cry of the
great whore is come up before the Lord, who is adulterated from the truth, they
who hate this light, hate Christ, which is the Husband, and goes from him: they
who love the light, have the Husband, which is Christ: but the judgment of the
great Whore is come, who made all Nations to drink of the Cup of her
Fornication, who must drink of the cup of the indignation of the wrath of God
powered out without mixture, who must have it filled double. Rejoice, rejoice
all ye Prophets and holy men of God, triumph in glory: sing aloud praises to
the Lord God Almighty and omnipotent, who is come to reign: rejoice over the
world, over the false Prophets, over the Beast, over the Whore, which is
adulterated from the light, and tells al her lovers that the light is natural,
and so denies the husband Christ Jesus, and lives in Fornication: but all who
loves the light, and walks in the light, witness Jesus Christ to be the
Husband, and this light to be spiritual. Now she is convinced of her Adultery,
of her witchcraft, of her sorcery, and that which does convince her is the
light which Christ has enlightened her with, and this is her condemnation. And
now the judgment of the great Whore is come, God will be avenged on her, who
has drunk the blood of all his Saints, who dwelt in the light, and loved the
light.

All who hate this light, they set up to be their light, such as are called of
men Masters, have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, stand making long
Prayers, lay heavy burdens upon the people, which devour widows houses, the
widow has not a husband, all are widows who are devoured of such; but who loves
the light which Christ has enlightened them with, it joins them to Christ, and
then they witness him to be their Husband, and such are not devoured of them.
And who hate this light, hold up them who bear rule by their means, which
Jeremy, who dwelt in the light, was sent to cry out against. And they that hate
the light, hold up them that cry for their gain from their quarter, and never
have enough; which Isaiah who dwelt in the light, was sent to cry out against.
And they that hate the light, go after the error of Balaam, and hold up such
who love the wages of unrighteousness; and all who hate this light have the
spirit of error; and they that dwell in the light, know the spirit of error,
and what the spirit of error follows. And all who hate this light, hold up the
hirelings that Micha cried against, and such as call for the Fleece, and cloth
themselves with the wool, that Ezeki^l cried against, who was in the light and
full of the spirit. Now where the same light is made manifest, as was in the
Prophets which saw Christ the light; and the Apostles in the same light, which
gave forth the Scripture, all the Scripture is witnessed; and here we are
grounded upon the Prophets, upon the Apostles, and Christ the corner stone, in
the eternal light, by which we see the Priests bear rule by their means now,
and seek for their gain from their quarter now, and are greedy dumb dogs now,
nay, worse than Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, but durst not
take it; but these sue men at the Law for it: worse than Simon Magus, who would
have bought the spirit; but these sell the letter: this corrupt doctrine has
long reigned, but now is made manifest, and in this light we see the hirelings
that Preach peace, but he that puts not in their mouths, they prepare war
against him, and by which light, we see teachers who profess they are sent of
Christ to be in the seat of the Scribes and Pharisees, and are called of men
Masters, and have the chiefest places, going in their long robes, love
salutation in the Markets, have the uppermost seats at Feasts, and under
pretense making long Prayers, devouring widows houses, which Christ cried woe
against, and such we cannot own as sent of Christ, nor hold up, for if we
should, we should deny the Scriptures, and hold up that which Christ forbids;
and if we should hold up them who rule by their means, we should deny Jeremiah
to be a true Prophet, who cried against such; and if we should hold up such as
cry for gain from their quarter, we should deny Isaiah, who was sent to cry
against such: and if we should hold up such as go for gifts and rewards, who
love the wages of unrighteousness, we should deny the Apostle, who cried
against such; for the same light is manifest, praised be the Lord God, by which
they are seen, and cannot be owned, but must be denied, as they were by the
Prophets, by Christ, by the Hpostles; and if we should hold up such that say,
Revelations are ceased, we should deny the Son, as they do, for none knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, and so we deny those to
know any thing of Christ, or to be sent of Christ, which deny the Son, and deny
revelations; for the Apostle, which was a Minister of God, he was not a
Minister of Christ, till the Son was revealed in him, and then he Preached him,
and Preached the Kingdom of God, so all who deny Revelations, deny the Son and
the Father both, and live in their imaginations of the letter: And the Apostle
exhorts the Saints to have the loins of their minds girded up, and hope to the
end, for the grace that was to be brought to them at the revelation of Jesus
Christ; now he was a Minister, and did exhort to wait for the revelation of
Jesus Christ: but now, thou that denies revelations, do declare thy self
openly to be no Minister, and raceth thy sdlf out from among the Ministers of
Christ, and thou go in the ways of Cain, thou art raced out from Abel, for
in thy heart lodges persecution, and thy mouth utters it, and thy hand acts
it. And you that speak a Divination of your own heart, art raced out from them
who speak from the mouth of the Lord, for the Prophets of the Lord cried out
ever against such, and so they do now: and ye that seek for gain from your
quarter, are they that are raced out from the true Prophets of God; they cried
out against you, and the same light cries out against you now, otherwise the
Prophets should be made of none effect, for they spoke forth freely, and so
they do now that speak forth the same light; the light is free which has
enlightened every one that coms into the world; thou that hates it, has learned
thy condemnation; it lets thee see all the evil deeds of thy heart. And the
Gospel is free to every creature, not to be bought and sold for money: Oh
shameless men, that tell people the letter is the word, and buy and sell it for
money, which is but a declaration of the word, and the grace is free, which
has appeared to all men, which is the Saints teacher, and you need not have
any teacher if you own the grace, which shows your ungodliness and worldly
lusts: this grace will teach you to deny it, and the light which has
enlightened every one that comes into the world, there is every one of your
condemations in particular that hates it; and there is every one of your
teachers that loves it, which is but one, and will open all the Figures and the
Parables, and Types to you: and waiting in it, it will guide you to God, there
is your teacher, there is your condemnation: every one of you shall eternally
witness me, to that which exercises your consciences do I speak, for now the
mighty day of the Lord is coming, meet him, by putting off your works of
darkness. God that made the world, and all things in it, dwells not in Temples
made with hands, neither will be worshipped with men's inventions: but Israel,
when he had forgotten his Maker, builded Temples; and Judah builded fenced
Cities: but the Lord will send a fire to devour them, and all your Songs shall
be turned into Mourning, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Oh then, all ye
that profess, see that you possess, and profess no more than you are.

G. F.

FINIS.

