A WARNING TO THE WORLD That are groping in the dark, after SECTS, OPINIONS,
AND NOTIONS, Which are all with the Light condemned; And by the CHILDREN OF
LIGHT Declared against.

By G: Fox.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1655.

A WARNING TO THE WORLD, That are groping in the dark after Sects, Opinions
and Notions, etc.
THem which the World, who are without the fear of God, calls Quakers in scorn,
do deny all Opinions, and they do deny all Conceivings, and they do deny all
Sects, and they do deny all Imaginations, and Notions, and Judgments, which
rises out of the will and the thoughts; and do deny Witchcraft, and all Oaths,
and the World, and the Works of it, and their Worships, and their Customs, with
the Light; and do deny false ways, and false Worships, Seducers and Deceivers,
which are now seen to be in the World with the Light; and with it they are
condemned, which light leads to Peace and Life, from death, which now
thousands do witness the one Teacher Christ, him by whom the world was made,
who raigns among the Children of Light, and with the Spirit and Power of the
living God, does let them see and know the chaff from the wheat, and does see
that which must be shaken, with that which cannot be shaken nor moved, which
gives to see that which is shaken and moved, such as live in the Notions,
Opinions, Conceivings, and thoughts, and fancies; these be all shaken, and
comes to be on heaps, which they who witness those things before mentioned
shaken and removed, walks in peace, not seen and discerned by them, who walks
in those things unremoved and not shaken.

And all ye who are not born of the Spirit, and have it not that gave forth the
Scriptures: You are they that are wrangling about the Saints words given forth
from the life, and are found in the fall from the Image of God, in the Spirit
and Nature that they was in, that murdered the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles that gave forth the Scriptures, which could not receive their words
but put them to death, which now ye children of your Fathers are wrangling
about, and jangling about the words that was declared from them which your
Fathers killed, and cannot hear their words now as your Fathers could not, but
are persecuting their Spirit which gave forth these words, and now their
children have built great houses, which is garnished with Pictures and Images,
and calls your houses by the name of St. Peter, or Paul, or Christ; whereas
Christ and the Apostles was haled out of the Synagogues and Temples, and was
beat and killed for witnessing the substance against all Idolatry, and Temples,
and Synagogues, and the changeable Priesthood; which now you are making Priests
by your wills in your great houses, and gives the name of Christ, Peter, or
Paul, where they teach, whereas Peter, and Paul, and Christ, suffered in such
places: So here is a killing the Men, the Apostles, and Christ, and thou sets
up a house of Wood and Stone, and gives it the Name of Peter and Paul; and
where any comes to witness Paul's life, and Peter, or Christ's life; yea, their
children hales them out and persecutes them, and so fulfils Christ's words, who
said, You shall scourge in your Synagogues: Christ the same to day, yesterday,
and for ever, and ye are doing the works of your Fathers, following them in
their paths and steps, in Cains Generation, against them that walks in the
steps of Christ, which ever was ungodly, going from the command of God; having
no habitation in the Lord, but Fugitives and Vagabonds, of old ordained for
condemnation, with the light in which the Saints do walk; and see Cains mark by
which he is known.

O England, and the Islands, and such as be about thee, whose Judges judges
for rewards, and Priests preach for hire, and Prophets prophecy for money, and
whose Divines divine for money, and yet you lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not
the Lord among you: and for this cause is England on heaps, as Jerusalem
became, and is as a field that must be plowed up, and their high places as a
Forest, under Micahs prophecy are you come, who said, Such built up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity; and so does these, and said, In the last
days that the Lords house should be established upon the top of the mountains,
and exalted above the hills, and many Nations should say, Come let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; The law shall go forth of Sion,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and he shall judge among his People;
now such as are in the Prophets light and life, do not follow such Divines as
divine for money, nor Prophets which preaches for hire, and Judges that
judges for reward; for those, their minds are from the Light and Power, such
becomes to be on heaps who be in the earth, and it loves; covetuousness is not
hated, and there is the Spirit of Murder from the Light; such slew Christ,
such builders build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity; with the
light all such are condemned which comes from Christ, and leads to him the
chief Corner Stone, the way to God the Father of life, where life and peace is
received.

Away with all your rudiments, away with all your formal Prayers, which are
contrary to the Light, which are of the wicked, abomination to God; away with
all your Will Worship, away with all your fained humility, away with all your
customary Preaching and trading with the Scriptures, which bring it and wrest
it for your own ends: away with all the Traditions of men, and not after God;
away with all your brain-study, and vain Divinations of your own heart and vain
Philosophy; away with all your singing David's Prayers, Prophecies, Fastings,
and roaring in Meeter, which conditions were not given forth for that end; away
with all your Pride, and cloaks of Profession and Religion, which are not what
you profess; away with all your inventions and lusts, for who are proud God
beholds afar off; and away with all your Imaginations, Conceivings and
Opinions, the Lord God is coming to scatter them; and away with all your
outside Churches which are not in God; and away with all your hirelings which
preach for hire, and your Divines that divine for money; which brings the
nation to be in heaps; away with all such Wolves, which cloth themselves with
the Sheeps clothing; and away with all such Priests that bear rule by their
means, which hold up the horrible filthy thing committed in the Land, which
blind the people; and away with all such Sheapherds which seek for their gain
from their Quarter, which are greedy, and have never enough; and away with all
such that make a prey upon the people, seeking for the Fleece and devouring
them; and away with all such that preach peace to people, but if they do not
put into their mouths, they prepare war against them; and away with all such
that paint themselves with the Saints words, and are as whited Walls, Serpents,
Graves, Sepulchers, stand praying in the Synagogues, called of men Master,
under pretense make long prayers, and devour widows houses, which Christ cried
woe against, Matthew. 23. and away with all such as scourges scourges in the
Synagogues, and hale out of the Synagogues, these are not in the life of the
Gospel, nor Christ, nor the life that gave forth the Scriptures: and away with
all such as go in Cains way, envying and murdering the righteous, persecuting
who be in the faith; and away with all that go in Balaams way for gifts and
rewards, the wages of unrighteousness, and gainsay the truth as Core did; and
away with all such that lead silly women captive, which be always following of
them, and of learning them, but never come up to the knowledge of the truth,
from such turn away; and away with all such that tell you, sprinkling Infants
is the Baptism, when there is no such Scripture, and of the Sacraments, when
there is no such Scripture; and away with all such as told you, and tell you,
the letter is the Light, and the letter is the Word, and has given it the name
of Christ who is the Light, and whose name is called the word of God; and away
with all such that take Tithes from poor people, and get treble damages if they
will not pay them, which did not the Apostles nor Ministers of God which gave
forth Scripture, which they profess, neither did the Prophets of God go in
Cains way, neither were they hirelings, neither did they bear rule by their
means, nor seek for their gain from their Quarter, nor make a prey upon people,
nor seek for their fleece; and they that did not put into their mouths, they
did not prepare war against them: neither did the Apostles go in Balaams way,
receiving the wages of unrighteousness, and Core's way; and they did not tell
the people, sprinkling water on the Childrens face did Baptize them into the
Faith, and into the Church: Therefore the Doctrines of men touch them not, away
with them, the Commandments of men and Ordinances of men will perish with the
using of them. The Prophets and Apostles had not 100 l. a year, and great set
maintenance or Augmentations; away with all these that mind earthly things,
that make the Gospel chargeable.

And all people fear God, and give glory to him, and worship the living God
which made Heaven and Earth; and away with all such who call Oxford and
Cambridge two Fountains, and so keep you from God who is the Fountain of Mercy,
to trust in those Trees that cumbreth the ground, which are old and rotten, and
houses of darkness and of bondage; in Cains way and in Balaams way, breeding up
Tradesmen of that which was not given forth to make a Trade of, but to be read,
and believed, and fulfilled, and practiced. You Plants of the Lord God, which
know the Springs of life, who to God the Fountain are come, in the life dwell
that gave forth Scriptures, which was before it was given forth, which from it
was given forth, which you will come to see, which brings to worship God the
Father of Spirits; here is your joy and peace.

FINIS.

