A Word From the Lord, TO ALL THE WORLD, AND ALL PROFESSORS IN THE WORLD;
Spoken in PARABLES: Wherein all may come to read themselves through the
PARABLES, and see where they are; Also a word to all Professors, who cast the
pure Law of God behind their backs, and turn the grace of God into wantonness,
and despise the day of their visitation; with a dreadful voice to all the
children of darkness, who hate and deny the light; that all may come to see
themselves, and repent, before the fierce wrath of the Lord, which is kindled
in England, sweep you all away: by them who are redeemed out of the curse, to
serve the living, called QVAKERS.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1654.

A WORD FROM THE LORD, TO ALL THE WORLD.
MAN being drove into the earth, out of paradise, and death having passed over
all men, the flaming sword turns every way to keep the tree of life, death
having passed over all men; death reigned from Adam till Moses: and as there is
death within, so death speaks, and as Christ has given to every one of you a
measure according to your ability, and this measure is the light; yet one, he
loves the light, and the other, he hates the light, and this is the
condemnation; he that loves the light, and brings his deeds to the light, there
is no occasion at all of stumbling; this is the light that gave forth the
Scripture; according as thou art grown up in it, thou will read them again; and
this light, thou that hate it, thou stumblest, because thy deeds are evil;
thou will not bring thy deeds to the light, least it should reprove them: thou
know thy deeds are evil, this light shows thee, there thou have learned thy
condemnation; thou know thou should not lie, be drunk, and that thou
should not steal, nor commit adultery* this light will tell thee all this,
and it will condemn thee, and reprove thee; if thou love it, and bring thy
works to it: but thy deeds being evil, and know it will reprove thee*
therefore thou hate it, and will not bring thy* deeds to it, therefore this
is thy^ condemnation; here thou have learned it, when the righteousness of God
is revealed through flames of fire upon thee, then thou shall see it is true;
thou know thou should not be proud, delight in fashions, and customs, and
follow the world; this light will show thee, and let thee see all that is
vanity, and bring thee sometime to confess it; and yet thy heart being hardened,
and the deceit strong, thou rejects and hates that which calls thee to
repentance, which lies low in thee, and continually calling thee to forsake thy
lovers: it tells thee thou should not lust, nor covet, nor thieve; it tells
thee there is danger to all you thieves, and lustful ones, and covetous ones;
it speaks to you, and I tell you there will be your condemnation; when the book
of conscience is opened, in your own mouths ye shall be judged, therefore take
warning: when the vengeance of God falls upon you, then you will say, you had
time once, when it is past, and the plagues of God are poured upon you, who
hate to be reformed with that in your conscience; when God calls you
continually to repentance, ye hear not his voice, but trust in your own fancies
and dreams, and lying divinations, and so hate the light, for if you love it,
it would bring you to repentance, and the fear of the Lord; and the fear of the
Lord is to depart from all sin and wickedness, and all evil, and all respecting
of persons, for thou that do, respects not Gods Law, which forbids it; for he
that does respect persons, transgresses the Law, and is convinced as a
transgressor, and commits sin; thou that do not own this light, which is
according to the Law of God, which respects no man's person, that in thy
conscience, if you love it and hearken to it, it will exalt God alone; ye proud
ones at this may stumble, but to that in your consciences, which should
exercise it, I speak, and this light will bring you to walk in the commands of
Christ; Christ Jesus says, In all your communications, let your yea be yea,
and your nay be nay, for whatsoever is more, is evil, and swear not at all, for
that was in the old time the swearing; now thou that do not abide in the
doctrine of Christ, art of the devil, swear not by the head, nor by Jerusalem,
nor by the earth, nor by heaven: These are great noted things; I say, swear not
by the Bible, which is a great noted thing, which you swear by now; if the
Lords oath be performed, which he swear by himself, then all oaths are put an
end to; if the high Priest Jesus Christ be owned, then all the Priests are put
an end to, which were true types and figures of him; for he that holds up
Priests which receive tithes according to the Law, and now does deny Jesus
Christ come in the flesh, and who loves the light that he has given them,
witnesses Jesus Christ come in the flesh, but those are they which deny all the
Priests: that receive tithes: for the receiving tithes was in old time, though
Abraham paid tithes to Melchizedeck, who was a figure; when Jesus Christ the
everlasting Priest was come, he put an end to all figures, and they and thou
that holdst up the figures, denyest Christ come in the flesh. There was a
Temple which God commanded; when Christ was come and risen, all outward Temples
were denied; and we witness one Priest, which is over the household of God, ten
thousand witness one Priest, which is entered into the holiest, and all the
Priests and his hirelings are denied; and all such as go after covetousness, to
make gain of the people, are denied, and all such as bear rule by their means,
and seek for their gain from their quarters, are denied; and all such as are
called of men Masters, and have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, are
denied; such then, who have one Master Jesus Christ, to whom all power is given
in heaven and earth, who masters over all, and has conquered all, subdued all,
raigns over all heaven and earth, Judge over all heaven and earth, and the
mighty day of the Lord is coming; God that made the world, dwells not in Temples
made with hands, neither is he worshipped with the works of men's hands: Seeing
he is Lord of all, has given to all birth and life, made of all Nations man of
one mould, to dwell upon the face of the earth; and is coming to fill his with
the knowledge of himself; to all you that are unlearned outwardly, of the
letter, that cannot read the Scripture outwardly; to you I have a word from the
Lord to speak; which is, Christ says, I have given to every one a measure,
according to their abilicy; this is the measure, the light which is pure, which
does convince thee, and if thou do take heed to this light, that is Scripture
within thee; as a man should give, or a King should give to his Subjects, or to
them that are under him, every one a measure of the outward; so Jesus Christ
the King, gives every one a measure of the inward, according to their ability;
as the King does outwardly according to their ability, and so that is a figure
to thee, and if thou waitest in this measure, and approve thy measure, and be
faithful in thy measure to God who has given it thee, then thou come to be a
servant to the King Jesus Christ; as the servant outwardly does improve his
outward measure, and serve the King outwardly, so thou come to improve thy
inward, that is a figure to thee; so figures are spoken to the carnal part in
man, and as the light opens and exercises thy conscience, it will open to thee
parables and figures, and it will let thee see invisible things, which are
clearly seen by that which is invisible in thee, which are clearly seen since
the creation of the world, that does declare the eternal power and Godhead;
that which is invisible is the light with in thee, which he who is invisible
has given thee a measure, that will let thee see thy heart to be stony, and as
stones without thee of the like nature; and the highway ground without thee,
so thy heart is highway ground; and as thorny ground without thee, and thy
heart is as thorny ground; and as thou walk up and down, it will let thee
see the rough way without thee, and rough way within thee; and as thy and walks
in the way, full of briars and thorns without thee, so crooked ways within
thee, it will let se^; as there is briars without thee, so there is briars
within thee; and as serpents without thee, so the nature of serpents within
thee; as vipers without thee, so nature of vipers within thee, and all this
lodges upon the earth; the earth without thee, so the earth within thee; as
Lions without thee, so the nature of Lions within thee; trees without thee, so
thou art the nature of a tree, which rises out of the earth; as trees grow out
of the earth without thee, trees within thee; as forests without thee, so the
wilderness in thy heart; these things does the Scripture speak of: who had the
light spoke forth these Parables, to that nature in men and women, this light
lets thee see, who hates the light, as fat Bulls without thee, feeding the
flesh: thou art as a fat Bull, who feeds the flesh; as there is Dogs and Swine
without thee, thou art a Dog that bites, and devours, and barks, there is thy
figure that barks; as Swine without thee, thou art a as Swine wallowing in the
mire; and as a house without thee, thou art the house, and foul house without
thee, thou art the house; as a candle lighted up in the house without thee, the
candle is lighted up in thy heart, which is the spirit of the Lord, and thou will see the house foul, there is thy figure; as tall Cedars without thee, thou will see thy self a tall Cedat, who lives without the truth, spreading thy
self; and as strong Oaks without thee, thou in thy strength wilt see thy self
as a strong Oak, who art full of earth, and live in thy power and dignity;
and as horses without thee, thou who live in earth and filth, and lust, thou
art as a horse neighing up and down, this light will let thee see; as Asses
without thee, snuffing up their noses upon the mountains, thou that art lifted
up in thy high-mindedness, and full of pride and wildness, thou will see thy
self to be as a wild Ass; and as the grass without thee, which is green for a
while, thou will see thy self to be as the grass that grows upon the earth,
which is green for a while, but is suddenly cut down; the light within thee
will let thee see these things; and as cutting down without thee with a sickle,
and with a sickle so cutting down thee; reaping thee down as reaping without
thee, so reaping thee down, hewing down the wicked: Here thou must learn thy
^gure, who art reaping and mowing, as thou art walking in the field, thou may
read Scripture; as flowers are beautiful for a time, so thou that art famous,
thou that art beautiful in thy glory, so thou art as fading flowers, there thou
may learn thy figure; this light will let thee see the good ground without
thee, so are they who are the good heart; plowing up without thee, so plowing
up the fallow ground within thee; as thou hear the thunder without thee, so
must thou hear the thunder within thee; the voice without thee, so the voice
within thee; these are figures: as the earthquake without thee, so earthquake
within thee; and as mountains without thee, so mountains within thee; as
hailstones without thee, so hailstones within thee; as wolves without thee,
so the nature of wolves within thee; here thou can go no way but thou may
read thy figure? as beasts without thee, so thou art the nature of bruit
beasts, that turns from the light of God in thee; as the canker without thee
eating, so the canker within; as the Sea without thee, so the wicked are as the
Sea, the like nature of the Sea within thee; as foaming without thee, so
foaming within; as harvest without thee, so harvest within, who come to see
with the invisible eye, all they that mind the light shall see another harvest;
as there is many sowing the seed without, that lies under the clods, so shall
you see the seed that lies under the clods in thee; and as the summer without
thee, so are che children of God brought into the summer, where there is joy
and peace, and are brought out of the world; and as singing of birds without
thee, so are they that are brought out of thee; the world it is a figure to
them: as a turtle dove without thee, that is a figure who comes to this joyful
Land; as doves without thee, nature of doves within; as Lambs without thee, the
nature of Lambs within; as sheep without thee, so the nature of sheep within;
and as goats without thee, so nature of goats within; now the light of God gave
forth all these figures, like unto that nature in man, what the Saints should
enjoy; and this light will let thee see, as there are fowls without thee who
have nests, so thou who art flown above the truth, art as a fowl that has a
Nest, the nature of Fouls within: and as there are Dragons that devour without
thee, so there are the nature of Dragons that devour the righteous, and Acts
contrary to that pure Principle in thy Conscience; And as a Bed in sorrow
without thee, so thou must be brought that art harloted from the Truth, into
the Bed of sorrow: And as there is a widow without thee which has not an
husband, so thou art a widow who has not Jesus Christ, who follow such
Priests as are called of men Masters; As a Garden without thee, and dressing it
without, so is Christ and his Spouse the Saints: As there is a weeding without
thee, so the weeding of the weeds are in the heart: Thistles without thee, the
nature of Thistles* within thee; Sower Grapes without thee, thou that art
turned from the Truth, have the nature of sower Grapes in thee: As thou see
the wild Grapes without thee, which set the childrens teeth an edge without
thee, so they set their teeth an edge, who are growing in the truth, and take
of that which Acts contrary to the light, and the light will let ye see: as the
night without thee and darkness, so there is night within: and as Stars without
thee, so there are Stars within thee: as Moon without thee, so there is Moon
within thee: and as Clouds without thee, so there are Clouds within thee. These
are all Earthly Figures; And as the Sun without thee, so the Sun of
Righteousness arising with healing in his wings within thee. All who mind the
measure which God has given you, it will open unto you these earthly Figures
unto that nature in you which God spoke, and will teach you; as you go up and
down you shall read your Figures: as covering without you, so there is covering
within, Woe to him that is covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord: and as
a Fire and an Oven without thee, and as Stubble without thee, All you Proud,
and all you Wicked are as stubble to be consumed in the fire, as fire does the
stubble; Now this light will show you these Figures: Here you may read
Scriptures thou that love the light; thou that hate this light can not
see these Figures. But it is the invisible that opens these, that gave them
forth; And here thou that art unlearned in the Letter, may read the
Scripture, and as the secret Chambers without thee, hearken to the light within
thee; and it will let thee see the secret places, where the retired place, the
secret Chambers are; and as a Prison without thee, so there is a Prison within,
where the seed of God lies; And as there is Threshing without thee, it will let
thee see Threshing within thee; Chafe without thee, the Chafe within; Wheat
without thee, so there is Wheat within: This light of God which gave forth the
Scripture, this light of God according to its measure will open the Scripture
to thee; For man being drove into the earth, and the earth being above the
seed; So as the earth without thee, so the earth within thee; The Lord speaking
low things, Comparisons like to that nature in man; that man may look upon the
Creation with that which is Invisible, and there read himself; there thou may
see wherever thou go. And to all you the word of the Lord, that has
learned the Letter of the Scripture, your Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, Who hate
the light within you, and say every one has not the light; To you shall I open
my mouth in some Parables. Ye are the painted walls, as ye see the painted
walls without you, so your painted walls, there is your Figure: and as you see
men stumble without you, which are blind: So do you which say that every one
has not the light, and that every one is not enlightened: For ye stumble at the
eye which should let you see, and your mouth is the mouth of the false Prophet,
which the Scripture speaks of: The true Prophet, says he, enlightened every one
that comes into the world; and there was but two, and there is but two; and
them that says he does not enlighten every one that comes into the world, and
he says he does enlighten every one that comes into the world; thou art the
false Prophet, and go about to make Christ a liar, who is the true Prophet:
Ye are the hypocrites who are hipt above the truth, and your fair faces; and ye
are the thieves which steal your neighbors words, and ye are filthy dreamers:
Which says, Christ has not enlightened every one that cominto the world, they
speak a lie, the definition of their own brain; and sell the Prophets words,
and Christ's words for money, which was spoken forth freely. Ye tell people ye
Preach the Gospel, who Minister the Letter, and know not the Gospel; and ye
tell them that the Letter is the Word; And the Letter says God is the Word;
and ye tell them the Letter is the Light: The Letter says Christ is the Light:
The Lord is coming in flames of fire, flames of fire without you, as you see
with a natural eye, see flames of fire who have the light come upon you: You
ungodly ones, as a sword without, which hews down, So shall ye that are wicked
find the sword of the Lord, which is the word of the Lord, hew you down; and as
you see fire burning without you, so ye that hate the Light, wels without
water, say every one has not the Light; and as a Cloud without you, so are the
Clouds without water, and all your knowledge, Hebrew, Greek and Latin is
natural; and the natural man knows not the things of God: Therefore to all
people everywhere, to that light in you I speak; which shows you Sin and Evil
to be Works of Darkness, and Deeds of the flesh: O the Old man! there is your
Teacher, and there is your Condemnation, hating that light; And ye are they
that get the Saints Words in the old Bottles, and ye give meanings to them, ye
who are of the Generation that murdered ever the Righteous seed; as Bottles
without you, so are you Bottles, New Wine put into New Bottles, the Old Wine
put into Old Bottles, and that is a Figure; And as Trees with leaves without,
that bears no Fruit, so are they that have oppression and no life, nor no
fruit; As Suns and Daughters without, born by the will of man, so there are
Sons and Daughters of God, born by the will of God, Heirs of another World; as
these are born in this World, and as there is the world without you, so there
is the World in the heart; as there is the field without, so there is the field
in the heart; As there is the Merchant-man without, that seeks for Pearls
without, so there is the Merchant-man that seeks for Pearls within; and as
there is the Kingdom without, sothere is the Kingdom of heaven within; and the
Axe is laid to the Tree Root without, to hew down the Tree without, so the Axe
is laid to the Tree within, that brings not forth good Fruit; And as Trees
cumber the ground without upon the earth, so do men cumber the ground,
fruitless Trees; And as there are Rocks without, there are Rocks within; as
there is cleaving of Rocks without, so is there cleaving of Rocks within; As
there are heavy burdens without, so there are heavy burdens within, the pure
are burdened; And as the rain falls upon the Plants without, so does the mercy
of God fall upon the tender Plants within; As there is a Vineyard Planted
without, so are the People of God a Vineyard, who love the Light, and have the
Invisible eye, will read these Figures and Parables, and ye heed not go to your
natural Priests without you; But this within will open them, as you love it,
and walk in it as the Saints did, who gave forth the Scripture, and they
Exhorted others to take heed to that light, and said, ye have a more sure word
of Prophecy, unto which ye do well to take heed, and as unto a light shining
in a dark place, till the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; and
this light is your Teacher, which teaches you wholesomeness, and Holiness, and
Teaches you the fear of the Lord; and this light, hating of it will be your
condemnation, and then you stumble, and then you neither understand Parables
nor Figures, but are them that stumble at noon day; all you who are earthly,
minding it which is Invisible, ye will read the earthly Parables and Figures,
and see the time of Winter; as there is Winter without, so there is Winter
within, the time of Winter, and the time of Summer, if you wait to get through
the earthly part; The earth must be removed, and the earth must be shaken when
the Glory of the Lord arises. This is witnessed: so God almighty open your
understandings, all people everywhere, that you may see your selves, Which if
you take heed to that light which will exercise your consciences, it will let
you see your selves, which eye is the light, and this light will let you see
God* But if your minds go forth, the God of this world comes in and takes the
Dominion, and so your minds are blinded, and your understandings darkened:
Therefore every one, what you possess, profess, for the Saints were what they
spoke: and every one as Christ has given you a measure, according to your
ability mind your measure, and improve your measure, and let the Saints
conditions alone, but as you find them fulfilled in you; and lay aside all
contention, and striving about words, which is no profit, but mind the pure
light of God within, which will teach every one to know God, and so every one
must improve his Talent, and improve his measure according to his Ability: so
every one will be rewarded according to his works, whether they be good or
evil; and thou that say every one has not the light, who art the blind
Pharisee, I shall stop thy mouth with a few words which the servants of God
has spoken forth; Christ himself says, which is the true light, he does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, and the one he loves it, and
the other he hates it: And this is the Condemnation of the World, that light
is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their
deeds are evil: And thou sai^ he does not enlighten every one that comes into
the world, and there thou art a false Prophet, and a witness against Christ;
and thou that say the Grace of God has not appeared to all men to teach
them, thou art he that tuins the Grace of God into wantonness; and to thee the
Grace has appeared, for that is Grace that shows thee ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and there thou go to make the Apostles liars, when the Grace of God,
they say, which we witness, has appeared to all men, which teaches us the
Saints to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live Godlily, and
Soberly, and Righteously in this present evil world; and this Grace has
appeared to thee who live wickedly, and ungodlily, and are of this present
evil world, to that in thy conscience I speak, which thou shall eternally
witness me, for to it the Grace comes and appears; and when the Book of
Conscience is opened, all men shall be Judged out of it: and here thou that
say every one has not the light in their Consciences, to exercise it, thou
go about to make God unjust, for the light which lets man see sin and evil,
is a perfect light of God; and thou that says every one has not a measure of
light within them, to show them all their Works and Actions which they do; thou
go about to make God unjust, and unrighteous, and to keep the Creature in
darkness, for God says he will give to every one a reward according to their
works; and if he had not a light, how should he see his Works, and how should
the world be Judged in Righteousness but blind Hypocrites must show themselves,
that they may openly appear blind to all them that are in the light, and love
the light; and you that hate the light, there is your condemnation.

G. F.

TO all the Worlds Professors and People, that you may see where you are, and
repent; The word of God is not known to the world, nor worldly wisdom; He that
has the word has life, he that knows the word knows God, and here is life
manifest, and the word has quickened him, and raised him out of death and dead
works; He who has but the Letter, hears a sound, but knows not what nor
whence it is; and as he receives it in the Air, so he declares it, and death
speaks light words without power, and dead-works, and lightness is brought
forth, and the power of death Reigns; and the life of this is but an imitation,
and not the life it self; the Chafe, but not the Grain tossed in the wind; And
the Prince of the Air is Head, and Rules; And here Vanity is Exalted, the
light mind is fed with Ayery Notions, would be wise; but the Colt is at
liberty, not subject to the Yoke, but kicks against the pure, and the obedience
is not; And the Cross is despised by this nature who feeds here, whose end is
destruction, and for the fire; For this nature knows not the living Word, but
the Letter, and is without God in the world; but he who has the Word, has
God, and is come into the Covenant by which all things stand; For he is come
into the beginning, out of the Fall, to the first Fruits, and witnesses the
Word Spiritual, Invisible, Powerful, and Pure, and Sharp, a Divider, and a
Discerner; By it he is Sanctified and made clean, by it he is established,
unmovable, by it he grows, and is fed daily, it is his Life, his Light, his
Joy and Delight. And this Word is not to fetch from above, nor from below;
Neither is it to seek in a Chapter, or a Steeple-house without; But it is nigh,
in the heart, and in the mouth: by which Word he is taught, guided, and kept at
all Seasons: it is his Counselor, and he enquires at it, as at the Oracle: and
thereby he himself is brought to live the life of Godliness, and from which is
spoken forth words of life, and power to others, and he speaks not his own
words, not brings forth his own works, but has ceased from his own works, as
God did from his, and is entered into his Rest, and is come into the Eternal
Sabbath, and is comprehended into the word, which is Christ, and is no more his
own: For now Christ speaks in him, acts in him, and works in him, both the Will
and the Deed: Now Christ and he is one, is married to him, and Christ is his
Head and Husband: And now the head speaks, Prays, and Praises, and Prophesies,
and is uncovered: and here is the Church of the First born, the Pillar and
ground of Truth, where the woman must be covered and keep silent, and is not to
speak in the Church, is not to Usurp Authority, but is to be in subjection; and
if she would know any thing, she is to ask her husband at home, and he is to
her a covering of the eyes for ever. Now all you Priests and People that talk
of these things without you, from the Letter, this is a Parable to you, and you
read the outside in the Letter: and from that you Imagine, and so set up a
Form, or Likeness, or Image of these things: and here you Worship, and for this
you contend, and would compel all to Worship your Image you have set up, and
you go about to persecute and destroy all that will not bow to it with you: But
it is but the Form you have, and not the Substance; And you put the Dead Letter
for the Living Word, and your own meanings of it, arising from the brain, and
first Wisdom, and natural Learning; This you declare, and call it professing*
and put off your hats, which is Carnal; but the head you know not, and it is
the woman that speaks, and the head is covered, and you dishonor your head, and
honor your selves; Neither are you subject to your head, but your own wills
rule in you, and you live in the pleasures of the world, and are become wanton,
and have set your eyes upon many lovers, and you are adulterated from your
husband, and live not with him, nor is he a covering to you; neither can you
witness him in you, and you in him, and the pure seed is not brought forth in
you, but your seed is accursed; Neither is the pure language brought forth in
you; but as to God you are smitten with barrenness, and bring forth nothing but
Words, Wind, Shows and Shadows, Imitations, Inventions, Imaginations, and false
Conceptions, and you never look to bring forth better fruits; Never to come to
Holiness, and Perfection, and to come to your first Fruits, and that Estate in
which you were Created, and you will not know that you are departed from your
first fruitfulness, and have lost him in whom your life stands, and in whom
your Fruit is found, and are become widows and desolate, as to your first
husband, and have been running after other lovers, and have committed Adultery
under every green Tree, and the holy flesh is departed from you, and you have
been doting upon the Egyptian and Assyrian for wisdom and strength, whose flesh
is as the flesh of Horses, and have been as fed Horses, living in the lusts of
the flesh* as it is at this day. Now all People stand still a while, and see
where you are, and the cause of your unfruitfulness; Look back from whence you
are fallen, and return to your first husband, that you may bring forth your
first fruits; For till then all you do is abomination to the Lord, and he
cannot accept it; For what you bring forth is the seed of the Adulterer and the
Whore a Generation of evil doers. And yet you make a Profession and outside
appearance* as to Righteousness, and Holiness: But the Power to Act
Righteousness you have not, but in your Actions bring forth the Image of the
Devil; for all sin bears his Image, and he is the father of it; Let no man
deceive you through fair words, He that sins is of the Devil, and is doing his
work; and upon this Image where it is, Is the wrath of God revealed from heaven
in flames of fire; here is your Portion, you workers of Iniquity.

D. N.

O All you who have cast the Law of God behind you, and walk despitefully
against the Spirit of Grace, give over your Profession for shame, and never
profess you love God, and have cast his Law behind you, and walk in
uncleanness, fighting, wrangling, quarrelling, in Drunkenness, and
maliciousness, and brawling, ralling, and backbiting, cursed speakers,
inventers of evil, and doers of mischief, Plotting together to devour the
Truth, living in Wantonness and Pleasures, Feasting and Ryoting, and Gluttony;
In misnaming and miscalling the People of God who live in the Truth, and
Covetous Cheaters, incontinent, without natural affection, unholy, unjust, and
unrighteous, brutish, given over unto all unrighteousness, People and Priests
are gone out of the way, fierce despisers of them that are good. Now all people
and friends, where is your Profession and love toward God? Awake ye Drunkards,
awake ye Scorners, and give over your Drunkenness and Scorning; God scorns the
scornful, and Drunkards shall rot, Isa. 5.24. Therefore as the flame of fire
devours the Stubble, and as the Chafe is consumed of the flame, so their Root
shall be rotteness, and their Blossom shall go up as dust, because ye have cast
off the Law of God, and contemned the word of the holy one of Israel: Awake ye
proud ones, for ye are as the Stubble, as the fire burns the Stubble, so
shall ye be barned: Awake ye wicked ones, for ye are as the Chafe that the
wind drives to and fro* Woe unto you liars, for you are without God: Awake and
blush for shame, and turn to the Lord: Awake ye dogs which bite and devour one
another* For ye are without God; and cross your lusts, and learn meekness, and
tenderness, for that is of God, and the other is of the Devil: Awake ye
Idolaters, who trust in the earth; trusting in your Riches, and in your Horses,
and in your beauty, delighting in your Corn and Wine; Your Woe and misery is
coming, for all the Gods of the earth must be famished: O trust in the Lord and
forsake your Idols! Come down thou proud one, and lay thine honor in the dust;
cast down thy Crown of Pride who art Exalted, that the Lord alone may be
exalted* Who at thou that art Exalted and lifted up in Pride? who art thou
that sets thy nest on high, and oppressest thy Fellow Creatures, and Taxes
them? Remember! Remember that there is a God; and remember what he did to
Pharaoh that was a Taxer, Oppressor, and was proud: O consider! thou shall not
escape the Judgment of God, thou hard-hearted Pharaoh, thou wild Ishmael,
whose hands are against every man; Thou Profane Esau which despisest thy
Birthright for the Earth; thou art a place for the Dragons to dwell in, greedy
devourers; thou that enviest thy Fellow-Creagures art Old- Cain; He that envies
his brother is a murderer of the Righteous and the Just, whose Sac ifice God
does not accept; and thou that art Cain, who live in envy, God does not
accept thy Sacrifice; all your Preaching, all your Praying, all your Singing,
and all your Praising, is not accepted of God, whilst you live in envy; for it
is the pure that he accepts, and the heart that he requires, and not the
murderers Sacrifice, for that is Cains: Woe, Woe to the world; and woe to all
you that turn the Grace of God into wantonness: Woe, woe unto all disobedient
children that will not take Council of the Lord; Woe, woe to you that paint your
selves with other men's words, that appear beautiful to men outwardly, but
within are full of poison, whited Walls, painted Sepulchers, full of Deceit and
Hypocrisy, outside-Churches, outside-Forms, outside-Teachers, Formal-Prayers,
Formal-Teachings, Formal-Singing, Formal-Praises, Carnal-Teachers, speaking the
Carnal-Letter, for Carnal-Money, to Carnal and Brutish People: Away with all
this filthy Profession, for the Curse of God is upon it, and upon all that
filthy Nature: And the Cursed Nature holds it up: Who are Redeemed from the
Curse, their Church is in God, and their Teacher is God, and they are brought
to obey the Law of God, who Teaches holiness, without which none shall see
God; who Teaches Pureness and Meekness, Tenderness and Righteousness; And to
lay aside all Envy, Wrath, Malice, Hatred, Drunkenness, Railing, Theft,
Murder, Fighting, Quarrelling, and Idle-Jesting, Vain-Songs, and all
Venomousness, all Hypocrisy, Cozening and Cheating, Worldliness, and
Earthly-mindedness: For these are the Works of the Flesh, and who act these
things, shall never inherit the Kingdom of God. O all People confider where you
are, there is a light in you that tells you, that all these things are sinful.
Herein you have learned your Condemnation, for you know that you should do no
unrighteousness; this light is your Teacher, and this light is your Condemner:
and if you love this light, you love Christ, and if you hate this light, you
hate Christ; (for this light shows these things) and your Profession is Carnal,
Heathenish and Brutisn; Hearken to the light, and it will draw you out of all
the Worships, Customs and Fashions in the world, up to God, and to live in Love
and Unity one with another; gather in your hearts together in one. Now you have
time, prize it. O all People! beware of the Woe and Misery that is coming upon
you: the Earth shall be shaken, and all Earthly ways; And all your Profession
shall come to nothing, but to be Fuel for the fire: Heathenish-Ways,
Heathenish-Forms, Heathenish-Teachers. For God is coming to overturn the
Kingdoms of the World, and to set up his own Son, and in Righteousness will he
establish it, and throw down all Unrighteous Kingdoms, all the Heathenish
Kingdoms, and Synagogues of Satan; You which have Professed the Saints words,
will be found to be of the Devil, and out of the Truth; Squeaking-Professors,
Fained-Professors, Away with all your Fained-Humilite, for God is Power: Away
with all your Professors that Profess God and Christ, being within full of
Blood-thirsty-devouring, to slay the Righteous; And you which Profess truth,
and live not in it, but in Envy and Sin, You are of the Devil, and his Works ye
do; and every Tree shows forth its Fruit, and ye are Trees. A good Tree
brings sorth good Fruit, and an evil Tree brings forth evil Fruit. Now all
People consider which of these Trees you are; every man and woman is likened to
a Bottle; New Wine is put into New Bottles, and Old Wine into Old Bottles; And
what is within you Pours forth; the Old Bottle pours forth the Old Nature;
Which is, Envy, Wrath, Malice, ra^ing Gods Name in vain, Swearing, Lying, Pride
and Oppression, and sp^wing forth your Filthiness, Corruptness, and all
Abominations, and all ^ng^dly-Deeds, and Unrighteous-Ways, and your
Filthy-Profession, which is in (...) Wisdom of the World, by which Wisdom the
World knows not God: and he that drinks the Old, does not desire to drink the
New, and he that drinks the New, will not in anywise desire to drink the Old.
Out of the New Bottle proceeds Righteousness, or Rivers of Living-Water: all
People see, and consider which Tree, and which Bottle you are: Whether the good
Tree which cannot bring forth evil Fruit, or the evil Tree which cannot bring
forth good Fruit? Whether you be the New Bottle that pours forth Righteousness,
Holiness and Purity: Or the Old Bottle which pours forth Wickedness, and all
manner of Ungodliness? All People see, consider what Fountain you are: Whether
the good Fountain that venteth out Righteousness, or the evil Fountain that
venteth out evil and Unrighteousness, Spewing out the Venomous Nature? One
Fountain does not send forth Sweet-Water, and Bitter, Salt and Fresh: And you
that send forth the Bitter-Water you may Profess to be of the Sweet-Fountain:
But God knows your Hypocrisy, and the Plagues of God are to be poured forth
upon all such Beasts: For you are Beasts, Dogs, Swine, and Devils, Who do not
abide in the Truth. Fat Bulls of Bashan, Hypocrites and Serpents, Antichrists,
Seducers, and Deceivers, Dragons, Murderers, and Devourers of them that abide
in the Truth: But they that abide in the Truth, the Deceits of all the World
are discovered to them.

TO all the children of darkness, that stumble at the light, wherewith Christ
has enlig^ted every one that comes into the world; says Christ, I am the
light of the world, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life: And this light you deny to be sufficient to lead to
God, and here you are unbelievers, and cannot believe in the Son of God, whom
the father has given for a Covenant of light, that whosoever believes in him
should not abide in darkness; but you that deny this light, deny the way to the
father, the way out of the world, the way out of darkness; you deny the
Prophets and Apostles, and all the holy men of God, for they all walked in this
light, and spoke of it; and you deny the Scriptures given out from this light,
and by this light you are condemned, and found to be of that sort, which all
that dwelt in the light bear witness against, for of this sort you are who deny
the light, Such as are blind guides, proud and covetous, such as are called of
men Masters, such as bear rule by your means, hirelings, greedy dumb dogs, such
as seek for their gain from their quarters, seeks for the Fleece, lay heavy
burdens on the people, such as go in the way of Cain, and after the error of
Balaam, for gifts and rewards, and such as with feigned words make merchandise
of the people; which Christ the light, and all that vvalked in the light, cried
vvoe against; and their words in the Scripture are left as a vvitness against
you all, who live in such things, which words you dare not stand to be tried
by, they are so plain against your practice, but wrest them by your subtilty,
giving other meanings and private interpretations on them, to make them fit
your private ends, and filthy practices, and thereby they have covered your
filthiness, and hid your iniquities, all these times of dark (...), and have
gone under the name of the Ministers of Christ, by crying out against others
for persecuting, quarrelling, fighting, stocking, stoning, suing, covetousness,
pride, and idleness, and thus by your fair pretenses, have ye deceived the
simple; but now that the same Christ is manifest, which has always been
persecuted, by his light are they discovered, to be these who garnish the
Sepulchers of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles whom your fathers slew, which
ye your selves are in the same work; are not you now found beating, backbiting,
stocking, imprisoning, suing, false-accusing, and persuading the Powers of the
earth against the bodies of these, where the light of Christ is owned, and the
brightness of his coming manifest, to lay you open, so that the Prisons are
filled by your means? who would have believed within these few years, that you
had been of them, of which Christ spoke, by which his messengers should be
shamefully entreated, beat in the Synagogues, halled before Rulers, falsely
accused, and imprisoned? who would have thought you had been the men, who
should have been found beating your fellow servants, suing and imprisoning for
tithes and hire, such who cannot uphold you, but sin against the light of
Christ in their conscience? and these whom a few weeks since you counted the
most conscientious of your hearers, to whom you cried peace, peace: now that
they cease putting into your mouths, you prepare war against them, and here you
are found in the steps of the false Prophets, who were enemies to the light,
and were witnessed against by the light, as all who walk in the light, are now
turned away from you, and are come out from you, and made to declare against
you with that light; and now by such as are turned from the light, are ye
upholden, and to them ye fly for refuge; and now you set up drunkards,
swearers, scorners, fighters, such as deny the light, and bring forth works of
darkness, to uphold you with clubs, stones, and stocks, fighting and tearing by
the hair of the head, and shedding of blood of such as are sent to vvitness
against you; and the most envious and cruel are become your best friends; and
the Scripture is fulfilled upon you all; Like People, like Priest; and the woe
that came upon such, is coming upon you all, except you repent.

FINIS.

