JUS FECIALE ARMATAE DANIAE. With a short Demonstration Of the most Weighty
Causes, WHEREUPON His Sacred Royal Majesty of Denmark, Norwey, the Vandals and
Goth's, etc. Urged by mere necessity, does by His Herald, according to the Law
of Nations, denounce War both by Land and Sea, AGAINST King CHARLES GVSTAVVS
AND The Kingdom of Swedeland, After unsufferable Injuries and Damages done Us,
and most equal conditions of Peace rejected by the Swedes; and does renounce
all Neighbourly friendship.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold at the Sign of the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

JUS FECIALE ARMATAE DANIAE. With a short Demonstration Of the most Weighty
Causes, WHEREUPON His Sacred Royal Majesty of Denmark, Norwey, the Vandals and
Goth's, etc. Urged by mere necessity, does by His Herald, according to the Law
of Nations, denounce War both by Land and Sea, AGAINST King CHARLES GVSTAVVS
AND The Kingdom of Swedeland, After unsufferable Injuries and Damages done Us,
and most equal conditions of Peace rejected by the Swedes; and does renounce
all Neighbourly friendship.
We FREDERICK the IIId by the grace of God King of Denmark and Norwey, the
Vandals and Goths, etc. To all and every one that shall read and hear these
present Letters, of what Degree, Nation or Condition soever they be, Greeting.
OF our own natural Inclination, We have hitherto, according to the Domestic
examples of our Ancestors, and those later footsteps of the most glorious King
our Father, still followed Peace; and in all our Councels have still aimed at
the public tranquillity, never intending to have receded from this constant
resolution of maintaining Peace, unless an inevitable danger from the Enemy had
hung over our heads.

God has granted us Kingdoms and Dukedoms enough, has inricht enough our
subjects, without the injury of any one, so that they who understand their own
good, need not to envy any of their neighbors.

We have hitherto endured with patience and connivence the suspected attempts
of our enemies, and of their Injuries against us, have thought fit wisely to
dissemble some, others to remit at our own will and pleasure, expecting when
the unbridled ambition of that Nation, should by the will of God be allayed,
which could not choose at length but be weary to see whole Provinces imbrued in
Christian blood, and thereby change their hostile minds so exasperated against
their neighbors.

At last when we had so often urged that they could no longer with any just
pretense gainsay, a meeting was appointed at Copenhagen, where we laid open
those grievances which chiefly molested us, namely, That we ought not to be so
defrauded by the Swedes of our Toll; that our losses and injuries ought
according to equity to be repaired: Immediately hereupon Magnus Durelius the
King of Swedelands Deputy and ordinary Ambassador among us, wanted
Instructions to treat upon these Heads, and his King wanted Equity to supply
those Instructions, and the satisfaction we have upon most equal conditions so
often desired, he thinks to be derogatory to the rights of the Swedish Crown,
and unexpectedly dissolves those Treaties which were begun by the friendly
intercession of the Lord Electour of Brandenburg: Neither have they taken
notice of our desires of Peace so often offered and transacted by us, nor
afterward of our just Indignation expressed by our Letters of Reprisall; but
rather with an obdurate mind have refused all just and equal Proposals,
remaining according to their custom most perverse and untractable.

And now more clearly they begin to discover their hidden counsels, being
become more insolent by the indulgence of Fortune toward them, and seeing many
of their blind attempts, God conniving at their ways, have met with some
success, they have now so far forsaken all consideration of Justice, that
whatever their neighbors dispute with them in point of right, they impiously
think to decide it by cruel violence and the sword. We should have been glad
utterly to have forgot that Invasion, by us as little expected as the falling
of the skies, and also that remarkable loss, whereby they deprived the most
glorious King our Father of so many large Provinces and Islands, and Us of the
Archbishopric of Breme, and the Bishopric of Verden, had they not recalled it
to our memory by their reiterated violence and their new practices against us.
We were once in a fair way to peace at Bremsebroa, by the providence of God,
and at the Intercession of the most Serene King of France and Navarr: the
Swedes distrustful in a matter of greatest security, took care to have
Hallands-ars delivered into their hands in pawn, an inestimable Province
fortified with three strong holds, and this they did with so much the more
obstinacy, because they thought themselves not to be obliged by these Covenants.

We are heartily sorry that these firm beginnings of Peace at Bremsebroa, by
which the public quiet of the North was so strengthened, being so far
removed from their sight and minds should be so shaken, and that our Royal
Authority should be so immodestly contemned and neglected: Since therefore they
bear with an ill mind even our most moderate councels, at length through their
means, We call the whole world and all honest Nations to witness, all Peace was
given over as quite hopeless. And therefore We also, this way not succeeding,
proceed another way, and having both the Law of God and man on our side, with a
sincere and quiet conscience, appeal to the Lord of Hosts and that supreme
Tribunal of Nations where all matters are justly decided, and according to the
Law of Nations, have recourse to our just Arms, for the defending our Kingdoms
and Dukedoms, and protecting Our selves and subjects from the Injury of the
Swedes; that at length by the decree of Divine Providence, and the aid of our
Confederates, an honest and secure Peace may be established and confirmed. The
friendship therefore which has hitherto been observed between the two
neighboring Nations, so often rashly infringed and violated by the Swedes,
both we for our parts give over, and against the most High Prince the Lord
Charles Gustavus King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals, the Kingdom of
Swedeland, and all his subjects, by the Law of God, and by the council of the
worthy The Peers of the Realm.
Senators of the Kingdom, and by the unanimous aid of all our subjects, We
according to the Law of Arms denounce War both by Land and Sea.

But since we ought to prove this Expedition allowable before God and our own
conscience, with both which we made peace, before we made war with the
Swedes, they being guilty of all that bloodshed, and those calamities which
render wars so vexatious, and also to submit our selves to the judgment of
the universal and Christian world, who will altogether assent unto us, when
they shall hear those high aggravations and weighty motives by which we are
urged, and will free us from all imputation of unlawful revenge and invasion.

I. It is already well known to all the world, that the Swedes in the year
1643, invaded our Archbishopric of Breme and Bishopric of Verden, when as by
the permission of both parties which were then in war, and by a most solemn
exemption we were to have been Neuter and Secure, forasmuch as by the Authority
and subscription of Caesar, the Royal and faithful promises both of the Queen
and Peers of Swedeland were confirmed, and without any default on our side
constantly observed. When we had recovered the Castle of Vorden, a Cessation of
Arms was agreed on between us and the Swedish Army, on condition that pay and
provision should be allowed to our Garrison Soldiers out of the
Archbishopric; but these Covenants which they yielded unto for their profit,
they afterward receded from, as thinking they would not prove so profitable
unto them as they expected; so that in the same thing we are again deceived in
the truth of the Swedish promises. Also, At the Peace at Bremsebroa, the
restitution of the Archbishopric, at the mediation of the French Ambassador,
and with the large promises of the Swedish Deputies, was referred to other
Treaties to be renewed at Stockholm in presence of the Queen of Swedeland,
nevertheless we our selves, being then Archbishop, as also our Officers and
servants, with every ones goods, were inserted into the 38th Article. But what
secret designs they fostered under these promises, they afterward more openly
declared; when contrary to Conditions agreed on, by which we were freed and
exempted from the attempts of both parties, and both the Cessation of Arms
forbidding, and the Peace at Bremsebroa gainsaying, at that very time when our
Ambassadors at Stockholm treated with the Swedes according to agreement, they
invaded the Castle of Vorden and took it by siege, and at length inserted the
Bishoprics that were to be restored, in the satisfaction which they proposed
at Osnabrugg, that so they might the better keep, to our prejudice, those
things which they had gotten with injury and violence.

II. It was most wholesomely agreed on by the 35th Article, for a renewing of
friendship and mutual alliance between the two Kings, and that each of them
should hinder whatsoever might hurt the Person, Government, Realms and
Provinces of the other: This Agreement they utterly neglecting, connived at
Corfitz Ulefeld unworthily dealing with us, who published an injurious Pamphlet
in diverse Languages, that, to the ignominy of our Royal Person, which by every
honest subject is always held inviolable, and to the contempt of our blameless
and laudable government, he might spread it so much the farther,
notwithstanding that the Agreement at Stetin decreed such slanderous detraction
a capital crime. And when we complained of this injury, they neither much
regarded it, nor made us any reparation, so that Ulefeld was confirmed in his
malicious design; and after he had been earnestly accused by us, was admitted
to his defense by the Queen and the Senators, our Ambassador not without some
disgrace being invited to hear a defense of the same Apology, wherein by a
scandalous example, he wronged both Us and the Senators of our Kingdom, and
wherein a bad Cause was covered with worse pretenses, that he might take some
advantage in a void and fruitless process. Neither are the Swedes ashamed,
impiously to force new Oaths upon those Ministers of State who are bound to Us
by Oath, and being unabsolved and called to defend themselves, to use their
service and assistance.

III. Nor could they satisfy their insatiable ambition by those Provinces and
Islands obtained at the Agreement at Bremsebroa, but against the express words
of that Treaty, they seized upon two Parishes belonging to Aggershuse, Irn and
Zern, which they yet retain, notwithstanding that we have very often but in
vain required the restoring of them. We required that a day might be appointed
for the deciding of the Controversy, which was appointed by agreement; at
which day when ours appeared, the Swedes in a contemptuous manner delude us,
and come not at the time appointed, as altogether mistrusting the justice of
their cause.

IV. They transgrest that rule and order which our Toll-gatherers were to
follow as a certain course in the gathering of their Toll. They intruded
themselves into that employment contrary to the dictate of right and reason,
for that being strangers they so confounded all things, as if uncertainty and
fraud had been their chief aim: to manage these violent and irregular affairs,
they put unexperinc't boys in office, and that they might make us the more
contemptible among foreign Nations, they employed women also. The immunity from
Toll granted at Bremsebroa to Swedish Ships and Goods, they by false Bills of
Lading and other cunning devices, made common to other Nations which were
subject to pay Toll, owning them as Swedish Ships and Goods, and so letting
them pass under that notion, and those forms framed in express words in our
Treaty with the States General of the United Provinces, out of which the
Toll-gatherers were perfectly informed of the quality of Wares, and of Ships
both free and tributary, they by persuasion and authority extorted from
Forrainers; at once endeavoring, with a rash desire, as much as in them lay,
to spoil us of this our chief Prerogative. Instead of these they for greediness
of gain, framed certain Notes or Bills, wherein at pleasure they inserted
matters of small moment. Out of the Accounts of the Customehouse we can prove
with undeniable certainty, that in the year 1642, (while yet the Livonians paid
Tribute) the Cities of Riga and Revell, brought in an Account in the name of
their Citizens, for Wares valued scarcely at the rate of ten thousand
Rixdollars, but that in the year 1655, in the space of one year, when the
Swedes had obtained the Immunity granted at Bremsebroa, they sold in the name
of the said Cities, diverse Wares amounting to the value of Six hundred and
fifty thousand Rixdollars, of which the greater part doubtless was properly the
Tribute of other Nations, and so unjustly gaining the shorter way, they were
let pass through the Sound. We contradicted, but in vain, for it was gainful
for them to counterfeit false Papers or Writings, which without shame they many
ways multiplyld; and the oftener also whenas the business was again referred to
the arbitrament of the Lord Electour of Brandenburgh. They have always so
carried themselves as if from them nothing belonged to us but scorn, not
contented unless having hitherto injured us, they abused also our patience.
Neither could we hope better things from them, whenas the Treaty written at
Bremsebroa, while it was yet scarce dry, nothing regarded, they were so far
indulgent to their vain Imaginations, that they used all endeavor in behalf of
the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, that their
subjects also might obtain a freedom from the tribute of the Sound. But they
chose rather to purchase immortal glory by their constant integrity, and the
keeping of their faith unbroken, then to seek an infamous gain out of these
suggestions. With the same malicious Intentions they intruded themselves into
those matters controverted between Us and our beloved Neighbors and Kindred,
which things being undecided, they endeavored, had the adverse Party assented,
to hasten immature execution by the Sword and wonted violence of the Swedish
Army, that thereby they might deterr us from prosecuting our own right.

V. The 42d Article wherein the liberty of Dantzick and of Traffic is
asserted, they have utterly rejected, lest there should remain any thing, that
might obstruct that Dominion which they have so long arrogated to themselves
over the Baltic Sea. They imposed with accustomed Swedish insolence a Tribute
upon our Subjects Ships at the mouth of the Weyssel, endeavoring to force the
Weyssel out of it is naurall into an unwonted channel, and at once to offer
violence both to Nature and Commerce. By this very act, Our Royal Authority is
greatly injured, whereby partaking of the peace at Bremsebroa, we are both
obliged and also fully resolved, God assisting, to vindicate our right to our
Crowns, Commonwealths and Cities. They also infringe our Rights upon the
Baltic Sea, sufficiently witnest to the whole world, which have been derived
to us from our Royal Ancestors, without the controversy of any of our
Neighbors. From hence also we sustain very great loss, in regard Commerce
being hindered, our ordinary Revenues from the Customs cease, so often do they
endammage us even in one thing.

At length we observe that by our patience and lenity, the Swedes are so much
the more exasperated and offended, and that the friendship which is truly and
sincerely observed between us and our neighbors, out of a secret hatred is
perverted by them, maliciously judging, that by those Aids which according to
the Agreement at Bremsebroa, we together with the High and Mighty States
afforded to distressed Dantzick, and afflicted commerce, the Peace was broken
at it were by a hostile Invasion. When by a most just demand we treated with
them about repairing our Losses and Injuries, they with an offended mind
answered, that this could not be done with safety of their Kings right, (as if
the Law of Nations exempted Swedeland from equity toward their neighbors;)
with fierce and often repeated menaces they threaten Us, speak proudly of
themselves and ignominiously of Us; and without asking leave of Us, they march
with their Armies through the Duchy of Sleswick and Holstein, neglecting the
rights of the Empire, and of the circuit of Saxony, and carry themselves so
proudly as if we were already in their power and jurisdiction. Let all
Christian Princes but remember this Insolence, and they will hold us the more
excused. Many of them also have approved this expedition with their favorable
suffrage, and with extraordinary Embassies, have friendly admonisht us of this
storm hanging over our heads from a neighboring Kingdom, to which no doubt the
rest will vigorously join.

For with what dangerous Intents the Swedes rove out of their own Country, they
have more openly declared among the Polonians, where with a more indulgent
fortune, which the Swedes are not capable of, growing more insolent, and with a
gainful boldness from time to time transgressing the bounds of honesty and
right, they always gape greedily after their booty and profit; neither do they
observe amidst this their blind rashness, that Poland abounds both with
domestic and foreign forces; mainly endeavoring this, that having Prussia in
their power, they may command the Baltic Sea and all commerce, and there fix
themselves so firmly, as not to be shaken or disturbed by any, but may take
upon them to be umpires in all things among their neighbors, to vary and
dispense Fortune among them at their pleasure, and thence at a convenient
season to overrun and infest the sacred Roman Empire.

From these carriages of the Swedes, our faithful subjects are to be
vindicated with the greater caution, because it would be a dangerous simplicity
to repose any trust in old or new Covenants long since subverted by them, and
which with minds enraged, they to the ruin of their Neighbors, the loss of
their own Countrymen, and the prodigal effusion of blood, have designed in
their minds, utterly to cancel and extinguish. And also our faithful subjects
themselves, have by the singular guidance of the Eternal Providence,
seasonably foreseen the tempest hanging over their Country, and with most
humble obedience as is meet, have so diligently performed the office of good
subjects, that we trust with Gods favorable assistance, not only to defend our
own Kingdoms and Dukedoms, but also to preserve our best neighbors, (who are
concerned with the care of honesty, faith, and the maintenance of Peace) quiet
and untoucht; provided that they help to promote this most profitable design
with their endeavors and authority; especially because those Germans under the
Swedish jurisdiction, who, that they might redeem their Country from the
tempest coming upon them, by a certain hazardous throw, were exposed to the
Insolence and Tyrannous exactions of the Swedes, have been used in so hostile a
manner by them, that they have often times implored help from God and us.

We also, according to that inbred zeal derived to us from our Ancestors,
shall use all diligence, that care may be taken for the good and quiet, as long
as is possible, of the sacred Roman Empire whereof we are one of the principal
members, and for the promoting of the more prosperous enlargement thereof. In
this we have studiously followed our Ancestors, have so friendly carried our
selves toward our common Country, and are so conscious to have done well, that
they will free Us from all Imputation of rash turbulency, and help our
Intention with their counsel and aid; and on the contrary, strongly oppose
those professed disturbers of the common Peace and quiet, resolved to repress
that inhumane and barbarous Nation, that at length, God being our Leader, we
may quell and utterly vanquish this fierceness of theirs, which grows so
presumptuous in the midst of Arms. We shall thankfully acknowledge the help and
assistance which the equity of our undertaken Expedition requires from all, and
shall earnestly strive to deserve it, by our singular amity, and favorable
propension of mind to them. And we shall also take care, that the most weighty
Reasons which have moved us, of our selves unwilling hereunto, be shortly made
public in a more full Relation.

God to whose protection we commend you with a pious and sincere heart, direct
our Arms with his omnipotent hand to their right aim, and give judgment
according to the equity of the Cause, to the glory of his eternal Majesty, that
the oppressed neighborhood may be vindicated, the liberty of interrupted
commerce restored, and secure peace, happy, quiet and undisturbed rest may be
renewed and established between Us and our neighboring Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. Farewell.

Given under our Hand and private Seal at our Residence of Copenhagen, June 3d
1657. FREDERICK. L. S.


