The Unmasking and Discovering Of Antichrist, With all the false Prophets, by
the true light which comes from Christ Jesus, written forth to convince the
Seducers, and for the undeceiving of the Seduced.
By George Fox.
BEware of false Prophets, which shall come unto you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening Wolves; by their fruits you shall know them. Do men
gather grapes on thorns, or figs on thistles says Christ, Mat. 7. who is the
light which enlightneth every one which comes into the world; every one
witnesses Christ Jesus a true Prophet, but you that hate the ligth are
deceived with the false prophets which hate the light; neiter will the false
prophets be proved with the light, for they are in the world which hates the
light, and all who dwell in the light, which comes from Christ, see them and
their fruits, for thorns and thistles are in that nature that acts contrary
to the light, and they that are there, are out of the strait way, in the
ungodly world which is to be condemned with the light. And Christ says Mat.
24. many false prophets shall arise, Crist is the Ight, and all who be in the
light, which comes from him, which he has enlightened withal, with this light,
again I say, witness Christ to be a true prophet, and all the false prophets
foreseen with the light out of what they rise, out of that nature which hates
the light which with it is to be condemned with the world: And Christ Jesus
says, who is the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the
world, that if any say, lo here is Christ, Christ says so if any man may say,
lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, believe it not. Now with the light
which comes from Christ, every one in it waits with it to see Christ, and see
all them which say lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, to be the false
prophets which hated the light; which with the light are to be comprehended and
condemned. And Christ says, there shall arise many false Christ's, and false
prophets which shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that if it were
possible they would deceive the very Elect; Behold I have told you before,
says Christ, these are they which does not own the light, which Christ has
enlightened them withal; so they own not Christ who does enlighten; these false
prophets, and false Christ's are with the light seen which Christ Jesus does
enlighten withal, with it they are condemned and seen to be in the world, and
all the false Christ's, and all the false prophets, which shows the great signs
and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible would deceive the very Elect,
with the light which comes from Christ which comprehends the world: all these
false Christ's, all these false prophets, all these signs and wonders that they
do act is seen, in that nature contrary to the light in which light the Elect
dwells, and if it were possible these false Christ's and these false prophets
should deceive them; but it is not possible that they should deceive the Elect,
for in the light they dwell, which the false prophets hates, for Christ calls
him no Antichrist nor false prophet that dwells in the light which comes from
him, which he has enlightened every one with which comes into the world. And he
is no Antichrist that dwells in light, Christ does not call him Antichrist nor
false prophet which dwells in the light, which comes from him, which he has
enlightened every one that comes into the world withal, but such are
Antichrists as opposses his light, which he has enlightened every one with that
comes into the world and it denies, such are as briars and thorns, and are the
Antichrists and the false prophets, and the false Christ's, and they that shall
deceive if it were possible the Elect, but not possible it is, for by the light
which comes from Christ they are all tried and seen.

And Christ says, if they shall say he is in the desert, go not forth, behold
he is in the secret chamber believe it not, no it is not believed among all
them that dwell in the light which comes from Christ, for in the chamber of
their imaginations Christ is not, for they must be scattered and with the light
are to be condemned, and to you this is the word of the Lord God, with the
light they are seen these false prophets and false Christ's, whose eyes be
abroad from the light, which Christ does enlighten every one that comes into
the world withal. And the false prophets say lo here is Christ, and the false
prophets and the false Christ's show the signs and wonders, which faith, he is
in the desert, which says he is in the secret chamber, which says, lo here
is Christ be there now with the light which comes from Christ, which he has
enlightened every one withal; with the light Christ is seen, who is the head,
and with the light they are seen to befools, whose eyes are abroad, and with
the light they are condemned, which light comprehends the world and see them,
where they are turned into the world, and not among the children of light, but
from the children of light, with the light which the children of the light do
walk in, are they with it condemned.

And Christ says in Mat. 24. Take heed that no man deceive you, for many shall
come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, such are they who
does not own the light which comes from Christ, but denies it, and such are the
deceivers, that deceive many, but all who dwell in the light which comes from
Christ, sees these many deceivers which says, I am Christ, with the light of
Christ such are condemned to be foolish, for they are no deceivers that
dwells in the light which comes from Christ and has received Christ in the
male and in the female one seed which seed is no false Christ, but the same to
day, yesterday, and for ever; Christ in the male and in the female, and with
the light all false Christ's and false prophets are seen to be them whose eyes
are abroad, fools which are with the light to be condemned, for this is the
condemnation the light; and these false prophets and false Christ's, which
Christ, which is the light, which does enlighten every one that comes into the
world says, should come and arise, they are such as deny this light, and says
he does not enlighten every one that comes into the world, and he says he
does. Now to all the children of light, this I leave to you, to give judgment
upon, whether they be not the false prophets, which says, he does not
enlighten every one that comes into the world, yea or no? which light is the
condemnation of him that hates it, whose deeds be evil, which light was before
the world was, which comprehends it and condemns it. And while many shall say,
I am Christ, and many false Christ's shall arise, with the light which comes
from one Christ all these many shall be condemned, for Christ is but one in all
his Saints male and female, and they are all one, he makes them all one, head,
body, and members, one seed if ten thousand, and this seed speaks in one, and
is one in all, where it is head King and reigns over the false prophets, and
the false Christ's, and sees them with the light and condemns them.

And John who was a Minister of Christ, and in his light said that many
deceivers and Antichrists was entered into the world who did not confess Jesus
come into the flesh, this is a deceiver and an Antichrist John 2. And John said
if we walk in the light as he is in the light we have fellowship one with
another, the world hates the light which lie in wickedness, and all the world
wonders after the beast, that is the world which wonders after the beast which
is out of the truth, Rev. 13.3. And they worship the beast, saying, who is like
unto the beast, or who is able to make war with the beast.

And John says many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that
Jesus is come in the flesh, this is a deceiver and an Antichrist, they are the
deceivers that hate the light, and such turn into the wicked world which lies
in wickedness, and they are the Antichrists which deny the light and hate it,
which are turned into the world, which opposses the light, with the light all
such Antichrists are seen, with the light which was before the world was, and
condemned with the light which comes from Christ. And such deceivers and
Antichrists that enter into the world which lie in wickedness, does not confess
Christ come in the flesh, but with the light all such are condemned which comes
from Christ, for from the light they are turned that are deceivers, and from
the light of Christ they are turned that are Antichrists and does opposse it,
as it is manifest now at this day in England both the pretended teachers and
Ministers, which does opposse the light of Christ.

And John says whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ has not God, and he that abides in the doctrine of Christ he has both
the Father and the Son, and he that transgresses is turned from the light
which comes from Christ, and he has not God, not the Son; and he that dwells
in the light which comes from Christ comes to receive the Father and the Son
and see him, and is no false prophet, nor no Antichrist, nor no deceiver but
with the light he sees Christ as John saw Christ then, and the Antichrists and
the deceivers ^ow which be in the world, as he saw them then, which light leads
out of the world, for the lust of the eye, the pride of life is not of the
Father; it is of the world, and the world passes away, and the lusts thereof,
but he that does the will of God abides ever, he that does the will of God
abides in the light which comes from Christ, which leads to the light, in such
the love of the Father is not in them, and there is the lusts of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, the pride of life which is not of the Father but of the world,
and such does not the will of God, and such does not abide for ever, but such,
and the lusts and the world passes away, from the children of light, are
condemned with the light which comes from Christ, with it they are seen in
which the children of light walk.

And Jahn says, little children, you have heard that Antichrist should come,
even now there are many Antichrists come, we know it is the last time. And they
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out that it might be made
manifest that they were not all of us.

These Antichrists, John with the light of Christ saw as he writes in his
Epistle 1 John 2.8, 9. They went out from them, which needed no man to teach
them, but as the anointing teached them all things, and was true and is no lie;
and with the light he saw all these Antichrists which did opposse Christ, he
saw them then which now are manifest in the world with the same light which
John saw withal, for they be such as deny the light of Christ which he has
enlightened them withal in themselves and others, and so none comes to know
the Father nor the Son, nor none (comes to know their conditions that needed no
man to teach them but as the anointing) among these Antichrists, but such as do
come to witness the anointing, witnesses the greater in them, then he that is
in the world, and witnesses him in them that overcomes the world, and to you
this is the word of the Lord God. And the many deceivers is entered into the
world, who confesses not Christ come in the flesh, this is a deceiver and an
Antichrist.

All you children of the light mark, the deceivers enter into the world, the
Antichrists enter in the world, and such as confess not Christ come in the
flesh enter into the world, and the whole world lies in wickedness. Now all you
that are wicked are turned from the light, and are with all these deceivers
which are entered into the world to be condemned, for who live in wickedness
hate the light, and such are deceivers and Antichrists against him, such does
not confess Christ come in the flesh, for none in the world can Christ Jesus
confess, but who in the light dwells which comes from Christ, and he is no
Antichrist which dwells in the light which condemns the world and the
deceivers and Antichrists who confess not that Jesus is come in the flesh, for
such does not, that hate the light, and deny the light which Christ has
enlightened every one withal, and such with the light are to be condemned.

And John says you have heard that Antichrists should come, even now there are
many Antichrists with the light which comes from Christ, John did see many then
that was against Christ, and did opposse him, and such entered into the world,
from they children of light was condemned with the light, and would not
continue with them, and they that discontinue witnessed the anointing, and they
needed no man's teaching, but as they anointing, and they that from this drew
them, did seduce them, for they drew them from waiting to receive the promise
which is eternal life; and they that did in the anointing continue, needed no
man to teach them but as it taught, so came to witness the promise that he has
promised eternal life; and witness the Son and the father also; and they that
went out from them that had the light, and was oppressors against Christ,
Antichrists, and such did not confess Christ come in the flesh, and such denies
the Son of God; and he that denies the Son denies the Father also; so with the
light all you Antichrists that are entered into the world, which John saw was
come then; and all you deceivers and all you seducers, you be all in the world,
and that is the world that hates the Light, and there the deceivers enter, and
the false prophets and seducers which would if it were possible deceive the
very Elect, but it is not possible to deceive the Elect of God for the Elect of
God dwell in the light, which comprehends the world which the world hate, which
gainsayers gainsay, which the deceivers are turned from and hates, and will
not bring to it, because the light will reprove and them condemn which the
Antichrists oppose and deny, and there they deny the light which Christ Jesus
has enlightened every one withal; there you deny the Son and the Father also,
with the light all such are condemned; for he that confesses the Son
acknowledges the Father, and he that denies the Son denies the Father also; And
all these Antichrists and deceivers that deny the light, which Jesus Christ
does enlighten every one that comes into the world withal, with the light they
are seen and comprehended and condemned, in which light, the Saints in light
the Elect, walk over all the world, and does reign eternally for evermore,
praises be unto the Lord God for evermore.

And John who was in the light and exhorted to walk in the light, in which they
had fellowship one with another, said, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they be of God, because many false prophets are gone out into
the world; and hereby know we the ipirit of God, every spirit that confesses
Jesus to be come in the flesh, is of God; and every spirit that confesses not
Jesus to be come in the flesh, this is the spirit of Antichrist, whereof you
have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the world. Then
John saw Antichrist to be come into the world, which did exhort the children of
light to dwell in the light, so with the light they tried their spirits, and so
we try all your spirits now with the light, which says Christ Jesus does not
enlighten every one that comes into the world, to be the Antichrists in the
world to be the false prophets and deceivers, to be condemned with the light,
which Christ Jesus does enlighten every one with that comes into the world.

And you wicked world where the Antichrists are entered into, and the false
prophets are gone out into the world, as John says in his first Epistle, such
are turned from the light, in which the children of God dwell, and these are
the oppossers and Antichrists among the children of light which dwells in it,
which condemns the world, there is no Antichrist nor no false prophet, nor no
deceiver, for they had no abiding among them in the light, but with the light
they were condemned, and so they enter into the wicked world, Antichrists,
deceivers, and false prophets and seducers, and they that love the world are
turned from the light, and the love of the Father is not in them, and they that
dwell in the light dwells in that which comprehends the world, and all the
deceivers, and all the Antichrists, and condemns them all. Little children, let
no man deceive you, he that does righteousns is righteous even as he is
righteous, and all them that are turned from the light acts in
unrighteousness, and all unrighteousness is sin, and all that which is not
righteous is to be condemned with the light, and profane, vain babbling which
increases unto unrighteousness, whose words eats as a canker, with the light
(such are to be condemned) which comes from Christ. And all seducers and evil
men shall wax worse and worse deceiving and being deceived, and are hardened in
their deceit, which with the light are seen which comprehends the world, and
with it is condemned, which light is before the world was, and all truth
breakers, proud, covetous, lovers of themselves, and lovers of pleasure more
then lovers of God, unholy, unthankful, high-minded, fierce dispisers of them
that are good, having the form, denying the power, which creeps into houses,
leads silly women captive, laden with sin led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, never able to come to the knowledge of the truth with the light which
is truth which comes from Christ who is truth, which teaches the truth, the
light which comes from him does condemn all proud boasters, heady high-minded
blasphemers, truth breakers, dispisers of them that are good, unthankful,
unholy disobedient to parents; these are to be turned away from, for of this
sort are they that lead silly women captive. All these are turned from the
light which Christ Jesus has enlightened them withal, and with it all such are
to be condemned with the light as before mentioned, which acts contrary to the
light, which light who walk in it, and love it, grows into the knowledge of
God. And now all who be in the light which comprehends the world, and in it
which does condemn the world-walk* here is no novice, here is no sottish
children, here is no inchanter, nor sorcerer nor no seducer, nor no silly women
that are led captive, captivated with the lust, for such as are led captive
turns from the light, which comes from Christ, and with the light such are
condemned, in which light the children of God walk, which condemns the wicked
world, and all that hate it. And the Apostle Paul which was in the light of
Jesus Christ, said, the spirit spoke expressly that in the latter times some
should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of
devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy having their consciences seared with a hot
iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God
created to be received with thanksgiving, of them that know the truth, for
every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused if it be with
thanksgiving, and with the light all seducing spirits is seen, and who from it
turn and it hate, their conscience is seared as with a hot iron, and such does
speak lies in hypocrisy, and their is forbidding to marry, and the eating of
meats, which every creature of God it is good, with the light it is seen, who
dwells in the light holds the my stery of faith in a pure conscience, and the
doctrine of devils is acted in that nature which is contrary to the light, with
the light it is seen, and with the light condemned, and they are see to be out
of the faith.

And such as is a Teacher or a Bishop made by the will of God, he must be no
striker nor greedy of filthy lucre, he must be grave, he must be patient; he
must not be a brawler, nor covetous, one that rules his own house well, having
his children in subjection with all gravity, he must not be a novice, least he
be lifted up with pride, and so fall into condemnation of the devil, with the
light all such are seen that are before mentioned, which is contrary to the
light, which is to be condemned with light, and so with the spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, are these seen before mentioned, which departs from the
faith, departed from that which putifies the heart, and does give heed to
seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, and with the light which never
changes, which light we are enlightened withal, which comprehends all the
teachers of the world and their doctrine, how that they are not blamless, how
that many of them are strikers, and how that they are greedy of filthy lucre,
how that they are not patient, but are brawlers and covetous, how that they are
not grave, nor does not rule their own house well, nor has not their children
in subjection, but are the novices lifted up in pride, and so falls into
condemned of the devil, 1 Timothy 8.

And with the light all these are seen and comprehended, which was before the
world was, and to you this is the word of the Lord, but when the children of
light are judged, they are chastned of the Lord, that they should not be
condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. but in the light which does condemn the
world the children of light walk in, and so they are not condemned with the
world, but dwells in the light which was before the world, which it does
comprehend and condemn the world, the light.

And Jesus Christ says, I am the light of the world, and this is the
condemnation of the world that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil; for every one that
does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light least his deeds
should be reproved, but he that does truth comes to light, that his deeds may
be manifest, that they are of God, now with the light all deeds are seen and
manifest, that which manifests is light; and so David said, who was in the
light, in thy light we shall see more light, with which light he saw Christ,
and called him Lord, who said the lightening lightened the world, the earth
trembled and shook, as in Psalm. 77.18. And again David said, his lightenings
lightened the world, the earth saw and trembled.

Now all who be of the world, among the false prophets, seducers, and
Antichrists that be entered into the world, does deny this light with which
David saw the enlightnings, his lightnings enlightened the world, which makes
the earth to tremble, Psalm. 97.3. So with the light all you heathens is
condemned that does not see his enlightnings, which he enlights the world
withal, and every one that comes into the world, now you that be Antichrists
are manifest which oppose and deny the light, with the light you are seen and
condemned with the world, which light is before the world was.

And Jesus Christ says, he is tho Light, and does enlighten every one that
comes into the world; if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch, and they are the blind which hate the light, which live in that nature
that acts contrary to the light, which with the light they are to be
condemoed, for who dwell in the light which comes from Christ with the light
see Christ, such are not blind, nor such do not lead into the ditch, but with
the light leads up to Christ, from whence the light comes, and so joins to the
head, and brings the body together, which are all joined together in the light,
and with the light which condemns the blind world which hate it, which eats and
drinks damnation ta themselves, who discern not the body of Christ, how can
they which hate the light, which light is their eye, which light is thesr
condemnation.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at the West End
of Paul's. 1653.


