Sir Thomas Fairfax LETTER To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons. CONCERNING All the Passages of his Army since his
advance from Exeter, and the manner of Routing the Princes and the Lord Hoptons
Forces at Torrington, Together with all the particulars in that Expedition.
ALSO Another LETTER from a Gentleman of quality, of the whole passages of this
great Victory. Both which were read in the House of COMMONS.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. Feb. 24. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
PLymouth being set free, and Da rtmouth taken, I sent Col. Hamond with part of
the foot to possess certain houses near Exeter for the blocking of it upon the
West side of the River (as formerly I had done on the East) and lay with the
rest of the Army, so as to countenance both that work, and the raising of some
Forces in the Southams to lie about Totness for the securing of that Country,
and to keep the Enemy from coming of that side of Devonshire again, when the
Army should remove to the other. These two things, with the continual foul
weather at that time, and the absence of Col. Cook with so many of the Horse,
ocacsioned my stay thereabouts above a Fortnight, in which time the Houses
being competently Fortified, and the Forces raising in the Southams in good
forwardness, I drew the Army up toward Crediton, with purpose to advance into
the North of Devonshire to dislodge the Enemies Horse from their Quarters
thereabouts, and force them into Cornwall, and to endeavor the further clearing
of that part of Devonshire also, either by the taking of Barnstable, or by
blocking of it up, and raising a Force in that well-affected Corner to keep it
in, so as (having all clear or made fast behind me) I might the better follow
the remaining Field forces of the Enemy into Cornwall: And to continue the
blocking up of Exeter on the East side, I left Sir Hardres Waller with three
Regiments of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse of this Army, and advanced with
seven Regiments of Foot, five Regiments of Horse, and five Troops of Dragoons,
(the rest of the Horse and Dragoons being absent with Col: Cook in Dorsetshire,
but then sent for to come up) when I was resolved upon my advance this way, the
Enemy at the same time advanced out of Cornwall with all the Foot they could
make to Torrington, about which their Horse did lie before, and began to
fortify the Town. Their intentions therein (as we conceived, and do since
further find) were by the advantage of this place, and their Garrison of
Barnstaple so near it, to make this part of Devonshire more surely theirs, and
more difficult for us to come into, and lying so much the nearer to Exeter
(against which they supposed this Army wholly engaged) to take their best
advantages: From hence, and from Chimleigh, which they meant also to have
possessed, to relieve Exeter on the North side, or disturb us in the Siege; and
it is probable, they might have a further purpose in their posture here to
secure the Landing of Irish or Welsh Supplies so much the forwarder toward the
East.

On Saturday last, I advanced from Crediton to Chimleigh, where by many
Prisoners taken I was Informed, That the Lord Hopton had hereabouts Four
thousand Horse, and Three thousand Foot; we believed them to be about Two
thousand Foot or upwards, and Three thousand Horse. The extreme foulness of
weather that day and next, occasioned me not to advance from about Chimleigh
for the next night, save only one Foot quarter, and an Horse Guard advanced to
Ring-ash, three miles toward the Enemy, to secure a Rendezvous so much the
nearer to them for the day following: I understood by the best Intelligence,
That the Enemy was resolved to make good their station, and set their rest upon
it to fight us there, if we would come up to them: And truly, men in their
condition could not hope (all things considered) to have more for it. Their
Horse in number superior to what I brought up with me, their Foot (as I find
since) not much inferior; and if they could with all their force make good this
Town, and put us to lie in the field, (there being no Villages near it that
could shelter the Army; the wet weather continuing which was then most likely)
would have forced us to draw back, and make our Firearms little useful, either
for assault or defense; and besides, we were like for matter of Provisions to
be forced to draw off first, they having both by their posture (with the
plentiful Country of Cornwall behind them, and a River at their backs securing
also a good part of Devonshire unto them) and by their strength of Horse much
advantage for longer subsistence then we; and we (by the barrenness of the
place where we must have lien before them, especially for Horse-meat, their
Garrison of Barnstaple lying partly behind us, their Horse more numerous then
ours. which might with stronger parties cut off our supplies) had had little
possibility to subsist long before them. These considerations we had in our eye
to discourage us from going on (as I believe they had to encourage them to
stand) yet on the other side finding, That by reason of the barrenness and long
exhausting of our Quarters behind us, we could neither keep our Horie so close
together as to lie safe so near the Enemy, nor indeed find subsistence for the
Army, either where we were, or in any other Quarters more backward, (where we
could lie, so as to secure the Siege of Exeter from relief) and upon all
considerations, conceiving the Affairs of the Kingdom did require us, and God
by all did call us to make a present attempt upon the Enemy, we resolved to go
on to try what God would do for us, and trust him for weather, subsistence, and
all things. Accordingly on Monday morning I drew out the Army to an early
Rendezvous at Ring-ash (within six miles of the Enemy) the weather still
continued very wet, and so by all signs, was like to hold, till we were
advanced from the Rendezvous; but suddenly when we were upon march, it beyond
all expectation grew fair and dry, and so continued, whereas we had scarce seen
one fair blast for many days before. The Enemy (as we understood by the way)
had all their Horse drawn together about Torrington, and with their Foot
prepared to defend the Town, which they had fortified with good Barracadoes of
Earth, cast up at every Avenue, and a competent Line patcht up round about it,
their Horse standing by to flanck the same, and some within to scowre the
streets. Our Forlorn hope had Order to advance to Stephenson Park (about a mile
from the Town) and there to stay for the drawing up of the Army, there being no
other place fit for that purpose nearer to the Town on that side we came on:
But when we came near, we understood the Enemy had with Two hundred Dragoons
possessed the House in the Park, and were Fortifying of it, being of it self very
strong: But upon our nearer approach, their Dragoons quitted the House, and our
Forlorn hope falling on them, took many Prisoners, and pursuing them near the
Town, were engaged so far as they could not well draw back to the Park, which
occasioned the sending up of stronger parties to make them good where they
were, or bring them off; and at last (there being some fear the Enemy would
draw about them, and hem them in, Col: Hamond was sent up with three Regiments
of Foot (being his own, Col: Harlows, and mine) and some more horse to lie for
Reserves unto them, by which time the night was grown on, so as it was not
thought fit, unless the Enemy appeared to be drawing away to attempt any thing
further upon the town till morning, in regard none of us knew the ground nor
th'advantages or disadvantages of it; But about 9. of the clock, there being
some apprehension of the Enemies drawing away, by reason of their drawing back
some out-guards, small parties were sent out toward the towns end, to make a
certain discovery, which going very near their works before the Enemy made any
firing, but being at last entertained with a great volley of shot, and
thereupon supposed to be engaged; stronger parties were sent up to relieve
them, and after them the three Regiments went up for Reserves, till at last
they fell on in earnest; after very hot firings, our men coming up to the
Barracadoes and Line, the dispute continued long at push of Pike, and with
But-ends of Muskets, until at last it pleased God to make the Enemy fly from
their works, and give our men the entrance. After which, our men were twice
repulsed by their horse, and almost all driven out again, but col: Hamond (with
some other officers and a few Soldiers) made a stop at the Barracadoes, and so
making good their Reentrance, rallyed their men, and went on again (Major
Stephens with their Forlorn of horse coming seasonably up to second them) The
Enemies foot ran several ways, most of them leaving their Arms, but most of
their Officers, with assistance of horse, made good their own Retreat out of
the Town toward the Bridge, and taking advantage of strait passages to make
often stands against our men, gave time for many of their foot to get away over
the Bridge. Their horse without the Town (after some attempts at other Avenues
to have broke in again upon us being repulsed, at last went all away over
another Bridge, and at several other passes of the River, and all fell
Westward; the ground, where their horse had stood, and the Bridge they went
over lying so beyond the Town, as our horse could not come at them, but through
the Town, which (by reason of strait passage through several Barracadoes was
very tedious, by means whereof, and of the continued strait Lanes the Enemy had
to Retreat by after they were over the River (as also by the advantage of the
night, and by their perfect knowledge of the country, and of escape, and our
utter ignorance therein) our horse could do little execution upon the pursuit,
but parties being sent out several ways to follow them (as those disadvantages
would admit) did the best they could, and brought back many prisoners and
horses; we took many prisoners in the Town, who being put into the Church,
where the Enemies Magazine lay (of above Eighty barrels of powder, as is
reported, besides other Ammunition) either purposely by some desperate
prisoner, or casually by some Soldier, the powder was fired, whereby the
Church was quite blown up, the prisoners and most of our men that guarded them
were killed, and overwhelmed in the ruins, the houses of the Town shaken and
shattered, and our men all the Town over much endangered by the stones, Timber
and Lead, which with the blast were carried up very high, and scattered in
great abundance all the Town over, and beyond, yet it pleased God that very few
of our men were slain or hurt thereby (save those in the Church only) our loss
of men otherwise in this service was small, though many wounded, it being an
hotter service then any storm this Army has before been upon, wherein God gave
our men great resolution, and Col: Hamond especially, with other Officers
engaged with him, behaved themselves with much courage and diligence recovering
the ground after their men were twice repulsed; of prisoners taken in this
service, about two hundred were blown up, two hundred have taken up Arms with
us, and above 200 more common Soldiers remain prisoners, besides many
Officers, Gentlemen and Servants, not many slain, but their foot so dispersed,
as that of about Three thousand, (which the most credible persons do affirm
they had here, and we find by a List taken among the Lo: Hoptons papers
themselves did account them more) we cannot hear of above four hundred that
they carried off with them into Cornwall, whither their horse also are gone,
being much broken and dispersed as well as their foot. By the considerations
and circumstances in this business which I have here touched upon, you will
perceive whose hand it was that lead us to it, and gave such success in it.
And truly there were many more evident appearances of the good hand of God
therein then I can set forth, let all the honor be to him alone for ever,
being desirous (as God shall see it good, and further enable me) to improve
the advantage of this success to the utmost. The next day having sent some
Regiments of horse and foot to advance unto quarters up toward Holsworthy to
set the Enemy more home into Cornwall, and with more terror upon them: I sent
also one Regiment of foot with some horse back toward Barnstable, to possess
the Earl of Bathes house at N. Tavestock, about a mile from Barnstable on this
side the River, whereby that Garrison will be easily kept in on this side, and
I shall further try what may be done upon it other ways, while the Army takes
a little rest hereabouts, which the unseasonable marches, miserable quarters,
and hard duty both horse and foot for many days have been put unto do
necessarily require: But I conceive, that so soon as the Army can be fitted for
the purpose, it would be best to follow the Enemy home, and thoroughly into
Cornwall, the breaking of that body of horse that is left there being the
likelyest means to prevent or discourage the landing of any Foreign forces in
these parts, or the raising of any more out of Cornwall. In order to which, I
must earnestly recommend to your care two things especially, the one, To
provide by the disposal of your Forces in the Midland parts, that by Excursions
from Oxford hitherward I may not be diverted from prosecution of the work in
Cornwall, to send again that way; nor the sieges of Exeter and Barnstable
disturbed when I am engaged further West: The other, that Money may be speeded
(if any ways possible, but for one month or six weeks) to enable the horse as
well as foot, to pay quarters in Cornwall, whereby th'oppositions that people
might make would in all likelihood be taken off, and their affections or good
opinions gained, to make them helpful to us against their present oppressors.

There came unto me this day a young man from about Truro, who certifieth me,
That Sir Walter Dudley came very lately from France, to let those about the
Prince know, That if there were an absolute necessity, they could bring over
their men from France with a fair wind, to be here by the middle of the next
month; expressing, That they had near Eight thousand foot, and a thousand
horse in readiness, and three months pay provided for them, besides Ten
thousand pounds in Bullion daily expected, a Mint being ready to coin the same:
But yet intimated a convenience in the giving a little more time for their
coming over; whereupon Sir John Culpeper was to go in all haste for France upon
Friday last and is supposed on purpose, either to hasten all or a good part of
those Forces over. I think it will be very good, that as much shipping as may
be obtained be hastened to those parts; I shall upon this Information, and the
good success God has been pleased to give us, so to dispose of the Army, as
may most effectually conduce to a speedy and thorough settlement of these
Western parts of the Kingdom. Therefore I desire you again to have a special
care, that the Forces about Oxford be not permitted to range into these parts,
when the Army is like to be engaged so far West, lest it occasion the diversion
of our Forces, and hinder the accomplishment of that we desire to effect. I
remain

Your most humble Servant, T: FAIRFAX.
Great Torrington, Feb. 19. 1645.
To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
I Suppose before the Date of this Letter, you have received my former Letter
of the Engagement of this Army and Hoptons at Torrington on Monday night last,
where we took Six hundred Prisoners, besides Officers, near Two hundred
Prisoners blown up with Haptons Magazine, set on fire by one Wate a Northern
man, for thirty pounds promised him by Sir Ralph Hopton, as he confessed a
little before his death: He died this day of the wounds he received by the
Timber that fell upon him: The rest of the Prisoners cast him out for a
Monster, that would have destroyed all them his Friends. All the houses in the
Town are almost shattered in pieces with the blast. Hopton had his Horse killed
under in the street; and as we understand by those that come to day from
Cornwall, he is desperately wounded; All his force are All-ago into Cornwall,
there they are in great Confusion for fear of our Armies advance, and an Army
out of France: we had been there before now, but for settling the business of
Barnstaple, by blocking it up close: One Regiment is at the E: of Bathes house
at Tavestock within a mile of Barnstaple; other Forces at Biddiford and other
places. On Saturday or Sunday we are for Cornwall, Godwilling. By Hoptons Papers
we perceive the Relief of Exeter was the principal end of his Motion to
Torrington. The quantities of Powder and Salt to be left in Exeter, we find in
writings. We took eight Colors, one Hoptons own Colors with this Motto, I
will strive to help my Sovereign King. His Commission from the King and Prince
to be General, and Digbies to be Colonel General of the Forces before Plymouth,
were also taken. Two Ships are come into Biddiford yesterday; the one will
prove Prize.

J. R.
Torrington, Feb. 19. twelve at night.
FINIS.

