THE LORD GENERAL'S LETTER To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of
LONDON, Concerning the ARMIEs advance up to the City of London; and desiring
the Advance of 40000 li. presently, for pay of the ARMY.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
BEing upon an immediate advance with the Army toward London, we thought good
hereby to give you notice thereof; For the grounds and necessity leading us
hereunto, we refer you to our late Remonstrance, and to our late Declaration
concerning the same. We have only this further to add, that as we are far from
the least thought of plunder or other wrong to your City, or any the places
adjoining (which we hope your former experiences of us will give you cause
enough to credit us in,) so for the better prevention of any disorder in the
Soldiery, or of any abuse or inconvenience to the inhabitants in the
quartering of the Soldiery at private houses; we earnestly desire, that you
would take a present course for the supply of Money to pay those Forces, while
we shall be necessitated to stay there, upon which we assure you we shall so
dispose of them into great and void houses about the City as much as may be
possible, as that few or none of the inhabitants shall be troubled with
quartering of any Soldiers at all. And for this purpose we desire, That forty
thousand pound may be forthwith provided upon the security of your Arrears to
be ready to be paid out to the Forces to morrow night if possible. And we
shall be ready to receive from you any intimations for the further prevention
of hurt, or inconvenience to the City in this business, I remain

Windsor, ult. November. 1648. Your Lordships most assured friend and servant, T.
FAIRFAX.

For the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
1 December. 1648.
Imprimatur.

Gil. Mabbot.

London, Printed for Lawrence Blaiklocke. 1648.


