ORDERS, AND RVLES; Set forth by his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairefax, for the
taking off of all Free Quarter, and Billet in the Commonwealth of England and
Wales.

Published by his Excellencies special Command.

July 28 1649 LONDON, Printed for George Roberts.

Orders and Rules for the taking off of all Free Quarter and Billet.
WHereas the Parliament has made provision for the constant pay of the Army,
and taking off all Free Quarter and Billet, and have passed an Act with
certain Rules and Instructions intending the necessary provision for the
Soldiers, most indifferently both to the Country, and them: These are
therefore in prosecution of the said Act to require all Colonels, Majors,
Officers, and Soldiers, whatsoever, to observe and put in execution such Rules
and Instructions in their respective Commands and places, as hereafter
follows.

1. That no Party under the Number of 25. though upon a March, Quarter in
private Houses, without the Owners consent.

2. That whereas the Act allows the Soldiers upon March to Quarter in private
Houses two Nights, to the intent they may within that time provide for
themselves, and diverse Soldiers do take advantage thereby (contrary to the
intent thereof) to remove Quarters oftener then is necessary, and upon their
remove march but two or three Miles a day, or there abouts: I do therefore
order, that no Troop march less then ten Miles a day, nor Company of Foore
less then seven, except upon service or extraordinary occasion.

3. That upon settlement of Quarters, the Officer in Chief of every Troop
Company, or commanded party, make known to the respective Landlords within his
respective Quarters, that they are to discharge their Billet; and in case any
Landlord shall complain to the Captain or Commander in Chief upon the place
that any of his Soldiers have not paid their Quarters: The said Captain or
Commander in Chief of the said Troop, Company, or Party, to give satisfaction
to every person out of the Offenders pay within tonne days after just
complaint made, upon pain of Cashiering: And in case the Captain, or Officer
in Chief shall refuse or neglect to give satisfaction, as aforesaid; the
Colonel, or Major of the said Regiment, to give satisfaction himself to the
Landlord out of the said Officers and Offenders pay next growing due: And to
transmit the Charge against the Officer so offending, with the examination to
the Judge Advocate at the Headquarters within ten days after he has had
information thereof.

4. That in regard the same care cannot be taken upon a March: It is Ordered,
That the Quartermaster, or any employed to take up Quarters, do in their
tickets for Quarter, express the name of the Soldier or Soldiers to Quarter
there, and make known that they are to pay their Quarters. And that in case of
neglect, upon complaint the next morning to the Commander in chief, of the
party, I roope, or Company, they shall receive satisfaction, That if either the
Quartermaster, or any employed upon that service, or the Commander in chief
fayl in the due observance thereof, that they incutre the penalty of
Cashiering, giving sasssfaction to the Complainers, as before.

5. That this may be the better put in Execution; I do Order, that all
Colonels, and other Officers (but such as I shall appoint to attend the Head
Quarters) be resident with their respective Regiments, and not absent above
fourteen days without special leave from my self, upon pain of forfeiting
their pay during their absence; And that no Colonel do give leave to any of
his Officers to be absent above fourteen days without special leave from my
self; the Officer so offending to lose his pay during that absence.

6. That the Deputy Commissaries of the Musters in their respect vecircuits,
and Associations do certify (by name) unto the Commissary General of the
Musters, every Muster what Officers of any Regiment, or belonging to Garrisons
they find absent from their commands. And that the Commissary upon it do make
Certificate thereof upon every Muster with all speed after the receipt thereof
to the Major General, or those who give out Orders at the Headquarters in his
absence.

7. That by virtue of the Commissions formerly granted for the keeping of
Courts of War in the respective Regiments; each Colonel or Major take care
for the convening the Officers of his Regiment at a Court Marshall once every
month, at the least, and examine what has been done in the observing and
executing of the before going Orders and the Articles of War. And to certify
to the Major General or Officer issuing out Orders in his absence at the Head
Quarters, what Officers were then absent from their commands, and upon what
grounds, as is expressed in the foregoing Article.

3. That all Offenses mentioned within these Orders which have not a particular
penalty appointed for them, be punished at the judgment of the Regimentall
Counsel of War; provided it extend to the loss of place of a Commission
Officer, nor to the taking away of life or limb from any whatsoever.

Given under my hand and seal at Kensington the 28. of July. 1649. T. FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

