This is to all Officers and Soldiers OF THE ARMIES IN England, Scotland, and
Ireland; AND TO ALL MAGISTRATES, And them in Authority in these Nations, and
the Dominions thereunto appertaining for them to read.

May 29 LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate. 1657

This is to all OFFICERS and SOVLDIERS OF THE ARMIES IN England, Scotland, and
Ireland.
THE word of the Lord to all you Soldiers, Governors, and Rulers, to rule in
Power and Love, to that in your consciences I speak, which is of God, that your
minds may be guided up to God, that you may see what you must rule over; for
all you dwelling in the Light which comes from Jesus, it leads all to Christ's
Government, and it leads from the world, and it leads from under the occasion
of the war; from whence does the wars arise but from the lusts; and so you that
follow the lusts, go from the light, you go from the true Sword of Justice, and
so in the light ye come to be condemned; and let nothing rule in you but the
light, that with it Christ Jesus you may all come to see, and him rule and
reign; and ye who would not have him rule, ye are for the Sword, and must be
slain; And all such as respect persons, contrary to the Light does act, and the
light there does not reign, and the Law of God is not hearkened unto, which is
upon all respectors of persons; but the light love, to lead you to the Law of
God which is perfect, according to that of God in every ones conscience, which
is Equity, and the Law here is Equity, and judges that which is not Equity, and
cuts down, and cuts out that which is not Equity, and that which is contrary to
that which is pure in every ones conscience, and so the Land comes to be swept
of evil doers, and the refuge of lies taken away; and all you Soldiers know a
Soldiers place, and see that ye be Soldiers qualified, that ye do accuse no
man falsely, that ye do violence to no man, and that ye be content with your
wages; so then you will see what the Sword is to, and is to be laid upon all
that do violence, and all the false accusers. And you that are Governors must
be no false accusers, nor do violence to any man, but ruled with that of God in
your consciences, to exercise toward God and toward man, against all violence,
and against all false accusations; see that you, and none of you be such; and
then let your Sword be laid upon such, and then set your Soldiers in their
places, and then let them go forth, and let them have their wages; for who are
false accusers, and do violence, are out of the natural affection, and have not
affection to Nature, but would destroy it in his own particular, and then in
the general through the rash headyness, upon such is the Sword laid. So to you
this is the word of the Lord, that ye may come to a pure and right
understanding, to know that which leads Nature out of its course, and has not
affection to Nature, upon such is the sword laid, and is to be ruled with the
Sword, and kept down; and see that none of you be such. To that in your
consciences I speak, be not violent doers, false accusers, drunkards; nor be
profane nor loose Soldiers, Governors, nor Rulers, if you be, that in your
consciences will witness me, that you are all for the sword of the Lord God
Almighty, and not justifiable in his sight; to the light in all your
consciences I speak, that with it you may all see your selves, and what you
have done, and how you have spent your time, and how you do do spend your time,
the end of your Soldiery, the end of your war, what the war is to, and what
the sword is laid upon, and what it is to keep in order, for all your
Soldiers, Governors and Rulers, which contrary to the light do act, which
comes from Christ Jesus, which light is in you; ye are to be ruled with the
sword of the Lord God: To you this is the word of God; for the Law of God is
perfect, and answers that of God in every one in the world; and he that has
the sword, that is a terror to the evil doer, he answers with the sword that
of God in every one that comes into the world, which if he do evil, he acts
contrary to that of God in him, which the sword takes hold upon him that does
evil; and he that does evil, acts contrary to the Just, so the Sword of Justice
takes hold upon him; now this is that which shall stand over the whole world,
(not over a Nation only) and does not regard customs of Nations, but it shall
answer that of God in every man that comes into the world; so he that answers
that of God in every one that comes into the world, he must be just, he must
not be a false accuser, that is not just, that is not true; and he must not do
violence, that that bears the sword for violence is not just; for if he does,
this will take hold upon him, the law of God which is just shall take hold of
him; and this shall answer that of God in every one.

G. F.

To all the Magistrates and them in Authority in these Nations, and the
Dominions thereunto appertaining, for them to read this.
YE Magistrates, ye Rulers, who have known the power of the Lord in giving of
ye Dominion, be low, and keep low, least you abuse the Power that ye once
tasted of; and wait for wisdom, the wisdom of God, that in it, and with it ye
may be ordered to the glory of God, and not abuse his power; for the mighty day
of the Lord has been seen in this Age, and has brought forth much to his
glory, and given you victory over much, and thrown down much, and set you above
much; and them that the power of the Lord has thrown down, of the power of the
Lord they may take notice. Now ye that have known this power, the power of the
Lord, be not lifted up, least the same power throw you down, that has thrown
down those before you; for the same power throws down that which is exalted, as
it did before. Be not high minded, but fear and be watchful unto Prayer, lest
ye run into wantonness, and cry Aha, your own hand has done this, and this I
have done, and the other I have done; and so boast, and take glory to your
selves, and rob God of his honor, and honor one another, such God will stain
their glory and honor, and deface it, and bring it into contempt, and overthrow
it with the same power that he overthrew his Enemies before, the same power
overthrows that, who are joined together, a Harlot, and make you to know that
he reigns the Ruler of Heaven and Earth, the Creator of all things, whose power
is dreadful in overturning, shaking down, and removing, and defacing, and
taking the glory to himself, and the honor to whom it belongs, and the fear to
whom it belongs. Therefore boast not your selves none, but be watchful and
meek, and learn the true humility, which goes before the honor, and the true
patience, which obtains the Crown of eternal life, and the immortal life,
through the patience received.

Now in Causes of Judgments in Controversies, with patience hear each party,
the Accused, the Accuser; the Offended, and the Offender, with meekness and
humbleness hear; that goes before the Honor; for it is an honor for a King to
find out a matter, and to search it out. And let not there be an eye among you,
nor in any of you, nor an ear that will respect persons, or have persons
respected; for in such causes there will be a will that will be brickle,
earthly, changeable, wanting the patience to judge rightly; selfish, and
stubbornnese, and prejudice, and sidings to parties more then to Truth; and
right judgment is blinded in these, and the true Measure is wanting, and the
true Weight to weigh withal, and to measure withal. Whilst there is
prejudice in the Officer, Judge, Justice, or Ruler, whilst he is passionate,
out of the humbleness and humility, out of the mercy, out of the patience, in
the wilfulness, in the stubbornness, sturdines, high mindedness, minding the
person, respecting, under this does the just groan; under this does the just
feel the weight, which feels the want of the true measure, and cries for the
true measure, and cries for the true weight, and puts up Petitions to the Lord,
who hears and answers the cries of the oppressed, and removes the Oppressor,
and brings him to shame and contempt, though for a time he has a day of honor
and glory; but such the Lord of glory their days does shorten often in turning
them out, and cutting them off, bringing his righteous judgments upon them who
rightly has not judged; such God measures their ways, God gives to them
measure and just weight according to their works.

Therefore all ye Rulers of the earth be awakened with the measure of God, be
awakened to righteousness, and to the measure of God in you all take heed, to
guide your minds up to God, whereby ye may stand all in Gods Counsel, to
receive that from God which shall never be shaken, whereby with it you may
answer that of God in every man, and be to the Lord a praise, and a terror to
the Nations about you; for true Judgment and Justice being set up, and being in
the hands of such that has the true measure to reach that of God in every man,
that of God in every man shall answer his measure; and having the true weight to
weigh things aright, that of God in every man shall witness his weight to be
just and true, and not too light, and his measure not too short; he gives to
every man his due, and every m^n his weight; here is the equity, here the
righteous is glad, the righteous rejoicetth the evil doer, that reigns, which
is a terror to it.

From the Lord God of Heaven and Earth I am moved to charge all to be meek, to
be humble, to be patient, and not to be rash, nor to be heady, nor to be
fierce, but to be gentle, and fear before the Lord God, whereby ye may receive
his wisdom, that in all Countries where ye come, where ye are Judges, Justices,
Rulers, and Magistrates, ye may be a praise in the Country where ye are, and
where ye come, and a good savor to the Lord God, answering that of God in
every man, which will exercise your conscience toward God, and toward man,
which is for conscience sake, and not for wrath, that all may come subject to
the Higher Power, (mark) the Higher Power, which is above that Power which
abode not in the truth, but is out of the truth, out of the life, which is the
light; and that is the Powers of Darkness, and there is the spiritual
wickedness, and there is the Rulers of Darkness, out of the truth, which is out
of the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world; the
light which every man is enlightened withal that comes into the world, will
witness to him the higher Power, which is a terror to him if he do evil. And so
ye all knowing and coming into the higher power to which the soul must be
subject unto, ye that are come to this, ye are in that that is above the
spiritual wickednesses, that is above the Rulers of darkness of this world, ye
come to be on top of all the world, in the whole world ye will be a dread and
terror to all the world; ye will be the Higher Power, ye will reach over
Nations, Tongues, People, Kinreds, and Languages, and so sound a dread and
terror over them all; ye which be in the higher Power, higher then the POWERS
of DARKNESS, Higher then the spiritual wickednesses, higher then all the
Heathenish gods and Rulers; higher then the Rulers of darkness in the highest
places of the world; this is higher, the higher Power is above the world, and
them all, on top of them all, and chains them all, and answers that of God in
all, the fashion of it, the lusts of it, which wars against the soul (mark)
which against the soul wars, which soul must be subject to the higher Power,
which higher Power goes against the lusts of the world, of the flesh, that
against the soul wars. Therefore whose soul soever is subject to the higher
power, above the power of him that abode not in the truth; none of them that be
here do the lusts of the Devil, that's out of the truth, but they are in the
Power above him, the higher power, which chains, overturns, brings down, brings
under, puts down all the powers of darkness, the spiritual wickedness. Who are
in this higher Power, they are in the Throne of God, and they be in that which
is honorable, and in that which does remain; they be in that which limits and
stops, and sets bars to that which is out of the higher Power, which comes
under the chain, the bridle, the yoke, the gage, the rule, which would destroy,
devour, tear to pieces; the higher power over that has Dominion; and all that
which wars against the soul, to which the soul must be subject to, and where
this rules there is peace, and the burden is taken off; the innocent rejoiceth,
the simplicity is glad; the righteous praises God, and magnifies him where
this rules; and where this rules, such as be in it, they know the kingdom of
the Most High tuling in men, and his Dominion which has no end; and his
Scepter of Righteousness, and his Throne is exalted, and the Kingdom where
there is no end is known, seen, enjoyed; who be in this are in the honorable
power, throne, Dominion, which has no end, which moves, throws down, shakes
all the contrary; which Power reaches to the seed of God, and to yt of God in
every man; who are here, him comes to know who upholds all things by his Word
and Power, and comes under the government of the Lord Jesus Christ, and are the
help Magistrates for him who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him,
whose Kindom is now set up, and setting up, to whom the glory is given; I will
not give it to another, says the Lord, but to his Son: And such as are here,
they be in the higher power, they seek that honor that comes from God only, and
honor the Son and the Father; such as receive honor one from another, and honor
themselves, receive Honor of men, be such as be without, the unbelieving, not
under Christ's government.

Therefore all wait in the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal,
that with the light you may see Christ Jesus, from whence it comes, and receive
power from Christ, who has all power in heaven and earth given to him, which
if you hate the light, and do not believe in it, which ye are enlightened
withal, which Light lets ye see (mark) your deeds, whether they be wrought in
God or no; the Light does let you see that comes to Christ, him by whom the
world was made, before it was made, this light will let you see whether your
deeds be wrought in God; but hating this light which lets you see, it will be
your condemnation; so stop not the ear against that which tells ye what ye have
been, and tells ye what ye have done, and tells ye what ye have said, and
tells ye what ways ye have walked in, and what actions ye have acted, and what
deeds ye have committed; stop not the ear against that, but let the ear be open
to that, lest ye remain in the unconverted estate, the unhealed estate in the
transgression; strangers from the life of God, his Covenant of Light, of Life,
and peace; Therefore close not the eye which lets you see your words, your
ways, your actions; for not closing the eye, not stopping the ear, the ear
open, the eye open, Gods counsel is heard, Gods secrets received, out of the
transgression ye come, and healing ye wi^ness, and the wisdom and secret of the
Lord God, and the renewing of your mind ye will here come to witness, and that
stand and brought up, that brings to stand in the counsel of God, and do his
will; the eye being unclosed to that which lets you see, and the ear being
unstopt to that which cries to the Lord in you, the Lords voice is heard, which
keeps ye tender, and from hardness of heart. And to you this is the word of the
Lord God, and with that ye answer that of God in every man: This shall stand for
a witness for ever to ye or against ye.

And ye that have known the power of God, take heed of your getting out of it,
and then that nature which is gone out of it, sets up such in authority that
the power has thrown down, which are out of it, lest the Lord God sweep you
both away with his power, who join to that which formerly the power of the Lord
God has overthrown, the Oppressor which would have reigned, which the Lord
has overthrown, and would not have the Lord to reign, therefore the Lord laid
it as the dust, and as the ground with his power, therefore keep you in that
power, and if any of them come in to repentance, and does acknowledge the power
which has thrown them down, and renewed and converted, then ye are in unity,
then you are in one in that which makes plain the way of the Lord, and lays
down mountains, that the Lord alone may be exalted, and his house established
on the top of the mountains.

And none is worthy to have the name of a Magistrate, that is proud, peevish,
selfish, crabb^d; or that is wilful, or wicked, or is heady, and highminded,
for the Higher Power is to chain such from their intents and mischievous ends,
that they would do and wrong the innocent with their unrighteousintents; and
such as touching judgment are blind, that be perverse, and full of ambition and
pride, such forget God, and is not in their thoughts, those feel nor the burden
of the oppressed, they feel not the burden that the innocent groans under; for
such as be there, be in that nature as burdens the just in particular, and in
the general, before whose eyes the fear of God is not, who makes a prcy of the
just, of whom the Lords eye beholds, and who shall be a terror to the evil doer,
and a praise to them that do well, which they all be that be in the higher
power, before whose eye is the fear of God, whose eye they behold that watches
over them, the Almighty with whom they have peace, in acting things that are
righteous, that of God in every man answering.

Now as concerning Priests and Teachers, who will not preach without a sum of
money, of whom they look for it of you, and with petitions to you come or send,
which themselves have not heard the voice of the Lord, the word of the Lord,
such as comes with petitions, and have not heard the voice of the Lord, nor his
word which was in the beginning, are to stand by, the Word commands them
silence, as it was in the days of Jeremiah, and such the higher power silenceth
that use their tongues, whose doubts is for outward maintenance, and taking
thought for that; such are in the state of the Gentiles, the kingdoms of the
world, and seeking for that, and not for the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of it first, which the other things follow, if this were found,
and a word from the Lord received, and his counsel stood in, people would be
turned from their evil ways, there would be no want of outward then; but if
they be Priests of the Readers of the Law to the people, then they must have
their Pulpit of wood, and a thing made ready for their hands, and boast in
other men's labors, but this was not the practice of the Apostles, but such are
excluded out of the Kingdom, the boasters, and are from their own measure, with
which they should reach that of God in every man, and such be they who would
have their mouths stopped, and would stop the mouths of them that have the word
of the Lord God immediately from his mouth, and speaks his word (by which all
things were made) without money or price freely.

So as ye all Magistrates be kept in the fear of God, and in the higher power,
in the true understanding, and the true wisdom which is pure, gentle, from
above, and easy to be entreated, it will bring you to the true instructions,
and ye being in them it will bring you to instruct all others, where ever ye
come, or be; in the wisdom and ways of God, Peace, Righteousness, and Truth,
and Meekness and Patience, whereby you may all come to love as the family of
God, and no frowardness or bitterness, but with wisdom, order and rvle the
creatures, by which they were created; for with that must all be governed to
the glory of the Lord God, the Creator, with the wisdom by which all things
are created.

G. F.

The End.

