A LETTER Sent from The Lord Fairfax, etc.

Dated at Popleton, January 1. 1659.

Superscribed, For the Right Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire; Speaker to the
Parliament, These.

Read in Parliament, January 6. 1659.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659. Jan: 7.

A LETTER Sent from The Lord Fairfax, etc. Superscribed, For the Right
Honorable, William Lenthall, Esquire; Speaker to the Parliament.
SIR,
HAving been Solicited by diverse Gentlemen of this County, both Parliament Men,
Commissioners of the Militia, and others, to try what Forces we could Raise, as
Volunteers, for the opposing of the Forces under the Command of the Lord
Lambert, who had Imposed upon our County both Free Quarter and Sessements, and
for the Reducing of the City of York, which was then Garrisoned by Part of his
Forces: upon conference with them, together with Major Smithson, and Captain
Strangewaies, and some other Officers of the Army, that were well Affected to
You. We did appoint upon Friday the thirtieth of the last Month, to Randezvouz
in several places, viz. The Lord Fairfax about Leedes, Sir Henry Cholmley, and
Colonel Bethel, and Captain Strangewaies, at Malton, and the next morning at
Bagby Moore, where they were to meet with Major Smithson, and some others of
the North Riding Forces, and so to March to the Lord Fairfax; all which was
accordingly Executed, except that on Bagby Moore, which by Reason of the sudden
coming back of the Army, we could not do; but drew together a Considerable Body
of Horse, and being joined with the Irish Brigade, who had Declared for You, We
have this day taken in York; and now understanding that the Lord Lambert has
Submitted, We conceive there will be no further use of Us, and do therefore
intend (after a days refreshment of Our Men) to send them home. And we desire
You to be assured, That what has been done was only in order to Your Service.

In Our March to York We met with a Packet directed to You, but the Messenger
not being in the direct Road to London, but to York, We thought fit to open it,
least it had been only to cover some directions for Lilburn, which made us open
it; and in it We found Our selves Aspersed with many scandalous untruths, there
scarce being any thing true in it, but that We were met together; and for the
Duke of Buckingham his being with us was merely accidental; and having been
forced, together with my Lord Fairfax, to leave his own House, he came to us
only for safety as a Private man, and upon exceptions against him withdrew
himself. We have no more to add, but Remain,

Your Humble Servants, Tho. Fairfax. Hen. Cholmley. Hen. Arthington.

Popleton, Jan. 1. 1659.

