THE KING OF DENMARK'S MESSAGE To the States of HOLLAND, FOR The advancing of
the King of Scots Interest; with Their proceedings thereupon; and His
Resolution to maintain the Quarrel against all Opposers; [if He can]

Also, His raising of a great Army; their advance toward the Seacoast; and 30
Men of War launcing forth to join with the Dutch; Together with the great
Present sent to the King of Scots, amounting to one hundred thousand pounds in
Gold.

Likewise, a great and glorious Victory obtained by the English against 120
sail of Dutch; with the number of ships taken, and brought into the Downs.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for James Williams, 1652.

A great and glorious Victory obtained against the Hollanders, upon the
Northern Seas; with the particulars thereof, and the manner how the Parliaments
Frigots fell upon the Convoy and Merchants, as they were passing to the Irish
seas, etc.
Right Honorable,
THough no Tongue or Pen be able to express the greatness of the action,
suitable to that magnificent appearance of God, in the behalf of poor England;
yet because it is a main part of our duty, in any measure, to become
subservient to his glory, it is conceived nothing can more advance it, then by
recounting before all the world, the many wondrous and mighty dispensations of
his mercy.

For upon the 30 and 31 of October. the waves at sea roul'd high and tempestuous;
for the winds were at a sad contest of Mastership for 48 hours together, so
that our Navy were necessitated to draw near the Harbors; however the very
storms proud advantageous to us; for a Squadron of the enemies ships passing by
the Isle of Wight, were by the force of the tempest scattered and divided, and
in that disorder 4 of them were driven in upon Genesis Blake, who willing to
entertain all the smiles of fortune, most courteously embraced their inevitable
reducement, and has sent them all prizes into the Downs. Two Merchant men since
laden with wines and other rich commodities, partaking of the same disaster in
weather, are taken in like manner, and now on sail toward Dover for
Winter Quarters, 7 ships more pretending themselves Hamburgers, were likewise
taken by the States Frigots, and conveyed to Plymouth, where they are at
present, till such time that they can make it appear that they are not Flemins,
otherwise to expect to be made prizes. Three more likewise upon the Coast of
France were brought in by the Pelican to the fleet, under the same pretense of
Hamburgers; but unless they prove it suddenly, and by sufficient demonstration,
they must look for an inimical Censure. Yet that which does most illustrate the
splendor of our Victory, is, the dissipating of the Dutch Convoy, with 100
sail of Merchants, near the Isles of Orkney, by Cap. Ball, with 20 Men of War.

From the Downs Novem. 8. 1652.
General Blake maintains the Western seas, and expects the coming forth of the
Dutch Fleet very suddenly. Vantrump has tendered an Oath to all his Officers
and Seamen; and unanimously they have vowed to dispute their Quarrel upon the
Neptu^e Ocean to the last man. But it is the Muzzle of the Canon, and not such
Squibs must resolve our Case.

Two hundred sail of Colliers are now bound from Newcastle for London; they put
forth on the third of November, and are daily expected at the Hope.

On Monday being the eighth of this instant, we received intelligence, That Sir
George Carteret is very busy with his Pickeroons upon the Western Coast,
seizing diverse small Vessels, but sometimes they snap short of their prey; and
instead of prize receive shipwreck. Amongst the rest, a gallant ship richly
laden with plundered Plate, and other famous Commodities, was bulg'd upon the
Sands near Little in Kent, and became a prey to the Inhabitants thereabouts: she
is by estimation deemed to be worth forty thousand pounds.

Great are the preparations for War throughout all the Provinces; but the most
active and forward to engage are the English: Yet there is a people who are
loath to run the hazard of War, knowing that it is not a little Ghelt must feed
the flame, and want of Trade will soon make a hole in the bottom of their
purses. And so I leave them between Hope and Despair: God knows the future
Events, and not I.

Yet notwithstanding, the Estates now prosecute their Design with great vigor,
and have paid the Seamen off all their arrears, so that there is a general
concurrence of their Mariners to be in action once more; and their whole Navy
are now ready to launch forth. The Lords have mustered 30000 able and expert
men of Arms, out of which 5000 were selected to man the Navy. The interest of
the King of Scots is eagerly prosecuted amongst them; and all the talk is, of
his Cause, and Advance, to palliate their new Design The King of Denmark has
sent a Declaration to the Estates General, assuring them of his readiness to
join with them, for the advancing of the King of Scots interest, provided they
would play the like Game; which they seem very forward in, to run an apparent
hazard of the fortune of their own Commonwealth to hold the contestation with
ours. Thirty men of War are coming from the Baltic seas to join with them;
from whence we hear, that the King has sent a summons throughout all his
Dominions, in obedience whereunto, there has been a great mustering of the
Militia, and a great Army is drawn down toward the Sound; so that there seems
to be a mighty compliance of both sides in heightning their war and conspiracy
against us. We hear that his Maj. of Denmark has sent the King of Scots one
hundred thousand pounds for a Present, with the promised assistance of Him and
His Subjects, in the disputing of His Cause against all Opposers.

In pursuance whereof, He has broke open the English ships by him detained in
the Sound, and is resolved to prosecute the Quarrel, which gives a second
occasion of joy to the Hollanders, in regard they suppose it is an engagement
upon him to stand to his affront: But there is a Judge above, that must censure
these actions, beyond whom there is no appeal, and in whom, no perverting of
Judgment.

FINIS.

