THE TRUMPET Of the LORD SOUNDED, And his SWORD drawn, And the Separation made
between the Precious and the Vile; AND The Vineyard of the Lord dressed by his
own Husbandmen, and the dead trees cut down, and all the mystery of Witchcraft
discovered in all Professions:

By them who have come through great tribulation, whose garments have been
washed in the blood of the LAMB; who are accounted as the off-scowring of all
things for Christ's sake, scornfully called by the World QUAKERS.

And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of
the earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God. And the
wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the wine press
even to the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand six hundred furlongs.
Rev. 14.19, 20. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-eagle
near the West End of Paul's. 1654.

OH all you that do profess God and Jesus Christ in words, see what you do
possess of him. All profession without possession, is nothing but hypocrisy
and dissimulation. You have heard long, and professed much in words: but now it
is not the hearers, but the doers that shall be justified. For he that says he
loves God and Christ, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth
is not in him. If you love me (says he) keep my commandments. Now I command
you to love one another, with the same love that I loved you withal. By this
you may see how you are brought into the obedience of the truth. Love the Lord
with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. Thou must love the Lord with
thy hearty love: see if thou do so: If thou say thou do, and do not, he
knows thy heart, and he will judge thee for thy hypocrisy. Take heed that thou
be not found a liar before him. Thou that art in the highest profession, see if
thy heart be not abroad in the world, delighting it self in pleasures, or
pride, or profit, or wantonness, or anger, or wrath, or peevishness, or
perverseness, or covetousness, or delighting in sporting, or idle talking, or
foolish jesting, or speaking evil of that thou know not: take heed that thou
be not delighting thy self in swearing and lying, and drinking, and running a
whoring after other lovers. If thy heart love any thing above the Lord, or
delight in any thing but in him alone, he knows thy heart, and he will judge
thee for dissembling with him: for if thou say thou love the Lord, and live
in envy, wrath, backbiting, deceit, oppression, cruelty, or guile, or malice,
or hard-heartedness, or passionateness, or any of these, the Lord knows the
secrets of all hearts; act it never so closely, or subtly, it is naked and
bare before the Lord, who is present everywhere, and his eyes are open to
behold the good and the evil. Thou may make a profession of God and Christ,
and make a fair show to the world, and yet be an hypocrite: but if thy heart
and tongue be not one, God does know it, and he will judge thee for it: and if
thou make never such a show in outward profession, and seem never so righteous,
and do not bridle thy tongue, thy Religion is vain. Pure religion and undefiled
is this, before God and the Father, To visit the fatherless and widow, and to
let the oppressed go free, and to keep thy self unspotted in the world. Now if
thou make a profession in words, and a show, to be seen of men, and do not the
works that are required, as to depart from iniquity, and to live righteously,
holily, and uprightly in this present world, all thy profession is but
hypocrisy, and God will judge thee and plague thee for it. Thou had better
never have made profession of God and Christ, then to profess him, and live in
sin and wickedness. Where is thy love to him, when thou disobeyest him, and
breakest his Commandments? There is no love to him, there is none at all to
him, if thou do so; but on the contrary, thy love is to the devil: for, know
you not, that his servant you are to whom you obey? whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Now if thou obey righteousness, thou
art servant to it, and art free from sin: but if thou obey sin, thou art
servant to sin, serving the devil, and so art free from righteousness: then
where is thy profession?

The Minister of Jesus Christ is to redeem souls from their vain conversation.
See what you are redeemed from, if you be not yet in your sins: if you be, you
are enemies to him. The Ministry of Jesus Christ is a Ministry of love, and
joy, and peace in the holy Ghost. It is a glorious Ministry, not formal, but
spiritual. You that profess it, see that you put in practice what you profess:
if thou profess thy self to be a Christian, obey the commands of Christ; make
manifest the fruits of thy Ministry. Be not a fore-sayer, but I charge thee by
the Lord that thou put in practice, or else profess nothing at all. If thou do
profess love, and do not perform it, what is thy profession worth? Do thou
clothe the naked, do thou feed the hungry, do thou let the oppressed go
free? If thou do not, thou art not obedient to the commands of Christ. Do
thou love thy enemies, do thou bless them that curse thee, do thou pray for
them that hate thee, and despightfully use thee? Christ says, Swear not at
all: do thou so? He says, Go not to law: do thou not? Let your
conversation be without covetousness: is it so? He says, Recompense no man
evil for evil: do thou so? He says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it:
do thou obey him, and keep his sayings? If thou do not, what use is thy
profession of? It grieves the Spirit of the Lord, to see the well-favoured
harlot, how she sits in the street, deceiving the simple, and ensnaring them;
and how she is painted with the Saints words, and with Christ's, and professes
it is love to him, and persecutes him to death, where he is made manifest in his
people. She sits as a Queen, but she must come down and sit in the dust ere
long: and you must all give an account of your profession, wh^t fruits you have
brought forth. For the Lord is coming to separate the sheep from the goats, and
your works will be tried, whether your love be made man^fest or no: He will
say, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you: when
I was hungry, you fed me; when I was thirsty, you gave me drink; when I was
naked, you clothed me; when I was sick in prison, you visited me. They will
say, When did we see thee so? Yea, said he, in my members ye did: for inasmuch
as ye did it to them, yet did it to me. Here are the fruits of the righteous.
Now the Lord is coming to look for fruit, see that your fruit be good that you
bring forth, I mean ye that are professors: for if it be not good, it will not
be accepted; for every tree that brings not forth good fruit, must be hewn
down, and cast into the fire. Your works must be tried by the fire; and if they
be unrighteou^, they must with the trees be cast into the lake that burns.
See if ye obey the Commandments of Christ, or of the Devil. The carnal heart
says, God is an hard Master: but he is not: it is none but the evil and
slothful servant that says so: for he is exceeding good, his commandments are
not grievous, but joyous: The carnal heart says it is hard to keep them. But
where is thy love toward him, when thou do disobey him? When he says, If ye
love me, keep my commandments; the carnal ones say, It is hard to keep the
commandments of the Lord, but the devils commandments are easy; they can keep
them with ease, and go on in joy and delight: it is no trouble to keep the
devils commandments. Says he, You may be proud, it is but Decency: he says
you may be covetous; it is but a provident care: he says you may be angry; it
keeps others in subjection to you: he says you may be drunk; it is but
good-fellowship: he says you may be oppressors; it will bring you in gain: and
he says you may use deceitful merchandise; for if you do not as the world do,
ye shall lose by them: he says you may swear and lie; they will believe you
the better: he says you may be envious, and hate; or else they will not matter
for you. And so in every unrighteous act, he will make a cloak for it, to cover
it. And for to live in unrighteousness it is very easy: you may run on the
broad way to destruction with joy and delight: but to act in righteousness it
is very hard. And then you say the way is narrow to keep in it: it is so;
therefore if ever you come to Sion, you must go on the strait way: for, it is
the strait way that leads to life, and few there be that find it; but broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that follow it. Let
every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity: for, no unclean
thing shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: for he is of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity. Therefore perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord; and live
not in words, but bring forth fruits meet of amendment of life; and cease from
evil, and turn to the Lord, that he may have mercy upon you. If you be willing
and obedient, you shall eat the good of the land: but if you be disobedient and
stiff-necked, then woe and misery will be your portion: for the day of the Lord
is coming in power, and he will gather his elect unto himself. See if you can
yet witness your election, that your names may be written in the book of Life:
if ye cannot, ye are deceived already: then what use is all your profession of?
it will prove hypocrisy; and it were better never to have made a profession,
then to profess and not put in practice what you profess. For it is not they
that say they love God and Christ, but they that make their love manifest by
their works, that shall be accepted, by yielding up obedience to his Commands.
If you say you love God and Christ, in words, and your actions be contrary, it
is but hypocrisy. You may profess much in words; but if your hearts be not one
with your tongues, to guide them; though they may prophecy in his Name, yet if
they be workers of iniquity, they must depart; and Christ will say, Depart, ye
workers of iniquity; I know you not. Therefore be not sayers, but doers, and be
what you speak in all things; and do not speak one thing, and do another: for
God does love the upright in heart. See how you are built up into the truth:
for the Saints that spoke forth the Scriptures were what they spoke, and they
spoke what they lived in: they were the workmanship of God, created in Christ
Jesus to good works. See if you can witness this yet: see what you are wrought
out of, and what ye are wrought into. And live not in words, but bring forth
fruit, that God may be glorified, that you may be what you profess in reality.
For the day of the Lord is coming, wherein the deceits shall be laid open, and
all things made manifest, as it is: all secrets shall be revealed, the secrets
of all hearts. And all the crowns of men shall be thrown down: for how can ye
believe, which seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor which is of
God alone? All the haughtiness of man shall be brought down, and all the
loftiness of men laid low: all secret pride, and secret envy, and secret
malice, and secret revenge, and secret subtilty, and secret hypocrisy, and
secret dissimulation, shall be laid open, and made manifest; and they shall all
be ashamed of the evil of their doings, and the pure naked truth be unveiled
and spread abroad, that righteousness may flourish, and see the Lord set up and
honored, and rule and reign for evermore. The Lord will plague the Beast, and
judge the Whore, and punish the wicked very sore. Sing Hallelujah to the
Highest for ever.

A Separation betwixt the people of God, the righteous seed, that ever suffered
with the seed of evil doers, that each may know that witness, and see ye have a
cloud of witnesses, who are the seed of the righteous; and you may see you have
a cloud of witnesses who are the seed of evil doers, persecuting the righteous
seed. Priests, People, and Rulers, you know the letter speaks, and you may read
it in Matthew, and all along the Scriptures, how the Priests, People, and
Rulers were against Christ: in which generation you show your selves to be; and
clear your selves for the generation of the feed of the righteous. Do not you
hale out of your Synagogues, and hale before Magistrates? Do not you here
fulfill Scripture, which Christ prophesied of? Do not you imprison, which Christ
speaks of? Do not you stone with stones, showing your selves to be in the
generation that stoned Steven, that cried against the Temple? Acts 7. And do
not you hale and beat them that come to speak the truth freely in your Temple,
showing your selves openly to be in that generation that beat the Apostles, and
haled them out of the Temple? And do not your Teachers go in the way of Balaam,
for gifts and rewards, who had the spirit of error, showing ye have erred from
the truth? Do they not go in the way of Cain, to envy, who would murder? And
do you not scorn, and mock, and wonder, and despise, as they did against David,
and Paul, and the rest of the servants of God? Are not your Teachers they that
Christ speaks of, which said, Beware of the Scribes and Pharisees, which stand
praying in the Synagogues, and have the chiefest places in the assemblies,
called of men Masters, devouring widows houses? Are not all your Teachers such
which Christ cried woe against? Are not you such, and your generation, that ever
persecuted the righteous seed, who had the form and the color, but not the
power? That generation persecuted Christ and the Prophets, which is the seed of
evil doers, a generation that is wise in their own eyes, a generation that is
swift to shed blood; the same generation that persecuted the Martyrs in nature.
You cry out of your fathers martyring, how Queen Mary imprisoned and burned:
you are in the same nature. It was the generation that held up the outward
Temple, the outward Worship, that ever persecuted. Priests and People, Where
did any of the Apostles stone any, persecute any, or imprison any, or cause any
to be imprisoned, or haled before a Magistrate? Oh horrible! how dare you
profess Christ, and walk in the doctrines of devils? Where did Christ give any
such command to act any such thing? You take him for your cloak, and talk of
his blood, who are murderers, blood-suckers, hunting after blood, to devour the
righteous seed, as all your fathers did in all ages, in the time of Jeremiah,
in the time of Isaiah; in the time of David, in the time of the Apostles: they
stoned, they imprisoned, punched, and beat, etc. And these be all your
witnesses, and they be your fathers who acted before you, who had gotten the
form of words, as you have. Here be ye witnesses that ye are the same
generation in nature, and have your cloud of witnesses which ever persecuted
the righteous seed, as you daily make it manifest. Both Priests, Rulers, and
People, this I am moved of the Lord to write unto you, to let you see your
selves: for you have not learned Christ at all. For we have a cloud of
Witnesses which were stooed by your generation, as you may read in the Hebrews,
and in diverse places; they were stoned, mocked. Paul was stoned for denying the
outward Temple; Steven was stoned to death, who denied the outward Temple: John
was banished: they took up stones to stone Christ the righteous seed: And where
Christ is made manifest, you do so now. Christ to day, yesterday, and for ever.
Praises, praises be to the Lord God Almighty for ever. Our suffering is our
joy, our reproach is our riches. Search the Scriptures, and you will find it
to be so.

Do not your Priests cry, Murder them? Do not your People cry, Stone them? Do
not you wag your heads at them? Do not you gnash your teeth at them which you
call Quakers? Moses quaked, David quaked, Jeremiah shaked, who cried against
the Priests. You may as well cry, Stone Moses, Paul, David, Jeremiah, and the
rest of the holy men of God who quaked and trembled, as they who witness
quaking, who quaked and trembled as they who witness quaking now, as they did
then. Here you show your selves to be the seed of blood-suckers thirsting after
blood.

O Ye blood-suckers, which hunt after blood, which lay traps and snares to slay
the righteous! Oh what a profession is this you live in, that are so full of
fury and rage! some mocking, some beating, some plotting and lying in wait to
shed the innocent blood: and yet you dare make a profession of God and Christ.
Christ never taught that doctrine. And there you show your selves to be as
bloody persecutors as ever the Jews were, who crucified Christ, and sought to
slay the Apostles. Oh England, England, is this the fruit of thy Ministry,
that your vineyard bears which you have planted? How, ye vine-dressers; how is
the vine yard full of briers and thorns! Oh how is the vineyard full of dead
trees, which cumber the ground, and bring forth no fruit! Oh how are the
Springs stopped, which should water it, with the Philistims! Oh how full is the
vineyard of Serpents! Oh how full is the vineyard of thistles and nettles! Oh
how full is the vineyard of weeds? Oh how full is the vineyard of wild beasts,
and of trees that bear wild grapes, and sour grapes, which set the childrens
teeth on edge! Oh, time has been, and now is, that the pretended Dressers and
Lookers to the vineyard are blind, and do not know one tree from another, and
cannot distinguish a Lamb from a Dog, a Sheep from a Goat, a Dove from a Kyte.
Full is the vineyard of wolves, strong horses neighing, and the horses of
Pharaoh and his chariots whirring up and down: and the vineyard is full of
thieves and robbers, and full of drunkards, drunk with the wine of the sour
grape. The Land is full of Oaths, and mourns because of such. The flesh has
been defiled: the Land is full of respecting of persons. But now is the Lord
arising, and risen, which respects no man's person, and lays the ax to the root
of the trees; every one that brings not forth good fruit, must be hewn down,
and cast into the fire. For now is the Lord sending his sons, and daughters,
and servants into the vineyard. Spears are broken, and turned into mattocks and
plow-shares, and swords into pruninghooks. Some are plowing up, and some are
hacking up, and some are pruning, and some are dividing the sheep from the
goats, and the lambs from the wolves, making a distinction, putting a
difference; and some are bridling their horses which have been wild: some are
distinguishing the Kytes from the Doves, and putting a difference between the
precious and the vile, betwixt the holy and unholy. Tremble, ye mountains and
hills, before the Lord: for out of Sion does the Lord utter his voice. Woe, woe
to all you who inhabit the earth: you will be scattered as the wind scatters
the chaff; you will be consumed as the fire consumes the stubble: for the
mighty day of the Lord is coming, that shall burn as an oven: look upon an oven
when it is burning, and you are afraid to go into it: but the fire of the Lord
is coming, which will burn you all up, root and branch. The mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, who will perform his word, and none of you that are proud and
wicked can escape it: whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, the
Word of the Lord shall stand.

TO all you who profess the Scriptures to be your Rule and Touchstone to try
withal, who fine men because they will not put off their hats at your Sessions,
at your Assizes, at your Courts. When did any of the heathenish Kings or
Magistrates in any Age set up such a Law? Read the Chronicles through, and give
an example, else you show your selves to outstrip all the heathenish kings.
When did ever Moses, who was a Judge over all Israel, command any people that
came before him to put off their hats, and fine them if they would not bow to
him? Or where did ever David or Solomon, who were Kings, command any to put off
their hats which came before them, and fine them if they would not do it? Here
you show your selves, that you outstrip all the heathenish Kings, who had not
received the Law from God; and the righteous Kings, that had received the Law
from God. The Law says, Thou shall not bow down to any but the Lord God:
though there was a time when Jacob bowed to Esau, and there was a time when
Israel bowed to Pharaoh; and there was a time when Pharaoh was destroyed and
his host, and Israel sung over Pharaoh: must Israel then bow to Pharaoh when he
is destroyed? Then came the command from God, when Israel was brought out of
Egypt, saying, Thou shall not bow down to any creature. For he that respects
persons, transgresses this Law. Many will bow to great men, that have a great
deal of earth, and fine apparel; but not to a poor man, that has not fine
apparel: and there he is a transgressor of the righteous Law: for who respects
persons, commits sin. And there was a time when Haman made a gallows, and who
would not bow to him might be hanged: and the true Jews, who had received the
righteous Law of God, could not bow to him. And there was a time when Haman was
hanged upon his own Gallows. And there was a time when Nebuchadnezzar made an
Image, and all that would not bow to it, were cast into the fiery furnace: and
there was a time his kingdom was rent, and the Image, whose head was gold,
whose breast was silver, whose belly and thighs were brass, whose legs were
iron, whose feet were part iron and part clay, the Stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, strikes at the feet of the Image, and he comes to be
hewn down. But Nebuchadnezzar cannot understand this dream, but Daniel, who was
a trembler, understood the stone, and the watcher, and saw the Kingdom and
Dominion that endures for ever: he saw Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom, who would have
all bow to him, become as the grass that withers away. So adieu all carnal
ones, who stumble at this cornerstone.

G. F.

WE are accused to deny the Scriptures. The Scriptures do we not deny: the holy
men of God spoke them forth as they were moved by the holy Ghost: and they were
given forth by inspiration of the Spirit; and they are of no private
interpretation: they were not given forth by the will of man. They that gave
forth the Scriptures, were such as ever suffered by the seed of evil doers, and
testified against them: therefore the seed of evil doers must be kept out of
the Scriptures, judged cut: They that spoke them forth, judged the seed of evil
doers, and kept them out. All who had the life of the Scriptures, and set them
forth, cried against such as bare rule by their means. The Scripture speaks
against them: they must be kept out of the Scriptures. Such as jangle about the
Saints conditions, such as seek for gain from their quarters, and are
hirelings, and seek for the fleece, they did not give forth the Scriptures; but
such as cried against these, gave forth the Scriptures; and all who have the
life of the Scriptures, as they had who gave them forth, testify against such
now, as they did then: and such must be kept out of the Scriptures. And such as
go in the way of Cain, and after the error of Balaam in covetousness, did not
give forth the Scriptures: who had the life of the Scriptures, testified
against such, and kept them out of the Scriptures: and so all who have the life
of the Scriptures now, must keep such out of the Scriptures now. Israel slew
Baal. And all such as were called of men Master, stood praying in the
Synagogue, had the choicest places in the Assemblies, uppermost rooms at
Feasts, laid heavy burdens upon the people, gave not forth the Scriptures:
keep such out of the Scriptures: for who had the life of the Scriptures,
testified against such. And all such as deny perfection, and overcoming of sin,
are Ministers of Antichrist; they di^ not give forth the Scriptures: keep such
out of the Scriptures: for who had the life of the Scripture, testified against
such, and kept them out. Holy men of God spoke forth the Scripture, and
testified against all sin and imperfection. All such as buy and sell the Saints
words, and make a trade of the Prophets, Christ's, and his Apostles words, must
be kept out of the Scriptures; for they wrest and pervert it, and make people
believe they are gifted, whenas the gift of God is not to be bought and sold
for money: keep such out of the Scriptures; for they are liars, evil beasts,
and slow-bellies, false prophets, and such as deny the light, that say Christ
has not enlightened every one that comes into the world; who go about to make
Christ a liar, and a false Prophet: such keep out of the Scripture; for they
are liars, and false Prophets, and Dreamers: who had the life of the
Scriptures, kept such out; and who have the life of the Scriptures, keep out
such now. Here you dwell clear and pure, in true judgment, and know what to
receive. The life which gave forth the Scriptures, that life must speak them
forth again. All subtle Serpents keep out of the Scriptures: who had the life,
kept them out, testifies against them, though they applied Abraham's words, who
were not of Abraham: he who was the life, kept them out of the Scripture: and
now, all who apply the Prophets and Apostles condition, Christ's words, and have
not life, such must be kept out for ever. All such who have the life of the
Scriptures, received the simplicity and innocence, and they put a difference
betwixt the holy and profane, clean and unclean, and what was polluted, and
what was not polluted; and what was torn, and what was holy: they were not to
eat what died of it self. All who are in the first birth, born of the flesh,
gave not forth the Scriptures: such were persecutors of them who are born of
the Spirit: such keep out of the Scripture, for they are enemies to that which
gave out the Scriptures, so are to be kept out of the Scriptures.

OH does not something in you cry a voice for equity, for equity, to set open
the door of equity? The Innocent cries for the law of equity, which respects no
man's person, how much of the earth he has, or how little; equity respects
neither, but equity: for, the earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it. When
the door of Equity is set open, then mercy rejoices the simple ones. Oh
therefore hearken to Equity, and that which cries for it in your hearts and
consciences, and so break the bands by showing mercy. And while Iniquity rules,
Equity is oppressed and prisoned, and the lustful nature rules, which crosses
Equity for its own ends, to gather in riches together on heaps, some by
cozening, or lying, or cheating. And all these things Equity cries out of thee,
and tells thee of all thy actions privately, when thou art by thy self, and
when thou art public. Equity cries for justice and righteousness, and against
all sin, and swearing, and lying, and adultery, and covetousnes, and
drunkenness: for this destroys honesty and reasonableness. And Equity cries in
all your hearts and consciences for equity: for it is burdened with deceit, and
unjust dealings, and corruptions. Hearken, hearken in your consciences, how it
cries for equity, and with sighs and groans cries upon the Lord for mercy and
equity, and the Lord does often send his Angel to relieve the simple: for lust
and pride oppresses it, and it is burdened with it, and often tells thee All
is vanity, which thy lustful will and mind delights in, which is without,
and which is in the first birth; and would have thee to hearken to equity, and
within, and not to thy lust, that thou might have unity with God, and not
with the world: for the whole world lies in wickedness, where equity cannot
enter; it cries up and down the streets: but hard hearts, and drunkards, and
cursed speakers, cozeners and cheaters, and thou high and lofty one, and
whoremongers, and idolaters, and oppressors, and dissemblers, ye all shut the
door of Equity: when it cries to enter, there is no room for it amongst these
thieves: for ye all must be brought before the great Judge of heaven and earth,
which despise Equity: The great Judge is coming, to render vengeance upon all
that act contrary to Equity, and in your own knowledge, and out of your own
mouths shall ye be judged, in righteousness: for he is righteous that judges,
and has spoken.

MEn bring up their children in natural Learning, to have natural Books, and
Languages, as Hebrew and Greek; and have the Schools of Oxford and Cambridge,
which they call the two Mothers of Divinity, which is Divinity: and so training
up in the natural, lives up in the natural man, both in pride, in knowledge, in
person, set up, called of men Master; and so with his books, and Learning which
he got at Oxford and Cambridge, he trades with others, and natural Languages,
and tells people it is the Original, and says he is sent of Christ; which is
the Whore and the Beast upon the waters, that is the people; and so all this is
Witchcraft, Whoredom, Sorcery, Divining and Conjuring, Hypocrisy and
Dissembling, and was never sent of Christ; for the Gift of God cannot be bought
and sold, but the letter; and Carnal sells the Carnal, but the Word cannot be
sold, by which all things stand and remain.

Another he stands up, and says he is the Minister of Christ, which never was
at Oxford and Cambridge, but has had some experience of the Truth tasted: and
he is got up into notions, and fleed the Cross: he goes out and trades, and
sells his experiences, and says he is gifted; which is false, for the gift of
God is not to be bought and sold for money. Now the Truth is not to be bought
and sold for money; but, Freely ye have received, freely give. Truth was sent
forth without bag, or purse, or silver, or scrip, or two coats, or a stick to
defend it: for their weapons were spiritual; and all the others, which Christ
has not sent forth, their weapons are carnal, they ride with their carnal
swords, and run to a carnal Magistrate to defend them, and to get their carnal
means of the poor people, which do not pay them: and those Jesus Christ never
sent forth. Where the pure light Christ is made manifest in Magistrate or
People, it does discover them, and deny them. And the one he preaches a Christ
without, and the other he preaches a Christ within. And he that preaches
Christ within, and he that preaches Christ without, are both without; for they
both have him in the notion; for he must be within, and not speak. For where
Christ is risen and speaks, he denies him that speaks a Christ within in the
notion, and him that speaks of him without in the notion, and all the earthly
powers to uphold them, and none but God alone to uphold him in his strength and
power, by his own Spirit. And he that preaches Christ without, he knows him
not, but only takes him for a Clack, and the Prophets and Apostles to trade
with them; like a Stage Player, which acts a Stage Play aloft, with Points, and
Reasons, and Uses, and Authors, and old Fathers, and Trials, and Mattens, and
singing David's quakings, cryings, prophecies, prayers, and praises; and so act
a Stage Play for money; and he that will give the most, thither he goes; and
where they will not give him money, he will not act his Play there. And he that
preaches and says Christ is within, he must be dumb, and not speak; and the
reason and the carnal part must speak him, and the dumb is crucified. And he
that speaks him within, and he that speaks him without, know him not with their
carnal reason. Where he is risen, and comes to be King, there he denies all the
worlds ways, Diviners and Conjurers, and denies all the world, and reigns over
all the corruption of man. To him alone be all glory, who reigns over all, and
is King of Saints, King of Kings, Lord of Glory, blessed for ever. To whom be
all Glory for ever. Amen.

Written by a friend of the Truth of the living God, to all whom it may
concern.

THe Lord God of power is thundering, and uttering them forth against all you,
and upon the top of all your Powers of Witchcraft, Charmers, and Inchanters,
who live in your Sorcery, and Whoredom, and Witchcraft, and Mystery of
Iniquity. The Lord is risen and rising to thresh you down with an Iron rod. The
weight of the Lords hand is upon you, and stretched over you; which goes to the
Popes head. All bag and baggage must be taken. The Sword of the Almighty is
drawn against all your Popish ways. Your Witchcraft and Whoredom is come up
before the Lord, to hew down and trample. The Horse is gone forth, Death,
Death: All your Idols, all your Jewels, all your Pictures, all your Beads,
earth to the earth. All your Chanters, and all your Charmers, will stand you in
no stead. All your Counselors will not hide you in the day of the Lords wrath.
All your outside knowledge of Angels, of the Apostles, of Christ, of Mary, will
not save you, nor stand you in any stead. For the day of the Lords wrath is
come among you; a day of Vengeance: the fire is kindling. All your Pictures,
all your Crosses and Crucifixes, must make a fire to burn you. The Lord has
stretched his hand against you.

Woe unto Rome, and all her Popish ways. Woe unto all the Priests in England, who
had the Popish Law. Ye Jesuits, ye Inchanters, Mystery of Wratchcraft; the
Sword is drawn out against you, to cut you down. Ye high Ekens, which thought
none had been able to make War against you; now is the hand of the Lord of
hosts upon you all, and his Army is gathering, and his Sword is drawn, which
has two edges, that before him none should escape. The Land shall be plain
before his host. The Lord has spoken it. To you all, this is the word of the
Lord. The hand of the Lord is stretched out against all the Adulterers and
Idolaters; and the Sword of the Lord lies upon the Popes neck.

FINIS.

