To all the Ignorant people, the word of the Lord, who are under the blind
guides the Priests.
WHo have told you the steple-house has been the temple, and the holy place,
and says, did not Christ go into the temple. My answer is, yea to whip out the
buyers and sellers, and if you count this the temple now in England, which is
called a steeple-house, it is almost full of buyers and sellers again, for
there is the Priests market day, for to sell his ware which he labors for in
the week, ten shillings a day, or a noble a day, or more or less as they can
get, and is not here buyers and sellers in the temple, as you call it, and money
changers, and is not it a den of thieves, a den of dragons; such as steals the
words of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles (the Priests which confesses
they have not the spirit which gave forth the scriptures) as you may read. Je.
23.30. but we deny this steeple-house to be the temple, which God commanded,
neither is it holyer then any other ground, for though Christ went into the
temple to whip out such before mentioned, as you may read. Mat. 21.12. and
again you may read. Mat. 24. he prophesied to his disciples, of the destruction
of the temple, and you that have built another, are in your own name, and are
the deceivers spoken of in that chapter, and so is against prophecy, and so he
that is against Christ's prophecy is Antechrist, and if it were possible should
deceive the elect, but it is not possible, for Christ has given them a light,
and he says to them, go not forth and so with the light Christ is seen, and
you idolatrous generation, when Israel forgot his maker, they builded temples
and Jud^h multiplied fenced cities, but I will send a fire and consume the
palaces thereof, as you may read. Hos. 8.14. so as a troup of robbers lie in
wait for a man: so does a company of Priests murder in the way by consent. Hos.
6.9. who the covenant of God are against, and after Christ's resurrection,
Stephen which was a man first of the Holy Ghost, when the Priests examined him
in the 7 of Acts, he said in his examination, that the most high dwells not
in temples made with hands, as says the Prophet, Heaven is Gods throne, and
the earth is his footstool, and says God has not my hands made, my hands made
all these things, and called them stifnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and
ears that held up the temple, and they said he had spoken blasphemous words
against the holy place, as Acts. 6.13. such as were stuborn men, and false
witnesses: and after that Stephen had spoken along in his examination, and came
to themselves, in particular, and said he saw Christ (who had prophesied of the
destruction of the temple) and when he was examined before the Priests and
people, then they run upon him, and stoned him to death: so are, Priests and
people ready to do the same now, he denied the temple which God had commanded
and witnessed Christ Jesus the substance, and for that they stoned him to
death, for denying the figure, and we deny that which they call a temple, which
God never commanded and witness Christ Jesus the substance, and for the
substance sake are they ready to murder us a company of Priests, by consent, as
a troup of robbers wait for their prey, but our deliverance is by the Lord
Jesus from the seed of evil doers, and after the Apostles which went into the
temple, and witnessed Christ Jesus the second priesthood, and denied the first
priesthood, and then the second priesthood and the chief priests was in a rage
against the Apostles, who witnessed Christ Jesus the second priesthood, and
they were brought out of the temple, and brought them before their counsel,
and the high Priest examined them, and then the Priests commanded them to
preach no more in the name of Jesus the second priesthood, and the Apostles
which denied the first priesthood and the temple, said, whether was it better
to obey God or man, judge ye, and the Apostles which denied the first
priestood, they went daily into the temple and into the houses, and feared not
to preach in the name of Jesus, as you may read. Act. 4. and in Act. 17. and
the 7. The Apostles Paul said, that God that made the world, and all things
therein, who is Lord of all, dwelt not in temples made with hands, neither was
he worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives
to all life and breath and all things, and has made of one mould and one blood
all the nations of men to dwell upon the face of the earth, and has determined
the time before appointed, and the bound of habitation that they should seek
the Lord, if happily they might feel him and find him, though he be not far off
from every one of us, here the Apostle he saw the times, and declared unto the
people which held up the temple, they did not know God, and he denied the
temple which God had commanded, and some of them mocked when they heard him
preach Christ Jesus and his resurrection, as they mock now which holds up the
temple which God never commanded, which Jude speaks of, Jude 18. and the
people said unto the Apostle in Acts 17. when he preached Christ, that the
Apostle seemed to be a setter forth of strange Gods, and called him a babbler,
and said, let us hear what the babbler will say, for he denied the temple which
God had commanded, and preached Christ Jesus, and said, God did not dwell in
temples made with hands, as you may read. Acts 17. and Acts 17. and Acts the
19. what uproar there was amongst the tradesmen against Paul, and they said he
set at naught their craft, and not only this, but the temple of the great Diana
might be despised and set at naught, and their magnificency should be
destroyed, whom all the world worships, and when they heard that they were full
of wrath they that held up the temple of their great Goddess Diana, and the
people made a shout for their great Goddess Diana, for the space of two hours,
as you may read. Acts 19. and 21. and the Apostle Paul goes into the temple,
when the Jews saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people and laid hands
on him, crying out, men of Israel help, this is the man which teaches all men
every where, and has brought also the Greeks into this temple, and poluted
this holy place, and all the city was moved, and the people ran together, and
laid hold on him, and drew him out of the temple, and the doors were shut, and
they went about to kill Paul, and they beat him, and when some soldiers, and
the chief captain came, and they saw them, then they left beating Paul, and
here the men of Israel were cried unto, which held up the temple to help out
with him, here all the wise in heart, may see what was Paul's end in going into
the temple, to witness forth the second priesthood Christ Jesus, Solomon build
a temple, and the Lord spoke unto David, thy son shall build an house, whom I
will set upon thy throne in my name, then Solomon began to set to work the
hewers of cedars and timber, and the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, which he did
promise him: Solomon had 70000 that bore burdens, and 80000 hewers in the
mountains, besides the chief of Salomons officers which were men over the work,
3000 and 300 that were over them that wrought in the work, and many there was
at the building of the temple, and Solomon had a command which the Lord said
Solomon should do, as you may read. 1 Kings 5. said he should build him an
house, and when it was built, and when Christ was come, a greater then Solomon,
who was the substance, though he went into the temple to whip out, but it was
in their time to be a house of prayer, after Christ showed unto his disciples
and prophesied unto them in the 24. Mat. the destruction of it, and Christ who
was greater then Solomon, there prophesied the destruction of Salomons
building: so Stephen denied it, who witnessed Christ, and the prophet denied it
who saw Christ. Acts 7. and the Apostle denied it, who was a witness of
Christ. Acts 17. and the people hawled him out of it, and said he polluted the
holy place. Acts 21. and the Apostle called it an Idols temple, and the Apostle
went into it, and was hawled out of it. Acts the 5. and they that preached
Christ witnesses of Christ, witnessed a greater then Solomon who built the
temple, such denied Salomons temple and said, what know you not that your
bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, and you are not your
own, for you are bought with a price: therefore glorify God with your spirits
which is Gods, such as can witness this Christ and this price, and are bought,
does deny the outward temple, and witness their bodies the temples of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 16.19. such do witness a greater then Solomon who built the
temple, Christ Jesus who prophesied the destruction of the temple, so the
temple which God had commanded was denied with them that witnessed a greater
then Solomon, and whereas you call your superstitious place, which was built
for popery, a church it is all false and a lie, they are no true temples nor
true churches, so they are teachers of lies and causes people to err by their
lies and lightness, as you may read. Jer. 23.32. and the Scripture says. 1
These. 1.1. the true church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
here let all the honest in heart see how these false prophets have deceived
you, and Christ prophesied and said unto his disciples, he sent them forth in
the midst of wolves, he bid them be harmless and wise, and he told them that
they would scourge them, and this he prophesied to them which we find true, as
you may read. Mat. 10.16.17. and how they would hawl them before rulers, and as
it is said they that kill you will think he does God good service, and Paul
while he was under the first priesthood, he being in the synogogues, and
imprisoned them that believed on Christ Jesus the second priesthood, and here
Paul fulfilled Christ's words as you may read. Acts 22. Paul was called Saul at
the 19 ver. and while Paul was in the first priesthood, he held up the temple
and the synogogues, but after he was hawled out of the temple, he denied them,
as you may read in the Scripture beforementioned, and Christ being the true
light which enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, as you may read.
John 1.9. who prophesied the destruction of the temple, the Apostle was sent to
turn them from darkness to this light, to believe in Christ Jesus the second
priest, as you may read. Acts 26. how he was sent to turn them from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive the
forgiveness of their sins, and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified
by faith in me, and the Apostle which went into ihe synogogues, the Jews
stirred up the gentiles, and there was a great assault made by the Jews and the
gentiles and rulers to use them dispightfully, and stone them, as you may read.
Acts 14. and the Apostle which preached Christ in the Jews synogogues, and the
people said, is not this he which once destroyed them that called upon this
name, and after many days they took counsel how they might kill the Apostle,
as you may read. Acts the 9. and all they in the synogogues when they heard
Jesus was filled with wrath, and thrust him cut of the city to the hill, that
they might cast him down headlong. as you may read. Luke 4.28, 29. Here you
may see the cruelty of them in the synogogues against Christ, and so likewise
against his Apostles, and so likewise against his servants, now as their fruits
manifest, so now woe unto them that are whited and painted with Christ and the
Apostles words, and out of their life found as you may read Matthew. 23. And all
you that takes the peoples Tithes, and brings the first Priesthood and say
they took Tithes, and say Levi took Tithes which came out of the loins of
Abraham, and say that the scribes and Pharisees paid Tithes, and Christ Jesus
said these things you ought to have done.

But he cried, woe unto them blind which strayned at a gnat, Who did not
discover the second Priesthood Christ Jesus; He said those things you ought to
have done, and the Prophet said, they robbed God of the Tithes, if they brought
them not into the Storehouse, and that was in the first Priesthood* so you
that say Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedecke; yea, I say he did so out of the
spoil, but not out of his substance; the Apostle in the seventh of the
Hebrews, speaks of Abraham paying-Tythes to Melchizedecke like unto the Son
of God: and Levi receiving Tithes in the Leviticall Priesthood, and he had a
command to take Tithes according to the Law. Yea, of their brethren, and said
the Law made men high Priests, the 28. verse, and then said the Priesthood was
changed, and that there was a necessity of the change of the Law, and there was
a disannulling of the command that went before, by which the Priesthood took
Tithes, Hebrews 7.18. verse. And when the Apostle had spoken of Tithes in the
days of Abraham, and Tithes in the Leviticall Priesthood, he said the
Priesthood was changed: Also the Law as you may read, Hebrews 7.12.18.
verses, and when the Apostle had spoken of these things before mentioned,
Melchizedecke, like unto the Son of God, who is the end of all likenesses.

Now of these things which we have spoken, this is the sum, the high Priest
Christ Jesus and Tithes was one thing and the Priesthood was another thing the
Apostle spoke of; and now if you speak of Tithes after the Law, Christ Jesus is
the sum of things, Hebrews 8. and you that keep people in those things,
keeps them from the sum.

The Word of the Lord God to all poor deceived people, who follow such Priests
as bear rule by their means, and you people love to have it so; as you may read
Jeremy 5.30.31. and so are the foolish people that are foolish, and the sottish
children that are wise to do evil, but to do good have no understanding; as
your may read Ierem. 4.21. and you follow such shepherds as are greedy,
secking their gain from their quarter and never have enough; as you may read,
Isaiah 56.10.11. and you follow such shepherds as seeks for the fleece and
clothe themselves with the wool which makes a prey upon you and devours which
the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry woe against, Ezekiel. 54.

So as a troop of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in
the way by consent, Hos. 6 9. And you follow such Priests as teach for hire,
and divine for money, and yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the
Lord amongst us, no evil can come upon us, and cry peace, peace, and he that
will not put into their mouths, they prepare war against him, and thus they
build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, Micah 3. And now all ye
Priests, this commandment is for you, if you will not hear, and if you will not
lay it to heart, I will send a curse upon you, I will curse your blessing; yea
I have cursed them already.

Behold, I will corrupt your seed and will spread dung upon you, Mal. 2.1, 2.3.
and you follow such hypocrites as stand praying in the Synagogues, Matthew
26.5. and such as are called of men Masters, and have the chief seats in the
Synagogues, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against, Matthew 23.

And you follow such deceivers, as tells you the Steeple-house is the Temple,
when Christ prophesied of the destruction of the Temple, Matthew 24. And
Stephen denied it, Acts the 7. and the Apostle denied it, Acts 17. and he was
haled out of the Temple, Acts 21.30. and you follow such as tells you the
Steeple-house is the Church, when the Apostle says the Church is in God, 1
Thessalonians 1.1. And you follow such which through fained words and
covetousness, does make merchandise of you, by whom the way of Truth is evil
spoken of, 2 Peter 2. and you follow such as go in the way of Cain in envy,
and after the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards, 2 Peter 2. Jude 11. and
you follow such as are mockers, and scoffers and sierce despisers and raylers,
whose bands are made strong Esaias 28.22. 2 Timothy 3. which has the form of
Godlyness, but denies the power from such you are to turn away if you hear that
Spirit that spoke in the Apostles, and from all such before mentioned, and you
follow such as serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and by
good words an fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. and
hear with the Scripture you may judge and try your teachers, and you follow
such as are given to filthy lucre, whose mouths must be stopped, Titus 1.11,
12. and such you follow as the Apostle called evil beasts and slow bellies, and
you follow such as stands not in Gods counsel, but speaks a vain divination of
their own hearts, who by their lies, and by their lightness have caused the
people to err, and has not profited the people at all says the Lord:
Therefore I am against the Prophets says the Lord, that steals my word from
his neighbor, and says, the Lord says, and use their tongues when the Lord
never spoke to them; but Priest and Prophet are both profane, Jeremy 23. and
they are such as gave you David's quakings, prayers and prophesies in meeter,
and when you read the Psalms, you keep on your hats, and when you sing them,
you put off your hats; and here you worship the works of your own hands, and
they are such as tell you the sprinkiing of Infants is the Baptism, and of a
Sacrament, and their is no such Scriptyres, and so the plagues of God are added
to rhem that adds, Revelation 22.

But the one Baptism with the Spirit into the one body, and the singing with
the Spirit, and with the understanding according to Scripture that we own and
witness, 1 Corinthians 12.13. 1 Cor. 14.

To the light of Christ in all your Consciences, I do speak which comes from
the Lord Jesus Christ, who enlightens every one that comes into the world,
which if you all do love it will lead you all from those teachers
aforementioned up to Christ from whence the light does come, and hear is your
way to salvation, and this is the light which shows you sin and evil; if you
love it, it will lead you to Christ from whence the light does come, and if you
hate it, it is your condemnation: so remember you are warned in your life time
this is the day of your visitation.
ALL you that reproach, revile, scoff and scorn at the children and servants
and messengers of the most high God, whom you nickname Quakers, and under the
same name persecute them as a people not worthy to live, and have no ground for
it, neither knows any evil by them, but all along their lives and
conversations condemns yours, and therefore you hate them, revile them and
reproach them, in whom the power of the living God is made manifest the same
which ever was, which shakes the earth and makes the strong man to bow himself
and the keepers of the house to tremble, Eccl. 12.3. the same power which all
the children of God witnessed and passed through in all ages, which then by the
same generation suffered both by Magistrates, Professors, Priests and People,
who were and are strangers to the life of God and his power; and therefore
reproached it, scoffed and scorned at it as you now do.

But t is that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon you, who are despisers of
those that are good, 2 Timothy 3.3. Isaac the seed of the promise trembled,
Genesis 27.33. who was mocked by Ishmael the son of the bond woman who was cast
out, Genesis 21.9.10. Gallat. 4.30. As the same seed is mocked now by you
Ishmaelites, who are the children of the bondwoman, who are cast out and are
found without mocking and scoffing at the righteous seed; and Moses the servant
of God, quaked and trembled, Heb. 12.21. who counted it greater riches to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, Heb. 11.26. and this you now call madness and folly who know not
that godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. and David who was a King quaked and
trembled, Psalm. 119.120. and drunkards made a song of him, Psalm. 69.12. and
some shot out their tongues and wagged their heads at him, Psalm. 22.7. and
gaped upon him with their mouths, verse 13. and this you sing in your
Steeple-house like hypocrites without knowledge, Psalm. 35.16. and yet scoff
and scorn and reproach those in whom the same power is made manifest, and yet
you will say as he said you are not puffed in mind, nor have no scornful eye,
Psalm. 131.1. And thus you deceive your souls and love to have it so: and Job
the servant of the Lord trembled, Job 4.14. and Jeremy a Prophet of the Lord,
his heart was broken, and all his bones did shake, and he was as a drunken man,
Jer. 23.19. who was then persecuted by the same generation, and Daniel trembled
and they that were with him quaked, Daniel 10.7, 8, 11. who was cast into the
lions den, because he would not deny his God. Daniel 6.16. but by his power he
was preserved as we are now from these lions, whelps, which would us devour,
and Habbakuk a prophet of the Lord, his belly trembled and his lips quivered.
Habbakuk 3.16. and Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ fell down and trembled. Acts
the 9.4, 5, 6. who was reviled, reproached and persecuted even to death, who
was one that hazzarded his life for the name of Jesus. Acts 16.26. and said,
all the day long was they killed and accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
Romans 8.36. now read what generation you are in, for they that were after the
flesh, always persecuted them that were after the spirit. Gal. 4.29. there was
always a generation, by which the righteous ever suffered since Cain the
firstborn upon earth, in whose way you are found, who envy, who are in wrath.
Jude 11. you kill the just, and he lies slain in the streets, Iam. 5.5, 6. at
whose hands his blood shall be required. Mat. 23.35. and the son of man was to
eat his bread with quaking, and to drink his water with trembling. Ezekiel. 12.10.
out of which life you are found, who are at ease in the flesh, feeding without
the fear of God, spending the creatures upon your lusts. Romans 13.14. scorning
them who are not one with you, in the same liberty and excess of riot. 1 Corinthians. 10.7. 1 Pet. 4.4. 1 Cor. 10.13. but fears before the throne of God,
and thus you err not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God, therefore
behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish, I will work a work in your days,
which though you see it, you shall not believe it, Acts 13.41. is it not
apparent before your eyes, the wicked man returns from his wickedness, and
the ungodly from his ungodliness, and the drunkard from his drunkenesse, and a
profane one from his profanesse, and seeks after God, and fears his name, and
yet you cannot believe, but despises, scoffs and scorns the power by which
this work is done, for it is no new thing, but the same which was, and you are
in the same adulterous generation which cannot see the signs which follow the
Truth, Matthew. 16.4. from whom the Gospel is hid, whose eyes is darkened by the
god of the world. 2 Cor. 4.3.4. and so speaks evil of the things you know not.
Iud. 10. putting darkness for light and light for darkness, evil for good and
good for evil. Isa. 5.10, you are the scoffers foretold of by the Apostles to
be in the last times. Jude 18. who are despisers of those that are good
incontinent fierce traitors, heady high-minded lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of God having a form of godliness, but denying the life and power, 2 Timothy 3.3, 4, 5.

And, here you are both Priest, People and Professors, who are scoffing and
scorning, slandering, reproaching and reviling and persecuting the righteous
innocent servants and messengers of the most high God, who is uttering forth
his voice through them in power against all ungodlyness and unrighteousness of
men, who will you call to judgment and convince you of all your ungodly deeds
and all your hard speeches, which you have wrongfully spoken against him and
his power, and will reward you accordingly, Jude 14.15. Revel. 22.12. Therefore
to that which is of God in all your consciences I speak, which is my witness
against your ungodly lives, which turning to it will let you see you speak
evil of the things you know not, loving darkness rather then light because
your deeds are evil, John 3.19. Therefore fear the Lord God and repent and
take heed of mocking lest your bands be made strong, Isa. 18.22. for God will
not be mocked, such as you sow such shall you reap, Gal. 6.7. Therefore fear
before the Lord and try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. and despise nothing before you know it, lest you speak evil of Gods
elect; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,
Heb. 10.31. Therefore take this for a warning as from the mouth of the Lord,
for now no ignorance is to be pleaded before the Throne of God, this was given
forth in vindication of the power of God which he is now manifesting in his
sons and daughters, lest the simple who are not yet acquainted with it should
stumble at the name by a friend of the Truth, and a lover of those people,
which you who are out of the Truth scornfully calls quakers; but the scorners
God will judge, Prove. 19.29. and the righteous God will bless, who work out
their salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. For says the Lord to such
an one will I look, who is of a meek and contrite spirit, and trembles at my
words, Isa. 66.1.2.

FINIS.

