The Lord General's LETTER TO To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of
the Honorable House of COMMONS, Wherein is fully related, The Particulars of
the Fight at MAIDSTONE, Where were near Three hundred slain, about One thousand
three hundred Prisoners, Five hundred Horse, Three thousand Arms, Nine Foot
Colors, and Eight pieces of Ordnance, with great store of Ammunition, taken by
the Lord Generals Forces.

With a Relation of certain PAPERS taken from the Enemy, of the depth of their
Plot and Engagements.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
June 6. 1648.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Mr. Speaker,
I Shall according to my last give you this further Account of our success at
Maidstone: Upon Thursday in the evening about Seven of the clock, after very
long marches, we got near the Town, and a Troop of Dragoons was sent to make
good a Pass, whilst the Town was viewing at what place our men might best
enter, it being resolved upon to force our passage, in case of resistance, the
gaining of that Town over the River being of great advantage to our Affairs;
but before there could be a view taken of the Town, the Dragoons had engaged
the Enemy; and forced them from that ground which they kept; the Dragoons being
very forward to engage, pursued, and so the Enemy drew forth a considerable
party of Horse and Foot to maintain a Pass against us, which necessitated the
drawing down of the greatest part of the Foot, with some horse: and though that
part of the town was of the greatest difficulty to enter, yet through the
goodness of God our men made their entrance, and became Masters of the Town,
after four or five hours hot Service; the Town being very strongly Barricoed,
and through the darkness of the night, and our ignorance of the Town, they
disputed the Barricadoes and places of advantage with our men, playing hard
with their Canon upon them: In which Service, both Horse and Foot did exceeding
well; and particularly I cannot but take notice of the valor and resolution of
Col: Hewson, whose Regiment had the hardest task, Major Carter his Major being
hurt, and Captain Price, a deserving and faithful Officer, slain: The best of
their men were there, whereof many were Cavaliers and London Apprentices; they
looked upon the consequence of that place to be very great, and therefore did
resolve to make what resistance they could, the old Lord Goring being that day
Proclaimed General at the head of their Army upon the Hill near Aylsford, where
we saw their Body drawn up, which as their Prisoners since do confess, and they
themselves gave out, consisted of Eight thousand men, besides those in
Maidstone and Aylsford; in both which places there were about Three thousand
men, those of Aylsford coming as a fresh supply to relieve those engaged in
Maidstone: There were near Three hundred slain, and about One thousand three
hundred Prisoners, many of them being taken next morning early in the Woods,
Hopyards and Fields whether they fled in the time of the fight; amongst which
were Gentlemen of good quality, Sir Gamaliel Dudley, Sir William Brockman,
Squire Scot, and Major Price, and others, a List whereof is preparing to be
sent. There were about Five hundred Horse, Three thousand Arms, Nine Foot
Colors, and Eight pieces of Canon, with store of Ammunition also taken. In the
first Charge which our Forlorn-hope gave the Enemies Horse (wherein our Horse
carried themselves very gallantly, as I since hear) Sir John Many, and diverse
others of quality were slain. After it pleased the Lord to give us this great
mercy in gaining of the Town, their men received so great discouragement, that
the greatest part of their Army left them, and were dispersed, and a great
number of Officers and Gentlemen since fled to shift for themselves: Their word
at the Engagement was, King and Kent; ours, Truth. Having thus possessed our
selves of the passes at Maidstone and Aylesford, the Enemy being much confused
with our Success, and their own men deserting them, they at last marched over
Rochester bridge toward Black Heath with about Three thousand Horse and Foot,
most of which were Cavaliers, Apprentices and Watermen, our men being not able
to make so speedy a march after them as was necessary. I sent Col: Whaley with
a party of Horse and Dragoons after them, upon whose approach they have left
Kent, and are fled over the water into Essex by Woolwich and Greenwich: Colonel
Whaley is in pursuit, and I doubt not but he will give a good Account of that
Service.

I have sent Colonel Rich with a party of Horse and Foot to relieve Dover,
where I trust we shall find the same presence of God as hitherto has been: My
prayer to the Lord is, That this great mercy may be further improved to his
glory, and this Kingdoms good. I thought fit to present unto the House these
Papers enclosed, taken from the Enemy, whereby you will perceive the depth of
their Plot, and their Engagements to pursue what they have undertaken, and
granting Commissions to raise Regiments, and the Oath of Secrecy, which they
took for the better management of their Affairs: I have secured the Major of
Rochester, whose hand is to the Commissions granted for raising of Forces. I
remain

Your humble Servant, T. Fairfax.
Rochester, 4 Junii, 1648. I desire you to be pleased to move the House on the
behalf of the Widow and Children of Captain Price, that some provision may be
made for them, and the Arrears of her Husband paid unto them, for their present
subsistence; that those who adventure their lives for the Service of the
Public, may receive encouragement for their faithfulness to the Public.



FINIS.

