The Woman learning in Silence: OR, THE MYSTERY OF THE Woman's Subjection TO
HER HUSBAND.

As also, The Daughter prophesying, wherein the Lord has, and is fulfilling
that he spoke by the Prophet Joel, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh,
etc.

Given forth by George Fox.

Quench not the Spirit. Despise not Prophesying. LONDON, Printed for Thomas
Simonds, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate. 1656.

THE WOMAN LEARNING IN SILENCE, etc.
LEt your women learn in silence, with all subjection; here is a silent
learning, a learning in silence: I suffer not a woman to Teach, nor to usurp
Authority over the man, but to be silent, there she is to learn, in the
silence, and not to usurp Authority over the man, but ask her Husband at home.
Gal. 5.18.
That which usurps Authority, the Law takes hold on, but if you be led of the
spirit, then you are not under the Law: So I permit not a Woman to speak in the
Church, as says the Law: So let the Women learn in silence, with all
subjection: But I suffer not a Woman to usurp Authority over the man, but be in
all silence; for Adam was formed, then Eve and Adam was not deceived, but the
woman was in the Transgression, Read 1 Timothy 2. Nevertheless she shall be saved
in childbearing, if she continue in faith and charity, and holiness, with
sobriety. Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted
for them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says
the Law, the women which are to be under obedience, and to be silent, and not
to speak in the Church, as also says the Law, which does not permit; but
Christ in the Male, and in the Female is one, which makes free from the Law: I
will pour out my spirit upon Sons and Daughters, and they shall prophecy: And
if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home, for it is a
shame for a woman to speak in the Church, i Cor. 1.21.
that which the Law forbids and commands silence; it is a shame to suffer them
to speak in the Church. What? came the Word of God out from you, or came it
unto you only? Paul, according to the measure given to him, 2 Pet. 3.
in all his Epistles, speaking in them of things which some are hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, to their own destruction: You therefore, beloved, seeing
you know these things, beware least you also be led away with the error of the
wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the end of the Law for righteousness
sake. Peter, which was unlearned in the Letter, yet learned of Christ, says,
Such as were unlearned, who wrest the Scriptures and the Epistles, being
unlearned. The Scribes, Pharisees, great Rabbis, and Doctors knew not the
Scriptures, being not learned of Christ, him who was the life of the prophets,
and the end of the Law, whom Peter was learned in, knew and preached, whom they
knew not: So here the unlearned, who was in the life, confounded all the
learned out of the life, who learned of him by whom the world was made, who
comprehended all the worlds learning that was in the world; so the unlearned
wrest, they are to learn in silence, and not to speak, as says the law, but
learn of their husband at home, Christ, who makes free from the Law;
nevertheless she shall be saved by childbearing, Christ in the Male, and
Christ in the Female. Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them.
Wives submit your selves first to your Husbands as unto the Lord: The Husband
is the head of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the church, and is the
Savior of the body: Therefore as the church is subject to Christ, Ephesians. 5.
so let the Wives be subject to their own Husbands in every thing. Husbands
love your Wives, even as Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it, that
he might sanctify and cleanse it, by the washing of water by the Word, that he
might present it a glorious church, without spot or wrinckle, or any such
thing, that it should be holy without blemish: So ought men to love their Wives
as their own bodies; he that loves his Wife, loves himself, for no man ever
hated his own flesh, but nourished it, and cherished it, even as the Lord the
church, for we are Members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; for
this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and be joined to his Wife,
and they twain shall be one flesh: This is a great mystery, I speak concerning
Christ and the church; He that has an ear, let him hear this great mystery;
now the unlearned men wrest it, and the unstablished, who know not this great
mystery, you that are ignorant of the Lords work, and the voice of his
prophets, who are wondering at the prophesying of the daughters, who make your
selves ignorant of the Scriptures, and are wondering at the Lords Prophets, his
Daughters, which Joel the Lords Prophet, which spoke from the Lord, and says
the Lord to him, I am the Lord your God, and none else, and my people shall
never be ashamed: It shall come to pass after those days, I will pour forth my
spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and
your old men shall dream dreams, and young men shall see visions; and also upon
the Servants and upon the Handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit,
says the Lord: Here all may see the Spirit of the Lord not limited, but upon
the handmaids and the servants is the Lords Spirit poured, and to be poured,
and many thousands of servants and handmaids witness the Spirit of the Lord
poured upon them, the word of the Lord fulfilled, and upon the sons and
daughters will the Lord pour out his spirit, and they shall prophecy, and many
daughters and sons, and young men, and old men witness the spirit of the Lord
upon them poured out, that visions are seen, old men dream dreams, and young men
see visions, and their sons and their daughters do prophesy, Joel 2.28. and in
Act. 2. the Apostles there do gather together, waiting upon the Lord, upon whom
the holy Ghost fell among them that were to wait for the Spirit. This Prophecy
of Joel they saw the fulfilling of, which to the world they were as men drunk;
and so here the Apostles witnessed the fulfilling of the Prophets, who are
witnesses of Christ, whom the Apostles did give testimony of, and did speak of
the daughters prophesying: and Phillip had four daughters that did prophecy,
which the Apostle did not forbid, and says the Apostle, despise not
prophesying: here the prophet Joel was not against the daughters prophesying,
nor the Apostles were not against it, but said, despise not prophesying; and
says the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 16.22. Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no
harm: so you that persecute the daughters on whom the spirit of the Lord is
poured, and believe them not, you are them that despise the prophets, and
despise prophesying, and so have broken the Apostles command, who says,
despise not prophesying, and shows that you are out of the Prophets doctrine,
and the Apostles doctrine, against the Promise of God stand with all your
might, who says, he would pour forth his spirit upon all flesh, and his
daughters should prophecy; and how can you be established, and believe not the
prophets? for believing the Prophets they came to be established, as you may
read, 2 Chr. 20. so how ignorant of the prophets and promises of God does the
called teachers of the world make themselves manifest, and how in darkness they
appear to the children of light, 1 These. 5.20. so you that despise prophecy,
and cast the daughters and sons, servants and handmaids into prison, who
witness the spirit of the Lord God poured forth upon them, you show that you be
out of the Apostles doctrine, and to be strangers to the spirit the Scriptures
were given forth from, and are ignorant of the Church the Apostle speaks of,
who says let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge, and if
any thing be revealed to one that sits by, let the first hold his peace, for
you may al prophesyone by one, that al may learn, and al maybe comforted, and
the spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets, for God is not the
author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the saints. This
order was in the Church of the Saints, the prophets to speak two or three, and
the other to judge, and if any thing be revealed to another that sits by, the
first held his peace: they might prophesy all one by one, that al may learn and
be comforted, and the spirit of the prophets was subject to the prophets, and
this was order, and not confusion in all the Churches of the Saints, which is
disorder and confusion in the Churches of the world, who cannot endure a
daughter to prophecy, for a daughter might prophecy, and a daughter is a
prophet, where the spirit of the Lord is poured forth upon, and a son; for you
never read that any of the prophets or apostles were against the daughters
which had the spirit of the Lord poured forth upon them, a daughter might
prophecy in the Church: for let your prophets speak two or three, and I will
pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your daughters shall prophecy, for you
that despise prophesying despise Gods command, and are out of Moses light and
life, who said, Would all the Lords people were prophets, Numb. 11.26, 27, 28.
and daughters are the Lords people; and when they were prophesying in the camp,
there ran a young man and told Moses, and Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of
Moses, one of his young men answered and said, My lord forbid them: and Moses
said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God all the Lords people were
prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them. Now mark Moses
answer, how backward Moses was from limiting the spirit, that he would have the
Lords spirit put upon them all, and said, would that all the Lords people were
Prophets: Now hear you magistrates, priests and people, which do put into
prison sons and daughters for prophesying, and the lords people, you show a
contrary spirit, you show a spirit that has erred from Moses spirit, who
cannot endure that the spirit of the Lord should be poured upon them that they
should prophecy, but would limit it to learned men, old books, and authors.
And Hanna the prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, which was about fourscore
and four years of age, came into the Temple, who served God with fasting and
prayer night and day, she spoke of Christ to all them that looked for
Redemption in Jerusalem.

Here was a large testimony born of Jesus by Hanna the Prophetess; Luke 2.36,
37, 38
here you may see a daughter which did give testimony of Jesus, which would be,
and is a wonder in this our age, to see a woman of fourscore years of age to
speak of Jesus to all them that look for redemption in Jerusalem, as she did;
put her in prison, would the wicked ones say, into prison with her would the
Priests say: And Paul the Minister of God in Phil. the 4th. there he entreats
his true yoke fellow to help those women which labored with him in the Gospel,
as you may there read. The Women were joined with the other Fellow Laborers,
whose names are written in the book of life; and in Romans 16. there you may see
Priscilla and Aquila, Paul's helpers in Christ Jesus, who for his life laid down
their necks; here the wife Priscilla was an instructor and was one of them that
laid down their necks, and a helper in Christ Jesus; Acts 18.24, 25, 26.
she and Aquila took Apollo and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly;
one who taught in the Synagogue was instructed by her and him in the way of God
more perfectly; at these you Synagogue-Teachers scoffs to be instructed by a
woman, and you that forbid a woman for speaking that has the Spirit of the
Lord, you forbid Scripture; 1 Cor. 16.19
for Aquila and Priscilla had a Church in their house, and the Church in
Priscilla and Aquila's house was to be greeted, who were instructers; and in
the aforesaid Chap. Act. 18. he that was speaking holdly in the Synagogue
witnessing Christ the second Priest, the end of the first Priesthood that took
Tithes, the Law, the Offering, and the Temple, by him, Priscilla and Aquila
expounded to him the way of God more perfectly, and the Apostle Paul a Minister
of the Lord who witnesseed the daughters prophesying, says, I commend unto you
Phebe our Sister, which is a servant of the Church which is at Cenchrea, Rom
16.1, 2.
that you receive her in the Lord as becomes Saints, that you assist her in
what business she has need of, for she has been a succourer of many, and of
my self also: This was Phebe the Sister, the Servant of the Church, which was
to be received in the Lord, and assist her in whatsoever business she has
need. And says the Apostle, as touching Priscilla and Aquila his fellow
laborers in Christ Jesus, who laid down their necks for his life, unto whom he
gave thanks, and not only he did give thanks, but also all the Churches of the
Gentiles. Here you may see the account Aquila and Priscilla were in, who laid
down their necks for the Apostle, how thank-worthy they were; and Mary in Verse.
6. was to be greeted, who bestowed much labor on the Apostle. You that cannot
own the prophesying of the daughters, the women-labourers in the Gospel, you
are such as the Apostle speaks of in the same Chapter, Romans 16. chap. thorowout.
which serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own bellies, and by the good
words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, for the obedience of
these was gone abroad, which the Apostle speaks of, and your disobedience is
gone abroad to the Apostles Doctrine, who cannot endure the prophesying of the
sons and daughters where the Spirit of the Lord is powered upon them; Joel. 30.
And Mary Magdalene saw Jesus after his Resurrection, which on the first day of
the week came to the sepulcher, and when she saw Jesus, she knew not that it
was him, and said unto him, Master; Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I
am not yet ascended to my Father, but go unto my brethren, and say unto them, I
ascend unto your Father and my Father, unto your God and my God. Mary Magdelene
came and told the Disciples that she had seen the Lord, and he had spoken these
things unto her; the same day at evening being the first day of the week, the
Disciples were assembled, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be
amongst you. Now here all may see that it was Mary Magdalone that was sent to
declare his Resurrection, and she was to tell the brethren (the Disciples)
whither Christ was to go, to his father and our father, his God and our God,
where her testimony was received. Now you that make a scoff and a wonder at a
Woman's declaring, you may see that it was Mary that first declared Christ after
he was risen, so be ashamed and confounded for ever, and let all your mouths be
stopped for ever, that despise the spirit of prophecy in the daughters, and do
cast them into prison, and to hinder the women-labourers in the Gospel, and
says the Apostle, Christ in the male and in the female, and if Christ be in
the female as well as in the Male, is not he the same? and may not the Spirit
of Christ speak in the female as well as in the male? is he there to be limited?
who is it that dare limit the holy One of Israel? for the light is the same in
the male, and in the female which comes from Christ, him by whom the world was
made, and so Christ is one in all, and not divided, and who is it that dares
stop Christ's mouth? that now is come to reign in his sons and daughters, Christ
in the male, and Christ in the female? and you that will not have him to reign
in the Female as well as in the Male, you are against Scripture, and will not
have him to reign over you; for in that Male where Christ does reign, 2 Cor. 13.
rule and speak, he will own Christ in the Female, there to reign, to rule and
speak, and come to see the Apostles Doctrine, a Minister of Christ and of God,
and not made by the will of man, who said, that Christ was in the Male and in
the Female, Christ all in all, and Christ in you, except you be Reprobates: Now
you that be Reprobates, in whom Christ does not reign nor rule, cannot endure
that Christ should be in the Female nor in the Male, but him you will hale into
prison, and yet profess the Words, as the Pharisees did, to whom Christ said, I
was sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not; and I was naked and hungry, and
ye clothed me not, nor fed me: Now them which had Scripture, and would not have
Christ to reign, said, When saw we thee in prison, or naked, and hungry, and we
clothed thee not, or visited thee not? In as much as you did it not to the least
of these, you did it not unto me, said Christ. So if they who visited him not
in prison, who had the Scriptures to talk on, of Christ that was to come, as
you have of one which is come, and would not have him reign, as you will not
now; such were to go into punishment prepared for the devil and his angels: if
such punishment came upon them that visited him not when he was cast into
prison, what will come upon you that do him cast into prison? but Chist is come
to reign, him by whom the world was made, before the world was made, who now
reigns in his sons and daughters, and in the male and in the female, that the
glory is seen that the Son had with the Father before the world began, which
glory those males and females that receive Christ do see, and the spirits of
the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, whether it be son or daughter that
prophesies, for the spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets, and the
prophets may speak one by one in the true Church, and the daughter is a prophet
as well as theson. 1 Cor. 14.31, 32, 33.
Now every one having a light from Christ Jesus, the son of God him by whom the
world was made, being turned to the light, turned to Christ, him by whom the
world was made, see him, the prophet, whom God has raised up, which Moses
spoke of, who is the end of the prophets, and with the Light see Christ, the
gift of God, the promise of the Father, and receive him; you will see with the
Light such as act contrary to the Light, such as act contrary to the Light
which they are lighted withal, what due and portion is to them who contrary to
the Light do act which comes from Jesus Christ; and with the Light you will see
the promise to them of life that walk in the Light that comes from Jesus, and
every one receiving the Light which comes from Christ, shall receive the spirit
of prophecy, whether they be male or female, and the spirit of prophecy is
the Testimony of Jesus; if male and female have received the Testimony of
Jesus, they have received the spirit of prophecy

FJNJS.

