THE PETITION Of his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General AND HIS
Council of Officers, FOR THE Recalling of all Penal Laws made against private
Meetings, the punishing of Prophanness, as Swearing, etc. the releasing of
persons under Restraint, and the taking away unnecessary Laws with their
Intricacies and Delays.

Presented to the PARLIAMENT on Thursday, August 16. 1649.

With their Answer thereunto.

Aug* 18 London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in
the Inner Temple. 1649.

TO THE Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of ENGLAND; The
humble Petition of his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, General, and his Council
of Officers;
Shows,
THat being very sensible of that power and presence of God, which has lately
appeared in Jreland, as the fruit of that Spirit of Faith and supplication,
which God has powered forth on the hearts of his people, to the bringing down
the common Enemy, and exalting his own Name, that does great things, by small
and contemptible means, That no flesh may boast, but he who glories, may glory
in the Lord, We are much pressed in mind (we trust by the same power and
presence that has made bare his Arm in the late Victory) to tender to this
Honorable House, the annexed Proposals, that your selves being set in high
Place and power of doing good in this Nation, may in the sense of this late
Mercy, so shine forth in ways of truth and Righteousness, That Gods People, and
this Commonwealth, may have cause to rejoice in You, and bless his Name for
You.

1. That all such Penal Statutes made under the several Kings of England, and
likewise any Ordinance made this present Parliament, whereby many conscientious
people are much molested, and the propagation of the Gospel hindered may be
removed, and some course taken, that the Spirit of Christ, flowing forth in his
servants for the declaring his Name in the Nation, may not be suppressed, but
receive all due encouragement, they living peaceably under the present
Government, without disturbing the public Worship.

2. And because we are sensible, that through the subtlety of s^t^n the most
lawful and Christian Liberty may be abused to licentiousness and profaneness,
which from our hearts, We therefore do humbly declare, That it is not our
meaning, that the liberty before desired by us, should extend to the Toleration
of Popery, Prelacy, the Book of Common Prayer, public scorn or contempt of God
and his Word; and do further desire, That through your care and zeal, all open
acts of profaneness, as drunkenness, swearing, uncleanness, and the like, be
vigorously proceeded against, and punished in all persons whatsoever.

3. That upon the sense of this great Mercy lately received from God, your
hearts would be moved to extend your favor so far as may stand with the safety
of this present Government to those who have formerly served you, and the
Interest of this Nation against the Common Enemies thereof, but of late for
their miscarriages have fallen under your displeasure, and are now under
Restraint, and for the future all disturbers of the public Peace be vigorously
proceeded against.

4. That speedy consideration may be had of those great Oppressions which the
People of this Nation groan under by Reason of the Multiplicity of unnecessary
Laws with their intricacies and delays, which tends to the profit of some
particular men, but much to the expense and damage of the whole.

June 15. 1649. By the appointment of his Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX, Lord
General, and his Council of Officers. Signed, Richard Hatter, Secretary.

THis Petition being presented to the Parliament on Thursday. Aug. 16. by Coll.
Pride, Lieut. Coll. Goffe, and other Officers.
The Officers (after reading the same) were called in, and Master SPEAKER in
the name of the House gave them thanks for their constant good affections, and
in particular, for the Petition, acquainting them that they had the things
therein, already under consideration, but that this should hasten the Granting
of the same with all possible speed and convenience.

FINIS.

