This is A WARNING To ALL that Profess Christianity And OTHERS. To Beware of
Covetousness, which is Idolatry.
By G. Fox.
ALL People that do profess Christ and Christianity, this is a Warning to you
all, to take heed of Covetousness; for Covetousness was forbidden both in the
Old Testament and the New, and by the Law of God, and by Christ and his
Apostles.

For the Apostle says, Covetousness is Idolatry; and it was forbidden both to
the Rulers, Priests, Teachers and People in the old and new Testament, that
Idolatrous Practice.

And Christ says, It is one of those Evils that defiles a Man, that comes out
of him.

And the Lord said in his Law and Ten Commandments, Thou shall not Covet thy
Neighbor's House, thou shall not Covet thy Neighbor's Wife, nor his Man
Servant, nor his Maid Servant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is
thy Neighbor's.

Now, if this Covetous Spirit be kept down, then the Idolater is kept down, and
that Idol out of the Heart.

Also Theft and Stealing was forbidden in the old Covenant, and so it is in the
new; and all are to labor in the thing that is Good.

Likewise Adultery was forbidden in the old Covenant, and so it is in the new;
yea, and more than outward Adultery: For, He that looks after a Woman to lust
after her, in the new Covenant, Christ says, he has committed Adultery with
her already in his Heart.

And Bearing False Witness against his Neighbor was forbidden in the old
Covenant; so it is in the new? For all are to speak Truth to their Neighbor,
and lie not.

And the Lord says in the old Testament, Thou shall not Kill.

The Apostle says in the new Covenant, They did not wrestle with Flesh and
Blood; and their Weapons were not Carnal, but Spiritual: and Christ forbids
Wrath in the new Covenant, etc.

And Samuel who was a Judge and a Prophet, who judged Isreal all the days of
his Life, 1 Samuel 7.15. and 1 Samuel 12.3. Samuel said, I am old and grey-headed,
and I have walked before you from my Childhood unto this day; whose Ox or Ass
have I taken? or whom have I defrauded or oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any Birbe to blind my Eyes therewith? And the Children of Isreal
answered and said, Thou have not frauded nor oppressed any of us, neither have
thou received ought at any man's hand, etc.

Now here was a Prophet, and a Priest, and a Judge clear from that Idolatry of
Covetousness; and has not he out-stripped many of them which now call
themselves Prophets and Priests, Judges and Teachers, that profess the new
Covenant?

And David said, Incline my Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to
Covetousness, Psalm 119.36.

So if all who profess Christianity, their Hearts were inclined to the
Testimony of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy, that would keep down the Earthly
Spirit of Covetousness, which is Idolatry.

And as Solomon says in Prove. 28.16. He that Hates Covetousness; shall
prolong his days. Then he that loves Covetousness, which is Idolatry, shall
not prolong his days.

And Jeremiah cried out against the Jews in the old Covenant, and said, From
the Greatest to the Least of them, the Prophet and the Priest, every one of
them was given to Covetousness, and to deal Falsely, Jer. 6.13. and Isa. 56.11.

And yet these Priests and Prophets, from the greatest to the least of them,
could make a Profession of the old Covenant.

And let the Priests, and Prophets, and People, that profess the new Covenant,
see if they be not given to this Idolatry of Covetousness, which was hated and
forbidden of God and Christ, and his People, Prophets and Apostles.

And Jeremiah further cries out against the Jews in Jer. 22.17. and said unto
them, Thine Eyes and thine Heart are for thy Covetousness, and for shedding of
Innocent Blood, and for Oppression, and for Violence.

Now this was the Jews Condition in the old Covenant, when they forsook God,
and his Law and Spirit.

And now let all who profess themselves Christians, in whom Christ does not
Reign, which are not guided by the Spirit of God, as the Prophets and Apostles
were, search and try themselves, if the Fruits of their Eyes and Hearts, and
the Fruits of the Spirit that was in the Jews, does not appear and is manifest
in them, a Spirit that lusts to do Violence and Oppression, and a spirit of
Covetousness, and of Persecution, and of shedding innocent Blood, which was
forbidden by God and his Prophets in the old Covenant, and by Christ and his
Apostles in the new Covenant, and by them abhorred and cried out against. But
what was the End of the Jews which followed after that wicked spirit, and went
from the Lord?

And do those called Christians think in their Profession of the New Covenant,
that they must have Liberty in these evil things now, which were forbidden in
the time of the old Law and Covenant? No, no; they are much more forbidden in
the new.

And the Lord said unto Ezekiel, That the Jews would come and fit before him as
the Lord's People, and they would hear his Words, but they will not do them;
and with their Mouths they would show much Love, but their Hearts went after
their Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31.

Now will not the Priests and Professors of Christendom hear and say the Words
of the New Covenant and Gospel, and appear to show much Zeal and Love for the
Words of the New Testament, but they will not do them nor practice them; for
their Hearts and Eyes go after their Covetousness, which is Idolatry.

For have not you that profess the New Covenant in words, done as they that
professed the Old in words, even coveted Goods, Fields, Houses, and taken by
Violence, and Oppressed a Man in his Heritage, and Devised Iniquity, and
wrought Evil upon your Beds, and in the Morning Light have practiced it,
because you had power in your hands?

And was not Woe pronounced against all such, that professed the Old Covenant,
and yet walked contrary to it; and much more against all such, as are found in
these Practices now, who profess the New? Micha chap. 2.

And Habbakkuk cries, We to him that Covets an Evil Covetousness to his House,
that he may set his Nest on high, that he may be delivered from the Power of
the Evil, etc. Hab. 2.9. He tells them, The Stone shall cry out of the Wall,
and the Beam of the Timber shall answer it against them.

And therefore let such covetous Persons, that profess Christianity, hearken
and hear, if the Stones out of the very Wall do not cry out against you, and
the Beam of the Timber does not answer it?

And Christ says in Mark 7. That which comes out of the Man from within his
Heart, defiles the Man (to wit) Evil Thoughts, Adultery, Fornication, Murders,
Theft, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit, Blasphemies, Pride, Foolishness, and
an Evil Eye: Now these are the Evils that defile men, which the Devil, the
Serpent, who is out of the Truth, has wrought in man's heart, both in Adam and
Eve, and the Jews, and the Christians that go from God, and disobey his Voice
and Command: For neither God nor Christ wrought any of these Evil Things in Man
in the beginning, nor since, who is the Author of all Good. And therefore these
Evil Things must be purged out of Man by Christ's Blood and Baptism, and by the
Mortification and Circumcision of the Spirit of God.

And Christ said unto them (to wit, the Jews) Take heed and beware of
Covetousness; for a man's Life consists not in the abundance of the things
which he does possess.

Oh! that all that are called Christians, and all people, would consider this
blessed Doctrine of Christ the Heavenly Man; and that they might come to
understand and know what their Life does consist in; then they would take heed
and beware of Covetousness, which is Idolatry, Luke 12.15.

And the Apostle Paul, who had the Care of the Churches upon him; he writes to
the Corinthians, Not to keep company with any man that is called a Brother,
that is a Fornicator, or Covetous, or Idolater, or Railer, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner; with such an one they were not so much as to eat: For such as
professed Christianity, and followed such Practices, the Saints were neither to
eat nor to keep company with them; for they shamed their Profession of
Christianity.

So here the Apostles and Saints; the true Church, had a Judgment given them,
and did judge out the Covetous Idolaters, Fornicators, Drunkards, Railers, etc.
from having any Fellowship with the Saints, the true Church, not as much as to
eat with them, nor to keep company with them of that spirit: For he says,
Neither Fornicators, nor Thieves, nor Drunkards, nor Covetous Idolaters,
Railers and Extortioners, etc. shall inberit the Kingdom of God.

And the Apostle told the Corinthians, that such were some of them, but they
were washed, sanctified and justified from these things, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of God. So these were washed from their
Fornication, Covetousness, Idolatry, Drunkenness, Railing and Extortion, and
justified in the Name of Jesus, and by the Spirit of God.

So the Apostle here does not speak of the Fornicators, Covetous Idolaters and
Extortioners of the World, which were without; for God judges such. But the
Saints, the Apostles and the true Church were to judge them that practiced such
things within the Church, showing the true Christians Church had a Power; and
not to keep company nor to eat with such, professing Christ, that were of such
Practices, knowing that the Unrighteous should not inherit the Kingdom of God,
nor Drunkards nor Fornicators, Thieves, Railers, Extortioners, nor Covetous
Idolaters; they that inherit these Evils, were not like to inherit the Kingdom
of God; for they were defiled, unwashed, and not sanctified nor justified, etc.
So that if the Saints did keep company, or did eat with such unwashed,
unsanctified, unjustified Persons, or have Fellowship with them, they took the
Members of Christ and joined them to an Harlot; for he that is joined to an
Harlot, is one Body; For two (says he) shall be one Flesh. And therefore the
Saints Bodies are the Members of Christ; God forbid they should be joined to
Harlots, or that they should make them Members of an Harlot. And he that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit: and the Saints Bodies are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, which proceeds from God and Christ, and being bought with a Price
the Blood of Christ, and washed, and sanctified, and justified in the Name of
Christ Jesus by the Spirit of God, they are to glorify God in their Bodies,
Souls and Spirits, which are God's, which he has given them to glorify him
withal; Glory to his Name forever.

And therefore all this old Leaven of Fornication, Adultery, Theft,
Covetousness, Idolatry, Drunkenness, Revelling, Extortion, and all
Unrighteousness, Envy, Malice and Wickedness, must be purged out, which is the
World's God the Serpent has wrought in, that they may be a new Lump, and keep
the Feast of Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth: For Christ our Passover
is sacrifice for us, as you may see in 1 Cor. 5, and 6. chapters, which was the
Practice of the Church in the Apostles days, and which should be so now to
keep this Heavenly Passover with Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

And further, the Apostle tells the Church of Corinth in 2 Cor. 6. and explains
himself with a great Care of the Church, that they must not be Unequally Yoked
together with Unbelievers. So this is an Unequal Yoke, to yoke Believers and
Unbelievers together; and gives his Reason, and says, What Fellowship has
Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what Communion has Light with
Darkness? and what Concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has a
Believer with an Infidel? and what Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

Now they that go contrary to the Apostles Doctrine in these things, have lost
their Sense, and Sight, and Feeling; for here is no Fellowship, nor Unity, nor
Concord; here is no Agreement, nor no Part with such aforementioned, that are
out of the Truth, but they are Unequally Yoked with such who are the Temples of
the Living God, that join with them; they in whom God does dwell and walk, and
he is their God, and they are his People.

Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the Unclean Thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says God Almighty. Here you
may see, what the Saints, the Sons and Daughters of God, are to forsake and not
to touch, nor make no agreement with, not be yoked to, but be separated from
it, that the Lord God Almighty may receive them.

And again, the Apostle writes to the Ephesians, chap. 4, 5. That they should
put away Lying, and every man speak the Truth to his Neighbor; for they are
Members one of another: and him that had stolen, steal no more, but let him
labor, working with his Hands the thing that is good. And let no corrupt
Communication proceed out of your Mouths, but that which is good, tending to
Edification, which may minister Grace to the Hearers: and all Filthiness,
Foolish Talking and Jesting, which was not convenient, was to be put away. And
the Saints, the Church of Christ, was not to have any Fellowship with such
things, the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove them. And
Fornication, and all Uncleanness, and Covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints. For this you know (to wit, the Saints, the
Church of Christ) That no whoremonger, nor Unclean Person, nor Covetous Man,
which is an Idolater [mark, Covetous, that is an Idolater] has any Inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Here the Church of Christ had their
Knowledge, and had their Judgment to judge out these things, that kept people
out of the Kingdom of God. And now Mark, if a covetous man be an Idolater, as
the Apostle says, then all covetous men are Idolaters, and shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God.

And now let all those that are called Priests, Teachers, Ministers and
Prophets in Christendom, see if their Fruits do not declare them to be
Covetous, and so Idolaters, who preach Christ and the Apostles (and seem to
have a Zeal for their) words; but how many of them will preach without Tithes
and Hire? and if people will not give it unto them, then to spoil their Goods,
and cast them into Prison, yea, till Death, as many have been, because they
would not hold up and feed that Idolatrous Spirit of Covetousness in them.
Whenas the Apostle commands the Church, not so much as to have Fellowship, nor
Company, nor to eat with a Covetous Person, which is an Idolater.

And now, if the Saints, the true Church of Christ, must not eat, nor keep
company with such, then how must they hear them, or be compelled or forced to
hear such? And knowing that Christ said to his Ministers, whom he sent forth,
Freely they had received, freely they were to give; and they were neither to
provide Silver nor Gold, nor Bag nor Scrip; but to enquire, who was worthy of
their Message; and what was set before them, that they were to eat; and such as
were unworthy, that would not receive them and their Message, they were to
shake the Dust off their Feet, which should be a Witness against them at the
Day of Judgment. And the Apostles did not cast those unworthy ones, that would
not receive them, and set Meat before them, into Prison, as some of your
Ministers do the People of God, because they cannot uphold your Covetous
Idolatrous spirit, in giving you Tithes and Hire.

And now all you that will not preach Christ's and the Apostles words, nor pray
amongst people, nor give them Psalms to sing, and sing among them, and baptize
Children (as you call it) or sprinkle them, without the Tenths of peoples
increase of their Labors, and without the Tenths of the increase of their
Cattle and Goods, and have Set Wages by the Year for these things; are not you
the covetous Idolaters? yea, and cast people into Prison, and spoil their
Goods, and excommunicate them whom you do none of these works for, neither have
they set you a work, nor hired you to do any of these things for them: For do
not most people every where generally hire you, and agree with you for so much
in the year? or do not you make Friends with great Persons to put you into fat
Benefices? and instead of inquiring where the worthy people are, are not your
Priests enquiring, where is the greatest Benefice, and most Tithes, and
In-comes? And then when you are settled, do not you spoil the Goods, and cast
into Prison, such as never hired you nor hear you? And is not this contrary to
the general Command of Christ to his Disciples, both to the 12. and the 70?
Freely you have received, freely give, etc. So is it not manifest here, that
you are covetous Idolaters that the Apostle speaks against, that shall not
enter into the Kingdom of God?

For Peter in his 2d general Epistle, chap. 2. speaks of the false Prophets and
false Teachers, and how many should follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the Truth should be evil spoken of; which Truth the Apostles preached
freely, as they had received freely, according to the Command of Christ. And
these false Prophets and Teachors through Covetousness should with feigned
words make Merchandise of people. For how often have the Teachers changed their
Places and Ways? The Apostle compares such with the old world, and Sodom, and
fallen Angels, that kept not their Habitation. And therefore, let the Teachers
in Christendom, who cast into Prison and spoil peoples Goods for their Bellies,
examine and see if they be not the men.

And also, the Apostle writes to Timothy in 2 Timothy 3. of such Covetous prond
Boasters, and false Accusers, and fierce Despisers of them that were good, and
which were heady, high-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God;
that had the Form of Godliness (which was the Form of Christianity) but denied
the Power thereof; from such the Saints, the true Church, were to turn away.
For he likened them to Jannes and Jambres, that withstood Moses, who were men
of corrupt minds, and did resist the Truth, and were reprobate concerning the
true Faith; these led such captive who were laten with sins, and led about with
diverse lusts, always learning, and were never able to come to the knowledge of
the Truth: And how should they, being destitute thereof themselves, and men of
corrupt minds, bring any into the Truth and the Faith, when they are out of the
true Faith themselves, and tell people, They must carry a Body of Sin and Death
to the Grave with them; and others say, They must have a Purgatory when they
are dead: And such are Reprobate from the Apostles Doctrine and Faith, which is
the Victory, and in the damnable Heresy. But the Apostles exhorted the Saints,
to walk in the Light, and the Blood of Jesus Christ should cleanse them from
all Sin. And the Apostle told the Church, That they were washed, cleansed,
sanctified, and justified, etc. and this was whilst they were upon the Earth.
And he tells the Ephesians, the Saints, You that were sometime Darkness, now
are you Light in the Lord.

And the Apostle writes to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. Having Food and Raiment let us
therewith be content; and Godliness with Contentment is great Gain: but they
that will be rich, fall into Temptations and Snares, and into many foolish and
hurtful Lusts, which drown men in Destruction and Perdition: For the Love of
Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred
from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. But thou, O
Man of God, flee these things, and follow after Righteousness, Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. This is the Man of God's Path, and to flee
Covetousness, and the Love of Money, and such as make Gain their Godliness; for
such are destitute of the Truth: and this should be the Practice of all true
Christians now.

And do not the men of the World, with the Covetous Priests and Teachers, and
others, fly after Riches and Money, instead of flying from it? and after Gain,
supposing it to be Godliness? and is not this a Mark, that such have erred from
the true Faith, and are fallen into hurtful Lusts, which drown them in
Destruction and Perdition, by falling into a Temptation and a Snare, in
coveting after Riches and the Love of Money, which is the Root of all Evil.
Has not the Root of this Evil been manifest by the Teachers of the World and
other People? the Priests and Teachers by destroying People for their Bellies;
and the People by coveting and encroaching other Peoples Goods, and so destroy
their own and others too: the Teachers and others showing, that they are erred
from the Faith which Christ is the Author and Finisher of, who says, Freely
you have received, freely give; and, Beware of Covetousness. For the Apostle
says, A Bishop must not be a Striker, nor greedy of Filthy Lucre, nor a
Brawler, nor Covetous; but he must hold fast the faithful word, and be
blameless: and such Bishops and Elders, Teachers and Deacons were Timothy and
Titus to ordain, as you may see in 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. And they were to hold
the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience: And therefore how can any Bishops or
Teachers, Elders or Deacons be the Succeeders of them, that the Apostles, and
Timothy, and Titus ordained, that are Strikers, Persecutors, Covetous and
greedy of filthy Lucre, yea, and cast People into Prison whom they do not
over-see, nor teach, nor preach to? are not such erred from the Faith, the Evil
Beasts and Slow-belies, that suppose Gain to be Godliness, that serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies, which the Apostle bid Titus, Rebuke
such sharply. And now you may see such as coveted to be rich, and were
Persecutors and Strikers, and greedy of filthy Lucre, such Timothy and Titus
were not to ordain those Bishops and Teachers, Elders and Deacons; for such
were erred from the Faith; then they were not like to hold the Mystery of Faith
in a pure Conscience, which Christ is the Author and Finisher of, who says,
Freely you have received, freely give. For the Apostle in Act. 20. says, that
he was pure from the Blood of all men; he took the Church to record, that he
had coveted no man's Silver, Gold nor Apparel; and said, that the Church knew
themselves, that his Hands had ministered unto his Necessities, and them that
were with him. Now here was a clear free Minister of Christ. And now let the
Bishops, Priests and Teachers, etc. in christendom, try themselves and their
Practice by the Scripture, and the Apostle's Example, and the Command of
Christ, who says, Freely you have received, freely give. Can you say, That you
have coveted no man's Silver, Gold nor Apparel, either of your own people nor
others whom you have not preached to? Can you say, You are clear from the Blood
of all men, as the Apostle said, and call the Christians to record? If you do
say, You are; will not the Goals testify against you, and the Courts, and your
own Hearts and Consciences also will witness against you? And how many have
been persecuted and imprisoned by you till Death for not giving you Money and
Tithes, whom you do no work for! what persecuting and haling before Courts have
you made! You cannot call the Christians to record, that you are clear from the
Blood of all men, that you Covet no man's Silver, Gold nor Apparel, and that
you labor with your Hands for your own Necessities and others, and that you
are not greedy of filthy Lucre, and are not Strikers and Persecutors, nor are
not them that do covet after Money and the Riches of this World; and that you
do not give freely, as Christ commands, manifesting that you have not received
freely from him; but that you are erred from the Faith of Christ (by which the
Apostles lived) and from the Conversation of the Saints in the primitive times.
For the Apostle says to the Church, Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. And the Lord says,
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. and Josh. 1.5. And so,
this should be the Conversation of all that profess Christ Jesus, and then they
would covet after the best Gifts, and not after the earthly things, and follow
after Love and Charity.

And the Apostle says, Be ye Followers of me, even as I am also of Christ. And
so it is clear the Church of the true Christians is not to follow any Teacher,
but as he follows Christ in his Life, Faith, Practice and Doctrine. And if
they make a Profession of the Form of Godliness, without the Power, and Spirit,
and Truth they were to turn away from them, and not to follow them: But as
every one has received Christ Jesus, so walk in him in Humility.

G. F.
The 5th Month, 1679.
THE END.

