A WARNING TO All in this proud City called London to call them to Repentance,
least the Wrath of the Lord break out against them; this is the day of your
visitation if you will own it.
VVO unto thee O London, (so called by name) who have made a profession of
Christ; but have cleared thy self from Christ, who lives in the affections of
lusts, for who are Christ's have Crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts; your pride stinks before the Lord, your glory and renown must wither:
plagues, woe and misery, and vengeance from God, is coming upon you all, you
proud and lofty ones, who have been the Adversaries of God, your profession
stinks before the Lord, pride and hardheartedness abounds, cruelty and
oppression grows and abounds in your Streets, and such are you that would know
meanings to the Scriptures, and cries for meanings, meanings, and which lives
in your conceivings, which must be scattered from the Lord God, and from the
Life which gave forth the Scriptures, for you have here cleared your selves
from the life which was in them which gave forth the Scriptures, for the Life
which gave forth the Scriptures, hews down pride and oppression, and envious
ones, and lusts hardheartedness, which thy streets are full of: And O London
thou art full of Inventions, and full of Images and Image-makers, Pictures,
glassed hoods, vails, and round atire like the Moon; let the Life which gave
forth the Scriptures search thee, and Judge thee, and bring thee under
Conedmnation, for these things art thou guilty of, O how does all excess
abound, and pride and lusts, and filthiness, which stinks before the Lord God,
and the smell of it is come up amongst his children, Plagues, plagues, plagues,
is to be poured upon thee; how beautiful art thou in thy colors, and in thy
changeable suits of Apparel, and thy dainty dishes, Dives like, who was turned
into Hell; the Life which gave forth the Scriptures, shall Judge thee Eternally,
and the Life it lies upon thee Judging thee: Over all the heads of the wicked,
heads of the oppressors, heads of the proud, the Devil is King; woe is
pronounced from the Life of God upon thee, who has drawn out his Sword, to hew
thee to pieces, and to thresh thee; to scatter you all as chaff with the wind,
to burn you as stubble with the fire, The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it;
this is the portion of all the wicked. To the just and them that fear the Lord
I say, come out of her ways lest you be consumed with her, that you may give
Judgment upon the Whore, that sits upon so many waters, least you be partakers
of her plagues, hearken to God and hear him; for the Rod of God is over you,
and you must come under it, for your Whoredom and for your pride and
oppression, and hypocrisy and desembling, the Lord will find you all out, for
his Mighty day is coming, to all your consciences I speak; which has been
convinced but has not repented, torment, torment, the fire is kindled, woe unto
you all; plotters to do mischief, who are not single to God: Woe unto you all
stubborn hard hearted ones, the Life which gave forth the Scriptures lies upon
thee, Judging thee, and this is the Word of the Lord to you all, to that in all
your consciences I speak, which will witness me, and condemn you, who live in
these wicked practices.

March.30. 1654 George Fox.


