Sir Thomas Fairfax LETTER TO Both Houses of Parliament; More exactly and fully
relating the Storming and Taking of DARTMOVTH, with the Castle, Forts, Officers
in chief, and Soldiers therein: Sent by Mr. Peter's.

Together with a LIST of the Name; of the several Commanders, Officers and
Soldiers taken in the said Town, Castle and Forts.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and
List be forthwith printed and published:

Joh: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.




Printed at London for John Wright, at the King's Head in the Old Bailey, Ian.
24. 1645.

For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers pro Tempore.
My LORDS,
AFter my coming to Totness, the Enemy rising in great disorder from their
Siege at Plymouth, leaving their Guns and some Ammunition behind them; I
considered with those about me of Attempting upon Dartmouth; and it being
concluded affirmatively, I caused two Regiments of Foot to march to Ditsam, and
two to Stoak, Flemming, being on the West side of Dart River. I having Summoned
the place before, resolved upon Sunday night to Attempt it by Storm, which was
agreed to be done in three places: The first Post was on the West Gate by
Colonel Hamond; on the North end of the Town by Lieut: Col: Pride; and on
Tunstall Church and Works by Col: Fortescue. The time resolved on, was in the
Evening; our men fell on with great Resolution (to whom Colonel Lamberts
Regiment was a Reserve, and to Alarm the Enemy elsewhere. Colonel Hamond
entering the West Gate, where four Guns were planted, and two upon the Mill-Pool
upon his Flank; The Enemy firing his great Guns but once, his men that had the
Forlorn-Hope did very gallantly (as indeed they did all) and went freely on,
and beat off the Enemy, and possessed one Fort after another; viz. Mount
Flaggon, the West Gate, Paradise Fort, and beat off the main Guard; where were
taken four Lieutenant Colonels: and so possessed the Town from the West Gate to
little Dartmouth. In the Interim, Lieutenant Colonel Pride attempted the North
part of the Town, called Harness, where beating off the Enemy he entered it, and
took about Eighty Prisoners in it, and by it possessed all the North part of
the Town unto the Drawbridge, which divided the North part from the rest of
the Town; where Colonel Hamonds men and his met Colonel Fortescue with his men,
attempted Tunstall Church, which was very well manned with above One hundred
men, and having in it ten Guns: His men, after some Dispute, with good
Resolution entered the place and possessed it, so that by this time the Enemy
was beaten out of all, except the great Fort in the East side of the River,
called Kingsworth Fort, and the Castle with the Fort which lay over the Castle
at the mouth of the Harbor, called Gallants Bower; to which last the Governor
with the Earl of Newport, and as many as escaped us fled. After they were
forced from their strengths out of the Town, the Governor coming back from the
Castle to see in what posture the Town was, had a remarkable shot; as he was in
the Boat, one sitting by him, a Musket shot was made at the Boat, which pierced
the Boat, and through both the thighs of one that was next unto him, and about
three inches into his own thigh, upon which he retreated to the Castle. Our
Dragoons, with two Companies of our Firelocks, and some Seamen, were Ordered
only to Alarm Kingsworth Fort, wherein was Sir Henry Carry with his Regiment,
having in it twelve Guns, and twelve Barrels of Powder, and convenient
proportion of Ammunition. This was a very strong Fort, with about four good
Bulwarks, strong enough to have made a troublesome resistance; but the Enemy
came willingly to terms; and to save time, I willingly condescended to let Sir
Henry Carry march away with the rest, leaving the Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition,
with all Provisions in the Fort to me, and all engaging themselves never to
take up Arms more against the Parliament, which was accordingly performed. Next
morning, being thus Master of all but the Castle, and Gallants Bower, I
Summoned that, the Governor was willing to listen unto me, but I held him to
those terms upon which after some dispute he yielded, which was, to deliver
himself, and all Officers and Soldiers upon Quarter: He sent me out Colonel
Seamor and Mr. Denham for Hostages, with whom came out the Earl of Newport, and
all was this day performed accordingly. In this Fort and Castle were Eleven
Guns, with proportion of Ammunition and Provisions. We have taken in the Harbor
two men of War, one belonging to the Governor of Barnstable, with twelve Guns,
Burden Two hundred Tuns; the other belonging to Newcastle, formerly Captain
Johnsons, of ten Guns; In the Town, One hundred and three pieces of Ordnance,
and about Six hundred Prisoners, and One hundred Horse, with good proportion of
Arms and Ammunition, an Exact particular whereof I am not able to give Your
Lordship at present an account thereof; There being many of the Inhabitants of
this Town Soldiers in Plymouth, and some Officers. And understanding that that
Town has Two thousand five hundred in Garrison, besides Townsmen, I have sent
thither for Five hundred Foot for this place, who quickly will increase to
more; and to this I desire Your Approbation; for having found more work to do,
I held it not fit to weaken my Army, especially considering the Recruits
designed by You, I doubt will be too long before they come. I have given Your
Lordship a brief Account of this Service, which I desire may be accounted a
sweet mercy of God in a very fitting season, and only ascribed to him who truly
did direct and act it, and made all the preparation to it, both in the ordering
our hearts, and giving health to the Army, which labored two months ago
extremely of sickness, but is now in good disposition generally to health. I
can say, I find it to be in the hearts of all here, in all Integrity to serve
You: And that it is so, is still the mercy of God; for surely the success of
Your Affairs, only Depends upon the ordering of a gracious Providence, which is
no less visible in Your Councels (which we congratulate) then amongst us; that
being the common Root and Spring of all, and which can and will carry You
through the greatest Difficulties, and us in serving You, until God has
finished his own work: Wherein to profess the Obligation and readiness of my
self and the Army, by the same good hand of God is all the undertaking of

Dartmouth, Jan. 20. 1645. Your Lordships most humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax.
FOr a further Relation of particulars, I refer you to this Bearer Mr. Peter's,
who was present upon the place, and did much encourage the Soldiers to do
their Duties.



Prisoners taken at Dartmouth, January 19. 1645.
SIr Hugh Pollard Governor. Earl of Newport. Colonel Seamor. Leiutenant
Colonels.
Codrington. Blunt. Wadland. Searle.
Majors.
Fulford. Hooper.
Captains.
Pollard. Woodly. Sampson. Duke. Powell. Colefin. Ford. Blewet. Start. Downing.
Horton. Conway. Raynolds. Lee. Phillips,
Lieutenants.
King. Pollard. Hunt. Duncalfe. Kigan. Eston. Be. Labull. Slanner. Johnson.
Drew. Williams. Hinly. Searle.
Ensigns.
Garret. Richard. Vpton. Read. Dode. Waggin. Vichering. Fitch-Iames. Coome.
Cornet Lamot.

Many Country Gentlemen, Ministers, and inferior Officers. All the Common
Soldiers being betwixt eight hundred and a thousand are set at liberty to
repair to their dwellings.

Ordnance about a hundred and twenty mounted, two men of War in the Harbor.

FINIS.

