THE King of Denmark HIS DECLARATION Concerning The English Merchants Ships
Lying In COPENHAGEN.

Translated out of the Danish Speech into English by EDWARD SMITH, May 17.
1653.

Printed at COPENHAGEN, Anno 1653. AND Reprinted at London for Henry Cripps,
and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at their Shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1653.

THE King of Denmark HIS DECLARATION.
AFter the difference between the two mighty Powers in England and the United
Provinces was broke out to an open War, and that all common Liberty and Freedom
of Traffic upon the Sea was thereby hindered and taken away, so that none
except by force of weapon could be allowed that freedom which unto Commerce is
necessary; then did the States General appoint certain Convoys which should
guard their Merchant Ships hither into the Sound, and also back again; whereby
here did always happen to be a quantity of States Ships of War lying, which were
commanded to continue some time about the Lap, and some time upon this side
Crownborg; so that the English Merchants Ships coming out of the East Sea,
durst not adventure themselves into the North Sea, but according to their own
Superiors Command sought leave for security of their Ships, that they might
bring them into the Haven within the Blockhouse here, as their supplication the
10. of August delivered, letter A. does make appear, which was granted them,
for as much as they in a high measure did give thanks therefore, as their under
written writing, letter B, declares. Thereafter came into the Sound an English
Admiral with 18 Ships of War, which by an Officer upon the 23. of Sept. at four
a clock in the afternoon did send a Letter to be delivered from himself unto
his Majesty: the Contents whereof are recorded, as letter C. And though his
Majesty at that time was not in the Town, but at Ibstrupe a mile therefrom, yet
the said Officer did intimate that he had order to tarry no longer for an
answer but until noon the next day, where accordingly when the next day at noon
he could not have his will, and so hasty an answer as he desired, he would no
longer be delayed, but went hence: In the mean time, for as much as it was
altogether unheard and unexpected that such a Fleet should dare without notice
or leave given, suffer themselves to be found upon his Streams, and that so
near his Castles, his Majesty sent Sir Axel Wrip of Beltberg Knight, Commander
of Copenhagen Castle, and Otte: Krag of Wollberg, chief Secretary and Commander
of Bouffling Castle, down to Hell siengor to understand from the Admiral or his
Assigns by what leave they came upon his Streams, with other Circumstances
which they were commanded to enquire, and what they effected with those two
English Captains, which the Admiral had sent to them ashore, and also the
Admirals Answer thereunto, with Letter D recorded, does further declare.

And after that his Majesty sent his final Answer and Resolution to the English
Admiral, as will herewith in Copia of Letter E be found.

Wherewith the Admiral prepared to sail away: And as soon as the Parliament of
England had understood that the English Merchant Ships were not come away with
the said Convoy, but did remain lying here; they suffered by public Edict,
that all the Ships of his Majesty's Subjects which could be found in England
not only to be arrested, but their Ships and Goods, over-powering all the money
therein found, as also such moneys as the Shippers had in their Lodgings to be
taken away, and moreover all such Ships as they in the Channel could light upon
of his Subjects to be brought in and detained, and ill entreated, not affording
the Mariners food to sustain life; although the English had command and power
of their Ships and Goods in this Haven, and no hurt at all done them, but were
secured from their Enemies, as they in their Supplication with thanks
acknowledged; and the English Admiral also mentions in his writing, that they
have by the Hollander been here kept in. After which the Parliament in England
sent their Resident in Hamberg, Bradshaw, hither with Credentials to his
Majesty, and those Propositions which upon the 28 of December. were in public
audience to some that were deputed of his Majesty's Council delivered: His
Majesty had in thoughts to afford him his own personal audience, but seeing
that Henrick Williamson, whom his Majesty had formerly sent with Credentials to
the Parliament, might not be admitted to that honor to be heard in Parliament,
for that he was not an absolute Ambassador, but be content to make his
Propositions before some that were of their Council deputed thereunto; which
example the Parliament cannot in reason take ill at our hands that we follow,
seeing they themselves had showed the way and beginning: The Proposition that
was delivered is found herewith entered with letter E.

And that it might be known what power he had to give his Majesty satisfaction
for the hurt done his Majesty's Subjects, and what security against such wrong
for time to come was to be expected, there was sent to him* Ote Krag his
Majesty's Chief Secretary, and Henrick Williamson; as their Memorial, and his
Answer thereunto following, with letter Gentered, does further declare;
whereupon his Majesty then finally resolved to give him answer as follows,
letter H.

1. Of that which in brief has been related is to be seen: First, As
concerning the English, That the Parliament has given the English Shippers
order to seek protection in his Majesty's Haven.

2. That the Masters have therefore petitioned; whereupon they have actually
received all the protection from their Enemies that could be desired, so that
they have given thanks therefore.

3. After that, a Fleet is sent hither into our Streams without any foregoing
Intimation given us, or any leave granted, or any Letter sent from the
Parliament to his Majesty; the like was never heard before of those that would
be counted friends.

4. The Parliament have first, in October, by a public Edict, suffered all
his Majesty's Subjects Ships, which could be found in England, to be arrested,
and also suffered all his Subjects to be taken hold on in the Channel, though
they came from neutral places, and carried them to London, their Loading, and
what money they had took away, and allowed them not sustenance for their liver.

5. In December did the Parliament send their Resident Bradshaw hither, which
not only had no Order to thank for that Protection the English had here, nor to
excuse the former Fleets unexpected approach into our Streams, nor to desire
leave that such a Convoy might come hither again to fetch the Merchants Ships
away that lay in the Haven, nor any proffer of restitution of his Majesty's
Subjects Ships nor Goods, much less any security that the like should not
happen hereafter; But only to make known, and desire, that the English Ships in
the Haven lying, might under Kingly hand and seal without damage be delivered
to an English Admiral, at what time and in what manner he should desire them:
And therein will the English have the pre-eminence to choose the time, when they
pleased, to bring a Fleet into these Streams, and how strong they should be,
and above all to have the freedom to declare to his Majesty the manner how they
will have their Ships delivered; which could as little suit it self to promise,
as it did ill become it self for them to desire.

On the contrary, besides that wearisom Embassage, which his Majesty, with all
proffers of friendship, to no purpose, was at charge with to England, he did a
long time also afford the English Shippers here in the Haven all the protection
they desired, suffering themselves to have the power and ordering of their
ships and goods, permitting them also to sell a great part therefore, and
employ to their own use; also did by the Castle of Crownborg protect them from
those that would have taken them; nor ever suffe^ed any English, either in
Denmark or Norway, to be arrested, or ill-entreated, notwithstanding all those
solicitations preferred against them; but always, all friendship continued
toward them, not suffering himself by any means to be persuaded to the
contrary, neither did regard the charge his Majesty had been at to fit and
prepare certain ships of War, seeing it was not great, though it was expended
upon so many, as in such haste could be provided while the English ships were
here; nor his Majesty's own honor and respect, which in that business was not a
little in danger.

Of that which is written, may easily be judged, of all that are not parties in
the matter, what a difference there is between what has been done to his
Majesty's Subjects in England, and what has been done to the English in this
Kingdom; and seeing that the Parliaments Resident Bradshaw, before he came
hither, had no Command to speak of any Reparation for what Damage his Majesty's
Subjects had suffered, much less to give any security, that such for the time
to come should not happen, and also not knowing how soon this begun
misunderstanding could be taken up; and for that some part of the Commodities
in the English ships were not fitting to be left longer aboard, except they
should be suffered utterly to perish: therefore it was thought fit to cause a
right Inventory to be taken, and the Goods registered, and unloaden, and so laid
aside, and kept till further Order and Resolution; which seeing it is a case of
indifferent weight, or concernment, and it may be is not rightly understood,
how all things have been carried; therefore also it is thought necessary, for
men's knowledge and information, that it should be so contrived and published.

A Copy of the English Shippers Supplication to his Majesty of Denmark and
Norway, Translated out of Engl.
High and Mighty King, May it please your Kingly Majesty seriously to consider
what is here underwritten.
WHereas we English Shippers, whose names are here underwritten, have our Ships
lying at anchor upon your Majesty's Streams and Haven, before your Kingly Seat
and City of Copenhaven, being richly laden with Merchants Goods, belonging to
our Nation, and are come for protection and security hither, by a special Order
from our Honorable High Council of State at White Hall in London, dated the 17.
of June. Having understood, not only peril and danger in the Sea, but also upon
the Road before Helsingor, we therefore in all humility beseech your Kingly
Majesty, that according to the Law of Nations we may have protection upon your
Majesty's Streams: and if occasion happen that any Enemy should be so insolent
to fall upon us, hurt or violate us, That your Majesty then will graciously
take us into protection; and in the mean while, for better security, give us
leave to hale our Ships within your Majesty's Bom and Blockhouse: for which
your Majesty's favor we will always be ready in all humility, not only our
selves in person to acknowledge your Benefaction, but further to refer it to the
States of our Natives Country.

And we will always pray for your Kingly Majesty's long, blessed and peaceable
Government. The Ship Elizabeth and Mary, Anthony Wolward Mr. The Ship Richard,
Henry Sheir Mr. The Ship Mary Bonaventure, Richard Bromwell Mr. The Margaret
and Sarah, John Wither Mr. The James, Andrew Raikes Mr. The Amity, George
Acklam Mr. The Employment, John Tuly Mr. The Ann and David, Charles Boomer Mr.
The Adventure, Robert Michelson Mr. The Fellowship, William Brunton Mr. The
Satisfaction, Matthew Southwell Mr. The Edward and John, Solomon Clark Mr. The
Plenish, Philip Noise Mr. The James, Samuel Ramond Mr. The Ship Mary Ann,
William Bexby Mr. The Charity, William James Mr. The Adventure, William Harding
Mr. The Friendship, William Danby Mr.


To the High and Mighty King of Denmark and Norway, the VENDERS and GOTTERS
King; The English Shippers, being now in Copenhaven, their humble Petition,
Leter B.
Humbly Shows,
THat we, according to an Order from the Republique of England, which we have
humbly obeyed, were commanded to cast our selves, with our Ships and Goods,
under your Kingly Majesty's gracious protection, and we are hitherto protected:
wherefore we are obliged to give your Kingly Majesty all hearty thanks, humbly
beseeching your Majesty of your gracious goodness to suffer us to repair to our
Convoy, which now lies below Helsingor, whose errand and message hither is
nothing but to conduct us home from hence to our Land again; This is all that
is commanded us from him who has the command of that same Fleet, to give your
Majesty to understand, and to pray and desire from your Majesty this liberty:
if it be admitted us, we will always pray for your Kingly Majesty.

Anthony Wolward John Tuly Andrew Raikes Robert Dren Thomas Robinson Solomon
Clark Samuel Ramond William James William Harding Matthew Southwell William
Bigby. John Withers Henry Shier George Acklim. William Danby William Brunton
Philip Noise Richard Bromwell Robert Michelson Charles Boomer Edward Nickson


A Copy of the Letter from the Admiral of the English Fleet to his Majesty,
Translated out of English into Danish, Letter A.
May it please Your Majesty,
I Have received Order from the Council of State of the Republique in England,
to sail into the Sound with this Squadrant of Ships, containing 18 in number,
to Convoy all such English Ships and Barques as have been now a long time kept
in by the Hollander: My humble request is, That seeing your Majesty has been
pleased graciously to protect them unto this present in safety, that I might
know your Majesty's gracious Will, whether I may be permitted to come up with
our Fleet to fetch them, or that it will please your Majesty to give Order they
may be safe-guarded down hither to our Fleet, where we lie ready to receive
them: That is all that is desired of him, who desires leave to subscribe
himself,

Your Majesty's most humble Servant, ANDREW BALL.

A Copy of Sir Axel Urups and the right worshipful Otte Krags Letter to the
Admiral of the English Fleet, delivered to those two Captains which the said
Admiral had sent ashore to them, together with the Admirals Answer thereunto,
Letter D.
HIs Kingly Majesty, our gracious Lord and King, has given us charge to
intimate to his Excellency, the Admiral of the Parliaments Fleet belonging to
the Republique of England, now lying here, That it seems very strange to his
Majesty, that the Parliament of England should send such a mighty Fleet of
ships into the midst of his Majesty's Land, and not at all given his Majesty
warning aforehand, nor desired permission to do it; the like was never before
this present attempted of any that had not resolved to begin hostility; seeing
those that are in Treaty or Aliance with his Majesty, may not do it, except
they do advertise thereof three weeks before any such Fleet should be suffered
to come into the Streams: it was indeed reported to his Majesty that such a
Fleet should come, but all the while neither his Majesty himself, nor his
Ambassador in England, were made privy to it, nor had any warning thereof: his
Majesty could not conceive that the Parliament would resolve upon any such
thing, as never was done by any of the Friends or Neighbors of this Crown.

His Majesty profers it to themselves, to consider how it would be taken in
England, if such a mighty Fleet came into the Thames, without any foregoing
warning or permission to come there: Also his Majesty had done the English
Republique that honor to send an honorable Embassage thither, and did proffer a
Treaty, and all good friendship, but has not hitherto perceived that the
Parliament have revealed themselves in any thing that might satisfy; yet did
he not at all expect, that in the place of a like honorable Embassage from the
Republique of England, or some full satisfactory Resolution otherways, his
Majesty should be constrained to behold, and that before his Kingly House and
Castle, such a mighty Fleet of Ships, which men were uncertain what might be
expected from them: And what charge it would put his Majesty upon, as all
Potentates in such cases usually do, to put by all hostility from his Streams,
so much as in such haste could be made toward preparing his Fleet, they may
judge: Wherefore his Majesty desires they will not attempt to begin any act of
hostility upon his Streams, but rather retire themselves further off, and not
be found so near his Majesty's Castles with so great a power, which can do no
other but give cause of suspicion and mistrust: Now according to his Majesty's
Command, we desire the Admirals Answer in Writing hereunto, and do as to our
persons remain,

Your Excellencies willing Servants, Axel Vrup, Otte Krag.

From Helsingor the 21 of September. 1652.

With a desire that it might be delivered to the Admiral, and we might as soon
as possible receive from him a satisfactory Answer, wherewith we will presently
repair to his Majesty, and also solicit for a further Resolution for him
toward his expedition, wherewithal the said Captains went aboard late toward
evening, and afterward in the morning, being the 24 of September. about six of
the clock, did come again on shore with the said Admirals Answer to the last
writing, delivered him dated about nine a clock at night, wherein he refers
himself to his former Letter, assuring that his coming thither with that Fleet
was to no other intent but only to Convoy those English Ships that lie in
Copenhaven, saying also that his Fleet was not of such force as we declared,
desiring also that he might receive an absolute Answer, if the Ships might be
suffered to follow him or not, that he might be gone back again, hoping that he
had carried himself here with all civility and respect: what more was required
in our Letter, he did excuse himself, that he could not answer unto, as his
foresaid Letter, signed N. 2. does further show: And when they gave us to
understand, that they were again come to Town, we repaired unto them in the
aforesaid Borgemasters house, where they delivered us the said Admirals Letter,
and therewithal desired we would visit the said Admiral aboard his Ship, and
excused himself, for his not coming ashore to us was because he durst not
adventure himself at that time from his Fleet, desiring earnestly that we would
expedite and further them such an Answer, as that they might have the English
Fleet with them, which they were sent for; and said also, that their Fleet was
of no such consideration as it was looked upon to be, for as much as it
consisted of but eighteen ships only, whereupon were few or no Soldiers:
excused also that the Parliament had not given notice of their coming, for that
he feared it would be declared and known to the Hollander, and then they with
force would watch for them, if there had been intelligence given before,
especially for that they knew the Hollander lay here with a party of Ships, so
they could not adventure themselves hither with fewer ships: That the
Parliament had sent no Ambassador hither, they desired it might not be ill
taken, for their thoughts abounded in friendship toward his Majesty, and had
honorably received his Ambassadors, and also well deported themselves toward
his Subjects; so that it was not forborne, for any other reason, but for that
their former Messengers, sent to Holland and Spain, were illentreated and
slain; whereupon the Parliament resolved to send no more Ambassadors abroad
till further considerations: also declaring, that the Hollanders had in many
ways dealt ill with them, so they had good cause to be aware of them, that they
might not in process of time mock them: and after we had answered them such
things as were necessary, according to our Instructions, and their former
desire of quick expedition again repeated, we took our leaves of them, and went
presently to his Majesty to Ibstrup, and after to the Privy Council, and
delivered in both places verbal relation of what had passed.

A Resolution given to the Commander of the English Republique Fleet lying upon
our Streams: Letter E.
WHereas we understand by a Letter written from the Commander of the English
Esquadron, delivered us the 23. of Sept. late at night, that he was sent hither
by the Council of State of the Republique of England, with 18 Ships of War to
convey all the English Ships that now have layn here a long time, and therefore
desires to know if he might have liberty to come up with his Fleet to fetch
them, or that an Order might pass for their safeguarding down to his Fleet;
whereunto our gracious Resolution is, That as it was altogether unexpected of
us that such a mighty Fleet without warning, much less permission, or Letter
unto us from their Principals, should come into our Streams in sight of our
Castles; so have we neither let nor given occasion that the English Ships now
lying in the Haven should retire hither; but they themselves by supplication to
our Stateholder have sought it, and themselves hitherto in safety preserved,
since which a Fleet of the States General Ships are come hither to watch for
those and other Ships, desiring to have taken them, if they had not here had
their retreat; and seeing they could not complain of any thing further to have
happened to them all the while they have been kept here, so had we much less
expected that we upon such a gracious protection should be desired to do that
which might infest our Streams, and occasion to our Highness the greatest
despect, and in our own Land the greatest unsafety and danger, we had well
expected that the English and Hollanders Fleets, as long as we gave them no
cause, should not against our Highness upon our Streams oversee themselves; but
if so many Ships came to be disputed for between them as now lies here, it is
to be feared we our selves should be blamed for giving them cause to lose that
respect, and to keep our Fleet here upon the Streams would give us cause to do
that which would be pleasing to none of our Friends: wherefore to avoid such
mischief as might follow, we thought it not good those Ships lying here in our
Haven secured, should be put out to become matter for two of our Friends and
Republiques Fleets upon our Streams to fight for, but rather willingly afford
them still that security they hitherto have had, hoping that time will so
change it self, that they without our respect and guidance, and to their less
hazard, may be set free.

Given at our Castle, Copenhaven, the 25. of September. 1653.
The English Residents Proposition, delivered to those of the Kingdoms Council,
deputed to receive the same. Letter F.
Well Born, High and Noble Lord,
Whereas for some time past it has pleased the great, mightiest Highborn
King of Denmark and Norway, in his Harbors, to detain several Merchant Ships of
great Value, belonging to the Subjects of the Republique of England, and also
to deny them freedom to follow those Ships of War, which for their Security and
Convoy without doubt were sent from England, whereby the said Republique, and
the Subjects thereof, hitherto no small hurt and damage have sustained: and
although the English Republiques Parliament, by reason of such an unexpected
Action, especially at the time when his Majesty's Ambassador was treating for a
nearer Union, are thereby highly troubled; yet are they nevertheless desirous
to use all possible means of friendship, whereby further Inconveniences may be
prevented, which otherways in such a weighty Case, that concerns the welfare of
both States, might follow; therefore have they of good affection sent me to his
Majesty, with Command in their behalf, to press earnestly, that the said Ships,
which by his Majesty's Command are detained with their several Goods and
Loadings, may with all possible expedition be again set free: Wherefore in the
name of the said Parliament I desire your high mighty Kingly Majesty, that all
the Ships belonging to the English Republique, which now are to be found in
this Haven, or upon these Streams, and by Kingly Order, or any other Officers
Command, are detained or delayed, each Ship with his own loading may presently
be set free with full power to proceed upon their Voyage toward those places
they were at first designed unto; moreover, that his Majesty will be pleased
under your Kingly Hand and Seal to promise and grant to the Parliament of the
English Republique by me their Minister, that all the aforesaid Ships, each
with his loading, shall be safe and fully delivered to that Fleet, which shall
be sent by the Parliament of England, or their Authority, at such time and in
such manner as the Commander thereof shall desire of his Majesty: And whereas
there is lately one of the English Republiques Ships, called the Antilop, run
ashore within your Kingly Majesty's Jurisdiction, near Jutland, and some of the
Guns, Ammunition, and other things, converted to the use of the Inhabitants of
the Town adjoining, also in the same Parliaments name I desire his Kingly
Majesty, that all such Guns, and other Implements that belongs to the said
Ship, whether they now are in the Inhabitants hands, or in any others Custody,
may be delivered presently to me, or my Deputy; also, that by his Kingly
Majesty's Command all good help and necessary assistance be afforded to save
and recover such other Guns and Riging, as by probability may be saved, seeing
that the Ship was lost near the shore; to all which I expect his Majesty's just
Answer in writing, that I may the better return back again to my Masters, the
Parliament of the Republique of England.

Richard Bradshaw.

A short Relation of what on the behalf of his Kingly Majesty of Denmark and
Norway, was verbalit spoken to the English Republiques Parliaments Resident,
the honest and worshipful man Richard Bradshaw; and afterward at his request
delivered him in writing by us whose names are underwritten, and out of Latin
put into English. Letter G.
AFter that some English Ships for some few Months past were returned out of
the East Sea into Oresound, they concluded there to remain, thereby to avoid
that great danger they otherwise might fall into, if they adventured themselves
toward England, by reason of the Hollands Fleet, that at that present they
found lying there, waiting a more seasonable time, that they with more safety
might sail hence; at which time his Kingly Majesty not only afforded them open
freedom, but also in a large measure protected them, for as much as some
Holland Ships would hastily have fallen upon them, some Guns were shot off from
Crownborg Castle: nor is there from that time hitherto any token of friendship
neglected to be shown them: Wherefore it is altogether admirable to his
Majesty, that the English Republiques Parliament neither by writing, nor
Resident in the least measure, have mentioned such Kingly favor and affection
as is showed to their Subjects; but after all, in the Harvest following a Fleet
of 18 Ships of War is sent into this Kingdom, to that end, as is formerly
declared, that they should for more safety convey the said Merchant Ships,
among which some part are so well fitted, that they might well be used in the
stead of Ships of War; and those Ships, not only without any preceding desires
or permission, which yet ought to have been obtained, but also without any
intimation of their coming, did come to anchor upon his Kingly Majesty's
Streams, which verily, of none of his Majesty's Neighbors, or those in Union
with him, before this time has the like been done; for as much as amongst
lordly persons, to avoid all mis-interpretation, it is usual not to enter into
any of their open or common ways, much less into such a narrow passage, with
warlike and weaponed power, except they have desired or obtained leave
thereunto: which seeing the English Republikes Parliament have forborne to do,
therefore does His Majesty with all equity and reason expect from their
Resident, for such unlawful Process, in the behalf of the Parliament some
satisfaction. Seeing His Kingly Majesty's Subjects ships, as many as they could
f^nd within the English Republikes jurisdiction, not only are detained and
forbid to depart, but also one of them in the open Sea lately by a Parliaments
ship surprised, brought to London, and a part of her lading plundered away;
therefore does His Kingly Majesty desire to know from the Resident the cause
why such arrests and enemy like proceedings were used against his Subjects: of
this and the former Propositions a speedy answer is expected.

Otte Krag. Henry Williamson. Rosenwing.


The English Parliaments Residents Answer to that Writing which in the name of
His Kingly Majesty of Denmark and Norway those honorable men Otte Krag and
Henry Williamson Rosenwing sent him the last day of December, Anno 1652.
Translated out of Latin into Danish.
AFter serious consideration of the said Letter, the English Republikes or the
Parliaments Resident does observe the substant matter thereof to be couched in
three articles.

To the first does pertain His Kingly Majesty's gracious good protection which
lately was shown to some English Merchants ships, for which Kingly benevolence
His Majesty expected that something answerable thereunto ought to have been
mentioned.

To the second, the unexpected approach of some ships of war, which without
foregoing notification or leave granted, were by the English Republikes
Parliament for the convoying of the aforesaid Merchant ships appointed and sent
into His Majesty's Kingdoms, for which strange process (in the English
Parliaments name) of their Resident some satisfaction is desired.

To which the English Parliaments Resident answers, that in those
Propositions which in the behalf of the English Parliaments Republike, he for
some days past had as well verb^lly uttered, as afterward in writing also
delivered, and thereupon had desired His Kingly Majesty's just answer: Nothing
of that which in these articles was mentioned was touched, neither in his
Plenipotentialls was any liberty given him of such Postulata, to confer or
answer: But if the matter of these Articles is supposed to be of such high
cons^quence, that it necessarily requires some pertinent Answer, then if so be
His Kingly Majesty, according to usual and friendly Correspondentz, will
command to have it reported to the English Republikes Parliament then without
all doubt it shall be found that they, as concerning the said points will
deliver a just and requisite answer.

To the third and last article, concerning which His Majesty is so troubled,
for that several of his Subjects ships are detained by the English Parliament,
and also that lately one of them in the open Sea was in hostile manner brought
up to London, and some part of their lading spoliert, and therefore of the
Resident do desire to know the cause of such Arrest and hostile entreating. The
Resident does answer as follows, that he does well know that some Danish
Su^jects ships by the Parliaments command in their jurisdiction are detained
but has not understood that any Danish ship in the open sea by any Parliament
ship was in such warlike manner dealt with; yet if it should appear that such a
thing has been done, there is no doubt, but if His Kingly Majesty desire to
know the cause thereof from the Parliament of England, he will receive a
necessary, friendly, and satisfactory answer to his content. But the stopping
those ships in the Harbors is a subs^quent act, seeing the English Merchant
ships were first by His Kingly Majesty here arrested, and after forbidden to
sail away: And although they were by a select Fleet of warlike ships sent for,
yet His Kingly Majesty must needs know the cause thereof not to have arisen
from any Warlike mistrust, much less from any unjust intention in the
Parliament either toward His Majesty or any of his Subjects, but only from
the desire the Parliament had that they by such means might the better further
the said ships being set free and at liberty: Yet that the Parliaments upright
and friendly carriage in that manner of proceeding may the better be known as
soon as it shall please His Majesty under His Kingly hand and seal to promise
unto the Parliament by then Resident, that the English ships may without
molestation be free to come away, as in my former writing is more l^^gely
expressed, then if it be desired, I will in the name of the Parliament, as their
Resident, at the same time in the highest manner engage, that all the Danish
Subjects ships that within the English Republikes jurisdiction are detained,
with all their goods and ladings, shall presently be restored to their former
freedom: provided the English ships be first set free and at liberty, seeing
they were first detained: That this may more happily be accomplished, the
English Parliaments Resident does earnestly desire, especially seeing the time
allotted for his stay here is almost run out, that His Kingly Majesty will be
pleased to those the English Parliaments desires which he has received, as
soon as may be, to give a just, full and satisfactory answer.

Given the fifth of January 1653. after the English Account. Richard Bradshaw.

The Kings Majesty of Denmark and Norway his resolution delivered the English
Parliaments Resident, the Worshipful Richard Bradshaw, unto that Proposition
he verbally uttered, and in writing delivered, the 28. December. 1652. Letter H.
FOrasmuch as in the said Proposition is first set down, that some English
Ships of great value were in this Harbor detained, and might not be suffered
to depart hence with the English Admiralls Fleet that was sent hither to convoy
them, and that the Parliament by such an unexpected action which happened at
the time of treaty for Union, were much troubled, and therefore to prevent
great inconveniences that might thereupon arise, had sent him hither to desire,
which he also did in the Parliaments name, that all the ships belonging to
English men, with their ladings, and which by Kingly decree were so detained,
may presently be set free, and fully licensed to sail to such place where they
are designed; and that his Kingly Majesty will under his hand and seal assure
to him their servant, that all the aforesaid ships, with their ladings, shall
be fully delivered to the English convoy or Fleet, which the Parliament will
send and authorize there unto, at such time, and in such manner, as the said
Admiral so sent shall desire.

Secondly, that all the guns, and other things belonging to the ship Antilop,
that was lost upon the shore of Jytland, where she was run ashore, may be
delivered, which at present are detained or preserved of any in Inteland, to
him or his Assigns, and also by his Majesty's recommendation he may be
furthered to take up, and save as many more of the said guns, and other
materials belonging to the said ship, as may be saved.

Before an answer can be given to the first, it is necessary to be known, and
it cannot be denied, but that the shippers of the English ships did in August
l^st petition, that they might be permitted to come here into the Haven to save
them from their enemies, and afterward did presently give thanks, for that it
was granted them, both with supplication and thanks, giving in their Orignals,
were shown the Resident; and that they by any Kingly Decree should have been
arrested, or their freedom to rule over their goods here in the Haven taken
away, that can never be made appear, forasmuch as each sh^pp^r is yet with his
ship, and has power over his goods, so that they need not require any
restitution to their freedom, but that fear only which they had and have of
their enemies which lay upon the streams, has detained or arrested them* and
nothing else, since which, there came in September before Crownborow, an
Admiral with a mighty F^eet, which without any warning given, liberty
obtained, or letter from the Parliam^nt, did desire he might fetch the said
ships without Cobenhaven, or that they might be securely conveyed unto him, all
which seemed just as wonderful to his Majesty, that while his Amb^ss^dors lay
in England and treated, they then without any in imation o^ consent, would
unexpected send such a F^eet hither into his land and streams, even as it did
admire the Parliament that their Admiralls desire was not accomplished; but
that the English ships, which by the shippers own confession in writing came
into this Harbor by the Parliaments Order, were not delivered to such an
Admiral, as neither had leave to come hither with his Fleet, nor any writing
from the Parliament, nor could get the said ships to him, except he first
became M^ster of the Hollands Fleet, which lay upon the stream, between
Kobenhaven, and the said English Fleet; his Majesty has as good an excuse for,
as any Potentate can have, that will not endure such an affront to permit
strangers in his land, upon his streams, and close in his very presence, to
wage war and fight, who shall be Lord and Master in another house and land;
and as his Majesty never but this time observing a Fleet of English and
Hollanders at one instant here upon his streams, was not willing the English
should sail hence, so has he never since forbid them, but to engage himself to
deliver the said ships securely to the English Fleet, at such a time, and in
such a manner as the English Admiral would prescribe and desire, is so
unreasonable a demand, that his Majesty cannot in any manner comprehend: For in
the first place, there is never any permitted, or has that freedom to come
here into the Sound with an armed Fleet, no more then to come into the Land
with an Army, which by special treaty have not gained consent; and those that
by such treaties have gained consent, may neither come stronger then is agreed
upon, nor upon the time agreed, without giving warning some weeks before hand;
and moreover there is not the least excuse made, for that the Fleet came hither
without notice given us, nor any request made that it might come hither again,
seeing that the Resident himself does acknowledge he has no instructions so
to do, so that it appears, as if the Parliament would take unto themselves
more then all others, and might against all right and custom come upon these
Coasts, Streams, and Towns when they pleased, which his Majesty can no ways
give consent unto: Moreover his Majesty has had no thanks for that protection
the English ships have had in this Haven, which doubtless had been in their
enemies hands, if they had not here been secured: but on the contrary, his
Majesty's Subjects Ships in England, by an open Edict of Parliament in all
their Havens, have been arrested, and one ship by force taken in the Channel,
and afterward spoiled, which will cause other resolution, unless in short
time, by due satisfaction, and assurance for the future it be remedied: As
touching that ship that was lost near Inteland, his Majesty does give Order to
his Officers there, to let the Resident or his Assig^es have all the guns o^
other things that were saved, when those that have taken pains to saving them
are paid what is accustomed and fitting to be paid, and also does further
Order, that they help and further the saving of as many more of the guns as can
be p^ssible sav^d. Given at our Kingly Seat Copenhaven, the 29. Jan. An. 1653.
under his Kingly Majesty's Hand and Seal.

FINIS.
Postscript to the Reader.
IT was intended that this Declaration should not have been published without
some Animadversions, rightly to inform the judgment of such persons as
understand not the true state of things betwixt the States of England and the
King of Denmark: But forasmuch as many have been solicitous for its speedy
publication, that so they might understand upon what pretended ground he made
so unjust a seizure, I could no longer detain it from thy view, not doubting
but thou art able to discover his fallacies, falsities, and undue insinuations,
scattered through all his Declaration.


