Something by way of QUERY to the BISHOPS COURTS, Which we the People of God,
called Quakers, never yet received an Answer to.
CHANSELLOR,
WHY do you not come to Church? Give a Reason why you will not come?

I demand of thee the Kings Patten, with his Seal, and his Hand, and his Arms,
for keeping thy Court, before I speak to thee any more; For many keep Courts
and show not their Authority, and by that I may be brought into Bondage: So I
will see thy Patten, with the Kings Seal and Hand, and Arms.

And Secondly, I would know the Reason of thee, Why thou and you forsook us
near about twenty years ago, and left your Church? that by this time I might
have been turned Heathen, a Turk, or a Jew, and my Soul might have been lost
for thee and you. For who has watched over me and been my Keeper about these
twenty years? But you have left me, I have neither Sermon, nor Exhortation, nor
Epistle, nor Colect, nor Gospel, nor Even-song, nor Homily, nor Mattin, from
you; though the Lord God has been my Watcher over me, and my Overseer, who is
now my Teacher. And do you think that the Lord will not require his Fock at
your hands which you left almost twenty years to the Wolves and Dogs, to tear
our Fleece, and Flesh, and to destroy the Sheep; and then will he require the
Fleece, if he require the Sheep and his Flock, which you have left to Wolves
and Dogs, to tear the Fleece off the back of them? For how have Anabaptists,
and Independants, and Presbyterians torn the Flesh off the backs of the Sheep,
and Prisoned the Sheep to Death: And you in the time of Persecution neither
sent Epistle, nor Colect, nor Exhortation, nor Gospel, nor Even-song, nor
Homily, nor Mattin to the Sheep, nor mattered not them, nor cared for them. For
if a man hire a man to keep a flock of Sheep, and have so many delivered into
his hand, and the hireling Shepherd have so much a year, will not the Master or
the Lord require both Sheep and Fleece of the hireling Shepherd if he see a
Dog, or a Wolf, (which may be calling the Usurping Power) come to worry the
Sheep, and he fly away in the time of Persecution, is not this an hireling that
flies, because he is an hireling, and does not care for the Sheep, and worse
than David who defended his Sheep from the Bear and the Lion? And so if the
Shepherd suffer any of the Sheep to be worried, or Feece to be torn off, Will
not the Master or Lord require both his Fleece and Sheep of the Shepherd? So
read Jacob to Laban. For does not the Lord say, He will require both the Fleece
and Flock? So consider and judge your selves in this case, and do not ask me a
reason Why I do not come to the Church but answer me this, Why you left me as a
Sheep to all the Wolves? For we have the Kings Speech, and Declarations, and
Promises, and Words of a King for Liberty of Conscience, that none should call
us in question if we live peaceably under his Government. Therefore what have
you to do to call us in question contrary to the Kings Speech and Declaration,
and Word of a King, we being peaceable? As you may read his late Declaration,
and there is an Act that Four may meet, So I may meet with my own Family by the
Act of Parliament. And so if you will give me a Reason Why you for sook us, and
prove all your Practice, Worship and Religion by Scripture, and whether or no
Paul, and the Apostles, Timothy and Titus the Bishops, had Tippets, Hoods,
Rayles, Altars, Surplices in their Worships? And whether Timothy and Titus,
which were called Bishops, were called Gracious Lords, as your Bishops are? And
whether to be called so is not a breach of Christ's Command, who said, The
Gentiles were called Gracious Lords, but it should not be so among his
Disciples? And whether or no John Baptized Christ in a Font, and signed him
with the Sign of the Cross? And whether he had a Godfather, or God-Mother,
yea, or nay? And whether or no those several thousands that Peter Baptized,
whether he Baptized them in a Font, and signed them with the Sign of the Cross?
And whether had all these Godfathers, and Godmothers? And whether or no the
Eunuch, when Philip Baptized him, did he it in a Font with the Sign of the
Cross? And if so, Who were their Godfathers and Godmothers, and where stood
the Font, and who Commanded the Cross? Answer me these things by Scripture, and
convince me by Scripture of these things, for we are to search the Scriptures
whether these things be so as you speak, and try all things, and hold fast that
which is good. And we are to lay hands on no man suddenly, nor presume above
what is written; thou know this is Scripture; Read the Corinthians and the
other Epistles.

And whether or no the Apostles, or Christ, or Timothy, or Titus had Paritors
to summon in People to hear them, and if they would not hear them, and come to
their Meetinging Place, Excommunicate them before they were of their Religion,
or know what it was, and before they had convinced them by sound Doctrine, and
good Conversation? And whether Excommunication be not to such as be of their
Church, and know their Principles, and which does some bad thing for which they
are Excommunicated and put out of their Assemblies? And is this Reason to
Excommunicate such as were never of their Church, and do not know their
Principles or Doctrine, nor cannot be charged with a bad Conversation in any
particular, and before they be convinced by sound Doctrine, or good
Conversation concerning your Religion and Worship? And is this reasonable to
Excommunicate those that you ran away from, and lest to the Devourer, before
you seek to bring them in again by sound Doctrine or good Conversation? Answer
these things, Yea, or Nay.

G.

Printed in the Year, 1671.


