A full and perfect RELATION OF The great PLOT AND Terrible Conspiracy, of
diverse Lords, Knights, Citizens, and Apprentices, against his Highness the Lord
Protector.

With a List of the Conspirators Names; the exact Particulars of their bloody
Engagement, Vow, and Covenant; and the manner how they were apprehended in the
Old-Bayley, and Covent Garden, and carried to James, on Tuesday and Wednesday
night last.

Likewise, their Examination and Confession before the Right Honorable the
Council at White Hall; and the Names of the LORDS that were taken, with their
Examinations before his Highness, and the Orders and Resolution passed
thereupon.

Together with the taking of a ParchmentSc^ol and List of 500 men, and ^he
going of the L. Hastings, and diverse othe^s from LONDON

feb* 18 LONDON, Printed for G, HOR^^^, 1654.

A full and perfect RELATION OF The great PLOT, and unparalleld Conspiracy of
diverse Lords, Gentlemen, and Citizens, against his Highness the Lord Protector.
GEntlemen,
Had it pleased the supreme Disposer of all things (who changes times and
seasons, and does with the Nations of the World as he pleases) to have united
Amity and friendship between the Royal party, and the Assertors of the present
Government (which by his Highness no means have been left unassayed) it would
have been matter of great content to the whole Nation: But since they seem to
choose Distractions rather then Peace, and to involve this Nation into new
Divisions; notwithstanding the great tenderness of his Highness and his
honorable Council to avoid every thing that might lead to a Rupture, saving the
undoubted Rights and Dominion of this Nation, and the justice they are resolved
to administer to the People. In consideration whereof, I am sorry the Design of
the Royal Party should be so secret and cunning, as to wind about the judgment
of some good men amongst us, undiscerned and unobserved of them, under the
pretenses of public service, loyalty, and freedom, rejoicing (though
obscurely) that they can put on our own party to prosecute one another;
tryumphing to themselves, that they can meke us lop off our own Branches, and
act that upon our selves in their behalf, which they themselves cannot do upon
Us: But I cannot but here publish to the World, that this was the grand
Artifice, and Design of the Enemy, both abroad, and at home, within the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, working in secret to make Us
the sad and fatal instruments of undoing and destroving one another, and
dashing in pieces this happy and glorious Government, now established under his
Highness the Lord Protector. But I hope we shall discern and embrace one
another, to the destruction of their stratagem; as already appears by that
happy and timely Discovery on Tuesday night last at the Ship-Tavern in the
Old-Bayley, where a company of Gentlemen being drinking two pair of stairs
high, and having called for as much Sack as came to eight shillings and six
pence, before* they had put a period to their quaffing Glasses, in came a
company of Officers and Soldiers, with their Swords and Pistols cockt, and
went immediately up stairs, where they demanded the Names of the Persons, their
Residence, and their present business; which they answered: But it being not
satisfactory: the Officers told them, they had an Order from his Highness to
apprehend them, and commit them to custody, during the pleasure of his
Highness: Whereupon the Drawers were all called up, and examined, Whether or
no, they knew those Gentlemen, they answered, They knew not one face there,
except Mr. Dutton's. Whereupon they secured them all, and conducted them to
Iame^'s; upon the Ordinance for Treason, for contriving and conspiring against
his Highness the Lord Protector. And withal, took away Mr. Amps the Master of
the house; but upon examination, he was acquitted. This party is said to be
very numerous, there being at the least five hundred, as we hear, confederated
together in an Oath and Covenant, to strike at the very Root of this present
Government, and to use the utmost of their endeavors to take off his Highness.
Which is a thing most unparalled, seeing that we are but as the first ripe
fruit to this flourishing Harvest, wherein the Sickle of Providence will be put
into the hands of our present Governors, to accomplish that glorious Prophecy,
of Gods cutting down Monarchs, his Adversaries, and making way for restoring of
his Judges as at first, and his Counselors as at the beginning.

A List of the Names of the chief Conspirators and Actors, taken in the Plot
against his Highness the Lord Protector,
Mr. Dutton of Gray's Inn, an eminent Gentleman. Mr. Amp at the ship-Tavern in
the Old-bayley; but upon examination released. Cap. Smith, M. Jacob, M.
Peterborough, M. Johnson, Mr. Bunch. Mr. Rolston, Mr. Switzer, A Goldsmiths
Prentice in Lumbard-street,
And diverse others, who were suddenly apprehended at the aforesaid place in the
Old-Bayley, and by his Highnesses command conducted to St. James's: from
whence, on Thursday ltst they were brought to White Hall, being guarded by a
company of soldiers; and in the afternoon they were brought before the
honorable Council, where they were examined by his Highness, touching their
Meetings, and their private Negotiations and Consultations, for to raise
insurrections, commotions, and to involve this Nation into another bloody and
intestine war, etc. But many of them stood like so many Smithfield Lions, being
not able to speak a word for themselves. Others, spoke with great dexterity of
spirit, yet some of them confessed their Errors, and laid themselves so low at
the feet of his Highness: and his honorable Council, that by their confession
it is conceived they may find remission; in order whereunto they have already
impeached diverse, and many brave Birds, bedeckt with dainty feathers, begins
now to flutter: Beware ye Citizens! Ay, it was an old Proverb of King James, that
he loved the Treason, but hated the Traitor. Which saying has been verifyed for
a century of years: But let me not deviate nor center too much upon
circumstances; but re-mind you, that after much time spent in examination, his
Highness, and the Council ordered that they should be remanded back to the
place from whence they came, till the further pleasure of his Highness were
known; and accordingly they were conducted by a strong Guard of soldiers.

About twelve of the clock on Wednesday night last the Lord of Newport, and the
Lord Vaus were both apprehended and committed to custody; but not upon the
Ordinance for Treason; but upon the Act against Duels; having challenged each
other: but on Thursday last they were both examined by his Highness, and upon
engagement, ordered their liberty.

The Lord Hastings of Loughborow is said to b^ gone,

With diverse other young Lords, Knights, and Citizens, Diverse Apprentices were
engaged in this horrid, and wicked Design, amounting to five or 600, as
appears as reported) by the Scroul taken in the Pockets of those that were
apprehended. A little before which time, appeard a STAR in the East, which
Astrologers interpret, to be the only Signal of a clear Discovery of any black
or foul Conspiracy.

depiction of a star

FINIS.

