6. Julii, 1648. From the LEAGUER AT Colchester, More certain News of the FIGHT
on Wednesday last; AND Of their present condition.

PRinted by the Appointment of the Honorable Committee at Derby-house.

GUALTHER FROSY Secr'



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 8. 1648.

6 Julii, 1648. From the Leaguer at Colchester. SIR,
THis day we have gotten more Intelligence of yesterdays business, and find
it to be a greater Victory then before we conceived it, for we understand from
good hands within the Town, that as they had Officers of quality slain in the
field, so they have had some dead since they were brought into the town, and
that diverse of their officers received very dangerous wounds.

They much lament that their success was no better, in regard they drew out all
the considerable Foot they had in the town, leaving not Six hundred upon the
Line, and had thought by this upon our fresh soldiers, to have fleshed their
men for further service.

This day the Enemy drew out on this side of the town, as if they would have
interrupted our men in the new work they are making near the Lord Lucas his
house, but they did not attempt it, neither would our Canon give them leave to
stay long without the walls.

It is certified from all hands within that town, that their hearts are very
much down, and that the conditions offered would now be acceptable, that the
Lord Goring and Lord Capel carry things high and peremptorily, but Sir Charles
Lucas more moderate, the townsmen are infinitely weary of their company. Butter
is not to be had under Five shillings a pound, and Cheese almost at so dear a
rate, and the Soldiers do seize upon the Meal at the Mills, and Bread at the
Bakers, which does reduce the Townsmen to extreme misery for want of Bread: we
are resolved to undergo hard duty, but we will ruin the Horse if they endeavor
to escape: Captain Moody who was taken prisoner is sore wounded, but is this
day exchanged, the Enemy had forty two prisoners of ours, and we ninety six of
theirs, a Trumpeter is gone about the exchanging of them: Lieutenant Colonel
Shambrook is dead of the shot he received by the poisoned Bullet, and many of
the prisoners we took yesterday are likewise dead of those wounds and cuts they
received, merely for their using of poisoned Bullets, who otherwise had
received fair quarter.

July 6. at 12. at night. Your Servant.

FINIS.

