The ACCUSER shamed: OR, A pair of Bellows To Blow off that Dust cast upon JOHN
FRY, A Member of PARLIAMENT, by Col: John Downs, likewise a Member of
Parliament, Who by the Confederacy and Instigation of some, charged the said
JOHN FRY of Blasphemy and Error To the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Whereunto is annexed,

A word to the Priests, Lawyers, Royalists, Self-Seekers, and
Rigid-Presbyterians.

Also a brief Ventilation of that chaffie and absurd Opinion, of Three Persons
or Subsistences in the Godhead.

By the accused JOHN FRY.

Rom 10 2. I bear them record, they have a zeal, but not according to
knowledge. Acts 17. 23, 24, etc. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions,
I found an Altar with this inscription, To the unknown God: whom therefore ye
ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. God that made the world, and all
things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in
Temples made with hands. London, Printed for John Harris, and are to be sold at
his house on Addle hill. Febr. 1648.

I Do wave any Epistle, either Dedicatory, or to the Reader, for these Reasons:

First, To avoid suspicion of guiltiness of the crimes laid against me, as if I
needed a protector.

Secondly, To shun the thoughts of Censoriousness, as though I thought that
Truth could not walk abroad without a Passport.

Thirdly, To decline that unworthiness (which I think some men are guilty of)
of begging men's suffrages to what I assert.

I did not adventure thus to straggle abroad, without much opposition in my
self, which chiefly was the consciousness of mine insufficiency to abide the
Test of judicious men's Censures, for method, congruity, and aptness of words
and sense.

But rather then I would lie under such a charge of Error and Blasphemy, I
chose to lay open my weakness to the world, in point of art, being stirred up
too by some of my (I am persuaded) very cordial friends.

What satisfaction I shall give to the world, I am not much troubled at,
because I seek not the satisfaction of al; if by this I may avoid the censure
of the godly, it is the height of my desire; however, this I am sure of, mine
own conscience does not condemn me.

I were a singular man, if I had not adversaries, such a man is certainly very
miserable, according to that in Luke 6. 26. We be to you when all men shall
speak well of you, for so did their fathers to the false prophets: And
therefore the having of adversaries is rather a comfort then a trouble.

Upon the best inquiry into, and recollection of passages for some years last
past, I cannot find that I have gained any Enemies, but either for adhering to
the public interest, opposing of self-interests according to my trust, or
declaring my opinion in matters of Religion; for the latter, I think advantages
have been taken of me, more in policy then piety, some being glad of such an
opportunity (as I have often been credibly informed) to remove me out of the
way to their private ends.

I am not discouraged a whit, to think that in a time when the Press is so
free, and accute wits so much in view, that mine must come in the rear of all;
if that were the consideration, I should not have manifested so much folly as
to be in Print; that is proper for his thoughts that writes more to show his
parts, then for one that is necessitated to vindicate himself from so foul an
aspersion as is cast upon me: if any man shall say, I am too tender of my
reputation, I wish him to make it his own case, and if that will not change his
Opinion, he must give me leave to doubt whether he be in good earnest or no.

I am not very greedy to solicit strangers to become my friends in this
particular, my desires are to confirm my old acquaintance and Christian
friends; yet I would not be wanting so far as it is meet, to satisfy those that
have nothing to lead their judgments but reports. I shall therefore give my
positive denial to my Charge, together with my opinion in the point, to be put
in one scale, and but his bold and untrue assertion in the other, and if this
will not at least suspend their judgment of me, I appeal to all the world,
whether they are upon grounds of equity or no.

I hear that many who have only heard of me, and had good thoughts of me, are
now staggering upon the report that I deny the Godhead of the Son; if by what
I have, and shall say, I cannot regain their good opinions, their
uncharitableness will more wound themselves then me, for were it so that no man
will believe me, mine own conscience, as to my self, is instead of a thousand
witnesses to acquit me before the Judge of all.

I hear that some say (upon what grounds I know not) that what I tendered to the
House of Commons for their satisfaction, is so covertly expressed, that they
conclude I have but deceived them, and that I am still, and have been for a
twelve month past of the opinion, that the second in the Trinity, to wit,
Jesus Christ is not God; but how groundlesly they conclude this of me, if I
have not lost all reputation amongst them, will be very evident by what I hold
forth.

That I have many Enemies, I doubt not, and such as are not of petty
professions and repute, as namely, Priests, Lawyers, Cavies, Self-seekers, and
Rigid-Presbyterians, of all these not a few: to such men's ways I profess my
self an Enemy, but not to their persons; and till I see some amendment of them
in their trades, I shall not, I hope, alter my thoughts of them; how the
Gospel, Law, men's Estates, and the Liberties and Freedoms of the people are
bought and sold, I am not altogether a stranger to; and what palpable
contradictions there are in these men's professions and actions, I shall
endeavor to clear.

First, let us take a brief survey of the Priest, but if any shall say there is
too much gall in my pen for using this word Priest, I shall refer him to what
the Apostle says, Heb. 7. 11. Where there is a change of the Priesthood, there
is of necessity a change of the Law; then it will follow, where the Law is not
abolished, there the Priesthood is not abolished; and that the Law is kept on
foot, I shall instance in one particular only (though I could show their
legality in many things) as that of Tithes: Was not the Tithes due under the
Law to the Priests, as such only? and do our Tithe and Parsonage-mongers,
claim it upon any other score? They like the profit, but not the title the Law
gives them; they would alter the term Priest, into the name of a Minister of
the Gospel: but how well this becomes them, their preaching and practice
considered, I profess, I think a man of ordinary capacity can see without a
pair of spectacles. Our Savior Christ in that Commission to the Preachers of
the Gospel, Matthew. 10. 7. commands them, Go preach, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Verse 8. Freely ye have received, freely give. Verse 14.
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when you depart out of
that house or City, shake off the dust of your feet. Luke 9. 5. says, Shake
off the dust of your feet for a testimony against them: This was practiced by
Paul and Barnabas, Acts. 13. 51. They shook off the dust of their feet against
them, and came to Iconium: But is this the practice of these Gospel-Preachers
(would be called?) nay, will they not rather shake off the dust of their feet,
and be gone from the Saints, where the maintenance is not great, and go among
men that scorn both them and the Gospel, for a good fat Parsonage, and there
cast the Gospel in the best manner they can, which is the pearl mentioned, Mat.
6. 7. unto a company of Swine, contrary to the command? How eager are many of
them for a Goose, or a Tithe egg at Easter with their Neighbors? if they
conceive they have not that which they call their Due, it shall make a breach
between them, that they will never love one another again: if these be
Gospel-Preachers, or if these do not sell the Gospel, I confess I know nothing.

Enter Lawyer.
Who would think that a Gentleman of so demure a garb, had so much (I had
almost said knavery) craft under his Sattin-Cap and long Robe? put him what
Case you will, he will tell you it is good, and perchance he speaks truth; but
the silly Clyent knows not the meaning, he thinks that his Cause is good, but
there is another meaning in it, which is this, it is good for the Lawyers, for
they shall get money by it: Does not too much experience manifest this? There
is a disease called Caninus-appetitus, let us see whether they are not sick of
this, especially those that are any thing eminent, and have the privilege to
plead within the Bar: Do not many find their appetites are so great, that
whereas heretofore ten or twenty shillings would serve their turn, now you must
give them five or ten pounds, and yet their panches hardly satisfied? Nay, do
not many of them take a man's money and not do his work? Does it not many times
fall out, that while the Lawyer is pleading in one Court for one Clyent,
another of his Clyents Cause is hearing in another? And when it is the Lawyers
fault to entertain so many Causes, that he cannot give attendance to them all,
Do they restore the Fees they have taken, though the man be undone for
depending upon him? if there be any such, for my part, I neither know them, nor
have I heard of them, but it may be there are black Swans.

A word to the Cavies.
How these have endeavored to sell their own and their Neighbors Freedoms for a
mess of pottage, I mean the Kings favor, is so apparent and obvious in every
eye, that I need not use arguments to prove it; and therefore I shall only say
this to them, Sithence what they have reaped of all their labor, is but scorn
and contempt of all honest true-hearted English men, and a Sequestration to
boot, I hope they will take warning for the future, by what is past.

In the next place comes the Self-seeker.
This Gentleman, notwithstanding his false vizard of zeal to the public
interest (which mask is likewise put on by all that I have to do with now) is
easily discovered: Do they think that those which have raised handsome Estates
out of nothing, and vast Estates out of mean Estates, since our general
calamity upon the ruin of many, as well friend as foe, can deserve any other
title then Self-seekers? and though they bless themselves in their mis-gotten
goods, that any honest hearts can but condemn them for their unseasonable
building their nests so high? let them read what the Prophet Haggai says, chapter
1. v. 4. Is it time for ye, O ye, to dwell in your ceiled houses, and this
house lie waste? So may I say, Is it a time for you, O ye Self-seekers, to ceil
and raise up your houses, when the Nation lies waste? Is not this a
preposterous way, to raise your Estates upon your Brethrens ruin? I speak to
those chiefly, that contrary to the Self-denying Ordinance, still keep the
Offices of the Commonwealth, the profit of which, especially in such a time as
this is, ought (allowing a competent Sallery to those that execute them) to be
converted to the public use: And though I speak principally to such, yet I
condemn all those new made Officers too, that have enriched themselves (whiles
others, better affected to the Nation, have been undone) by the Excize,
Sequestrations, etc.

In the next place a word to Rigid Sir John Presbyter.
How zealous this Gentleman is in his way, would be needless to hold forth,
because he is so well known; but the blindeness of his zeal is not as generally
known, and therefore I shall say something to that. I shall propound two
Questions:

First, Whether a man may be questioned in matters Divine only?

Secondly, If so, How, and upon what grounds he challenges this Jurisdiction,
more then a man of a different judgment?

To the first I answer, I am altogether unsatisfied, that the Magistrate can
take Cognizance upon Gospel-Rules which we ought to walk by, or call any man to
an account for any thing, but what is really prejudicial to his Neighbor, in
his person, estate or good Name; because it is said, Who art thou that
condemnest another? he either stands or falls to his own master. And I
challenge any one to show me a Text in all the New Testament, for such a
practice; if they cannot, and yet will practice it, do they not condemn the New
Testament of imperfection in matters of Rules, or else usurp this authority
because they will, and have no other Reason but their will for it?

But to the second: Suppose such a thing, yet I am not convinced by any thing I
ever heard or read, that he has right to assume this power: If Fire and Faggot
be an Argument, or the destroving of men in Prisons, what do they less then
justify all the persecutions that ever were made upon the Saints? If this
Gentleman could but demonstrate to me his infallibility, I should be much
staggered; nay, they are so far from this, that they dare not say so much: and
if so, what is it but the begging of the Question? I wish they would remember
that saying of God, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye; and
consider whether that Prophecy in the Gospel may not concern them, The days
shall come, when they shall put you to death, and think they do God good
service. And for that Argument, They that have the power may do it, and the
majority of Voices ought to carry all matters: I shall answer it with that
place of the Evangelist, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. Wide is the gate, and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go therein: But strait
is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to life, and few there be that
find it. I could say much more, but I study brevity. There is a saying amongst
Physicians, That when diseases are discovered, they are half cured; and that I
may not do my work to halves, I shall bestow the best skill I can.

For the Priest, I would leave him to the people, so as the Disciples and
Apostles of Christ were; and if they are his Messengers, he will surely pay
them their wages though men will not: certainly, as they have freely received,
so they ought freely to give; and if once I saw them of that disposition, I
doubt not but God would stir up the hearts of men to be as free toward them in
their Carnal things, as they are toward the people in Spiritual things: For a
Gospel-people, will be a free-people.

For the Lawyers cure, I would have the Parliament to stint him in his Fee, and
if he exceeded, or took more Causes then he could manage, so that any man were
undone by it, I would have him suspended from practicing, and his Gown pulled
over his ears.

And for the Cavies, I would take them short enough for ever being able to
abuse themselves and countrymen by any power they should be trusted with: I
would never put a Sword into his hands, that had formerly used it to the
enslaving of himself and country; and if he will be troublesome, and not take
such fair warning as he has had, I would send him to a New Plantation; for it
is pity, and dangerous to have any more of the Breed of him here.

As for the Self-seeker, I would be sure to trust him so far as I could see
him, and no farther: And to stop this Leaprous disease, I would not only give
him a Vomit, that he might disgorge those filthy Morsels he has so greedily
swallowed, to the prejudice of the Body Politic; but also have a special
care, and exact eye upon all the Money-vangers for the future, and not let pass
more then a month, for the calling of those to an account, who weekly, nay
almost daily receive money in some places, as your Treasurers in Counties, who
receive money for the Army, and money for Sequestered goods, and Rents, and
after this proportion of time, according as moneys comes in to all the several
money-takers for the Commonwealth, I would deal with them.

Rigid Sir John Presbyter is as desperately sick as any of the rest, and
therefore it will require more art then mine, I fear; but yet I will do my
best, and what is wanting, let it be supplied by an abler Artist. By my casting
of his state, his disease seems to be somewhat of kin to Mr. Cavies; and
therefore I shall prescribe much of what I did to him. I would almost as soon
put a Sword into the hands of a madman, as into the hands of a high-flying
Presbyter; certainly, the forcing of a man's conscience by civil Power, is a
note beyond the Apostles Ela: But what do I speak of the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ? they were puisns, and lived in the nonage of time; they never saw
such an Assembly of Divines, and a gallant Book called The Annotations upon the
Bible, which cost them many years travel. Truly, this Book cost me Twenty five
shillings, and if any one will give me but twenty for it again, I will give him
thanks, though it be not two pence the worse for my using of it; he that can,
or will afford time to read it over, has more leisure and liking to it then I.
Happily the Penmen of the New Testament writ at a venture, as King James did
his Book, entitled, Demonalogy; and as old Mr. Allen of New-Inn Hall in
Oxford, a reputed Conjurer, understood King James his Book better then himself;
so these Gentlemen may the New Testament, then the writers of it: If these
Gentlemen will needs be doing, I would make them Masters over all the Bedlams
in England, and if that be not work enough, let them go into America, and try
their newfound experiment there; in my opinion, it is not fit for Europe,
except as before. We read Heb. 11. 6. That without faith it is impossible to
please God, etc. And that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God, Romans 10. 17. And that faith is a gift, Ephesians 2. 8. It Is true, that at
Rome where this new first discovery was made, the Civil Sword has been used to
drive men to Heaven whither they would or no, but whether it ever wrought that
effect, or was at first intended for that end, I very much doubt, whatsoever
was pretended: And since this Opinion was forged there, I wish the Parliament
of England would send it from whence it came, and quite banish it our Land;
These diseases are grown Epidemical, otherwise I should have spared this labor.

A true Narrative, according to the best scrutiny I can make into my thoughts,
of what past between Col: Downs and my self, upon which he accused me.
IN January last past, about the fifteenth day, I was with many other Gentlemen
of the House of Commons in the afternoon, in the Committee-Chamber above the
Parliament House, by a fire there; one Cornelius Holland, Esquire; a worthy
Parliament man, and true Patriot to his Country (who Moses-like, chose rather
to suffer with the people of God, then to be one in the Kings Court, and enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season, as manifestly appears by his taking part
with the Parliament, and good people of this Island against the King and his
God-damme blades) came to me, and desired me to go to the Committee of
plundered Ministers, to help free a Minister that had lain in Prison two or
three years for denying the personality of Christ, to which I gave my ready
concurrence, being one of that Committee: Col: Downs standing by, and hearing
our discourse, brake out into passionate Language, saying, He deserved to lie
by it, and to have far greater punishment; I would be loath to abuse the
Gentleman as he has done me, but I take it, he said, he deserved to be hanged;
to which I replied, I do not see any ground for such a hard censure; for I did
think, that according to the common acceptance of that word, it could hardly
be defended by Scripture; and for my part, I was altogether dis-satisfied with
those expressions of three distinct Persons, or Subsistences in the Godhead:
to which he replied, I do not care for the word personality, but said, Jesus
Christ was God, which I did not apprehend to be the question before us, and
this was all that past at that time.

About two or three days after, I met the said Col: Downs in the
Painted-chamber at Westminster, whether we came as Members of the High Court of
Justice, for the Trial of the King, but being somewhat earlier then others, I
spoke to him thus, If it please you, since we have opportunity, for I suppose
the Court will not sit yet, let us calmly make a farther progress into that
discourse we entered upon the other day in the Committee-room, and had not time
then to prosecute; to which he consented: but whereas I desired him to dispute
without heat, he could not forbear that. The two main things we insisted upon,
were these:

First, the Trinity of persons in the Unity of the Godhead.

Secondly, what the Union was between Christ and his Saints.

But as I did not deliver my Opinion positively in either, but only
Argumentatively, so neither was there any method in our discourse, which hardly
can ever be obtained from a passionate man: After I had gained his consent to
speak together, as aforesaid, I began thus, Truly, I do not believe Jesus
Christ to be God, after that manner which some do hold him forth, for according
to my best understanding of their words and expressions, they hold forth three
Gods, and I would fain know how it can be demonstrated, that there can be three
distinct persons, or subsistences in one entire being; and for the word
Subsistence, it holds forth no more, in my judgment, of Christ his being in
the Godhead, then may be affirmed of every Creature, according to that in Acts
17. 24. In him we live, move, and have our being. I offered to his
consideration, touching the Saints Union with Christ, those Scriptures where it
is said, That Christ is the head, and the Saints are the members, which is in
many places of the New Testament, and then said, That whatsoever the head did
partake of, that did the members also, and my foot was as really of my body as
my head, but not indeed in so excellent a manner: I quoted that Scripture also
of 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partaker of the Divine Nature: And walking in a
round in our discourse; for as I have said, it was very immethodical, I spoke
of that word Subsistence again, saying, That according to my understanding of
that word, I might be said to be God too, as well as Jesus Christ, and the like
might be affirmed of all other Creatures whatsoever; to which he said, You had
best say the Devil is so too: After he had spoken this, there was not a word
more past between us at that time, for the Lord President came into the Chair,
which ended our discourse. I suppose many more words past between us, but this
is the substance of what I spoke. Had I imagined I should have been called to
an account for it, it is very probable I should have thought upon it more then I
did, and so have been fitter to give a more large and punctual relation, but I
have not dealt unfaithful in any material thing. I have often discoursed with
many, but I was never so injuriously and discourteously dealt with in all my
life, that I remember; which whether it was not far beneath the part of a
Gentleman, I leave to the world to judge.

About nine or ten days after, I was going in the morning from my Lodging at
Westminster, up into the City, about some occasions I had there, and by the way
I met with a Noble Lord, my very good and much honored friend, and after I had
humbly saluted him, he said he would tell me some news, I listened to him, being
very willing to hear what it was, he told me that Col: Downs had advised with
Mr. Speaker, to frame a charge against me of Blasphemy, which was, That I
should say, That Jesus Christ was not God: I must confess, I was somewhat
affected with it upon the sudden, but I thanked his Lordship, and told him, I
doubted not but to answer it well enough, and took my leave of him, hasting
about my business, that I might return, if possible, before the House sat,
that in case they were resolved to charge me, I might be present at the report
to make my defense; but yet I must profess, when I had considered it, I did not
think Col: Downs could be instigated, upon a private broken discourse as that
was, to charge me in the highest Court of England: For, knowing with what mind
I discoursed, and the confusedness of it too, it seemed to be so far beyond the
Rules of Civility, Christianity and Prudence, that I thought it incredible,
that a Gentleman should so much forget himself. But the Gentleman's zeal, or
rather weakness (for I profess I think he was abused by those that set him on,
they feeling his pulse, made a Mountain of a Molehill, and so heightened his
spirit, that, poor Gentleman, he thought himself bound in Conscience to
prosecute me as he did) transported him beyond all rules. I may be bold to say,
without partiality, because I have heard diverse Gentlemen of that judgment,
That he much transgressed the bounds of Civility; and certainly, it was not
done like a Christian, for they will admonish one another, and use all fair
means of conversion, and upon good grounds; so that they are incorrigible,
before they will lay open their faults to those in Authority. And if it were
prudentially done to engage his Reputation in a business of this nature, upon
his single Testimony, I am much mistaken. I think a wise man, if he had thought
me of that opinion, by what discourse he heard from me, and conceived himself
obliged in Conscience to discover it, would have asked me before witness,
whether I did hold that Opinion, or no? that upon my owning of it before
others, he might with clearness have charged me, without the least appearance
of reflection upon himself. I shall recommend that place of Scripture to him,
and all of his mind, for their direction for the future, it is Gal. 6. 1.
Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted. I made so quick a return out of London, that I came to the House
before the Speaker was in the Chair; I looked over all the House for Col:
Downs, to speak with him about it, but he was not there, but about half an hour
after the House was sat, he came in; I removed where he was, and sat just
behind him, and there being a great silence in the House, while the Clerk was
looking for an Order by Mr. Speakers direction, I spoke to Col: Downs with a
very low voice, thus, Sir, I understand you have a charge against me, you will
do me a favor to give me a copy of it before you report it, that I may be the
better enabled to make my defense; he answered not a word: whereupon I asked
whether he did hear me or no; and withal, said, I do not desire this as an
argument to have you wave it, or that I am careful to answer what you shall
charge me with, but if I know beforehand what you will say, I shall be the
better prepared to speak to it (and for this I have a witness that sat by,
Col: John Bingham by name) he started up immediately in a great fit of passion,
and cried out, Mr. Speaker, to the Orders of the House; Master Speaker, to the
Orders of the House; leave being granted him to speak, he said, you were
speaking but now that your secluded Members did you ill offices without door,
but I much more fear your Members within door. I do not often trouble you with
Speeches, neither would I at this time, but that the Gent. whom it concerns
pressed me to give him a Copy of what I am about to speak: I must confess it lies
heavy upon my Spirit, and I can no longer be burdened with it; I acquainted
some of this House with it some days since, hoping I should have been called up
to make this report, but failing in my expectation, and having this opportunity
offered me, I shall discharge my conscience. About nine or ten days since, in
the Painted-Chamber, this Gentleman behind me, Mr. Fry, engaged me in a
discourse, in which he delivered as his Opinion, and maintained it with
Arguments, and quoted Scripture for confirmation of it, That Jesus Christ is
not God; That Jesus Christ was no more God then he was, but he said, it is true,
he has more of God in him then I have, but so far as God gives forth himself
to me, I am as much God as he is: and this I do positively charge him with. To
this I immediately answered;

This Gentleman's memory serves him well, that he could keep this in his mind
nine or ten days without any addition or diminution, but with his favor, Mr.
Speaker, his report is very untrue; for first, I say thus, That I did not
believe Jesus Christ to be God, after that manner some held him forth; 2. That
according to that word Subsistence, no more was imported of Jesus Christ his
being in the Godhead, in my judgment, then might be affirmed of me and all
other Creatures, according to that in Act. 17. 24. In him we live, and move,
and have our being: And touching the Union of the Saints with Jesus Christ, I
said, he was called in Scripture, the Head, and the Saints the Members, now we
know that the hand is of the body as well as the head, though the head is more
transcendently of the body, and it is said, we are made partakers of the Divine
Nature; This I spoke in the Painted-Chamber, by way of Argument, not delivering
my Opinion positively in any thing, and Mr. Speaker, if you can make any thing
of this, I must submit to you.

The House fell into some debate of it, and it was moved, since I was
positively charged with the aforementioned particulars, though I did as
positively deny it, yet for the satisfaction of the House, I should deliver
what my Opinion was in that point, which for reasons then occurring into my
mind, I declined; Thereupon a Vote passed I should withdraw; and after I was
withdrawn, it was Voted, I should be suspended sitting in Parliament, till I
gave the House satisfaction: I took the matter into the most serious
consideration I could, and supposing if I did not something according to the
pleasure of the House, it would be some blemish to my reputation, I drew up my
Opinion of the Trinity in the Godhead in a paper, and delivered it into the
hands of a Member of the House, my very good friend, to tender it to the House,
which accordingly was done; and after the reading of it, and some debate
thereupon, I was restored; and for the satisfaction of all those to whose hands
this shall come, I have here inserted it verbatim.

The Opinion of Joh. Fry of the Trinity of the Godhead, humbly tendered to the
Honorable House of Commons, to take off, if it may be, all prejudice of Error
in that point, that lies upon him by reason of a Charge untruly reported
(whether upon mistake or other ground, I know not) by Col: John Downs; Together
with his Answer to the said Charge.
BEfore I speak to the abovesaid particulars, I shall take leave to make my
apology for not delivering my opinion at that instant, when I was charged, the
reasons that prevailed with me, which occurred then into my memory, were these:

First, I thought my denying the charge was enough to satisfy the House.

Secondly, I thought it would much reflect upon me, to be catechized after that
manner.

But consulting since with the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 15. who advises to be ready
to give an account to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, etc. I shall faithfully deliver my Opinion in the point.

I do and ever did, since I knew any thing of Divinity, really believe, That
the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and that these
three are equally God; That God the Son took our nature, and manifested himself
gloriously in it, and in a mystery, according to the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And
without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, which is, God
manifested in the flesh, etc. That the Son remains God for ever, and yet they
are not three Gods, but one God.

My Charge as follows.
FIrst, that I should say, I do not believe Jesus Christ to be God.

Secondly, that I should say, He is no more God then I am: It is true, he has
more of God in him then I have, but so far as God gives forth himself to me, I
am as much God as he is. Thus far my Charge.

To the first I answer, and this I do as in the presence of God, That according
to the best of my remembrance, I did say, I did not believe Jesus Christ to be
God in that manner that I conceived some did hold him forth; for according to my
best understanding of their expressions, they make Jesus Christ a distinct God
from God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost, and the like they do of the Father
and the Holy Ghost, and so they hold forth three Gods; and this is not my
Opinion alone of them, for I meet with others of the same judgment.

To the last I answer, in a word, I deny it totally; for as it was never in my
thoughts that Jesus Christ God, is not God, or that I shall ever partake of the
Essence of God, so I do abominate the Opinions charged upon me. The end of my
paper to the House.

I shall briefly speak to that gross and carnal Opinion of three distinct
Persons, or Subsistences in the God*head, and conclude.

Persons or Subsistences, are Substances, or Accidents; as for the word Person,
I do not understand that it can properly be attributed but to man; it is out of
doubt with me, that if you ask the most part of men what they mean by a Person,
they will either tell you it is a man, or else they are not able to give you any
answer at all: and for the word Accident, I suppose none will attribute that to
God; for according to my poor skill, that word imports no more but the figure
or color, etc. of a thing, and certainly no man ever saw the likeness of God,
as the Scriptures abundantly testify; and therefore neither of the words,
Persons, or Subsistences, can hold forth such a meaning as Accidents in God.

Athanasius in his Creed, says, There is one Person of the Father, another of
the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost; others say, That there are three
distinct Subsistences in God: Well, these three Persons or Subsistences, cannot
be Accidents, neither do I think it is the meaning of any: Then certainly they
must be Substances; if so, then they must be created or uncreated, limited or
unlimited; if created and limited, then the person of the Father is a Creature,
the person of the Son a Creature, and the person of the Holy Ghost a Creature,
which I think none will affirm; if they are not created or limited, then they
must be uncreated or unlimi^ed, for I know no medium between created and
uncreated, limited and unlimited: If they are uncreated and unlimited, then
there are three uncreated and unlimited Substances, and so consequently three
Gods. For my part, I find no footing for such expressions in Scripture; and I
think them fit only to keep ignorant people in carnal and gross thoughts of
God, and therefore I do explode them out of my Creed. I could have come forth
in a better dress, if I would have made use of help, which was offered me; but
I rather chose to be seen in a true face, homely garb, and russet coat, then a
painted face, borrowed accoutrements, and an hypocritical posture. A russet
coat serves the Countreymans turn very well, and suits best for a man of his
profession, and he thinks it comely enough, till he stands by a Satin or
Scarlet suit, then he sees what a home spun fellow he is; if there be no other
benefit of this, but to be a foil to set off other men's parts, it will not be
altogether useless.

FINIS.

