A Full and True ACCOUNT of the Behavior, Confession, and Execution OF Mr.
Richard Buttler, FOR A Notorious Felony and Burglary.
WHO WAS Executed at TYBOVRN, on Monday the 29th. of July, 1695. after having
been Twice severally Reprieved, for the Space of 17. Days.
WITH A Brief RELATION of his Extravagant Life, and other Remarkable Matters
and Circumstances, that Attended him to his untimely End, etc.
RICHARD BUTLER, having been Tried the last Sessions at the Old Bailey, and
found Guilty of a Notorious Felony and Burglary; for that he with other his
Accomplices, broke into the House of Robert West, of the Parish of Fullham, in
the County of Middlesex, on the 4th. of April last, taking thence Plate, Rings,
and wearing Apparel to a great Value, he, pursuant to the said Conviction, in
the close of the Sessions, received Sentence of Death.

Being remanded to Newgate, he seemed not at all concernded at the deplorable
Circumstances he lay under: But indeed owned he had lived a wicked profligate
Life, contrary to his better Knowledge and the good Education his Parents had
bestowed on him, being early drawn away to follow bad Company; especially by
Lewd Women, who in the end proved the worst of his Enemies, for by their
insatiable Craving, he was forced to still their Clamours, to undertake these
late Evil Practices.

Being visited by the Minister, and some of his Friends, they advized him to be
Serious, and consider his latter End, seeing he was Dead in Law, and the time
of his Death as it were fixed to a certain Period: He found his Conscience
touched with some Remorse, and, like Foelix, trembled at the Thoughts of Death
and Judgment to come; but this continued not long; for being left by them, he
labored to wash away his Thoughts of what he was to suffer, if not of an
Eternal State, with Liquors conveyed to him; yet this did little to the
Stilling his Conscience, which brought to his Remembrance his past Evil
Courses, and cast him at certain times into Agonies of Mind, which so shook his
Soul, that it little varied from a kind of Distraction; striving continually to
behave himself unconce^nedly

On Friday the 19th. of July, having before hand notice he must Die that Day,
there appeared in him a Confusion of Thoughts between Fear and Resoluteness,
and being delivered to the Sheriff's Officers, and put into a Cart with Edmund
Allen, (who suffered for Poisoning his Wife) he behaved himself very
extravagantly, as a Person not prepared for another World: but by the way a
gracious Reprieve met him, and a longer time was allowed him to prepare himself
for Death, at which he seemed not much concerned, however he was brought back
to Newgate, and had seasonable Advice given him to make use of the precious
Moments offered as it were by a wonderful Providence, to enable him the better
to fit himself for an Eternity, upon which depended his everlasting Happiness
or Misery; but we do not find he was so careful about it as he ought to be.

On Monday, the 29th. After 17 days Reprieve he was again brought down and put
into a Cart, appearing much Disordered, telling the People He was now come
again, to show himself, desiring their Company, etc.

Being come to the Place of Execution, and tied up, the Reverend Ordinary was
earnest in persuading him to be Serious, and to consider he was launching into
Eternity and therefore ought to employ his Minutes to a good purpose; according
whereunto he prayed with him; but Butler slighted it, professing himself a
Roman Catholic, and that he would die in that Faith: He protested he was
Innocent of the Fact he was about to suffer for; but, being desired to be
circumspect in his Words, for that the Evidence was plain against him, he
Inveighed against his Accusers vowing he never broke open a House in his Life.
The Ordinary desired for to sing a Psalm with him but he refused; and so, after
he had spent a small time in pri-Prayer after his own method, the Cart was
drove away and his Soul committedto (...)


