WHY NOT Eight Queries, made to the PARLIAMENT, From the People of ENGLAND, in
1649.
WHether this Nation shall be a free People, according to Magna Charta, (now
regained with such a vast expense of Treasure, and effusion of blood) and
according to our trust reposed in you, and your solemn deep Engagements, Vows,
and Promises, made to us, to make us a free People? And WHY NOT yet performed
by you, according to your promise made to us, since the Kings death?

II. Whether you intend to pass the National Act for Liberty or not, and to
take off all Capias for Arrests, That so we the people of England may be
secured from trouble in our personal Liberties, and thereby enabled freely to
follow our Callings and Endevors for Livelihood? And WHY NOT, seeing it is our
just Birthright?

III. Whether this Nation shall still be inslaved in their Estates, personal
Liberties, and Lives, to the present corrupt, delatory, chargable practices of
the Law, and to the cruel, impious (unparalleled) mercenary Instruments of the
same (by whom thousands of this Nation have been ruined and destroyed) even by
Lawyers and Gaolers? And WHY SO, seeing they are abominable and wicked?

IIII. Whether you intend to prefer the impious flourishing State of an
inconsiderable number of corrupt Judges, and mercenary Lawyers, and cruel
murdering Goalers (Enemies to Englands Liberties) before the ^ust Liberties,
Peace, and Welfare of this great Nation? And WHY SO? seeing he that treads in
their Paths, shall never have Peace nor Rest, Isai. 59. 7, 8.

V. Isai. 59. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Whether Justice shall be freely administered to all (both rich and poor) the
oppressed relieved, with full satisfaction and reparation for their wrongs
sustained, and the imprisoned set free, SO, as their persons may not be still
subject to imprisonment every two or three days, or as often as their
malicious cruel Adversaries shall think meet so to do? And WHEN, after eight
years Expectation? contrary to Isai. 33 15, 16.

VI. Whether the Creditors, according to Magna Charta, shall be enabled to reap
Due and Real Satisfaction for their Debts, out of the real and personal Estates
of all able Debtors, in the two third parts thereof (Intailed Lands also not
exempted) without any tedious juggling, chargeable delatory tricks in the Law?
And WHY NOT, rather then Lawyers and Gaolers, to rob them, and the Debtors?

VII. Whether all persons by you entrusted with many Millions of the National
Treasure, (and by them perverted) shall be called to a just and strict account
for the same, whereby the Soldiery may be duly satisfied, and this whole
Nation eased and acquitted from the unsupportable Burdens of all the several
great Taxes, and daily Plunders, wherein the Soldiery is made to appear the
Actors, (conceived to be done by the Speaker and Lawyers) merely to render the
Soldiers the more odious and detestable to this whole Nation (a subtle
contrivance, to imbrue the Nation again into a Sea of Blood) through the daily
increase of all the peoples heartburnings against you, and the Soldiers? And
WHY NOT, that so Knaves may be known?

VIII. Whether you intend to abolish Tithes, restore the Rights of the Poor,
call a new Representative, provided, That all mercenary Lawyers be exempted
from being any more elected or chosen to sit as Members of the same; the people
also prevented from coming up to Westminster for Justice; and the Law practiced
in our English tongue, in some brief expedicious way, without any delatory
Cheats, Fees, or Bribes, (as now used) according to the command of God, the
present practice of all other Nations in the World, where more Justice is to be
had for eight pence, then here in our Land for 800l. And WHY NOT unjust things
abolished?

Finally, our desires are, That because there is a far greater number of able,
honest, Conscientious, understanding men, in every of our Cities, Counties,
Hundreds, Towns, and Villages, that are able to judge and determine all
Controversies between a man and his Neighbor, better then any of those
Instruments of Contention, The Lawyers, (Englands Cankerworms) whose Nature and
Profession is to fish in troubled Waters, and to make the Wound of Contention
deeper and far larger, rather then to cure it, That therefore they may no ways
be thought fit to decide any Controversy in Judgment, nor to sit in our
National Assemblies, but to be expunged and expelled the House of Parliament,
even as the Bishops, Lords, and Judges were before them? And WHY NOT the power
of such Serpents destroyed, and quite confounded, confounded?

WHY NOT? Amen.
FINIS.

