An Admirable SPEECH Made by the Mayor of READING, upon the occasion of the
late choice of a Burgess for that Town, JUNE 28. 1654. WITH A true and
impartial NARRATIVE of the whole proceedings thereupon. Wherein is discovered
the design of the said Mayor, with the Aldermen and Priests of the said Town,
to deprive the Inhabitants of their vote of choosing.

Published by a well-wisher to the present Government in the making good of
former engagements to defend the free born people of ENGLAND in their Laws and
Liberties.

Printed at LONDON, 1654.

THe Author hereof having been an eye and ear-witness of the late irregular and
unjust proceedings of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Priests of the said Town of
Reading, in their choice of a Burgess to serve in the approaching Parliament;
and meeting with diverse false reports touching the same, tending to the
dishonor of the inhabitants of the Town before said, but finding no true
account thereof given to public view: Therefore, for satisfaction and
information of the people, and for the love be bears to the Liberties of his
native Country, (which are not a little concerned in this matter) the said
Author is induced to publish to the world an impartial Narrative of the whole
business; which is as follows.

THe Sheriff of the County having proclaimed the Writ from his Highness the
Lord Protector for summoning a Parliament to meet at Westminster the third of
September next, Mr. Frewen the Mayor of Reading appointed Wednesday the 28 of
June last, at ten of the clock, for the inhabitants of the said Town to meet in
the Town Hall, in order to the choice of a Burgess to serve in Parliament; and
that at the day and hour aforesaid, the Writ for choice should be read. The
people met accordingly.

Between nine and ten of the clock, the Mayor and Aldermen withdrew themselves
in private (as did appear) to choose a Parliament Man: For as soon as the Clock
had stricken ten, his Worship with all his retinue came into open Court; which
being full of the inhabitants, the Crier proclaimed Silence; and then the
Town Clerk with an audible voice did read the Writ for choice of a Burgess as
aforesaid. Which being done, the Mayor made a Speech to the people, such a one
as it was; however, it was not much unlike his actions. Which Speech (for the
singularity thereof) I have here inserted; and it is as follows.

Why do you hear me? here is a Writ directed to me, to choose a Burgess to serve
in Parliament; and we have chosen Col. Hammond, and him we will have; and I
will return the Writ for him.

What, right or wrong Mr. Mayor? said a Gentleman that stood by. I, (said Mr.
Mayor) we have chosen him, and will return the Writ for him; and therefore you
may go home again, (said he to the inhabitants.) Is not the Writ directed to
us? (said he meaning himself and Aldermen) and we have chosen Colonel Hammond,
and we will have him.

But Mr. Mayor (said a Gentleman) the most considerable part of the Electors
except against Colonel Hammond, and are here present, ready to publish to the
world whom they have made choice of to serve them in Parliament, viz. Captain
Castle, a man of conscience, wisdom and valor.

Whereupon, there was a cry amongst the chusers, four or five several times, A
Castle, a Castle; insomuch that the odds did clearly appear (to the impartial
and indifferent standers by) to be five for one for Captain Castle against
Colonel Hammond.

But the Mayor still stood it out, that the inhabitants had no power to choose a
Burgess, and that the power did lie in himself and his Brethren the Aldermen.
Whereupon the Electors of Captain Castle demanded, of the Mayor to go to the
pole; but he refused; and presently drew forth the inhabitants into a Field
called the Forbury, (without any adjornment of the Court, which signified a
disolution thereof) and in the said Field the difference remained for matter of
number as before, on Captain Castle's side, and the Electors again demanded of
the Mayor to go to the pole, and took witness thereof; but he refused again,
saying, He would do as he pleased, he would return the Writ for Colonel
Hammond; and so returned into the Town Hall again with the people following of
him, and then sent forth the Bell-man (his common call or crier) to go about
the streets with his bell, crying, All you that are for Colonel Hammond (to be
a Parliamentman) must presently appear at the Town Hall. (For Mr. Mayor is now
sitting to take your names.) The Majors Officer (also) John Bartlet most
industriously run about the stree^s, searching the corners thereof, and
Alehouses, crying out, Who are you for, hoe! For Colonel Hammond, would some
answer; but alas, we dare not, neither must we vote, because we are not worth
200 l. That Is false, (would the Mayor Officers reply) you may vote for all that.

And then demanding of another, Whom he was for, who said, For Captain Castle;
are you? (said the Majors Officer) you had best have a care what you do; for if
you are not worth 200 l. you are not capable to vote.

Thus did the Majors Officers run about the streets, two hours after the Writ
for the choice of a Burgess was read, and a clear election thereupon passed, as
by the testimony of sufficient witness may appear.

In the mean time the Mayor (who ought to have been Judge of the truth of
election) with some of his Brethren sat in the Town Hall to take the names of
such which his Bell-man and other Officers sent in out of the streets and
alehouses; and withal, Parson Fowler standing up above the people, in the
Majors presence, vaunting as in a stage play, and persuading such so sent in,
as aforesaid to subscribe for Colonel Hammond. And when they had acted their
part, the Mayor departed the Town Hall, being near two of the clock in the
afternoon; whereas a clear choice had passed for Captain Castle, at ten in the
morning.

Thus far have If declared the truth of things as acted by the Mayor, and his
brethren the Aldermen, with some few other Priest-ridden men, who indeed have
been ridden so hard, that even their understandings have been weakened thereby;
so that any ingenious man may behold the face of folly (and envy) upon their
actions, as by this Relation may appear.

Further, consider the Majors bold attempt upon the Liberties of the people, in
going about to introduce that which must needs render the people of England as
absolute slaves as any under the Turks dominion, by denying them the choice of
their Lawmakers, directly contrary to the mind of his Highness the Lord
Protector and his Council, who have so far testified their tenderness of the
Peoples Liberty in that respect, that they have enlarged the number of chusers
in Counties, by making many capable of choice, that were incapable heretofore.

What color can the Mayor show for such his practices, in running so great a
hazard as the Fine of above 1000l. to force the inhabitants of the said Town
out of their Liberties? Or how could he conceive, that such irregular, foolish,
and ridiculous ways and practices for the choosing of a Burgess, should be
either honorable to himself, or acceptable to any wise man?

But certainly (as I said before) the minds and spirits of these men being
ridden so much by the Priests, they are become barren and empty of all reason
and understanding.

He who by the Instrument of Government was bound to see the choice orderly and
peaceably made, in stead thereof, made factions and sidings amongst the people,
as if he had purposed to set them together by the ears: and the Priests, who
would be counted the Ministers of the Gospel of peace, are commonly found to be
the fomenters of strifes and divisions; and did so show themselves in this
Election of a Burgess.

Monday June 26. Parson Ford publicly in his Pulpit (in a base disgraceful
manner) said, that he heard that the inhabitants of the Town did intent to
choose a man on the other side of the water, (meaning Captain Castle:) it is
true, (said Ford) he is fit to make up differences between men about hogs
breaking over, or to mend up the hedge or ditch: but if you choose such, (said
he) then it will be Goodman Parliament Man, and Goodman Justice. Now if the
pride and insolency of this Priest Ford be such, that he dares publicly speak
in such scorn and contempt of one of his Highness the Lord Protectors Justices
of the Peace, what would he not do, had he power?

Correspondent whereunto, was the carriage of Priest Fowler, who in a
disgraceful manner called the Tradesmen (inhabitants of the Town of Reading)
The Ragged Regiment, because many of them came in Wastcoats, and with their
Aprons before them. Which language, how well it becomes a Messenger of Christ
(as he and his brethren call themselves) any sober Christian can judge. And
indeed, 'twas a mercy, (if not a marvel) that such language, at such a time,
from such a man, amidst a multitude, had not caused bloodshed.

But these are they that have in all Ages embraced all opportunities of sowing
discord amongst brethren, and who have been the incendiares, and even the
bellows, to blow up such sparks, as have set whole Nations in a combustion. And
it is to be feared, that they have some such design now, as when they would
have disbanded the Army: And therefore (my dear Brethren and Countrymen) have
I penned this sheet, to give thee warning of such designs and designers, in
the like case.

There are (as I hear) six Gentlemen of Reading (viz. Mr. Dean, Captain Curtis,
Mr. Goad, Mr. Write, Captain Goddard, and Mr. Stockwel) employed by the
inhabitants to represent the Case to his Highness the Lord Protector.

FINIS.

