A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE DAMAGES and MURDERS Done and Committed on the
Estates and Lives of the Protestants. BY THE IRISH REBELS IN IRELAND, BEING A
Complete Computation of all the Losses sustained by the King, the Church, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Kingdom in general.
1. THE King lost in his Revenue of Ireland, and the Irish got by their
Rebellion at 50000 Pounds per Annum, which accounting from the 23d. of October,
1641. (being the Time when the Rebellion began) only to the Year, 1650. when
the English began to prevail, being Nine Years, amounts to 450000 The
Protestant Church lost, and the Irish got, within this time, as followss. 2.
THE Revenue of 4 Archbishops, and 18 Bishops, during that time, at least 30000
pound, per Annum, amounting to 270000 The Protestant Clergy of above 2000
Parishes, lost during the said time, at least 60000 pound per Annum. 540000 The
Rents of the Protestant Nobility, at least 100000 pound per Annum, got by the
^rish during that time, amounts to 900000 The Rents of the other Protestants,
during that time, at least 150000 pound per Annum. 1350000 The Personal
Estates, plundered by the Rebels, from all the said Protestants, at least
700000 The Damages sustained by all the said Protestants, in having their
Plantations destroyed, their Houses burnt, Purchase lessened, the Country
dis-peopled, 3000000 The Pay of the several Armies Employed to suppress the
Rebellion is as follow. 3. IT appears by Records now in Dublin, that the Pay of
the English Officers, who served his Majesty, from the 23d. of October, 1641.
to the 6th. of June, 1649. amounts to 1800000 The pay of non-Commissioned
Officers, and private Soldiers, was double the aforesaid Sum. 3600000 The Scots
Army being about 12000 Horse and Foot, tho that Account was never adjusted,
could not be less than, 1800000 The Pay of the Army, which actually suppressed
the said Rebellion, from the 6th. of June, 1649. until October 1654, appears by
Records to be 3500000 The Abstract of the aforesaid account. THE Irish got by
the Rebellion, from the King, Church, and Protestants, as appears 4390000 The
Protestants dammaged by the said Rebellion. 3000000 The Pay of the several
Armies. 10700000 So that the Cost and Charge given the English, and occasioned
by the Irish Rebels, amounts to 18090000 Beside above 500000 Persons destroyed
on both sides by Reason of the said Rebellion.

Anno, 1641 Annual 1641. Purchase in 1641. 12 Years. Annual, value reduced to
6d. Sterling. in 1653 Purchase in 1653. at 8 Years. Damaged by the Rebellion.
Irish Propriety beside Encumbered about. 4 Millions of Acres. 400000. 4800000.
100000. 800000. 4000000. English Propriety. 2 Millions, 800000 Acres. 280000.
360000. 70000. 560000. 2800000.

This Diagram shows what Number of Acres the Irish were possessed of, in the
Year 1641; and also what the English had, except some of their Estates that
were encumbered by Mortgages (as is made appear by the Records in the Surveyor
General's Office) to the Number of Two Millions of Acres; and that by the
Records in the Auditors Office, they had as many Houses in Walled Towns,
Rectories, and Tithes, as did amount to 70000 l. per Annum: It also appears by
the same Records, that the English had many Houses, Rectories, and Tithes, in
Citys and Walled Towns, which were destroyed, and are not contained in the
above Diagram.

I can prove the Irish were restored to above half of what they were possessed
of in the Year 1641. being four Millions of Acres; and that what the Soldier
and Adventurer got in lieu of the aforesaid Damages, done to the King, Church,
and State, by their Rebellion, is not above 2 Millions of Acres, which in the
Year 1653, was worth but 400000 l. It is also plain, that there are many of
them, who have lately purchased great Estates, and are now actually Employed in
the Army under the Lord Tyrconnel; so that by another Conquest of them, they
may forfeit more Lands than they did by their last Rebellion.

When Cromwell had subdued the Irish Rebels, they did by their usual art of
Insinuation procure leave of him to be tried Man (...) Man according to their
respective Qualifications, and a Judicature to be set up at Athlone for that
purpose, without any Limitation of time to try such as pretend were Innocent;
whereupon such as could by good Proofs make appear, they were absent during the
Rebellion, or bore constant and good Affection to the English Interest, or were
Lunaticks or Minors, were all restored to their real and personal Estates.

This Court fitting four years gave all their Innocents time enough to set
forth their wrongs, and to prevail with the Usurpers, to have Large Scopes of
Lands set forth in the Province of Connaught; and County of Clare to such Irish
as could prove there was no Record of Outlary against them; by which means, and
by a year given them since the Restoration, they were Restored to above half of
what they lost, though it has appeared since that they were in the Rebels Army,
that they chose Members to sit in the Supreme Council at Kilkenney, and paid
Contribution to it.

Therefore it behooves all Englishmen, that have friends or any Estate in that
Country, to endeavous at this time to suddue that great Army Tyrconnel has set
up, against the known Laws of the Land, and to prevent the Subversion of the
Government, and the design he has, not only to rob us of our Estates, but also
Extirpate the Heretics out of the Kingdom, and to set up the Jurisdiction of a
Foreign Potentate. In doing this we shall not only settle a lasting Peace in
that Kingdom, but also incapacitate them from ever attempting the least evil
against the Protestants; The Protestants who have Estates will add to'em, and
they who have none, will get some.

This may be Printed,

James Fraser.

LONDON, Printed for W. Cadman. 1689.


