A full an True Acount of a most Barbarous and Bloody Murder, Committed by
Edward Williams, ON THE Body of Mr. Hinton, At the Windsor-Castle in
Green-Dragon Court, near Charing Cross, on Thursday last: With the occasion of
their Quarrel, and manner of the Murder; and how the Coroners Inquest brought
it in wilful Murder, and committed Mrs. Hinton to the Gate House, last Night
for being Accessory to the same.
MR. Hinton formerly a Trooper in the Kings Guards, and lately removed from the
Windsor-Castle at Charing Cross to the Windsor-Castle in Green-Dragon-Court in
the Strand, where he had kept an Alehouse for about Two Months, and having
been some Days out of Town on some extraordinary Business, leaving his Wife to
manage affairs in his absence, but returning home on Wednesday was Sevennight
last, found one Edward Williams in his House, and (as some say) too familliar
with his Wife, or at least took too much command upon him in his absence, and
to agravate the matter his Wife was at the same time disordered in Drink:
Whereupon high and provoking Word; being given on both sides, Mr. Hinton, (tho
at other times a very moderate and peacable Man) having some Tobacco Pipes in
his Hand, threw them at his Wife, which occasioned Williams, (who was then
present) to draw his Sword, but Hinton's Maid in vindication of her Master
stept'd between, and endeavored to keep them asunder, and had in all
probability performed that good Office had not her Mistress thrust her aside;
at which time (as we are informed) Williams taking the oppertunity, made a pass
at Mr. Hinton, and such an unfortunate one, that the point of the Sword run
into his Throat or Gullet, and (as some say) had repeated his violence upon him
had he not been prevented by Neighbors coming in; but notwithstanding all the
endeavors that could be used either by Surgeons or others, he languish'd from
Wednesday the 30th of October till Thursday the 7th of November and then Dyed
of his Wound at which time Williams the Murderer made his Escape, and not
before, having (as we are credibly informed) Dined with Hinton's Wife several
times since he had given him his mortal Wound, and once since he Dyed; which
behavior of hers toward the Murderer of her own Husband, has been much taken
notice of by her Neighbors, and no less reflected upon by her Husbands
Relations.

Whereupon the Coroners Inquest Sat yesterday on the view of his Body, and
after ^aving serch'd his Wound, and examined the Maid Servant concerning the
Occasion, and Circumstance of the aforesaid tragical Actiton, who gave a large
Account of each Par^^cular, relating as well to the neglegence of her Mistress,
as the rashness of Mr Williams, (...) after having sereously and Deliberately
considered the matter; and brought it in wil^^^ Murder. Mrs. Hinton, Wife to
the Deceased, was committed to the Gate House last ^^ght being Friday the 8th
of November, 1700, on Suspicion of being accessory to the ^^rther of her
Husband. But Edward Williams the principal Murderer, is not yet to be ^^^nd,
notwithstanding the great Search that is made after him.

LONDON, Printed for William Alkin, near Charing Cross, 1700.


