A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Wonderful Eruptions of a Prodigious Burning
Mountain, Which cast out vast quantities of FIRE to the Destruction of several
whole TOWNS.

Together with a Relation of a Wonderful EARTHQUAKE.

Likewise strange and Wonderful News from Ireland; giving a Relation of a
Great Flood that hapened there by Rain.

As it it is now sent in a Letter to His Majesty

This may be Printed

Nov. the 28 th. 1687. R. P.



LONDON.

Printed in Year, MDCLXXXVII.

A full and True ACCOUNT Of the Wonderful Eruptions of a Prodigious BURNING
MOUNTAIN. Together with a Relation of a Wonderful EARTHQUAKE, etc.
THE wonderful Eruptions of this Burning Mountain its prodigious Vomiting of
Fire, have for many Ages been the Subject of all Men's Admiration; but certainly
they never more justly challenged the Worlds Astonishment, than by that dismal
Inundation of Fire; whereof here is a Relation.

This Burning Mountain is distant from the City Catanianople 15 Miles; it is of
a wonderful height, and about 15 Miles in length, and 7 in breadth, it Burns
continually on the Top, but it has been observed for many Ages, that once in 15
Years it casts out Flames of Fire more then ordinary, with Stones, and great
quantities of Ashes. But in the Year 1669 on Saturday the 19th. of March, it
raged so furiously that with its most dismal Inundation it threatnd the Ruin
of the whole Island. It began not without some signs, for the Sun was observed
on the Friday, before its setting, to appear of a pale and dead Color, which
struck great Terror into the Inhabitants. But in the Night there happened a
terrible and unusal Earthquake, which shook not only the City but all the
Country, so violently that the People were forced to abandon their houses, and
fly into the open Fields to avoid the danger which threatened them from the
falling of their Houses. It continued so long and with such violence, that
shook down a whole Village called Nicolosi, whilst the poor people stood with
Grief and Astonishment, beholding from afar the ruin of all they had: but
observing the Earth to open in many places, their Terror carried them to the
City Catania, which was not used so roughly by the Earthquake, where they
entered so affrighted that they were wholly Insensible of what they did.

This dreadful Earthquake was followed by 3 Terrible Eruptions, much about the
same time, and a little distance from one another. They were observed to be of
the side of the Mountain Gebello, from whence with a terrible Noise it threw up
its Flames with wonderful fury and violence as high as any Steeple in His
Majesty's Kingdoms, its Noise not Roaring (as before) inward and from the Belly
of the Mountain, but violently cracking like Peals of Thunder, from ^he side of
it throwing out vast Stones, some of them 300 pound weight, which being as it
were Shot through the Air, fell several Miles distant from the place, whilst
the whole Air was filled with Smoke, Burning Sinders, and Ashes, which fell like
a Fiery Rain upon the Country.

In the mean time a vast Torrent of melted and burning Matter issued from the
side of this prodigious Mountain, and running down the Mountain Monpileri,
divided it self into two streams, the greatest of which took its course toward
the Towns of Monpileri, and Falicchi, which in few hours it utterly destroyed,
leaving not so much as the lest remainder of either; Besides lesser Villages
and Farms which stood in its way Quickly after it over-flowed the Fields for
above six miles in compass, like a Fiery Flood; It was of the Color of melted
and burning Glass, but as it cooled, became hard and rocky, leaving in its
passage several Hills of that Matter behind it.

The poor People were in such a Consternation, that they expected nothing less
than a general Conflagration; for at the same time Mount Gebello raged from its
Top with dreadful Flames, and such violent Roarings, that it was not easy to
be determined, which caused the greatest Terror, that, or the Concussions of
the Earth which yet continued.

These Currents of Fire kept on their course still, so that by Thursday March
the 24th. It had overrun Campo Rotundo, St. Pietro, and Masterbianco, with La
Potelli, and St. Antonio; Ruining all they met with in their way,
notwithstanding the Rain which fell in abundance that day; for the Water was
observed rather to add to the Fury of this Fire, then to any ways diminish it.

In the time of these dismal affrights, whilst the People were Astonished by
their Fears, a great number of Robbers took an occasion from this general
distraction to make a Prey of the already destrss'd People; which they found
easy to be done, and had already Murdered several of them for their Goods:
till Consultation being had, least Catania it self should be in danger from
their great Numbers, orders were taken to quell them. The Governor of the Town
was ordered to send out Parties with his Provost-Marshal, with command to Seize
on all suspected Persons, and to Execute them according to Marshal-Law, without
any farther Trial, those who where taken in the Fact. In order to this three
pair of Gallows were Erected, one before the Gate Di Aci, a second in the
Marketplace, and the third before the Gate Della Decima; strong Guards being
set every where. The poor People of the Country being by these Calamities
stripped of all their Estates, Ran with general Lamentations to the City Catania;
which indeed was opened to receive them, and orders taken to supply them with
Necessities (supplies of Provision being also sent from Messina to their
assistance) till their Calamities would give them leave to consider of their
better disposal.

At this time all the Element seemed to make War upon them together, for the
Air was continually darkened with Clouds and Smoke, insomuch that the Sun
scarce appeared all the time of these Eruptions, and if at any time, with
extraordinary paleness to the great Terror of of the People. The Sea ran
higher than it was wont, overflowing with extraordinary covering its Banks, in
many places. The Land every where infected with Thieves, so that no one could
stir abroad without danger of Death Till by the great care of the Magistrates
they were quelled: whilst the Fire by its prodigious overflowing threatened to
take possion of all.

These fatal Calamities continued till the 30th. of March, when they began to
have some hopes, that the violence of it had been over, the Mountan not
throwing out its Flames with that Fury as before, and its Noise and Roaring in
grear measure ceasing. Those who at the nearest distance viewed the Mountain,
informed, that the Top was fallen in, and that it was supposed to want near a
Mile of its former Height; that the largest of those Mouths which Vomit those
Fiery Streams, was about half a Mile in compass. The Matter which Issued out,
was a mixture of all sorts of Metals, Led, Iron, Brass etc. Its Flame like
Brimstone, and its Motion like that of Quicksilver. Wheresoever it passed it
left large heaps of its Matter congealed, which are now to be seen, they still
retain a Noisome Smell like that of Sulphur.

This Fiery Eruption lasted (with some Intermissions of its violence, but still
renewing it again afterward) from the 19th. of March, till the 18th. of April
1669 having consumed and wholly destroyed Eleven Towns, not so much as one
Foot-step of them Remaining, besides Farms, and other Villages.

DVBLIN, December. the 6th. 1687.
THere has happened here such an Inundation as has not been known in the Memory
of Man, or by any Record. The Rains have fallen extaordinary for these two
Mouths past, but on Saturday last, in the Evening, a sudden Stormatose, the
Wind being East, and South East, which raged with that violence, that it put
the lower part of the City under water up to the first Floor in most of the
Houses, and in some of them higher, insomuch that there was no passage along
those streets but by Carriages; and the Rains continuing, the Waters came up
almost as high as St. Patrick's Gate, and filled the Streets, so as Boats plied
in them? and from Rings-end to Cork hill, all Kitchins and Cellars were full of
Water, which rose also a Foot above the Custom-house-key, but, by the Care of
the Officers, the Goods there in store were secured from Damage. All the
Bridges upon the River are said to be broken down, and washed away, and, with
the same Rapidity, the stream has carried away great quantities of Timber,
Goods of all sorts, and men as well as Cattle. It continued showering
yesterday, and raised the Waters yet higher which broke down the Drawbridge
of Essex-Bridge, and a Gentleman passing over it at the same time in his Coach,
he had the good Fortune to escape himself, but the Coach and Horses fall into
the River, where the Coach man; and one of the Horses perished. The Rain has
since ceased; and the Water is much abated, and now People are at little
leisure to consider the damage which the Deluge has done, and they find it
exceeding great though we don't yet hear what prejudice it has done further up
in the Country, yet we cannot doubt but there must have been a proportionable
Loss.

FINIS.

