A Full and True ACCOUNT of the Penitent BEHAVIOR, Last Dying Words, and
Execution OF Mr. Edmund Allen, Gent.
Who was Condemned at the Sessions House in the Old Baily, for Abusing his
Loving and Tender Wife, by Cruelly Beating her several Times with a Bull's
Pizzle; and, last of all, most Barbarously and Inhumanely Poisoning of her, by
giving her White Mercury, which he unhappily mixed with Rasberry Gelly.
With a RELATION of The REPRIEVE of Mr. Richard Buttler, who was likewise
Ordered to be Executed with the said Allen; On Friday, the 19th of this Instant
July, 1695. With Mr. Allen's last Words, etc.
IT is sad to consider, that no Fatal Examples of the JUSTICE of GOD and Man
can deter some sort of People from Rushing on them to their Destruction: Not
only, to the certain Destruction of their Bodies, as being cut off from the
Society of Men, but to the great and eminent Hazard of their Precious and
Immortal Souls, which are more Valuable than a Thousand Worlds; Our Blessed
Savior tell us, There Is nothing can be given in Exchange for a Soul, when
lost. Then how cautious ought we to be, by all ways of Virtue and Religion, to
secure so Inestimable a Jewel: And since the Time that is here given us to
spend well, is the Talent we are to Improve to make us everlastingly Happy; or,
by not Improveing it Miserable for ever, we ought to be Circumspect about it.

This may suffice for Admonition and Cantion; but now we come nearer to the
Purpose,

EDMUND ALLEN, was well Educated and of good Parentage; but gave himself over,
when he came to Years to such Company, as made him for the future forget
himself, in pursuing those Virtuous Ways he was brought up to. Before he had
Settled himself well in the World, he fell into the Company of Lewd-Women; yet,
being at last weary of such a proffligate Course of Life; or else wanting Money
to Support it, he bethought himself of Marriage, and indeed in this he had the
good Fortune to get the Good Will of one that brought him a considerable
Portion, (some say about Fifteen-Hundred Pounds present, and more upon the
Death of Relations.) A while they lived together quietly; but some Lewd-Women
finding an Oppurtunity to draw him off and set him against her; his (as we may
truly term it) Dissembled Love turned into Hatred; he used her very grievously,
and because he thought this ill Usage not A^fliction enough to a Tender-Heart,
having spent most of the Money he had with her, and willing to live still in
Splendor, he reported himself a Widower, and going to a Young-Gentlewoman one
Frances Artis, he so insinuated himself into her Favor, that she had a good
liking of him, without the Consent of her Friends, and rashly gave herself
away, with a considerable Fortune; so that it is agreed on he had 3000l. by his
Wives and his Relations: But the matter being discovered he was Prosecuted at
Suffolk Assizes for Poligamy or Marrying a second Wife, the former being Alive;
where he escaped by his Clergy; but this was no Warning to this to be deplored
Sinner, for, being desirous to proceed further in the State of Matrimony, he
beat the said Frances Allen, as now we must call her frequently, in a most
miserable Manner, sometimes with a Bull's -Pizzle, at other times with a
Horse-Whip; and one time, by this cursed means, making her Miscarry, he would
not suffer those Women that offered their Neighbourly Assistance to come near
her in her doleful Condition. But her Heart not breaking with such violent
Usage, as, it is thought, he expected it would; he considered of other more
destructive Ways, for, comeing home from some Lewd Women, (where it is supposed
this poor Innocent Creatures Destruction was Plotted) he seemed more Kind than
usual, which the good Natured Woman taking to be real, and that, as he told
her, he had Repented him of his former Follies and Extravagancies, and intended
to turn a good Husband; she seemed Over-joyed at the supposed Reformation; but
alas, it proved Fatal to her, for treating her with some Rasberry-Gelly, or
Cakes, he treacherously mixed Poison, supposed to be Sublimated Mercury, in
them; which soon after put her into a violent Heat, and flying to her Brain,
caused Dis-rest and Uneasiness, of which she mightily complaining, he
pretending to be very Officrous, immediately fetched a Dose of Opium, which
finished the wicked design of her Death; though, being taxed, he said it was
only Poppy-Water he gave her. This, with many other Circumstances relating to
the Murder of his Wife, being proved against him at the Old Bailey, and he
making but a slender Defense for himself was found Guilty of wilful Murder;
and on the 6th. Instant received Sentence of Death.

Being returned to Newgate, he grew very Melancholy: His Thoughts were taken up
with Sadness, and a deep Reflection on his former misspent Life. As soon as he
was in the Prison he Retired himself as much as the Convenience would permit;
some of his Friends came to him, advising him, To betake himself to a serious
Repentance; to humble himself before God, for his many Sins; and to Implore
Pardon and Forgiveness for them; not to bear himself up with hopes of Life in
this World, seeing it was uncertain, but to use the Time allowed him in a
sincere Repentance, to wash off the Stains that polluted his Soul. These, and
the like Persuasions, touched his Conscience with Remorse, and drew Tears from
his Eyes, so that he desired them to, Pray for him, That God in his infinite
Mercy would consider him, a Poor, Sinful Creature, whose many Sins had provoked
him, in Justice, to bring him to this perril of Death, Shame, and Disgrace;
Praying by himself, and desiring to be prayed for, which was accordingly
performed: The Ministers that vifited him, desiring him to have in his Mind the
Words of the Prophet David, viz. From Blood Guiltiness Deliver me O God! He
Confessed his Sins were very great and grieveous, Imploring God, in this his
great Extremity, not to lay them to his Charge, but to take away his stony
Heart, and give him a Heart of Flesh, that he might be touched with a sense of
his Rebellion against him, in breaking his Commandments, and sining against
that Grace that was once given him, to lead him into the way of all Truth and
upright Walking in this his Pilgrimage on Earth. On the Two Sabbath Days that
happened during his Respite he behaved himself with extraordinary Devotion,
being very attentive to the Expressions of the Promises of God, in Mercies
offered by God to poor Repenting Sinners. Yet, notwithstanding this, at some
times flattered himself with Hopes of Life; especially when he found he was
Reprieved for Seven Days.

As for Richard Butler, who went with him, in Order to his Execution, he, to
outward Appearance, seemed not in the least Penitent, having, I suppose, some
Hopes of a Reprieve, or Pardon: But from Newgate to Knibbs's Pound (being near
that Place where he received a Reprieve) he all along bore a Cheerful
Countenance; speaking freely to all the Spectators, and often bitterly
inveighing the Person, who swore against him, etc.

But, to return to Mr. Allen: On Friday, the 19th. Instant, he was conveyed
privately in a Coach to Tyburn; where there was a great deal of Assiduity used,
as to his Eternal Concerns; not only by the Reverend Ordinary; but also, by
another most Reverend Divine: After he was Tied up in the Cart, he greatly
bewailed his former misspent Life; desiring others to be warned, by his unhappy
end: He Prayed, and was Prayed with; and according to all outward Appearance,
mad^ a very Penitent End; though he had lived a Wicked Life; so the Cart being
drawn away, his Soul was committed to the Hands of his Merciful Creator and
Redeemer: Whose ways with Mankind are Unsearchable; and whose Mercies toward
Penitent Sinners are Unlimited.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J. Williams, near Charing Cross, 1695


