FRUITFUL ENGLAND LIKE TO BECOME A Barren Wilderness Through the wickedness of
the Inhabitants; AND THE ARMY

Rebels and Traitors once more for not disbanding, and accordingly punished, as
some of them have been already at Sessions, Assizes and otherwise,
notwithstanding all their wonderful Victories, faithful and matchles services.

If the lawful remedies (for prevention) here justly advised, be not discreetly
and timely used.

So should Peace, Trade, and tranquillity abound,
And this Army in all Ages, be renowned;
Else, of what Cup they permit to be brewed,
Themselves shall drink, and cannot eschew't.
DEUTERONOMY. 30.15. Behold, I have set before thine eyes this day, life and good, and
death and evil.

Psalm. 107.34. Prove. 28.25. and 29.2. Lam. 1.1. Jer. 5.30.31.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

FRUITFUL ENGLAND LIKE TO BECOME A Barren. Wilderness, THROUGH The
wickedness of the Inhabitants, etc.
IN these mysterious and dangerous times, we are to take special notice of 3.
several parties, working to 3. several ends in this Nation, one party most
deceitfully and unjustly giving diverse bloody and deadly wounds, another party
most innocently and lamentably receiving them, and the third, most faithfully
promising and dutifully undertaking to cure them.

It cannot be justly denied, but the party thus offending, is liable to be
censured by the Laws both of God and man, chiefly if their notorious and
grievous facts be proved to be of set purpose, and the party offended, not
being able (for a time) to prosecute the matter against the offending party,
they being potent adversaries, able to stop the course of justice, yea and in
effect both Judges and parties; the party offended do refer their just cause
and innocent sufferings to God, unto whom belongs vengeance, and choose the
best and most expert Surgions they (to their knowledge) could find, to use
their best experiments in curing that parties grievous wounds; yea, and for
those professors better encouragement therein, and buying of all necessaries
for the cure, gave them both ready moneys and other rich presents at the
agreement; whereupon, these Surgions faithfully promised and undertook to
discharge an honest duty in all and whatsoever particulars requisite to the
complete and absolutecureing of that party so grievously wounded.

But it came to pass within a little space, that notwithstanding all these
Surgions great professions, faithful promises, and dutiful undertakings, yea
and their abundant receipts both of moneys and other gifts, (almost surpassing
all account) they spent both their time and labors, far more in the enriching
of themselves by those benefits, then in the conscionable performance of their
duty, (by careful using of their skill) toward the cureing of the wounded
party; so by these deceitful professors negligence in using the lawful
ordinary means, those wounds and sores do begin so to corrupt and putrify,
that they have brought the offended party to a far more dangerous and desperate
condition then at first they found them; for then any ordinary men of that
profession, by the use of the ordinary means might possibly have cured such
green wounds, but now they are grown so desperate, that nothing but desperate
cure can be thereunto applied.

Now the case being thus stated, a question hereby the way has need to be
resolved before we proceed; whether the offender or the curers were the
greatest enemies to the offended, and wounded patients? It can hardly be denied
but the curers are the greatest enemies, although the offenders were the first
open and deadly enemies, giving the offended such mortal strokes as could not
easily be cured, though the best means had been never so timely and carefully
used: and therefore the party offending are no wise to be excused, but justly
to bear their own blame; yet in regard they professed not to be friends, but
rather open enemies, and that they gave these mortal strokes freely without
either requiring or receiving any kind of recompense for their pains, and
neither professing, undertaking, nor promising to cure them.

But these Surgions most deceitfully professing to be such true, real, and
cordial friends to these paients, as if they had been indeed (as they said
they were) flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bones, and did faithfully
and solemnly undertake, promise, imprecate, vow, swear, protest and receive, as
great rewards as ever any Surgions received since these Wars (yea or the
world) began; and yet notwithstanding all, have proved miserable comforters,
yea and as false, corrupt, covetous, and deceitful to those poor objects of
pity, the wounded, bloody, needy, and cheated party, as ever any Physicians or
Surgions were to their turmoiled and grieved patients since the world began,
leaving that honest party, who recompensed them so liberally, even ready to
perish in those putrified and festered wounds, they having far more respect to
advance themselves and their posterities on their patients ruins, then any wise
to discharge their duties, according to that trust those patients reposed in
them for their recovery: so that if they be not condignely punished and
dismissed, to the terror of others, yea, and made to restore that recompense
they unjustly received, and better Surgions chosen in their places, there is no
hope neither of those patients recovery, nor of other patients safety, but all
to be thus cheated and abused continually by deceitful, self-seeking and
wicked men.

All which matters coming to this period, and the cruel party being so far
from repenting, that they have always raged more and more, taking all
advantages, and both seeking out and contriving many opportunities, plots, and
conspiracies to act more and more mischief, against the same party whom they
had thus wronged already; insomuch, that besides all the distressed parties
excessive contributions to those deceitful Surgions to little or no purpose,
they were forced not only to spend a great part of their own blood and estates
besides; (both wounded and spoiled as they were) but likewise, after they had
freely guarded those Surgions a long time themselves, even to hire diverse very
chargable guards for a longer time, almost to as little effect, except only the
last guard of all, which proved both faithful and valiant indeed, and did help
and assist them against the open cruelty, and unparalelled both plots and
violences of those most bloody and unplacable enemies.

By which powerful means and mutual concurrance, they (by divine providence)
through innumerable difficulties conquered, subdued, and captived their
greatest enemies; so that both their deceitful curers and malicious
destroyers, were brought under the mercy of them and their Guard.

But yet here stands the difference, those subtle Surgions (whom they chused
to be their curers, both of the Kings-Evill, and all other national and
abominable evils, sores and diseases, unto which they (like their forefathers
were subject) do presume upon some pretense of privilege, to agreee with the
violent party without either the patient parties, or their valorous Guards
consent, though all they can do, is but to speak and trea and prate, whereas
the other offended party with their victorious Guard, have the power and
fortitude to act, and smite and prosecute, howsoever they at present lie
lurking, like a Lion in his Den, until they see their own opportunity to catch
their prey, prevent them and laugh them to scorn; for though guilty men may
bless and make peace, yea and forgive one another, like Newgate birds: now
after they have received, destroyed, and murdered the just, yea protected,
assisted, and justified the wicked, as being most abominable acts in Gods
sight, yea and although hand join in hand, yet they shall not escape unpunished
in his due time.

Now the great matters of state now in present difference, being under this
simile discribed, as the Prophet Nathan did David's fault, they are both so
plain and evident in our daily sight and hearing, yea and palpable also by out
feeling the smart thereof, that they need little or no interpretation, were it
not for the plainer sort of people, who love that such needful and remarkable
matters in these distracted times, should be expressed in plain terms, having
too much woeful experience, how dangerous it is to be deluded and blind-folded,
either with whispering in the ear or with dark or Court-like phrases and vain
Complements.

The party who gave those grievous wounds, is the King and his Confederates,
(even the Papists and rude multitude) the party who received them, is this
whole distressed Nation, chiefly the most free minded and best principled
thereof, and the Surgeons who undertook and promised to cure these bloody
wounds, is the Parliament, and the Guard which the Nation chused, is the Army,
unto which party whereof, instead of any further illustration, ye may easily
join their own part in what has been briefly spoken.

Only for their cause, who delight more in plain English, then either in
doubtful or mystical speeches, it is to be considered, that the King and his
Consederates, have given many cruel and grievous wounds to this bleeding
Nation, not only by multitudes of oppressions, enormities, persecutions,
taxations, and monopolies always grinding the faces of the poor, grieving the
Consciences of the well-affected, before this Parliament, but infinitely by more
mortal, cruel, bloody, and destructive Wars, fire and Sword, throughout all
these three bleeding Nations ever since, whereof the particulars would fill
many Volums to express, but they are briefly comprehended in that little book,
called The Scots Mist, lately come forth.

The Parliament, though both chosen and trusted by this bleeding Nation, to
cure their wounds, and redress their grievances, having received infinite
treasures and unspeakable riches for these just and necessary ends, upon their
manifold faithful undertakings, promises, vows, imprecation, Oaths,
Protestations, and Declarations, yet have not in any competent nor
correspondent measure, discharged that great and public trust reposed by the
whole Commons of England in them; but were more earnest and careful to advance
themselves on the peoples ruins, then (as they ought) to perform their
promise, or discharge their duties, according to the end of their election,
trust, and vocation.

And the Army, though they have been very valiant, constant, courageous, and
victorious in all their practices against all the open enemies abroad, yet both
themselves and we have felt that they have been negligent, in taking some happy
and speedy course, both with those treacherous malignants and deceitful
friends when they were quiet at home: so that by their lenity, negligence,
pitiful delays, loosing many fair occasions, and precious opportunities the
last year, even when none in England durst presume to stir nor beat a Drum)
they might have been worthy instruments, both having the Sword still in their
hands, and as many more in number, then now they are, to have seen justice
(without respect of persons) executed, the public treasures accounted, wicked
Laws abolished, good Laws established, and the peoples freedoms restored.

But through the Armies failing herein, (though we should much more rejoice in
their conversion, then any wise in their confusion) and also by their declyning
from their faithful Engagement at New market, as was most apparent at their
Randevou^ near Ware, all these late insurrections have come to pass, these
inviterate enemies still intending, and by all possible means seeking to have
swallowed up both the Army and all the honest party, (according to that part of
the National Covenant, (howsoever they differ from the rest) and that by the
craft and stratagems of the Armies deceitful friends in Parliament, who
although they failled in their malicious plot of disbanding them wholly, yet
they prevailled afterward in getting the half, both ingratefully and untimely
carshired, and that by detaining from them their just wages and Arrears, that
they might be necessitated to be burdensome to the Country, by taking free
quarter, when no enemy durst any more appear.

By which deceitful means, those subtle enemies of all goodness proved just
like their Master Sathar, first by devising a temptation, next by using
indirect means to bring honest hearted people under the power of that
temptation, and last, in accusing the parties whom they had thus tempted and
snared, to those who have any power to punish them, even for not preventing and
overcoming that snare and temptation, though the devising, beginning,
proceeding, and ending, came all by those false accusers own means and
procurement.

But since the Army has not declared, what they intend now after these their
last viotories this year, as they did after their first victories the last
year; and although they did, in regard they were not so punctual in the
pursuance of their Engagement, nor in prosecution of the eleven Members, as
they pretended and was expected, they would hardly be trusted in words, without
some real performance in deeds, even besides their Martial affairs, wherein
(by divine providence) they are victorious, seeing most of all in any
authority, have been so deceitful during all these troubles, that scarce any
more such trust will be given in haste, to any condition of men in this age,
until they bring forth more real and ripe fruits, as well as leaves and
blossoms.

Thus the enslaved people of this Nation, are in a more desperate as well as
desolate condition every way, now after this eight years Parliament then they
were 20. years ago, when it was adjudged less then Treason in the highest
degree, to mention the very word [Parliament,] so that the cure is become worse
then the disease, and the last error worse then the first.

And moreover, by means and occasion of their corrupt, deceitful and underhand
dealing, in not going through with the work for which they were chosen, diverse
others also are (by their example and permission) become great oppressors and
underminers of this Commonwealth; wherefore it will be needful here to expres
some of the special particulars, wherein at present, each one of them bends
their chiefest endeavors for self interests, and no wise for advancing, (but
altogether for destroying) the public cause which tends to the peace,
safety, liberty, property, and tranquillity of the people.

And so by a mutual harmony as brethren in evil, though hating others in most
other things, yet like Pylate and Herod are familiar friends, by concurring
together for their several sinister ends (ambition, covetuousnesse, or
whatsoever else) to the utter ruin of this enflaved Nation, except the Lord of
his undeserved mercy provide some speedy remedy, either by this Army, or by
such other instruments or means, as he sees most expedient for his own glory
and the peoples safety; which special particulars do here follow in order.

1. The Kings deceitful demands and other expresses now in his most extreme
need, toward the prosecution of this personal treachery, that by his and his
confederates subtle mannaging of the businesses, and over-witting our wise
Parliaments Commissioners, chiefly to finish this treaty at London, (the place
of his chiefest joy) he may recover his wonted, and unlimited authority, and so
not only revenge, and grow as glorious and great as any Monarch or Monster in
Christendom, but prefer all his Cavaliers, and lay on such heavy burdens of
taxations and oppressions on all estates, both in Countries and Cities, as may
so impoverish, enslave, and disable them and their posterities for ever, from
any more rising or taking up Arms in their own defense, according to the
tyrannical custom and practice of other Kings over their subjects, or rather
slaves, such as Spain and France.

2. The Parliaments deceitful concurrance with his unjust desires therein, as
the case of this Nation is now in a rottering condition, apprehending it much
safer, easier, and speedier for saving their lives and estates, and avoiding
account of the peoples treasures, to make their own particular safe and
wel-grounded peace with him alone for all (who is both their prisoner, and
guilty also like themselves, (whereas a just Judge would condemn and punish
both) then with a multitude of honest people, who have far more accusations
against both him and them, then ever he or they will be able to answer.

3. The people (meaning the rude multitude) having no good nor solid principles
whereon to build or settle their resolutions, or to direct or avme their
actions, and therefore they being light as the dust in the drought of Summer,
are carried aloft, even with evrey small gale of wind, as well as by a great
tempest, so that they are sometimes for the King, and sometimes for the
Parliament, and sometimes for both, and sometimes for neither of them, yea or
scarce for themselves, and not so much as once minding, for less duly
considering what is needful or expedient either for their own particular or the
public good, but what they have either by a stinted or set form, or by
habitual custom or apish imitation of their Landlords, Masters, Friends, or
Neighbors; so that such time-serving and inconstant men's endeavors, do tend
more to the ruin, then to the good of a Natiou, if they be not under the
Government of more wise, discreet, and better experienced men then themselves.

4 The Priests sitting close at the helm, during all these troubles, as their
Masters the Bishops did in former times, who though they could not answer the
Parliaments 8. queries, had rather have other 7. years Wars throughout all
the 3. Kingdoms, then to want one years Tithes.

5 Landlords, exacting such intolerable rents both for ground, houses, and
shops, now beyond all former times, and thereby so grind the faces of the poor,
(who are heavy loaded with diversity of burdens otherwise in these sad and
troublesome times, both when Trades are decayed, Trading monopolized, and
dearth of victuals increased and multiplied) that many Thousands of families,
(especially where there are many small Children) are ready either to starve,
despair, or run away and leave all, even for want of such course bread, and
other necessaires, as Parl men, Committeemen, Priests, and Lawyers, will scarce
offer to their Horses and Dogs.

6. The Lawyers, whereof some being usually Members of Parl, do endeavor not
only to frame the Laws so to their own minds and ends, as they may receive
diverse interpretations, to the great vexation and grief of the people, but by
that means and occasion, such tedious and chargable, yea and sometimes endless
Law-suites are at their unlimited wills and insatiable pleasures depending,
that they abundantly enrich themselves, and impoverish the Commonwealth: so
that now it is thought, yea and approved a more safe, ready, and easy course
for any plantiffe, to acquit unto the defendant, the one half of whatsoever
debts he justly acclaimeth, provided he get the other half without trouble,
fraud, charge or delay, then at such excessive rates, delays and uncertainties
to prosecute any such action at Law against him.

7. The City, at least the turbulent domineering or conspiring party thereof,
diligently beholding, and vigilantly attending, whether at last the King, Parl.
or the Army shall be victoricus, though not in the Wars, yet by personal
treacheries, that they may partake with them, and so be still glorious.

8. And the Scots, (chiefly the Royalist Party) like most of the English,
choosing rather to destroy the Sectaries with the sword, then convince them by
the Word, and to be still slaves and beggars, then either to break their
ensnaring Covenant, which the best of themselves, and far less the Papists and
Athests whom they forced thereunto, were never able to keep, or to want one
Tyrant or Idol to sit on their old worn Throne, whiles Sun and Moon endure
in the Firmament. All these be Englands chief destroyers.

But contrary to the practices of all these eruell oppressors, the hope of all
true hearted Englishmen, whereof many Thousands (both Londoners and others whom
the Malignants call Leavellers) have lately presented a Petition to the Parl.
for imparciall justice and true freedom is, that God will either by this Army;
or some other instruments or means (according to his wonted mercies in all
ages) preserve his people and destroy his enemies.

Upon the Parliaments receipt of the aforesaid Petition (meaning only the
Commons house, not knowing more then ignorant and runnegate School boys, what
to say, or how to answer their lessons) perceiving by the scope of the
Petition, that the multitude of Petitioners were the very same persons in City
and Country, whose former Petitions the last year for Englands just Freedoms,
by their misorder of Parl. the common Hangman had burned, and that doubtless
those considerate and wel-principled people, (who knew both their own due and
the Parliaments duty) would importune them now as they did then, for a just and
real answer, and not rest upon their unjust sentence, or determination, but
still present Petition after Petition, to make them more and more ashamed to
the world, (if they were not hardened with sin and shame) they were forced out
of mere policy after much dispute and debate, to adjourn for four days.

Surely this did show as great wisdom in our wise, discreet, brave, and grave
Parliament, now as when they were forced not long age, both to take down their
second Excise house (which they built in Smithfield, and to quite their Excise
of flesh there, after the Butchers had both burned down the first house, and
would pay no more Excise to their Officers, notwithstanding all their high
Orders, Ordinances, threatenings, and penalties, but rather pay themselves when
they saw convenient time, as they and many Thousands of others also, were in as
good postuae, even to pay the Parl. men's pates, as they were to knock fat Oxen
on the heads.

And it is no wonder that the Parl. of England, were so fearful of the
Butchers of London, because they had good reason so to be, for is there any
sort, degree, or condition of men, yea Soldiers themselves (who are esteemed
most expert in killing) more desperate, bloody, aed dangerous then Butchers
are, their hands being for the most part in blood, whereas Soldiers will rest
many weeks and months without shedding of blood? and besides, Butchers do
surpass Soldiers in these other most remarkable things, for as they are most
perfect in knocking down, and beating out the brains, and letting of blood, so
they are most skillful in driving all away, cleaving a sunder, hanging up,
quartering, drawing, sleaing off the skin, and so in disposing of every thing
in its own due order, time and season, as it becomes wise, able and discreet
men.

So in all the oppressions and desolations that this rich Parl. have made,
since they left both selling of Lands in Ireland, and by cunning adulation and
affectation, even fair and flattering speeches, obtained both the multitudes
of Plate and Contributions, and began to force and squize out more and more by
foul actions, they never met with their match (in the way of ressistance)
until they began to vex the Butchers of London, because the Butchers scorned
to be enslaved, extorted, or have the gain of their toylsome labors taken from
them by the idle Parl. but as they were moved and occasioned, so they
powerfully and courageously stood in their own defense against the Parl. so
that neither the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, nor trained bands of London could
appease them, until they had both burned the Excise house, terrified the Parl.
and fought themselves free, like brave fellows from paying any more Excise.

Only the Army are to be excepted (in this and many other things) who at that
time had engaged, but had not declared, when the Butchers had thus opposed, and
began most excellently both to refuse disbanding contrary to all high Votes and
Ordinances, and to purge the Parl. until they saw some difficulties in the
way, which now they have past over, and doubtless (if they be either wise,
punctual or provident) will accomplish their work, both for their own safety
and the freedom of this Nation, according to their Engagements, Proposalls, and
Declarations.

Now the reason wherefore the Parl. did adjourn for 4. days at the receiving
of the aforesaid Petition, may be easily discerned, even to be the great and
remarkable trial they were put to at unawares, considering their rottering
condition, being so hated of the people for their unjust dealing; and therefore
they were necessitated to take 4. days, having 4 as special matters to debate
and resolve upon in that limited space, as they have had these 8. years (except
in 4. of their great and golden days, when they were in the greatest hate of
parting and disposing the peoples Treasures, Plate, Taxes, Sequestrations, and
Estates amongst themselves, their friends and relations; so that they wisely
proportioned the number of the days, according to the number of their most
urgent private affairs, what ever should become of the public.

The first day, how they might proceed wisely and warily with the Treaty
personally, though neither really nor actually at the Bar of Justice, but how
the King may acquit them and they him, and so deceive and enslave the poor
between them.

The second day, how to preserve their own lives, apprehending their own
guiltiness, and how far short their practices came of the scope of that
Petition, which tends to the just freedom of the people, for which mayn end
they were chosen, trusted, maintained, and defended against all whom they made
us think were their deadly enemies, but it seems, will be their friends when
they both please to enslave the people.

The third day, how to secure their ill gotten Estates, and whether to
adventure their late received moneys beyond the Seas with the former, or to put
it in hazard with their lives at home, they being in danger every day to be
questioned, called to account, and tried, even by those whom they esteem their
Servants, but may happily and speedily appear (as they are indeed) their Ma^^^^.

And the fourth day, whether to give a satisfactory or delatery answer to the
Petitioners, knowing by experience their ingenuity and importunity to be such,
that no congratulatory nor complementary, yea nor usual Parliamentary answer
would be acceptable to them; and therefore (doubtless) these grave Senators
handsomely considered, that it was better to give them no answer, but keep them
in hope of an answer, until they have finished their personal treachery with
the King, then certainly they would not spare to tell them another thing.

Object. It may be objected, according to the Parl. own declared tenent to the
same Petitioners the last year, in answer to one of the burned Petitions (which
are all contained in that little book entitled, Gold tried in the fire,) that
all the people are to rest satisfied in the Parliaments determination,
sentence, sense or answer, in what matters soever, or to this effect;

Answ. And its also answered, that these men told the Parl. withal convenient
speed by another Petition, that they would not rest satisfied in what the Parl.
pleases to determine, any further then their determination, sentence, sense,
or answer, shall be right and just, according to the true end, intent, and
meaning of their election, vocation and trust, chiefly the peoples freedom and
safety, and so always for their weal, but never for their woe; for otherwise
why should they be either chosen, called, trusted, or assembled, except it were
only to be dissembled, as their deeds witness against them?

Quest. But could not some Parl. men, like some of those who were accused by
the Army the last year, kick, threat, beat, and imprison some of those
Petitioners now as they did then, even for presenting the like Petition, yea
and both vote and order the Hangman to burn their Petition too?

Answ. No indeed, for at that time the Army had not yet engaged nor declared
unanimously, to stand or fall together, for the just freedom of this Nation,
but at that time, were taking these and the like unjust practices of Parl. into
consideration, and preparing themselves to take the best and speediest course,
both for their own and all their friends preservation, not being fully
persuaded before that the whole house should so suddenly vote them Rebels and
Traitors, without either consideration or co^memoration of all their former
victories, faithful and remarkable services, for not presently disbanding, but
that their only enemies had bin the King and his party, whom they had so lately
and powerfully subdued, conquered and imprisoned.

So that the Parliament were but then in hopes, that the Army would disband, so
soon as they were commanded, but now having undoubted proof and experience of
the contrary, they dare not presume to meddle any more with any, who are, or
seem to be of the Armies principles, lest they own both them and their cause,
as well now as they did then, yea and revenge their quarrel too, not only by
more strict accusing those 11 Members, but the most part of the house, if not
the whole house, and so put them all to the flight, for they are too
lap-winged, they having sitten 7 years too long, to advance themselves and
impoverish the Nation, that they may be more capable to be slaves to them, as
both the same Parliament Men and the rest of the people have been to the King.

For had these Representatives been as faithful, real and cordial to their
representers, as they seemed and pretended to be at the first, when they
relieved prisoners, abolished Bishops and diverse unjust Courts and Monopolies,
brought home the Banished, and made many element Speeches to gain the peoples
affections, that they might obtain their rich oblations, persons and estates to
defend them in these wars, they might have abolished more wicked laws, and
established more good laws, yea and prevented, or at least shortened these
bloody and distructive wars, and unspeakable both losses and expenses, to the
Common wealth, punished evil doers, and rewarded them that do well, more in
one year then they have done in all these grievous 8 years.

And therefore, seeing there is no grapes to be expected on thorns, nor figgs
on thistles, it is high time that the Army who (through God have done so
valiantly, and is the present and apparent safeguard of all the honest party in
this distressed Nation) would make a more wise, happy and speedy use of this
worthy opportunity, which God is pleased once more again to grant them, then
they did the last year; for he has made them his happy instruments of as great
victories as ever he, has made any others before them since the days of
Gidion, who only by 300, destroyed many thousands of the Midianites, or of
Ioshuah, who by the sound of Rams horns threw down the walls of Isrech, and
before whom, both the inhabitants of Canaan and the Kings of the Nations
^^^dering about, whom God has ordained to destruction, were but as stubble
before the fire, or dust before the wind.

Therefore, in consideration of the present case of this distressed Nation, the
Armies best, easiest, and speediest course (saving better advise) is, to use
that power which God (in much mercy) has put and reserved into their hands.

1. After they have declared their just reasons, desires, and resolutions to
the whole Nation, concerning their duties in all public affairs as the case
now stands, even to dissolve this present Parl. lest to be free from present
trial themselves, of all their unjust and double dealings, they involve both
you and us all, in a greater gulf of misery and slavery, then ever you or any
other Army after you can either comfort us in, or deliver us from, whiles the
world stands: can it be justly denied but that they (at present) having the
Sword, may upon far better grounds of the peoples safety (being the chief of
all Laws) dissolve this deceitful Parl. who have been 8 years surfetted;
glutted, and fatned with all the best things that this Nation could afford,
either without giving any account of the peoples treasures, or acting any thing
toward their freedoms,) then he or his Father had, to break up many good
Parliaments, merely for their own prerogatives, ambitious, and covetous ends,
to the ruin, misery, and slavery of the people.

2. According to the Armies Proposalls, there may be not only a set time
appointed for the beginning and ending of Parliaments every year of their own
accord, after the peoples election, with certain limitations therein for
avoiding of Malignants (as in Parl. there be too many at this time) but
forthwith, to call a just Parl. to a strict account of all the oceans of the
peoples blood, and multitudes of their treasures that have been spilt and spent
in all these long cruel and destructive VVarres, as both many thousands of
faithful witnesses, and many ten thousands of pitiful complaints will be
produced from all places.

That justice now at last, without respect either of persons or states, being
administered the cruel sting of Norman bondage removed, and an exact account of
all the blood, treasures, estates, revenues, assesments, oblations,
alienations, contributions, sequest rations, compositions, and taxations made,
then the publict debts may be paid, all kind of Taxes discharged, the Army and
all publict charges by subsidues maintained, the peoples freedoms restored,
wicked Laws abolished, and good laws established.

Otherwise, as the Parl. accused the King of many odious and heinous crimes,
and did not prosecute their charge, and though the Army accused the 11 members
of diverse treacherous acts, and did not prosecute their charge; and though
Lieut. Genesis Cromwell accused Manchester for many treacherous acts, and did not
prosecute his charge, and though Mr. Lenthall the Speaker of the House, and his
brother Sir John were accused, for heinous crimes against the Commonwealth,
and their charge not prosecuted, but as it seems all did forbear one another,
for ends best known to God and their own Consciences, yet it is neither feared
nor doubted, but God knows very well how to reach both the height and
deepnesse of men's policies, treacheries, and confederacies, and how to catch
them in the midst of their sins, when they are ripe for his judgments, but we
hope better things of the Army, though little of the chief Officers.

FINIS.

