A Full and True RELATION OF THE Examination and Confession OF W. Barwick and
E. Mangall, OF TWO HORRID MURDERS,
One Committed by William Barwick upon his Wife being with Child, near Cawood
in Yorkshire, upon the 14th. of April last: As likewise a full Account how it
came to be discovered by an Apparition of the Person MURDERED.

The Second was committed by Edward Mangall, upon Elizabeth Johnson alias
Ringrose, and her Bastard Child, on the 4th. of September last, who said he was
tempted thereto by the Devil.

ALSO Their Trials and Convictions before the Honorable Sir John Powel, Knight,
one of Their Majesty's Justices, at the Assizes holden at York, on the 16th. of
September, 1690.

October the 7. Published according to Order, 1690.

AS MVRDER is one of the Greatest Crimes that Man can be guilty of, so is it no
less Strangely and Providentially discovered, when privately committed. The
foul Criminal believes himself secure, because there was no Witness of the
Fact. Not considering that the Alseeing Eye of Heaven beholds his concealed
Iniquity, and by some means or other bringing it to Light, never permits it to
go Unpunished. And indeed so certainly does the Revenge of God pursue the
Abominated MVRDERER that when Witnesses are wanting of the Fact, the very Ghost
of the Murdered-Parties cannot rest quiet in their Graves, till they have made
the Detection themselves. Of this we are now to give the Reader, Two Remarkable
Examples that lately happened in Yorkshire; And no less Signal for the Truth
of both Tragedies, as being confirmed by Trial of the Offenders, at the last
Assizes held for that County.

The First of these Murders was committed by William Barwick, upon the Body of
Mary Barwick, his Wife, at the same time big with Child. What were the Motives
that induced the Man to do this Horrid Fact, does not appear by the Examination
of the Evidence, or the Confession of the Party: Only it appeared upon his
Trial that he had got her with Child, before he Married her: And it is very
probable that being then constrained to Marry her, he grew weary of her; which
was the the Reason he was so willing to be rid of her, though he ventured Body
and Soul to accomplish his Design.

The Murder was committed upon Palm-Monday, being the Fourteenth of April last,
about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, at what time the said Barwick having
drilled his Wife along till he came to a certain Close, within sight of
Cawood-Castle, where he found the Convenience of a Pond, he threw her by force
into the Water, and when she was Drowned, and drawn forth again by himself upon
the Bank of the Pond, had the Cruelty to behold the Motion of the Infant, yet
warm in her Womb. This done, he concealed the Body, as it may readily be
supposed among the Bushes, that usually encompass a Pond, and the next night,
when it grew duskish, fetching a Hay-spade from a Rick that stood in the Close,
he made a Hole by the side of the Pond, and there slightly Buried the Woman in
her Clothes.

Having thus dispatched two at once, and thinking himself secure, because
(unseen) he went the same day to his Brother-in-Law, one Thomas Lofthouse of
Rufforth, within Three Miles of York, who had Married his drowned Wifes Sister,
and told him he had carried his Wife to one Richard Harrison's House in Selby,
who was his Uncle, and would take care of her. But Heaven would not be so
deluded, but raised up the Ghost of the Murdered Woman to make the Discovery.
And therefore it was that upon the Easter-Tuesday following, about Two of the
Clock in the Afternoon, the forementioned Lofthouse, having occasion to Water
a Quickset Hedge, not far from his House, as he was going for the Second
Pail-full, an Apparition went before him in the Shape of a Woman, and soon
after sat down upon a Rising Green Grass-Plat, right over against the Pond: He
walked by her as he went to the Pond; and as he returned with his Pail from the
Pond, looking side-ways to see whether she continued in the same place, he
found she did; and that she seemed to Dandle something in her Lap, that looked
like a White-Bag (as he thought) which he did not observe before. So soon as he
had emptied his Pail, he went into his Yard, and stood still to try whether he
could see her again; but she was vanished.

In his Information, he says, That the Woman seemed to be habited in a Brown
Colored Petticoat, Wastecoat, and a White Hood; such a one as his Wifes Sister
usually wore; and that her Countenance looked extreme Pale and Wan, with her
Teeth in sight, but no Gums appearing; and that her Physiognomy was like to
that of his Wifes Sister, who was Wife to William Barwick.

But notwithstanding the Gastliness of this Apparition, it seems it made so
little Impression in Lofthouse's Mind, that he thought no more of it, neither
did he speak to any Body concerning it, till the same Night as he was at his
Family Duty of Prayer, that that Apparition returned again to his Thoughts, and
discomposed his Devotion; So that after he had made an end of his Prayers, he
told the whole Story of what he had seen to his Wife: Who laying Circumstances
together, immediately inferred, that her Sister was either Drowned, or
otherwise Murdered, and desired her Husband to look after her the next day,
which was the Wednesday in Easter-Week. Upon this, Lofthouse recollecting what
Barwick had told him of his carrying his Wife to his Uncle at Selby, repairs to
Harrison beforementioned, but found all that Barwick had said to be false; for
that Harrison had neither heard of Barwick nor his Wife, neither did he know
any thing of them. Which notable Circumstance, together with that other of the
Apparition increased his Suspicions to that degree, that now concluding his
Wifes Sister was Murdered, he went to the Lord Mayor of York; and having
obtained his Warrant, got Barwick apprehended: who was no sooner brought before
the Lord Mayor, but his own Conscience then accusing him, he acknowledged the
whole Matter, as it has been already related, as it appears by his Examination
and Confession herewith Printed: To which are also annexed the Informations of
Lofthouse, in like manner taken before the Lord Mayor of York, for a further
Testimony and Confirmation of what is here set down.

On Wednesday the Sixteenth of September 1690, The Criminal William Barwick was
brought to his Trial before the Honorable Sir John Powel, Knight, one of the
Judges of the Northern Circuit, at the Assizes holden at York, where the
Prisoner pleaded not guilty to his Indictment: But upon the Evidence of Thomas
Lofthouse, and his Wife, and a Third Person, That the Woman was found Buried in
her Clothes in the Close by the Pond-side, agreeable to the Prisoner's
Confession, and that she had several Bruises on her Head, occasioned by the
Blows the Murderer had given her to keep her under Water: and upon Reading the
Prisoner's Confession before the Lord Mayor of York, attested by the Clerk, who
wrote the Confession, and who swore the Prisoner's owning and signing it for
Truth, he was found Guilty, and Sentenced to death, and afrerwards ordered to
be hanged in Chains.

All the Defense which the Prisoner made, was only this, That he was threatened
into the Confession that he had made, and was in such a Consternation, that he
did not know what he said or did. But then it was sworn by Two Witnesses, that
there was no such thing as any Threatening made use of; but that he made a Free
and Voluntary Confession, only with this Addition at first; That he told the
Lord Mayor, he had sold his Wife for Five Shillings: But not being able to name
either the Person or the Place where she might be produced, that was looked
upon as too frivolous to outweigh Circumstances, that were Proofs too apparent.

The Information of Thomas Lofthouse, of Rufforth, taken upon Oath the
Twentyfourth Day of April 1690,
WHO says and deposes, That one William Barwick, who lately Married this
Informant's Wifes Sister came to this Informant's House, about the Fourteenth
instant, and told this Informant, he had carried his Wife to one Richard
Harrison' s House in Selby, who was Uncle to him, and would take care of her;
and this Informant hearing nothing of the said Barwick' s Wife, his said
Sister-in-Law, immagined he had done her some mischief, did Yesterday go to the
said Harrison' s House in Selby, where he said he had carried her to; And the
said Harrison told this Informant, he knew nothing of the said Barwick, or his
Wife, and this Informant does verily believe the said Barwick to have Murdered
her;

Thomas Lofthouse.
Jurat die and Anno super dicto coram me,

S. Dawson, Mayor.



The Examination of the said William Barwick, taken the Day and Year abovesaid,
WHO says and Confesses, That he this Examinant, on Monday was Seventh
Night. about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, this Examinant was walking in a
Close, betwixt Cawood and Wistow; and he farther says, that he threw his said
Wife into the Pond, where she was drowned, and the day following toward the
Evening, got a Hay-spade at a Hay-stake in the said Close, and made a Grave
beside the said Pond, and Buried her;

William Barwick.
Exam. capt. die and Anno super dict. coram me,

S. Dawson, Mayor.



The Examination of William Barwick, taken the Twenty fifth day of April 1690,
WHO says and confesses, That he carried his Wife over a certain
Wain-Bridge, called Bishopdike-bridge, betwixt Cawood and Sherburn; and within
a Lane about One Hundred Yards from the said Bridge, and on the Left Hand of
the said Bridge, he and his Wife went over a Style, on the Left Hand of a
certain Gate, entering into a certain Close, on the Left Hand of the said Lane;
and in a Pond in the said Close, adjoining to a Quickwood-hedge, did Drown his
Wife, and upon the Bank of the said Pond, did Bury her: And further, that he
was within sight of Cawood Castle, on the Left Hand; and that there was but one
Hedge betwixt the said Close, where he Drowned his said Wife, and the
Bishopslates belonging to the said Castle;

William Barwick.
Exam. capt. die and Anno super dict. coram me,

S. Dawson, Mayor.



On Tuesday September the Seventeenth 1690, at York Assizes.
THomas Lofthouse of Rufforth, within Three Miles of York City, says that on
Easter Tuesday last, about Half an Hour after Twelve of the Clock, in the day
time, he was Watering Quickwood, and as he was going for the second Pail, there
appeared walking before him, an Appariton in the Shape of a Woman, soon after
she sat down over against the Pond, on a Green-Hill, he walked by her as he
went to the Pond, and as he came with the Pail of Water from the Pond, looking
side-ways to see if she sat in the same Place, which he saw she did; and had on
her Lap something like a White Bag, a dandling of it (as he thought) which he
did not observe before: After he had emptied his Pail of Water, he stood in his
Yard, to see if he could see her again; but could not: He says her Apparel was
Brown Clothes, Wastecoat and Petticoat, a White hood, such as his Wifes Sister
usually wore, and her Face looked extreme Pale, her Teeth in sight, no Gums
appearing, her Visage being like his Wifes Sister, and Wife to William Barwick.

Signed Thomas Lofthouse.

THE Second was a Murder committed by one Edward Mangall, upon the Body of
Elizabeth Johnson alias Ringrose, the Fourth of September last past, at a Place
called King's Causey, near Adling-fleet, in the County of York. He had got her
with Child, at lest as she pretended; and was brought to Bed of a Boy, which
she called William, and laid him to Mangall's Charge, and required him to Marry
her: which he refused at first to do; but afterward pretending to make her his
Wife, bid her go before him down Kings Causey, toward the Church, and he would
follow her, as he did; but knocked out her Brains in a Close by the Way, and at
the same time, as was shrewdly suspected, Killed the Child.

This Mangall being Examined by Mr. William Mauleverer the Coroner confessed
that he had Murdered the Woman; but denied that he meddl'd with the Boy. And
being asked why he Murdered the Woman, he made answer that the Devil put him
upon it; appearing to him in a Flash of Lightning, and directing him where to
find the Club, wherewith he committed the Murder. So ready is the Devil with
his Temptations, when he find a Tempter easy to work upon.

He was Convicted and found Guilty upon the Evidence of Ann Hind, and his own
Confession to the Coroner, as may be seen by the Information annexed; and was
thereupon Sentenced to death, and ordered to be Hanged in Chains, as Barwick
was before him, he making no Defense for himself for so Foul and Horrid a
Murder, but that he was tempted thereto by the Devil.

Informations taken upon Oath, September the 10th 1690.
The Information of Ann Hind, Wife of James Hind, of Adling-fleet, in the
County of York, Husbandman, upon her Oath says;
THat on Monday, the first of September, one Elizabeth Johnson, alias Ringrose,
came to her House in the Evening, with a Child she called William; and the said
Elizabeth the next Day told this Deponent, That the said Elizabeth was going to
Gawthrope, in the County of Lincoln, to seek for one Edward Mangall, who had
got her with that Child, to see if he would Marry her: Upon which this Deponent
went with the said Elizabeth, to persuade him to Marry her; but he denied
having any dealings with her. But this Deponent does further Depose, That on
the fourth of September, the said Edward came to this Deponents House, and
asked for the said Elizabeth; if she were there she might serve a Warrant on
him, if she had one, for he was going to Rawclyff, to consult his Friends about
it; and after some private Discourse had betwixt the said Edward and the said
Elizabeth, the said Elizabeth told this Deponent, that he said, The said
Elizabeth might go down King's-Cawsey, and he would follow her, and Marry her:
And this Deponent did see the said Elizabeth go down King's-Cawsey; and a
little after this Deponent saw the said Edward also go down the King's-Cawsey;
and after that, this Deponent did not see the said Elizabeth, nor the said
Child till she saw them lie dead.

Ann Hind.
Un. Coron. Commit. praedict.

Capt. 10. die Septembris 1690, By me W. Mauleverer.



THE Examination of Edward Mangall, upon the Murder of Elizabeth Johnson alias
Ringrose, taken before me William Mauleverer Gent. one of the Coroners of Our
Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary, etc.

THE said Edward Mangall did confess, that he did Murder the said Elizabeth
Johnson alias Ringrose, upon the Fourth Day of September instant, in a Close
nigh to King's Causey, he being asked the Reason, said the Devil put him upon
it, appearing to him in a Flash of Lightning; but denied that he meddled with
William Johnson alias Ringrose the Child.

Taken the 10th of September 1690. By me W. Mauleverer, Coroner.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Isaac Cleave at the Star, next to Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane.


