PROPOSALLS From his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX: AND The Council of his
Army, by way of Address to the Parliament, for removing the causes of the
Cries and Groans of the People; For pay for the Soldiers, Relief for Ireland,
Disbanding the supernumery of Forces in England. And removing of the Quarters
further from London, into several parts.

Also for inabling the Kingdom to find Moneys, and for making Commodities to
be cheaper, and more plentiful The High Sheriffs and not Committees to
execute the power.

To prevent the Designs of those that study Anarchy; to remove distractions,
and grindings of the faces of the poor, and the wasting of the Counties, And
to settle a true peace, and security through the whole KINGDOM.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
his Army, Subscribed JOHN BUSHWORTH,Secretary.

October 17. 1647.
THese Proposals from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,and his Council, are
appointed to be Printed, according to the Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament.

Imprimatur,

G. Mtt.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1647.

PROPOSALS From His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX AND The Council of his Army,
by way of Address to the Parliament, for removing The Causes of the cries and
groans of the PEOPLE.
Mr. Speaker,
THe great sense we have of the cries and groans of the people, under Free
quarter, and those unutterable calamities, that must inevitably befall this
poor Kingdom, presses us sore, And invites us to make this earnest address
unto you; that you would please to take it into your present consideration to
make out a provision for a constant pay of those forces you intend to keep on
foot for the security of this Kingdom, and the reducement of distressed
Ireland.

And because His Excellency and this Army are obliged by their engagement to
take care of all those Forces, which have mutually engaged with you, in these
late services.

We do offer unto you our opinion; whether it may not much conduce to your
affairs, speedily to prepare moneys for the disbanding of such as you intend
not to be of the number of that standing body of Horse and Foot, for the ends
aforesaid: That so your Forces being contracted, the Kingdom may be better
encouraged and more enabled to make good their pay, and the Army be disposed to
the respective Garrisons, and such Quarters that the price of commodities may
not be inhauced in any part of the Kingdom, (much less so near this populous
City) which is occasioned by this contracted posture.

Truly Sir we might press you with that months pay which has been so often
promised, and we did believe was before this deposited in your Treasury, And
that great neglect (which must rest some where) that no part of it is drawn
in: And that if the City be the fayler, the sad president it gives to the whole
Kingdom.

We might mention unto you the necessity of the Soldiery: And the great
advantages some that study Anarchy, and destractions take upon it, to make
their impressions upon this Army.

But nothing is so difficult and grievous to us, as to consider how the poor
Soldier (for his mere subsistence) is compelled to grind the faces of the
poor, to take a livelihood from them, who are fitter to receive alms, to undo
families, wast counties, threaten the ruin of the whole, and al propriety, and
to be an abhorring to himself (which some ingenuous of them acknowledge) and
this for want of that constant supply and pay, whereby they might chearefully
and with content to the people discharge their quarters, and so ease both the
Country and their own minds of an intolerable burden,

This being that which the neighbor States both of the Netherlands and others
make their prime scope, and whereby they enjoy so much peace, and quiet, under
a warlike posture, this being the only and certain medium to stop the cries,
and groans of so many thousands ready to perish, and to heal the wounds of
this desolate Nation, that will otherwise bleed to death, and inevitable ruin.

Sir, We do humbly conceive, that the present and speedy dispatch of what we
here offer, is the only Basis, and foundation for the rest of your Affairs, how
weighty soever they seem to be. And without which you cannot answer to this
Kingdoms, peace, or safety.

We shall only add, that for the bringing in your assessements, it may be
most contenting, and effectual too; To pass it by the way of the
High-Sheriffe, etc. As it used to be in the Case of Subsidies, the Name and
power of Committes being so unpleasant to the people, and the High Sheriff
being so responsall, both for his Estate, and power in the County.

We would not have put thus much trouble upon you, but that it is to ease you
and the Kingdom of a greater, and to discharge our selves before God and men,
as those that have moved every stone by our several addresses to accomplish
that without which the Kingdoms peace and security cannot be established.

We do further offer unto you, the necessity of a present Auditing, the
Arreares of this Army, and that the Committee for the Army, may be forthwith
dispatched, with full instructions to that purpose, according to your late
Vote, which being put into a way, would give great satisfaction to the
Soldiers.

And we shall again re-minde you of our humble desire, that the Arreares, and
Public Faith of the Army, and Soldiery of the Kingdom may be satisfied out
of the Deanes and Chapters Lands, etc. or such other visible way as shall be
contenting to the Soldiery; And what shall be resolved upon in this behalf
to be insisted upon with the rest of the Propositions.

Putney the 7. of October, 1647. By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of his Army, Signed, JOHN RVSHWORTH Secretary.

FINIS.

