A Full ACCOUNT Of a Bold and Barbarous Murder Committed on the Body of
William Culliford Esquire; BY George Cruff,
IN Water-Lane near the Custom-House London, on Friday the 8th. day of August,
1684. in the open street between the hours of 11 and 12 of the same day.

As also The Relation of a Gentleman of Qualities Groom, who was Shot by a
Life-Guardman upon Monday the 4th. of this Instant in the Town of Kensington.

TOGETHER With the further Account of a Lamentable Fire that happened in a Town
called Church-Hill, within two Miles of Chipping-Norton, in Oxfordsheire, on
Wednesday the 30th. of July, last.

THe depravity of Man's Nature is such, that if God once Withdraws the
assistance of his Grace and Spirit from him; No Action, tho the same in it self
be never so Horrid and Unnatural, but he is too prone to undertake, and go
through with. An Instance of this kind, as rare perhaps, as any, the present or
past Ages could afford; the Reader shall be satisfied with in the ensuing Page.

On Friday the 8th. Day of August, 1684. William Cullifiord Esquire; a Gentleman of
known Loyalty and Integrity to his Prince and Country, having had some Business
at the Custom. House in London, as he came thence, and was going up the Hill in
Water-lane, not far from the Post and Chain; he was followed by one George
Cruffe (formerly in some Office belonging to the Custom-House, and since turned
out for Misdemeanors) till he came just against the Plummers Shop in the same
Lane; where unperceived, the said Cruff came up to him, and drawing out a
Pistol, suddenly Discharged upon him, and shot a brace of Bullets into his
Body. The strangeness of the Attempt, the same being at Noonday, and in so
Public a Place, was the Astonishment of all such who beheld it; who came in
Immediately to the Apprehension of the Criminal, but he seemed not at all
Concerned thereat: and never so much as endeavored his Escape: declaring that
if the Action were a second time to have been Committed, he would willingly and
readily have undertaken the same. The Audacious Villain being thereupon taken
into Custody: Squire Culliford was carried into the Dolphin-Tavern, at the end
of Mark-Lane; where likewise they brought the Malefactor.

Soon after which notice being givein hereof to the Worshipful Sir John
Buckworth, Knight and Alderman of the City of London, who was at the same time
sitting as Commissioner, in the Custom House he came to the Dolphin, and being
one of the Justices of the Peace for London, he took the fellow nto Examination
inquiring into the reason of so Barbarous an Attempt, which the fellow would
not in the least extenuate, but boldly declared that he did and had long since
intended the Fact, which he was not at all sorry for, pretending that the
Squire had wronged or otherwise injured him in the Displacing him from his
former Employment and Livelihood, in the World: carrying it all the while so
unconcerned, that all Persons stood amazed thereat: Nay such a Monstrous height
of Impudence possessed the execrable and abominable wretch, that he declared if
any other person had done him the like injury, and his liberty were restored
him he would in like manner take revenge upon him for so doing, adding, that
nothing troubled him but that he had not seen the Gentleman Dead before his
Confinement in Newgate, whether he was forthwith Committed and where he now
remains, to consider of the Villainy he stands Guilty of; which certainly is one
of the most Barefaced and audacious Crimes we have read or heard of: Not only
in that the same was done at Midday but also in the Public street without
either hope or intention of Escape or Pardon, so that we may justly reckon this
a second Felton, who out of a like Spirit of forethought Malice and revenge
Murdered the late Duke of Buckingham, and who in Point of Honor owned and
bragged of his Villainy to the very place of Execution: whether in due time the
justice of Nation, will undoubtedly bring all such Criminalls.

But tho the Example of such Men's Faults are every Day set as a Warning to
others, yet is the Temptations of the Devil so prevalent on too many; that
seldom a Week but affords us more than one Instance of this kind, as this has
done. For that one Monday last at Kensington in the County of Middlesex, a
Person of Quallity's Groom being Rideing out of Town, he wrs met by a
Lifeguard-Man, in the middle of the Town, near the Red-Lyon-Inn, and some
Difference happening between them about the Way, they Quarreled, and several
Blows were exchanged between them, till at last the Groom struck him over the
Face with his Whip so severe a Blow that the Blood gush't out, which put the
Lifeguard-Man into so great a Passion that immediately drawing out one of his
Pistols, he clapped the same to the Temples, of the Groom: and tho as some
believe the same was only Charged with Powder, yet the same had such effect
upon him that, both his Eyes were Shot out, and made so great a Wound in his
Head that when the Chyrurgeon came to Probe it, he could turn his Fingure
therein; so that all People looked on the same as Mortal. The Groom that was
thus Wounded was carried into the Red-Lyon-Inn aforesaid: But the Lifeguard-man
seeing him fall, being well Mounted, made away with all the speed he could; and
tho several People pursued him, Escaped as far as Chertsea, on the otherside of
the Water, in the County of Surrey; where it was found that he had left his
Horse, and had beta^e^ himself either to some private reception in the Town, or
gone further a field, out of the reach of the Hue and Cry: so that he is not
taken, nor has as yet Rendered himself up to Justice. But when Blood Cries for
Vengeance, as in this case, rare it is but Providence in due time regards the
voice thereof, and brings a due and Condign Punishment on his Head, that
unlawfully and Murderously sheds the same,

Having given you these 2 Relations, I thought fit to subjoyn the further
account of a certain Fire, that happened at a little Town called Church-hill,
near Chipping-Norton in Oxford-sheire; which fell out by the Covetuosness of an
Old Woman, who to save the expense of Chimney-Money: and being by Trade a
Baker: had made a Funnel from her Oven into another Chimney: which tho she had
notice of, and twice before had like io have Burnt the House; yet did she not
alter the same; till on Wednesday the 30th. of July last, about four or five of
the Clock in the Afternoon a Fire Broke out, which continued so fierce, that in
the space of four Hours the same Consumed Twenty Habitations, besides Barns and
out Houses in the stopping whereof, four People were Killed two by falling of
the Ruins, and two Burnt.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball, over against Baynard's
Castle, in Thames Street, 1684.


