A Full ACCOUNT OF The Barbarous and Unhumane Usages OF The French Protestants
IN FRANCE:
HAgue, December. 16. Our last Letters from Paris say, That some days ago, one of
the largest Stage Coaches in that City, attended by eight Archers, went to the
Bastile, to bring thence 8 or 10 Persons who were detained there on the Account
of the Protestant Religion, in order to transport them to the Frontiers, but
whether they are to be sent out of the Kingdom, or not, is not said. The new
Converts would be well satisfied, if they might have the same Treatment;
especially, since the Judgment given against some of their Brethren, by the
Intendant of Poitou, according to which some of them have been executed, and
others sent to the Galleys; and there are, moreover, some Regiments of Dragoons
sent into that Country, to be Quartered upon the new Converts. Several Letters
have been writ upon that Subject by the new Converts, to show that they are
more worthy of Compassion, than of the Severity of the Judges, seeing they are
accused of no other Crime but that of their Religion, which was formerly
allowed in the Kingdom, though now forbidden; and, as to which, it is not in
their own Power to change their opinion, or neglect their Duty. Those Letters
contain in substance: That their Condition is very deplorable, by reason of
those Fears and Doubts, with which they are constantly perplexed, amidst a
Clergy who never suffer them to be at rest: They are not satisfied with having
obliged them to take upon themselves the Title ^^ Roman Catholics contrary to
their will, but they will have them to perform all that is incombent upon such,
to assist at a Service and partake of a Communion, which they are persuaded in
their Consciences is contrary to Divine Institution, which they ought rather to
obey than that of Men. That is to say they would have them either to be
accounted Dissemblers or Sacrilegious. They say they must go to be instructed;
which they would do with all their Hearts, provided they were allowed freedom
to debate when they are not convinced; but Instead of that as soon as they open
their Mouth they are Branded as Opiniators. It Is their submission and their
Conviction, that they desire; tho they cannot submit with a relucting
Conscience. If they assemble to pray to God, and to comfort one another, they
are accounted Criminals; and if they offer to leave the Kingdom, that they may
enjoy that liberty, they are reputed equally culpable. These are the Precipices
on all sides, from which they cannot deliver themselves, but by renouncing
either their Consciences, or their Lives. In such an extreme Perplexity, those
poor People are solicitously Inquisitive, to know whether it be the King's
pleasure, that they should reap such bitter Fruits from a Peace, which they
have so much defired. They cannot be convinced, that Royal Goodness can allow
such Violences; and they are persuaded that if the is Humble Complaints could
but meet with a free access to His Majesty's Throne, he would be moved with
Compassion toward them, and receive their Defenses; which are the same with
those of the Primitive Christians, in that excellent Apology of Tertullian.
Their meetings were accounted factious, as if when they met to worship God,
they had violated the Emperors Command: And they defended themselves by this
Grand Principle: That Religion could not be forced; and that Divine service was
a pure Act of the Will. We assemble, say they, to Pray to God, to read the Holy
Scriptures, which neurish our Faith, raise our Hopes, and strengthen our
Confidence in God. Malefactors tremble when they are surprised, and deny all
when they are accused; but Christians are not ashamed when it is discovered
what they are; and they repent of nothing else, but that they did not sooner,
obey the Commandments of Jesus Christ. They would force a Christian to deny
what he is, to the End that he may be absolved; which is, in truth, to betray
the Holiness of (...) ^aws, etc. Several Cavaliers have been disgraced of late
for interceeding with the King for the Protestants: And some say, That His
Majesty being displeased at the Parliament of Paris, for having revoked the
Sentences of Death given against several of the new, Converts in the Country,
had thereupon Ordered that they should Appeal no more to that Court.


