A FULL RELATION Of the late Proceedings, Victory, and good Success (Through
Gods Providence) Obtained by the PARLIAMENTS Forces Under Sir William Waller,
At the taking of the Town and Castle of Arundell, In Sussex, December. 20. and
Jan. 6.

Where were taken above a thousand Prisoners, two thousand Arms, near two
hundred Horse, about a hundred Commanders and Officers, with great store of
Treasure.

As it was delivered by a Messenger from Sir William Waller, To the Right
Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker to the House of Commons.

And by him appointed to be forthwith printed and published.

Printed by JOHN FIELD, Jan. 8. 1644.

ON Sunday the 17. of December, Sir William Waller drew forth his Forces and
marched to Hazelmoore: On Monday he came to Midhurst: On Tuesday night he came
into Arundell Park; and on Wednesday morning about eight of the clock valiantly
assaulted the Town of Arundell on the North-west, and South-west parts thereof;
and about ten of the clock the same day, forced the Enemy to fly from their
works, and retreat into Arundell Castle: In which service, his new soldiers
taken at Alton, did good execution; the same night a Regiment of Horse came
from his Excellency the Earl of Essex to the aid of Sir William Waller: Sir
William possessing himself of the Town, where Provision being scarce; on
Thursday diverse People sent in six load of Victuals freely, which good example
of theirs for the public good, did induce many others to do the like.

The same day, Colonel Morley came thither with a Regiment of Kentish Forces;
and Major Bodley did a notable Expolit; he perceaving diverse in the Castle
look forth in a Balcone, took unto himself and 12. others, their muskets,
unto a private place of advantage, from whence they altogether discharged into
the said Belcone, and slew and wounded diverse of the Enemy; The same night 2.
Sacres were planted in the Steeple, with diverse musketeers, who on Friday
morning betimes, played hotly on the enemy, which appeared on the top of the
Castle; the same day diverse were taken in their intended escape from the
castle; Also, Sir Miles Livesey brought a Regiment of Horse, and Sir William
Springate a Regiment of Foot from Kent, to the aid of Sir William: also the
same day, the course of a Pond was turned, and more fully perfected on
Saturday, the draining whereof emptied the Wels of water within the castle, so
that now the Enemy began to be distressed with thirst; the same day diverse of
them fled from the castle, and were taken prisoners; whereupon a stronger Guard
was kept about the said castle.

On Sunday diverse more fled from the castle, and many horses were turned forth,
of which our Soldiers made a good purchase, only one of them was shot by the
Enemy, whose bloody cruelty and inhumane malice did mightily appear against us,
in that they took him, and hewed him all to pieces; which doubtless they would
have done to every one of us, had we been likewise in their power. The same day
Colonel Hads, and Colonel Dixie, approached toward us with two Regiments out
of Kent, for the further aid of Sir Willam Waller; and also diverse Regiments
out of Suffex: On Monday the 25. of December the enemy make show of a salley,
and about 30. of them appeared unto us from the Castle yard, whereupon the
Drums did beat, and the Trumpets sound, and all our men were presently gathered
together, in a fit posture to charge the Enemy; who presently took themselves
to their heels, as the best remedy to prevent danger, and so manfully retreated.

On Tuesday we planted Ordnance in a new place against the Castle, which made
the Enemy that they durst not peep over the walls to shoot at us as they had
wont to do. On Wednesday, diverse of the Enemies having forgot the former
danger, came forth into the Belcone again, whereupon we placed diverse
Musketeers in the ruins of an old Chapel, from whence we did good execution
upon them; the same day Sir Ralph Hopton came to Petersfield, and quartered his
Forces thereabouts, and some of the Enemies fled out of the Castle, and escaped
by the River, in a boat made of a raw Ox hide. On Thursday more of the Enemies
were taken escaping out of the Castle, and that afternoon, the Enemy hungout a
white flag, pretending a parley, and calling to some of our men, delivered them
Letters directed to our General, and Colonel Marlow, in which they desired,
Sack, Tobacco, Cards and Dice, to be sent unto them to make merry this idle
time, promising to return us for them, beef and mutton; but the truth is, they
wanted bread and water, and that night did put diverse live Oxen over the walls
of the Castle, for want of fodder; the same day, a party of his Excellencies
horse incountred with a party of Sir Ralph Hoptons Horse near Petersfield, and
took prisoners, two Quarter Masters one Sergeant, and two common Soldiers. On
Friday Hoptons army moved toward us, as far as Mardin and Wesdin, and we
brought our Ammunition that was at Midhurst, to Arundel. On Saturday morning
diverse fled forth of the castle unto us, amongst whom was one Sergeant, who
signified the great want of provision, having nothing but powdered beef, and a
few live beeves left them. The most material passages until Thursday
following, was the Enemies treatingwith too haughty requests for men in their
Condition, and the daily running away of the Enemy from the Castle unto us;
notwithstanding Sir William had made it death by Proclamation to those that
came forth. On Friday the 5. of January, 1644. the Enemy began to feel the
fruits of their deserts, being extremely pinched with famine, and thereupon
sent a message to our Major General of the West, the generous spirited, Sir
Will. Waller, with more humble expressions then formerly: Desiringa Treaty, by
means of 3. persons from either party; and that the Lady Bishop, with her
Daughters, and waiting Gentlewoman might have liberty to come forth and refresh
themselves. To all which Sir William agreed, and invited the said Lady and
Gentlewomen, together with Colonel Bamfield, Major Bovill, and a Captain,
being the persons sent from the Castle to dine with him, who all had noble
respect, and good entertainment: Persons on our part sent to the castle to
treat, were, colonel Wems, Major Anderson, and a Kentish captain: At this
Treaty, there was no full agreement made between them in regard the Enemy did
not fully condescend to Sir Williams demands; and so the persons on either side
were returned, but the Gentlewomen continued with Sir William, who feasted and
entertained them that night; also in that afternoon the Lady Goring and her
Daughter came to visit the Lady Bishop and her Daughters, one of them being
married to the Lady Gorings only Son, he being in the castle; which visit
gave a speedy accomplishment to our Design: For Mistress Goring after some
conference with her Mother in Law, returned to her Husband in the castle; and
shortly after, the enemy sent a Drum, with colonel Rawlins and Major Mullins,
to treat for a final agreement; upon which Treaty, they condescended to Sir
William: The substance of which agreement was, That all the Enemies should be
surrendered Prisoners, together with the castle, all their arms, ammunition,
treasure, and whatsoever they possessed, into the custody and disposing of Sir
William, by 9. of the clock on Saturday morning, being the 6. of this instant.
For assurance whereof, colonel Ravvlins and Major Mullins engaged themselves,
and also promised that colonel Edward Foard, and Sir Edward Bishop should
immediately come forth, and engage themselves to Sir William also: To which
purpose the said Drum was sent back, and after midnight returned only with a
Letter, in which were some simple demands; hereupon Sir William trebled his
Guard upon the castle, least any escape should be made; and returned the Drum,
and demanding them to come forthwith, or else he would dissolve the Treaty,
and proceed against them; whereupon Sir Edward Bishop, and Colonel Foard came
according to agreement, to Sir William, about two a clock in the morning: Thus
God brought about this great work, without bloodshed, and Sir William Waller is
possessed of the said Town and Castle of Arundell, with about 100. Officers
and Commanders, the chief are, Sir Edward Bishop, Colonel Bamfield, and
Colonel Foard with one Doctor Shelling vvorth; besides, about 2000. arms,
with ammunition, and good store of riches to encourage our Valiant Soldiers
in their further service, mean while Sir Ralph Hopton has spent his time
frivolously against Warbleton House, betwixt Winchester and Portsmouth, where
we leave him till divine Justice finds him, and give the whole Glory of our
success to God.

The taking this Town and Castle has been of excellent consequence to the City
of LONDON, as will shortly appear to be made manifest.

FINIS.

