A Full and True RELATION As well of the Blowing Up of the Ann FRIGATE As also
of the Examination, Trial, and Condemnation of John Adams THE GUNNER Thereunto
Belonging: As the Occasion of that Accident by His DEFAULT.

For which he was on the 24th of this instant DECEMBER, Sentenced BY A Council
of War To be Hanged.

With Allowance.

Printed by A. Purslow in the Year, 1673.

A Full RELATION Of the Blowing Up of the ANN FRIGATE; And of the Trial and
Condemnation of the GVNNER, etc.
THe Ann, one of his Majesty's Third-Rate Frigates carrying Sixty Guns, having
been out at Sea a Crusing, not unsuccesfully off the Coast of Holland, came the
last Month into the Dock at Sherness to Wash and Tallow, and provide other
necessaries, having endured much bad weather, and some damage, being designed
after that Recruit to have kept out all this Winter: For this purpose her Guns
and (as it is generally reported by the Ships Crew) all her Powder was taken
out of her, and secured on shore, Being there in short time Refitted, she was
brought forth again, and when the dreadful Disaster we are going to relate
befell her: viz On the Second Day of December, was Riding at Anchor near
Quinborough Swail, expecting that very Afternoon, to have her Stores again
brought Aboard. During this time many of the Seamen that had belonged to her a
considerable time, were allowed to go on shore, but the Prest-men and other new
comers were kept on Board; where that morning about Nine a Clock they were
Mustered, and after Dinner all hands apply themselves with Diligence to get
their Ship Rigged, looking every hour for their Stores coming in, for which the
Gunner was gone, and the Captain and most of the Officers gone a shore, except
Mr. Agres the Purser, whose Wife was now unhapily come on board, with an intent
only to visit, but as it proved in the fatal Event, to dye with her Husband
upon which little-thought of Errand several other women were also led thither
by their own ill Destinies, amongst whom some had brought their Children too,
as if Fate had thought a Sacrifice of the strength of Men, and beauty of Women
not enough, without adding the Inocence of Babes to complete the Tragedy.

Stop here good Reader! and think it no Digression to consider a little
seriously what a bubble is Humane-Life! How silent are the approaches of Death?
how unforeseen the Trap-doors of the Grave? Man that in pride of Health will
needs now and then bluster as if he could pluck down Stars, or throw the world
off from its poles, what is he still but a little brittle Clay? kneaded at
first with Tears, and then hardened by the Sunshine of Prosperity, into a lump
of vanity, which yet a Fevers Fire can scorch into dust, a shower of Rhume
wash away into dirt, or a blast, in a moment scatter into irrecoverable Atoms.

Here might you have seen almost two hundred Souls, thinking of nothing less
than their impending Fate, and indeed in the eye of Humane Reason they were
safe, being in Health, on board a good Ship, no Enemy near, no Tempest, no
Powder neither as they poor souls imagined, to hurt them: But alas! here they
mistake, and Death in a private corner lays his Ambuscade; for about two a
clock that Afternoon, as the Joyners (several being come from Sherness) were
busy at their work near the powder room, and all the rest aboard employed,
some managing and preparing the Tackle, other walking on the Decks, some merry
with their Friends, and others securely snoaring out their last breath in their
Hammocks, behold! in an instant, sudden as a flash of Lightning, or the
springing of a Thought, comes a dreadful blast that blows up all before it, and
rends not only this Ship, but a Fire-ship that lay near her, to pieces, Heaven
is eclipsed with an ascending cloud of Sulpher, and the bodies of men, women,
and children promiscuously hurled with a furious impetuosity a loft into the
Air, some having their brains beaten out, with, or against the shattered pieces
of the Masts and Decks, others disanimated with the violence of the motion, or
drowned at their fall. In brief, in the twinkling of an eye, there appeared
such a Scene of Destruction, and spectacle of Horror as would puzle the ablest
Orator to express it fully; nor indeed do we delight to agravate that
Affliction in the Readers breast which all good Natures out of a generous
compassion, will be sufficiently sencible of on such deplorable occasions: It Is
too sad a truth, that one hundred and thirty odd persons of the Ships Crew, six
Women, four or five Children, about eight Joyners, and four Cawkers then
employed there, were hereby without a moments warning or consideration
dispatched into another world, and only seventeen men, and one woman that were
then Aboard saved, of whom the greatest part were wounded or grievously hurt,
but escaped through infinite mercy with their Lives, being quickly taken up by
the charitable assistance of some Boats from Ships that lay near.

To tell the manner how the Powder took fire, is more we conceive than can
certainly be done by any, but it is thought some of the Workmen not imagining
any Powder to be aboard at all, might be less careful then otherwise, and so
contributed to their own destruction; For what ill end it lay there unhappily
concealed may be gathered from the Sequel: For soon after the Confusion of the
Blow was over, the Officers coming together concluded to take into Custody both
the Gunner of the Ann, and of the Fireship that perished with her: But the
Latter giving a very satisfactory account of his Innocence, was soon discharged
of his Confinement: But the former could not so handsomely clear himself, and
therefore was continued under a Guard, and after some time sent up to the
Marshalses, in Order to receiving his Trial at a Council of War.

Accordingly on Monday the 22. of this instant December a Council of War was
held on board one of his Majesty's Yatches, lying over against Towerwharf,
where amongst other things this business was Examined, and the Prisoner charged
with imbezelling his Majesty's Stores committed to his Charge: and that by
Concealing this Powder (which he designed to have disposed of to his own
advantage) he had been the Occasion of destroying so many of his Majesty's
brave Subjects, and of the loss of the Ship; but desiring to Examine some other
Witnesses for clearing the matter, they Ordered him to be brought again on the
Wednesday following.

On which day the Judge Advocate and Council of War siting in the place
aforesaid, the Prisoner was again brought aboard, and upon a full Examination
it was proved by Two Witnesses that he ordered them to lay in Sixteen Barrels
of Powder in a private unusual place, to be concealed, which he intended
secretly to have got out and sold; and this was the quantity of Powder which
gave the Fatal Blow: Besides; another gave Evidence that a Hundred and Forty
Barrels of Powder were delivered out of the Ship, whereas he had placed only
One Hundred and Thirty Barrels to Account, so that it was evident he had
slighly designed at least the converting of no less then Twenty six Barrels of
Powder to his own use, and was thereby the unhappy Cause (by Accident) of all
this miserable disaster: whereupon the Council finding him Guilty, the
Honorable Judge Advocate proceeded to give Sentence against him, That for such
his Offense he should be Hanged.

This Thunderbolt leveld against his life, he received with a becoming
subjection, yet with a Courage that might cast blushes on the Gallantry of a
dying Roman; and though all Spectators could not but Applaud the discreet
proceedings and justice of the Council of War, yet at the same time they no
less heartily Commiserated the Prisoners unhappy Fate; many that Abominated his
Offense, having a love for the man, who was indeed a person before reputed
honest, and of a quiet, industrious, obligeing Temper, quallities that much
recommended him to the Affections of all the Common Seamen concerned with him:
besides, what added much to the Scale of Compassion, he had a disconsolate
Wife, and Four or Five small Children to leave behind him: But we see how far
that cursed desire of Money prevails even upon the best Natures, so as to
prompt them for the smallest advantage, to prostitute their Honesty, Honor,
Conscience and all, and venture on the most Nefarious Crimes, Fellonies,
Burglaries; and other too common violations of Law, though Heinous and
Insufferable in themselves, are yet but Private Injuries, and Damnifie only
some particular persons, but Embeseling or Purloyning the Stores or Munitions
of War, especially in such a junct^^^ (besides the Horrid Ingratitude of
abusing his Majesty's Gracious Trust) is a kind of Civil Sacrilege, and of a
more mischeivous consequence in Relation to the public, than any thing else
(almost) in the whole Catalogue of Villainy; If there be yet Any (as for the
Honor of our Country we most passionately wish she may never be guilty of
producing one of that viperous brood) who Traitorously prefer their own Private
Lucre and Emolument before the Honor, Safety, and Advantage of their King and
Country, who shall endeavor to misdispose public provisions, or by mixing
the Dust of Sea-coals with their Powder render it more weak, and less
effectual, to the unspeakable abuse of his Majesty, and prejudice of his
Service against his Enemies, or that use any such or the like hellish cheating
devices. Oh! may they with Confusion behold their errors timely discovered by
the prudent vigilance of our Superiors, and as they have lived without any true
Honor, be proceeded against without mercy, and dye without Pity.

FINIS*

