A full and true Account of the taking Count Charles John Coningsmark, lately
Impeached as the principle contriver of the Barbarous and Bloody Murder of
Thomas Thinn Esquire with the manner of his being discovered on Board a Sweeds Ship
at Gravesend, in the habit of a Seaman, on the 19. of this instant February.
AFter the Bloody Murder was committed upon the Person of Thomas Thinn Esquire the
Actual Murderers were discovered (as we may say) by Miracle, but the account
of that being already made known, we shall not trouble the Reader to repeat it,
but proceed to our present Relation, which was much after the same manner.

Captain Vrats upon his Examination, having confessed that what he did was upon
the account of Count Charles John Coningsmark, his Majesty was pleased to
order, that a diligent Search should be made, in order to apprehend him, of
which, (as it is supposed) he having notice, shifted his Lodging so often, that
although he was traced from place to place, and narrowly pursued, yet could not
be met withal, whereupon order was given to put him into the Gazett, exactly
described, with the reward of 200 pounds to any that could bring him to
Justice. When on Saturday last, somewhat late in the Evening, Information was
given to some person of Quality, that a Seamans wife at Eriff, being asked for
her Husband, should say, that he was gone on Board a Sweeds Vessel, which was
to carry over a Person of Quality, which words being taken notice of, they
farther enquired into the matter, defiring to know who it was, she replied she
knew not, but that she having been on board with her Husband, and there seen
him, gave a Description of him so near, that such as heard it, did verily
believe that it might be the same Man that was described in the Gazett, and
told her what they thought, to which she replied, she knew not who he was, but
if it was him, her Husband knew nothing of the matter, and added, that she
believed the Ship might lie at Woolwich.

This Notice being given, several Persons having a Warrant to apprehend him,
went on Board such Ships as they suspected and knew were ready to Sail,
spending a great part of Sunday Morning in so doing, but not finding him there,
just as they were about to Land, news was brought that a Sweeds Vessel was
fallen down to Gravesend, whereupon taking Boat, they went down with all speed,
where they found as had been Related, and after some dispute went on Board,
there being about 60 Seamen (all Sweeds) in the Ship, when they were on Board,
they searched the Cabins, Decks, and Holes, and finding no Person in any
Gentile garb, they suspected he might be there in disguise, when viewing the
Seamen well, they found him between Decks in Seamens habit, Smoking a Pipe of
Tobacco; when being assured it was him, they commanded all Persons present, in
the Kings-name, to be aiding and assisting to them, and thereupon Seized him,
and upon search, found a naked Sword under his Coat on one side, and a Pistol
tucked in his Girdle on the other; when taking him from on Board, they put him
into their Boat and brought him on Shore, sending an Express to relate what had
happened. And this Morning he was brought to White Hall, where he was ordered
to the Secretaries Chamber, there to remain in private, till such time as the
Counsel sat, and then to be brought upon his Examination as to the matter of
the aforesaid Murder.

London, Printed for E. Brooks, 1681.


