A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the sad and dreadful STORM That happened on Sunday
Morning, the 12th. of January, 1689. WITH A Relation how it happened, and
continued, and the Damage it has done by Land and Sea, by blowing down Houses,
Chimneys, Trees, killing and wounding diverse People, carrying away Hay-Reeks,
Corn-Reeks, etc. in damaging Churches, casting away Ships, Boats, Lighters,
etc. with other prodigious and fearful Circumstances attending it; the like
not known in any Age.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, J. Back.

A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Sad and Dreadful STORM, etc.
THough many of the West-Indian Islands and Plantations are frequently subject
to the dismal Effects of prodigious Storms and Hurracains that carry all before
them, yet England amongst other parts of the World has been mostly exempted*
from a ruinous Event of that nature; and when such things ^^ppen, they may be
looked upon as Prodigies: But amongst (...) ^^at have happened in the Memory of
Man, or we find recounted in History, none has ever proved so destructive as
this we are about, to describe; the dismal Account of which, as we have been
Eye witnesses, and received from several places, take as follows.

On Saturday Morning being the 11th of January, 1689. the Sun rise pale, with
dark Spots and Clouds, crossing it with red duskey Streaks, and was often
over-cast with red and dark Clouds, which the most curious Observers ever
denote, to forerun a Storm; but within an hour or two, the day cleared up for a
time; but in the Afternoon, the Wind began to rise, and changed its Quarter
twice or thrice in a short time, till it came to South-West, and South by West,
and then great flakes of Snow fell, and continued so to do, mixed with a kind
of drizling Rain, from four in the Afternoon, till between Twelve and One in
the Morning, at what time the Wind increased, and on a sudden grew so violent,
that such as hapened to be abroad were not able to stand before it; and the
Tiles and Brikes flew every where about the Streets in such abundance, that the
Watch in most places in and about the City of London were obliged to leave
their Stands, and seek Shelter, the open Streets being every where unsafe, and
many were beaten down with Tiles and Bricks, the Houses every where rocked as
with an Earthquake, and shafts of Chimneys fell thick, many breaking through
the Roofs, and carrying all before them, which obliged the Inhabitants to quit
the upper Stairs of their Houses, and betake themselves to the low Room, or
Cellars; the strongest Houses rocking and tottering all the while in a most
grievous manner, so that many doubted their Safety in the most securest places,
and several fearing the fall of their Houses, and betaking them to the Streets,
and void places, were not only carried against their Wills, and driven too and
fro by the Violence of the Storm, but beat down and wounded by Tiles, and
Bricks, that were blown off the Houses, and carried into the Air at a
prodigious distance; nor did the strong Churches escape the Fury; the Lead in
several places being ripped off and rent in piece^ (...) the Stones shaken and
uncemented; and particularly that ^^^ous and ancient Church in the Temple,
suffered by this Storm, which for its Violence, seemed to threaten the
Dissolution of all things, and by its force, in shaking the Steeples, made the
Bells chatter in some Steeples.

This was but the least part of the Mischief the fury of the Wind occasioned,
for in places where Houses stood most exposed, it took off whole Roofs, and
scattered them in the Air, wounding, if not killing diverse Persons, whilst the
Ruins every where spread the Streets; and we had an Account, that in a place
called Gravel-Lane, a Boy and a Man were overwhelmed, and killed in their Beds
by a Stack of Chimneys which broke through the Roof the House upon them; and a
Carman being early up to remove some Goods, had the misfortune to be beaten
down in Thames Street, by the fall of several Bricks from the top of a Chimney,
and his Scull being broke, he died of the Wound.

The River of Thames raged with impetuous Violence, being agitated by the Fury
of the VVind, meeting the Tide, and dashed to pieces a great many VVherrys, and
some Lighters driven from their Anchors, which appeared the next Morning by the
VVrecks, and broken pieces that floated in abundance, and diverse dead Bodies
were taken up, and discovered, as well below as above Bridge, supposed to have
been cast away in this impetuous Storm; and diverse are likewise missing, and
enquired after; and happy it was for many Hundreds, that it fell out in the
Nightime, otherways, few that were on the Water, any thing far from Shore,
must have expected to escape. But deplorable and ruinous was the sight in the
open Fields, and enclosed Grounds, where mighty Oaks and Elms, out of the Age
of Man's Memory lay rooted up, having turned up with their Roots, upon their
falling, whole Loads of Earth, the Branches of their main Roots as thick as a
Man's Thigh, being snapped asunder, part up, and part remaining in the Ground;
and mighty Arms of Trees bestrewed the Fields, and Roads, carried in the Air an
extraordinary way, some of which beat, and did considerable damage to the the
Neighboring Houses and Barns, and this not only in the Country, but near Town,
for in that famous Park by White Hall, known by the Name of St. James's Park,
the pleasant Walk of the King and Queen, and Court, Nobility, etc. a great
many of those stately Trees on the North side the Pall Mall near St. James's
were blown up by the Roots; others were split in sunder, some again were
snapped short, and others had their great Arms blown off, so that those that
were blown down were sawn asunder, to clear the Walk, their largeness not
admitting of any other speedy way of removal; and this Ruin happened not only
in the Walk, but other places of the Park, the young and pliable Trees
suffering very much, as well as the large and stubborn; nor did White Hall, or
St. James' escape marks of this Storms Fury; and that the City might no more
boast of her pleasant VValks in the Moor-Fields, by New Bethlehem, Ten or
Twelve of those Trees, planted out of the Memory of Man, were blown up by the
Roots, or rent in sunder, beating down, and breaking the Rails in their fall:
As for Pails, Palisado's, Fences, and things of that kind, they made but feeble
resistance, being for a great part broken, and carried away at a great
distance; the Cattle in diverse places, that were in the Fields, were blown
forcibly into Ditches, Rivers, and Ponds, where several of them perished for
want of timely Help. Several Carriers that were upon the Road, had their
Wagon overturned by the fury of the VVind, and diverse Market-VVomen in their
going home, were blown, together with their Panniers and Dorsers off their
Horses; nor was this the greatest damage, for not only whole covering of Barns,
but a great number of Reicks of Hay, Corn, Pease, etc. were taken up and
scattered in the Air, so that the ground was covered very deep with the Spoil
of the Country, one Man's Corn or Hay being frequently carried unto another
Man's Ground at a great distan^e; as in other places were Sheets of Lead,
Timber, and Roofs of Houses, the Thatch of Thatched Houses flying in the Air
like little Clouds, insomuch, that, together with the Snow, it darkened the
Light that faintly appeared from the Moon; a great many Houses were qui^^ blown
down in several places, and about two hundred stocks of Chimneys fell in and
about London, not only destroying before them, but wounding, or killing many
People; and although this was every where lamentable at Land, yet it proved
more dreadful at Sea, and in the Harbors where the Shipping lay; for in the
Downs no less than Fifty Ships in great precipitation were obliged to cut their
Cables, and stand off to Sea in great Confusion and Disorder some of them
f^lling foul of the Shoal and Sands, others forced to throw their Lading over
Board, to save their Lives, whilst the Masts, Rigging, and Galleries were rent
and broken with the fury of the Wind; and we are credibly informed, that
several Ships are cast away, and a great many Men drowned, Wrecks of Ships,
Goods, and dead Men being cast ashore in many of our Ports.

And we had News of the Loss of an East-Indian Ship, to the value of 20000 l.
but it is since contradicted, though she received considerable damage in the
Storm, and very hardly weathered it: Our Men of War escaped the best, yet not
without some damage in their Masts, and Rigging. We have it strongly reported,
That several French Privateers that were crusing Abroad for Prizes, were cast
away; and that the Western and Eastern parts of France have suffered
considerable damage; and not only Paris has felt its Fury, but that King's
stately Palace at Versailles, one of the finest in Europe, is dismally rent
and dismantled, and will require a great sum to repair it; and a number of his
Ships are missing that were driven out of his Ports of Breast and Versailles.

We do not hear from Scotland, that this Storm reached so much Northward as
that Kingdom; but have daily fresh Accounts from many places of the almost
inexpressible Damage it has done in the most Southern parts of England being a
very melancholy Relation, and the sum of Loss sustained very Excessive, so
that those that reckon the least, make it extraordinary, requiring much Time
and Money to repair it. Many Boats upon the River of Thames breaking loose,
have been since found as far as Graves-end, whither they had been driven with
incredible swiftness; and several Lighters were staved in driving against the
Piles of the Bridge, and other places. The Ships that lay at Anchor in the
River, were beat against each other, and the Sea-men's Labor proved
ineffectual, in keeping them from considerable damage in their Hulls; and it
may not without good ground be suspected, that Countries which lay low to the
Sea, have suffered by Over-flowings, or innundations for; agitated by this
furious VVind, the Ocean appeared so exceeding Mountanous, as if it had
threatened to swallow the Land, above which it raised its Waves: This Storm
which began about Twelve at Night, lasted till about Five in the Morning in its
full force, to the great Terror and Amazement of the People, some of them
concluding it to be the end of the World, which made them betake them to their
Prayers, which they had not perhaps thought on some time before; but, according
to the Prophet, When God's Judgments are Abroad, the Nations will learn
Righteousness; then what remains, but that we look upon this Storm, as an
Admonition from Heaven, to give us timely warning to repent us of our Sins, and
turn away from the Evil of our doing, cleaving to that which is Good, and
forsaking that which is Evil, that it may be well with us, and a worser thing
may not befall us, for the Almighty for the most part shakes, like a
compassionate Father, the Rod of Correction before he strikes, and if we will
return to our Obedience, he will keep back the Execution of his Indignation,
and not suffer his Fury to be poured out. A timely Repentance disarms him of
his Thunder, or stays it in the mid Volsey, stops his hand, who at Pleasure can
Arm the Elements, to punish our Disobedience.

After this Storm was over, the Sky that had been troubled with tumultuous
Clouds, cleared up, and grew Serene, it Freezing very hard, as it did all the
next day, the Wind-being come about to West by Nore.

And thus, Reader, you have a Relation of what has occurred in relation to this
unusual Storm, the greatest that has been in the Memory of Man, and not to be
paralleled by that which so amused this Kingdom, in the Year One Thousand Six
Hundred and Sixty, about the time of the Death of Oliver the Protector.

FINIS.

