A Full and Exact RELATION Of the Storming and Taking of Dartmouth, With above
Five hundred Prisoners, Sixty piece of Ordnance, great store of Ammunition and
Ships belonging to the said TOWN.

As it was sent to the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker to the Honorable
House of Commons.

Together with an Order of both Houses of Parliament, for Thursday come
Fortnight to be a day of Thanksgiving within the Lines of Communication, and
ten miles about; and Thursday come three weeks in all other places in the
Country.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation and Order
be forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple, January. 23. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
IF I write confusedly, I shall humbly crave your pardon; for we have been up
all night, and things are not yet in a settled order: In my former Letters I
acquainted you how the army was engaged before Dartmouth (a place of as great,
if not greater concernment then Exeter) it required some few days time to be
thoroughly informed of the state of the town; after which, it was unanimously
resolved to storm the town (for we find more loss of men by lingering sieges,
then sudden storms) every Commander was allotted to his post, and they as
faithfully and valiantly performed their duties; every man gaining the command
of every Fort or place that fell to his lot, with all the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition: The storm begun about one a clock this morning; after the Enemy had
discharged their Canon once, our men got under the shot, and possessed the
Canon, and turned them against the Enemy (for we had no pieces at all of our
own, the weather not admitting any to be brought) after the Line was cleared,
and some works taken, we became Masters of the whole Town, and then of Tunstal
Mount and Church, Mount Boon, Mount Paradise, and the old Castle, in which
castle were five great Iron Guns, which command the River. In the storm our men
possessed themselves of about sixty piece of Ordnance, the two great Forts not
yet taken (being a mile from the Town) for these two Forts, if they accept not
of quarter while they may have it, in the opinion of the General and Lieut.
General, and Commanders, we may reduce them by force in forty eight hours, and
batter them in pieces with their own great Guns, which we have taken in Town,
one whereof is a brass Demi canon; Truly I never see men fall on more
cheerfully and merrily; Mr. Dell, and Mr. Peter's preached to them, and put much
life into them, and God was wonderful merciful unto us, for we had but one
man slain, and but few wounded, though the Forts played most fiercely on the
Soldiers; the Commanders and Forces that were engaged in the storm, were, Col:
Hamond and his Regiment, Col: Lambert and his Regiment, Col: Fortescue and his
Regiment, Lieut. Col: Pride with Col: Harleys Regiment, and a good party out of
the Generals, and Col: Ingolsbies Regiments, and lastly, two hundred Seamen,
and some Dragoons. And though the Town was entered thus by storm, yet very
little prejudice was done to the town, the Soldiers being fair conditioned
beyond expectation, they grumbled a little that they had not the Reward
promised at Bristol, to save that town from plundering, which City deserves to
feel the smart of plunder, for their unthankfulness for so great favors they
found from the Army. The Messenger is in haste to be gone; and for further
particulars the House will suddenly receive an account. It has pleased God
wonderfully to bless the Army in this Expedition further West, not only to
scatter the Enemies Horse, but to hinder the relief intended for Exeter; and
interrupted, nay quite broke the young Generalissimo in his new leavies,
relieved Plymouth, and enforced the Enemy into Cornwall, leaving a force
sufficient to besiege Exeter: If the Army had formerly advanced, leaving that
City unbesieged, as it was much desired, I think the service would not have
been of so much advantage, as to take this season; whilst you have Commanders
that are faithful, if you let them put Designs in execution, when their own
Consciences and Judgments leads them to it, I hope you will have no cause to
repent it: But it is hard to please all.

Just now the Enemy beats a Parley in the Forts, so you may be assured we may
have them on any terms; The General sent the Comptroller to Summon the two men
of War in the River, who yielded immediately, the one was one Captain Johnsons
Ship of Newcastle, ten piece of Ordnance; the other of fourteen piece of
Ordnance: at Townsall Fort we took six score prisoners, about four hundred more
in the Town and other Works. I humbly take my leave, and remain Your most
humble Servant, J. R.

Dartmouth, Ian. 19. 1645. four in the morning. Sir,
The Messenger is a diligent man, and willing to come, I leave him to your
consideration.



Die Jovis, 22 Januarii, 1645.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, do Order and appoint this day
Fortnight for a day of Thanksgiving for taking in of Dartmouth, to be kept
within the Cities of London and Westminster, Lines of Communication, and Ten
miles about, And this day three weeks for all other places in the Country.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


FINIS.

