A FULL RELATION OF The Proceedings at the Rendezvous of that Brigade of the
Army that was held in Corkbush field in Hartford Parish on Monday last.

AND A LETTER from the Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, concerning the said Rendezvous.

With a PAPER, Entitled, Englands Freedoms, and Soldiers Rights.

ALSO A Petition to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, of diverse Officers and
Soldiers of the Army under his Command.

Together with a Declaration against the Proceedings of the new Agents.

Nov. 15. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.



London, Printed for Laurence Chapman, November 16. 1647.

To his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax.
SIR,
THis house received several desires from you, in behalf of the Army under your
Command, which they took into present consideration; but by the Kings
withdrawing from Hampton Court, were interrupted in that debate. For the
months pay, they have endeavored the complying with it, and doubt not, but it
may be speedily effected; for the Arrears, they are resolved to give a full and
sufficient security; and are very sensible of those expressions of the Army,
wherein they declare their resolutions (upon a constant pay) to make it death
to take any thing from any inhabitant of this kingdom; and remembering that the
Rendezvous of the Army begins on Monday next, They have commanded me to make
known unto you (and desire you would make it known to the Soldiers) that they
will forthwith proceed upon those desires of the Army, which by reason of this
accident (for the present) they could not finish; and make such provision for
them, both for the present for their Arrears, and their future constant pay, as
may let them clearly see, the care they have of them, and the value they put
upon their past services; resting confident of their compliance and submission
to the Commands and Directions of Parliament; not having more in command, I
remain,

Your Excellencies humble Servant, William Lenthal Speaker.
Westminster. 13. Nov. 1647.
SIR,
THis day (according to appointment) the Rendezvous of the first Brigade of the
Army was held in Corkbush field in Hartford Parish, between Hartford and Ware;
Hartford being the Head quarters Saturday and Sunday, the General went from
thence to the Rendezvous; where according to order there met, of Horse, The
Generals Regiment, Col: Fleetwoods, Col: Riches, and Col: Twistletons; of Foot,
The Generals, Col: Hamonds, and Col: Prides: And besides these, upon the
seducements of the new Agents, Col: Harrisons, and Col: Lilburns Regiments: The
General expressed himself very gallantly and faithfully at the Head of every
Regiment, to live and dye with them for those particulars which were contained
in a Remonstrance read to every Regiment: And notwithstanding the endeavors of
Major Scot and others; to animate the Soldiers to stand to the Paper called The
Agreement of the People, they generally by many acclamations declared their
Affections and Resolutions to adhere to the General; and as many as could in
the short time they had allowed, signed an Agreement drawn up for that purpose,
concerning their being ready from time to time to observe such Orders as they
should receive from the General and Council of the Army, I had sent you the
copy of this Agreement, and His Excellencies Remonstrance, but that I was so
straightened in time I could not: I should have acquainted you before, That upon
the Generals coming into the field, Col: Eyres, Major Scot, and others, were
observed to be insinuating diverse seditious Principles into the Soldiers, and
incensing them against the General and General Officers: Upon which Order was
given for the Commitment of Col: Air and others into the Marshals hands; and
Major Scot committed to the custody of Lieutenant Chillenden, and sent up to
the Parliament: Some inferior persons were likewise committed, for dispersing
sundry scandalous and factious Papers, as The Agreement of the People, etc.
among the private Soldiers: And finding that those persons who pretend most for
the Freedom of People had dispersed diverse of those Papers amongst Col:
Lilburns Regiment of Foot (the most mutinous Regiment in the Army) strict
Command was given for them to tear them and cast them away; which was done: and
Captain Lieut: Bray (who was the only Officer above a Lieutenant left among
them, the rest being driven away by the mutinous Soldiers, and one of them
wounded) was taken from the Head of that Regiment, and committed to custody; it
being alleged, That he had led on the Soldiers to that Rendezvous contrary to
Orders. And afterward a Council of War being called in the field, diverse
Mutiniers for example sake were drawn forth, three of them were tried and
condemned to death, and one of them (whose turn it fell to by lot) was shot to
death at the Head of the Regiment, and others are in hold to be tried. The
Soldiers of this Regiment crying out, That they were abused by their Officers,
and being told by the Lieutenant General, That they should have Justice against
them, were very much satisfied, sensible of their error, and promised
conformity to the Generals Commands for the future. Col: Rainsbrough and some
others presented this enclosed Petition, and The Agreement of the People, to
His Excellency at his first coming: Col: Harrisons Regiment, who had them in
their Hats with this Motto on the outside in capital Letters, Englands
Freedoms, and Soldiers Rights, when they understood their error, tore them out
of their Hats, and expressed their Resolution to be obedient to His
Excellencies commands. Lieut: Col: John Lilburn came this day to Ware; but
things not succeeding at the Rendezvous according to expectation, came not
further. Sir, As I cannot but rejoice in this days Unity, in relation to the
Peace of the Kingdom; so, I hope, That the issue will tend to the benefit
thereof; and that the General and Officers of the Army will do as much for the
real Freedom of the People, as the other do pretend; and how good soever their
Intentions may be, nothing but confusion at present appears in their Endeavors.
In much haste I rest,

Hartford, 15. Nov. 1647. Your affectionate Friend and Servant, WILLIAM CLARK.

Englands Freedoms and Soldiers Rights; An Agreement of the People, for a firm
and present Peace, upon Grounds of Common Right.
HAving by our late labors and hazards made it appear to the world at how high
a rate we value our just Freedom, and having so far owned our cause, as to
deliver the enemies thereof into our hands: We do now hold our selves bound in
mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we can for the future, to
avoid both the danger of returning into a slavish condition, and the chargeable
remedy of another War: for as it cannot be imagined that so many of our
Country men would have opposed us in this quarrel, if they had understood
their own good; so may we safely promise to our selves, that when our common
Rights and Liberties shall be cleared, their endeavors will be disappointed,
that seek to make themselves our Masters: since therefore our former
oppressions, and scarce yet ended troubles have been occasioned, either by want
of frequent National meetings in Counsel, or by rendering those meetings
ineffectual; We are fully agreed and resolved, to provide that hereafter our
Representatives be neither left to an uncertainty for the time, nor made
useless to the ends for which they are intended: In order whereunto we Declare,

1. That the people of England being at this day very unequally distributed, by
Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, for the Election of their Deputies in
Parliament, ought to be more indifferently proportioned, according to the
number of the Inhabitants: the circumstances whereof, for number, place, and
manner, are to be set down before the end of this present Parliament.

2. That to prevent the many inconveniences, apparently arising, from the long
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be
dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, 1648.

3. That the People do of course choose themselves a Parliament once in two
years. viz. upon the first Thursday in every second March, after the manner as
shall be prescribed before the end of this Parliament, to begin to sit upon the
first Thursday in April following at Westminster, or such other place as shall
be appointed from time to time by the preceding Representatives; and to
continue till the last day of September then next ensuing, and no longer.

4. That the power of this, and all future Representatives of this Nation, is
inferior only to theirs who choose them, and does extend without the consent or
concurrence of any other person or persons; to the Enacting, Altering, and
repealing of Laws; to the erecting and abolishing of Offices and Courts; to the
appointing, removing, and calling to account Magistrates, and Officers of all
degrees; to the making War and Peace, to the treating with foreign States; and
generally, to whatsoever is not expressly, or implyedly reserved by the
Represented to themselves, which are as follows;

1. THat matters of Religion, and the ways of Gods Worship, are not at all
entrusted by us to any humane power, because therein we cannot remit or exceed
a tittle of what our Consciences dictate to be the mind of God, without wilful
sin: nevertheless the public way of instructing the Nation (so it be not
compulsive) is referred to their discretion.

2. That the matter of Impresting and constraining any of us to serve in the
Wars, is against our Freedom, and therefore we do not allow it in our
Representatives; the rather, because money (the sinews of War) being always at
their disposal, they can never want numbers of men apt enough to engage in any
just Cause.

3. That after the dissolution of this present Parliament, no person be at any
time questioned for any thing said or done, in reference to the late public
differences, otherwise then in execution of the Judgments of the present
Representatives, or House of Commons.

4. That in all Laws, made, or to be made, every person may be bound alike; and
that no Tenure, Estate, Charter, Degree, Birth, or Place, do confer any
exemption from the ordinary course of legal proceedings, whereunto others are
subjected.

5. That as the Laws ought to be equal, so they must be good, and not evidently
destructive to the safety and well-being of the People.

These things we declare to be our Native Rights, and therefore are agreed and
resolved to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, against all opposition
whatsoever; being compelled thereunto, not only by the examples of our
Ancestors, whose blood was often spilt in vain for the recovery of their
Freedoms, suffering themselves, through fraudulent Accommodations, to be still
deluded of the fruit of their Victories; but also by our own woeful experience,
who having long expected, and dearly earned the establishment of these certain
Rules of Government, are yet made to depend, for the settlement of our Peace
and Freedom, upon Him that intended our Bondage, and brought a cruel War upon
us.

FOrasmuch as our condition with the Army in May and June last occasioned us
to make choice of Agitators for transaction of our business with, and
representation of our grievances to the General, and by him to the Parliament,
for the keeping of a mutual correspondencie and unanimous compliance amongst
us, for the clearing of all misprisions and misapprehensions that might any way
retard the firm establishment of a lasting Peace in this unhappy Kingdom, as
also in order and relation to the providing complete satisfaction for the
Soldiery: Notwithstanding upon several informations that those formerly
employed by us did more consult their own advancement then the Public settled,
we were induced about the 19 of October last to make choice of two new
Agitators for a Regiment; not in the least manner intending that they should
presume to usurp authority over the General, the Council of War, the old
Agitators over the Kingdom, or over us, as to appoint Conventions at their own
pleasure, and there to compose and publish in print to the world strange and
unheard of Fancies, and frame Ideas of their own brain, and bring them to us to
father. But the authority that we derived upon them, was only to act according
to our first engaged principles, with the consent and advice of the General,
the Council of War, and the Agitators first elected, to clear those things that
seemed dubious unto us, to prevent misinformations, to endeavor to facilitate
things that appeared difficult, to make us intelligent Subjects what progress
had been made in order to our first engagement and representations to the
Parliament, and to improve their best assistance to remove such obstructions as
did any way impede the just and legal proceedings of the Army. And whereas
they have contrary to the trust reposed in them, contrary to the end for which
they were selected and chosen, and indeed, contrary to good subjects, cast off
all allegiance and obedience (as we conceive) to all present visible Authority
in the Kingdom, and have betaken themselves to a new framed City of Refuge,
have declared that they will insist in that way positively against all
opposition whatsoever, have endeavored to incense the Nation that the Armie's
intentions, Declarations, and Remonstrances have been but to gull and mislead
the people, and have rejected all terms of correspondency with those formerly
entrusted and employed by us; and all this acted printed, and published before
any antecedaneous notice thereof given, or consent had from their respective
Regiments. Therefore we do declare to the said pretended Agitators, and to all
the world, that we are so far from countenancing their preposterous
proceedings, as that hereby we testify our utter dislike to it: And do hereby
recall any pretended authority that the said Agitators make claim to from us,
and likewise do require them to return to their several and respective Troops,
and not to persist any farther by virtue of any colorable pretense whatsoever;
we being fully resolved to adhere to the former Mutual Agreement of the Army,
and not to act in a distinct way from the General Council of War, and those
Agitators formerly entrusted by us, much less in opposition to them; but to
comply with them in all such things as may conduce to the speedy redress of
the public distractions of the Kingdom, and the bringing to perfection our
just desires contained and specified in the Engagements and several
Declarations of the Army, and will make choice of such men as shall be
appointed to communicate their utmost endeavors in the assistance of the
General and Council of War, in such a way as may best conduce to the Been
esse of the Nation.

Consented to and subscribed by the Officers and Soldiers in Col. Whaley's own
Troop.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax our noble General.
The humble Petition of many Officers and Soldiers under his command.
Shows,
THat in Judgment and conscience we engaged in the war against the King under
your Excellencyes command, to preserve and vindicate the freedoms of our native
Country, and of the Parliament in order thereunto.

That by the blessing of God all those our Enemies are fallen or fled before us.

That for the same Ends, and for our own Rights, for our service, we were
forced to hazard our selves in disputing the Parliaments commands, and those
our Opposers have been likewise subdued.

That the Countyes have petitioned your Excellency to procure the long expected
settelment of their freedoms.

That we have waited many Months for the securing to us, and all the free
borne people, their native Rights, and for our Indemnity, and Arreares as
Soldiers; and our Hearts bleed to see our Country consume under continued
Distractions and heavy Oppressions.

That we see no hope of Indemnity for us and our Assistants; nor settling the
foundations of freedom, but by entering into this Agreement which we herewith
offer to your Excellency desiring your concurrence therein.

That we have seen and felt the sad Consequences of being divided and
scattered before our native freedoms were settled, and our Arreares secured,
and such a way established for constant pay, that we may know where to receive
it monthly without fail.

That we are bound in conscience from the sense of our duty to our native
Country, and in mercy to our selves, to keep together with our swords in our
hands, to maintain these our freedoms, for which the Parliament first invited
us to take Arms, to see our Arreares and pay secured, and our dear Country
freed from its intolerable Burdens.

May it therefore please your Excellency to go on in owning and leading us in
maintaining of this our Cause, to the righteousness whereof God has born such
clear witness: And in the prosecution of these things we humbly desire to
live and dye under your Excellencyes conduct.

FINIS.

