A Full and True ACCOUNT OF A MOST Barbarous and Bloody MURDER, COMMITTED By
Esther Ives, with the Assistance of John Noise a Cooper; on the Body of William
Ives, her Husband, at Rumsey in Hampshire, on the Fifth day of February 1686.
Together with the Miraculous and Wonderful Discovery of the Murder and
Murderers.

AS ALSO An Account of their TRIALS at the last Assizes, holden at Winchester,
where being found guilty of the said Murder, they received Sentence of Death,
viz. John Noise to be Hanged, and Esther Ive^ to be Burnt. With their manner of
Behavior and Execution, according to the said Sentence.

This may be Printed,

R. P.

Printed for P. Brooksby at the GoldenBall in Pye-corner.

A Full and True ACCOUNT OF A MOST Barbarous and Bloody MURDER, COMMITTED
By Esther Ives, with the Assistance of John Noise a Cooper; on the Body of
William Ives, her Husband, at Rumsey in Hampshire, on the Fifth day of
February, 1686.

MAny and Notorious have been the Murders of late committed by diverse Wicked
People, and in sundry manners: But I think none in the Horridness of the Action
can exceed, if parallel, what I am about to relate; and for which, as you will
plainly find, the Hand of Justice overtook the Murderers and brought them to
their deserved Punishment. The Relation of which, take as follows.

In West-Weller, a place in the County of Hants or Hampshire about two miles
from the Town of Rumsey, Lived one John Noise, by Trade a Cooper, but a Person
of ill Fame, and a very desolute Liver. This Man keeping Company, in a more
familiar manner, than was convenient, with the Wife of one William Ives, who
kept a Victualling-House in Rumsey, known by the sign of the Hatchet. On the
fifth day of February last, h^ stayed there drinking till about one or two of
the clock in the morning, at what time, as it afterward appeared, Ives's Wife
and Noise having conspired against Ives, Murdered him by strangling or
breaking his Neck, to make a freer way for their unlawful Lust; Or as it is
conjectured, being rid of him, they might Marry. However Ives his Children, who
were in the House, having notice that their Father was dead, which their Mother
had possessed them happened naturally or suddenly, they fell into loud
Lamentations; which the Town Bell-man, being then upon his Rounds, hearing, and
much desirous to know the cause of the Childrens cries at so unseasonable a
time, came under the Window of Ives's House and calling to them, demanded the
reason? who, with mournful voices, told him their Father was dead. At which,
the Bell-man being somewhat surprised, for that a little before, he h^d heard
Ives in a kind of a disorderly or confused Tone, cry out or say; What do thou
do to me, Noise? went and acquainted the Constable of the Watch therewith: who
taking along with him a Guard, came to the House of the said Ives; and upon
their coming thither, found that the Wife had been abroad to light a Candle;
and likewise at a House, known by the Sign of the Black Boy; and there had
called up the Woman, to have of her Some Strong-water; under pretense that her
Husband was very much indisposed: but upon their entering the House of Ives,
and going up stairs; they found Noise and Esther Ives the Wife, very busy
about Ives, who was indeed dead, in dressing him: viz. putting on his Breeches,
Stockings, Shoes, and other wearing Apparel; having newly as was supposed,
taken him out of his Bed, it being then warm. The Design of which, as many
imagined, and they in part confessed was, that being so clothed; they would
have tumbled him down Stairs, that so the Bruises there by occasioned might
color the Pretense they intended to make: that he accidently and unfortunately
fell down them, and so consequentl^ had lost his Life. But they being known to
be People of bad Conversations, the Constable would not be so satisfied; but
with the Light he then had, proceeded to make a narrower Inspection into the
unhappy Business: Causing the Dead Body to be diligently searched, securing at
the same time Noise and Esther Ives, as suspecting the matter to be otherwise
than they pretended; whose pretense then was, that he dyed suddenly of some
extraordinary Distemper, at which they could not guess. But upon a narrow
search of the Body, much violence appeared to be done to the Neck of the Party
deceased, either by strangling or twisting; insomuch that the Blood had issued
from him in abundance, and stained the the Pillow whereon his head had lain; as
also upon his Shirt: And it further appeared, that through the vehemence of his
Struggling and Contending for Life, his Water had come from him, with which not
only his Shirt, but part of the Bed was wet.

These plain signs and palpable demonstrations of a Murder, made the
Constable, and those that were his Attendance, make a narrower search upon the
Criminals; and thereupon found much Blood upon Esther Ives, supposed and verily
conjectured to proceed from her Husband; either when she was Assistant to
Noise, in perpetrating the wicked and unnatural Murder; or when she went about
to remove him. However that night they were both secured, and the next day
carried before a Justice; who, upon examining the Business, and by the two
Chyrurgeons that viewed the Body, finding it Murder, according to the
Circumstances as beforementioned; and they having nothing material to offer in
their own defense, committed them to Rumsey Gaol, where they continued in order
to their Trials, till the Judges came in their Circuit to Winchester in the
County aforesaid; to hold there the Lenten Assize: at what time, being brought
from Rumsey to Winchester, in order to take their Trials, the Coroners Inquest
having before found it wilful Murder.

The Assize^ aforesaid, being held on the 24th. day of February last, they were
brought to their Trials: where Noise, after the Evidence was given against him,
as to the Circumstances of the Murder, pleaded in his own defense; That being
in Ives's his House, a Quarrel happened between the said Ives and his Wife, and
that all that he did on that occasion, was only to interpose, that he might do
the good Office of parting them: but Esther Ives, did in Court declare that
Noise was the Person who Murdered her Husband. Upon which, and the other
Circumstances, the Jury after some consideration of the Matter of Fact; gave in
their Verdict, That John Noise and Esther Ives, were guilty of the wilful
Murder whereof they stood Indicted. So that in the close of the Assize, they
accordingly received Sentence of Death, Viz. the former to be Hanged and the
latter to be Burnt; and so returned to Prison, in order to be Executed
according to the said Sentences.

The 11th. day of March, the day appointed for their Execution being come, they
were by the Sheriffs Officers taken our of Winchester Gaol: where for some days
they had remained, to bewail their Wicked and Barbarous Act; and being placed
upon one Horse, were in that manner conveyed to Rumsey, the place ordered for
their Execution; Where John Noise turning to the Spectators, who came to see
him Executed, desired them, especially the younger sort, above all things, not
to profane the Sabbath Day, but to keep it with all Reverence and due Regard;
as likewise, to refrain from Drunkenness, which occasions so many evils and
mischiefs in the world. He confessed he had long kept company with Esther Ives,
in a lascivious and unlawful Manner. After this and some other Expressions, he
went up the Ladder, and when the Rope was made fast, turned himself off; and
about half an hour after, was cut down, in order to his Interment or Burial.

Esther Ives being brought to the Stake, said very little; but being fastened
thereto, and the Fuel placed about her; after the Executioner had strangled
her, the Fire was kindled, and she consumed to Ashes. And thus, Reader, the
miserable Wretches came to a shameful, though a deserved end; which I hope may
be a Warning to deter others from committing the like Crime.

FINIS.

