A full and True RELATION Of a Dreadful and Terrible STORM, That Happened at
Forte St. George, IN The EAST INDIES, on the 3d of November, 1684.
Communicated in a Letter to a Friend in London, from one belonging to the
English Factory.
STrange and Wonderful are the ways of Divine and Governing Providence, in the
management of the several Changes and Alterations on this Terrestrial Globe,
the ways of the Almighty being unsearchable and past finding out; yet he is
often pleased to give us warning of his Displeasure with us, for our Manifold
Sins and Iniquities committed against his Divine Majesty; That we may yet turn
from them and Live: And as he has placed the Rainbow in the Heavens as a Sign
or Token to the Wretched Sons and Daughters of Adam, that he will no more
Destroy the World by Water, so he often gives us notice when his Wrath and
Anger is kindled against us, by Signs in the Heavens, Air, Earth, and Waters;
often letting loose the powers of the Air, to rove about the World in Storms
and Tempests: but we have seldom heard of Hurricanes so violent as this,
whereof take the following Relation.

By Letters from Fort St. George of the 5th. of February last past, we have
Advice that on the third of November, 1684. at the said Fort St. George in the
East Indies, a Factory of the English, about Nine of the Clock at Night
happened a Violent Storm, which lasted until two of the Clock the next Morning,
in which time it wrought wondrous Effects, to the great Astonishment of the
Inhabitants, who were at a greater Consternation at the extreem fierceness of
the Tempest, than ever any Garrison was, that was taken by Storm; some
concluding that the Dreadful day of Doom was come; the great amazing sound of
it made the Wisest Tremble, and the most bold and Valiant, faint-Hearted: It
untiled all the Houses in the Town, which made such a Rattling and terrible
Noise, as if some thousands of Bombs had been thrown into the Town by an Enemy.
It laid all their Gardens, (of which they have many Curious and pleasent ones)
as flat and level as the smothest Bouling-Greens. Trees which were of a great
and prodigious Growth, some of them perhaps as Ancient as the World, were
Violently torn up by the Roots, and their Aged Trunks riven in Pieces: The
noise of the cracking and breaking of their Boughs and Branches, seemed almost
to equal that of the Tempest; but that which the most of all added to their
Amazement was this, a strong Iron-Bar which belonged to a Window, (a thing
hardly Credible) was with the extreem force of the Wind, snapped into three
Pieces. Which things had not the Relator of this from Forte St. George, been an
Eye Witness the next Day, and of the Ruins caused by this Tempest, or
Hurricane, he could not have believed it; and adds further, that had it
continued but for two or three Hours longer, it had certainly leveled both the
Fort and Town, which are both strong built, and well Fortified; but no doubt
but this Storm has been very Prejudicial to both, and done great Damage to the
Inhabitants: I shall conclude with the Relators own Words: The Lord be Praised
for this Cessation, and grant us deliverance from such Storms and Tempests, to
which had not the Providence of Almighty God in his great Wisdom put an end,
and rebuked the Violence of its Rage, that Stately Fort and Town had certainly
been laid even with the Ground, to the unspeakable Damage of the Right
Honorable the East India Company here.

This may be Printed,

1685. R. L. S.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard 's-Castle. 1685.


