York, the 24th. and 25th. of the 4th. Month, 1696 Dear Friends?
We being met together at this our Yearly Meeting, to wait upon the Lord, to
feel his Ancient Power, to fill our hearts and contrite our Spirits and comfort
us together; we have renewed cause to say he is the same God that ever he was
yesterday to day and will be the same for ever, unto all those that believe in
him and put their trust in him.

And Dear Friends, in the sense of the same Love wherewith we have been sweetly
comforted together in this our Meeting. We do salute you all, and give you
Account in this our County how things has been with us, for blessed be the
name of our God he is with us in all our undertakings, and causes his Work to
prosper both here and elsewhere, for we have had several Testimonies in Writing
from the several Monthly Meetings of the care and diligence of our Women
friends in their particular Meetings in things relating to Truths Prosperity.
And Gods living ^owerful Presence, has abundantly appeared in this our
Meeting, and many living Testimonies have been born amongst us blessed be the
Name of the Lord for everand evermore.

And this short Epistle, we have given forth for the encourageing of all, and
also to warn any whom it may concern to be faithful in this their Day. And now,

DEar Friends we being under a weighty consideration of the tender dealings,
and many mercyes of the Lord, and what he has been to Us, and done for Us, in
gathering Us out of the World, yea out of Babylons confusion, and by the
Revealing of his Heavenly power, has made a little Remnant willing to bear
testimony against the evil of this World, its vain Customs foolish Fashions and
Traditions; for which Testimonye some have suffered great abuses, for
Testifiing against Observing Mass times, Feast days, or any other vain
Past-times, therefore let none professing the same truth think these things
light, or matters indifferent which others purchased at so dear a rate;
therefore see that truths Testimony be born up in every particular Meeting, for
by the same power has many been made willing to lose the friendship of the
World, the favor of Relations and acquaintance for the denying of extravagent
feastings in Marriages, Births and Burials; and though many of our Ancient and
Honorable Women be removed and gone to their rest, yet some here is yet in
being blessed be the Lord, who bear a true Record of the good effect this
Testimony had amongst the sober Peo-ple of the Neighborhood, where it was
faithfully born up, therefore let none professing the same truth vary from it,
but in the unity of the one Spirit, see that all be done decently and in good
Order, to the honor of our God, who is a God of Order, and not of Consusion:
Here has diverse Testimonies been given from this Meeting wherein we have
hinted at many things, and particulared some, as conserning Apparill, we could
be glad our Testimonies were generally Observed, and the Judgment of truth
submited to, and these things put in practice in every particular Meeting, for
it is the doer that is accepted, a few Lines may soon be writ, and a Testimony
soon delivered, but the Work is weighty, and requires great Care and
Diligence, here is also a warning in our Hearts from the Lord, unto you who are
Mothers of Children, that you be good examples in your Families, in your Words,
Actions and Apparel, and in all other things both to your Servants and
Children, and keep a watchful eye over them, and take a narrow inspection into
their ways and inclinations, And Crush every appearance of Folly in them in the
bud, while they are young and little, before they grow high and stuborn, and
still keep your Authority in the truth, and rule over the unsubjected nature in
them; But if you lose your authority they will rule over you, and then the just
will be Opressed and they will act to truths dishonor, their own ruin, and you
grief, therefore be ye warned to see to the discharge of your Duty in this
behalf, and do not connive at any Loose Wanton behavior in them but restrain
them. Remember old Elys fall, and consider the Daughters of Sion who walked
with stretched out necks, and wanton eyes, and read Isaiah the third, the
Judgments threatened against them: And surely the Lord is the same this day, he
has no more favor for the Proud and Rebellious, nor friendship with the
workers of iniquity, though he has been slow to wrath, and of great mercy and
long hovered over us, waiting to be gracious yet he will arise as a Man of War,
and those that will not that he should Reign over them, they are his Enemies he
will slay them, but well will it be with those that live in subjection to him
and under his Government, he will be tender over them as the Apple of his own
Eye, and preserve them in the hollow of his hand until his Indignation be over;
But be you warned you proud and wanton careless ones though Professors of truth
who yet have your Coversations in the World, and your Companions of the Spirit
of it. Many Warnings and Invitations you have had, but now the Day comes on
apace, which long has been threatened, that will be as a consuming Fire wherein
the Lord will avenge himself of his adversaries, and all the Proud, and all
that work wickedness will be as Stubble, for tho he will gather his Wheat into
his Garner, the Chafe, he will burn with unqueanchable fire.

And now you dear hearts who are young and tender, springing from the true
root, who by the Heavenly Power have been made willing to deny your selves and
take up your Cross daily and follow the leadings of truth, tho through many
trials and deep exercises, you are the living branches of the true Vine which
drinks in the Heavenly dew, upon whom the pleasant showers fall. O you are near
and dear to us, we are comforted in you; you are our Joy in the Lord. Oh, the
flowing Streams of our Fathers Love, which reaches from one to another, which
many waters cannot quench, nor distance of Miles separate, for though absent in
Body, yet present in Spirit, and can simpathyze together, and be a comfort one
to another, Living Praise to our God for ever.

Now Friends here is many of our Ancient and Honorable Women removed off the
Stage of this World and gone to their rest, yet their Memorial is comfortable
to us, and their travel is often before us, and some of us but weakly and not
likely here to continue long, therefore we desire you may let no Place be
empty, but take your Orders, and keep your Ranks, and put on the Breastplate of
righteousness the Helm^t of Salvation, and take the Sword of the Spirit, and
make war in righteousness against the Uncircumcised Phyliftian Nature, lie
waste and untterly consume all Babilons trumpery, cast our her goodly Garments
and Wedge of Gold, and let Achan be destroyed, that Isreal's Camp may prosper,
and tho Corah, Dathan and Abivams Spirit charge you for taking to much upon
you, and as the Scoffers of the Ancient Jews may scoff you matter them not,
but carry on your work and keep your Weapon in your hand. And you that have
Public Testimonies be careful in all your Travels, as well of the good order
of truth and Church Discipline as discharge of your Testimonies where you may,
come or others have need of your affistance; And be not to familiar with any
Spirits, but try the Spirit whether they be of God or nay, and beat down the
cross, proud unsubjected Spirit; But those that are weak in the Faith receive
you; For it ever was, and yet is our great care, the weak may be strengthen,
the Feeble confirmed, and the mourners in Sion comforted, and help to lift up
the Heads and Hands of those that are ready to hang down, and invite the
Daughters of Sion to arise, and s^ake themselves from the dust of the Earth,
and put on their beautiful Garments, that therein they may glorify God.

And Friends, you that are in your places of abode in your Service for the
Lord, be diligent in keeping of your Women's Meetings, and faithful in the
Lords work, having nothing in your Eye but his honor, the prosperity of his
truth, and well being of his people; But still keep under all that which will
not be subject to Truth, and though you may meet with reflections and secret
smiteings, yet the Lord will be with you, for no Weapon formed against Sion can
prosper, no Enchantment against Jacob nor Divination against Israel, therefore
be encouraged and encaurage one another as co workers, and fellow helpers, and
as formerly we have said according to your Measures, as Deborah, willingly be
concerned in the Government of Israel, and as Dorcass making provision for
the Widows and Fatherless; That joy and gladness may be heard in Israell's
Camp, and Jacob may be safe in his Tent.

For Friends, this is the very end of our Travel and Labor of Love that we
all might be gathered to our Ancient Rock and refuge and sure hiding place,
before this trying day come, which now approaches, and times of callamity
which seems to be near; So with dear Love to you desiring the continuance of
your care in coming up to the next Yearly Meeting, if the Lord give us an
opertunity: And that care be taken that these Testimonies be Read in every of
your Women's Meetings; or where Friends may see service for them: So we remain
your Loving Sisters.

Signed on the behalf of our Women's Meeting. BY Katharine Winn. Elizabeth
Beckwith. Judith Bouldby. Mary Frost. Deborah Winn. Sarah English. Sarah Elam.
Mary White.


Dear Sisters,
YOU that are as Mothers in Israel, it is unto you my Love and Life is drawn
forth at this time, desiring to cast my Mite with you into the Treasury of God,
and it is the desire of my heart, that both you and I, and all whom God has
called to be as Mothers in Israel, may be found both in Example and Doctrine,
following the good advice of the holy Apostle, who said, let the Elder Women
exhort the Younger to be sober, to be chaste, to be lovers of their own
Husbands, lovers of their own Children, keepers at Home, not Gadders abroad.

And now dear Sisters, here is much in these things, and they deserve a due
consideration, by us all, to see they be put in practice by us all in our
respective places. First, by Example, and then by Doctrine, to those we have
the Oversight of, as the Flock our Fahers fold, that they with us, and we with
them may all be found performing the things, and answering the end the Lord
created us for, to serve and glorify him in our Age and Days, by a Godly Life,
and holy Conversation in all we put our Hands unto, that our Light which the
God of Israel has been pleased to Englisnte us with, may so shine that others
may see our good Works and Glorify our Father which is in Heaven, who alone is
the Author of every good thought, Word and Work, and is worthy of the Honor of
the same; For without him we can do nothing that is good or that will bring
honor to him, and therefore we are engaged to Exhort one another, and that
daily to have their Eye upon the Lord, for his Divine assistance to help us in
our Respective Places to perform our service to him and to our Husbands and
Children; to be Lovers of our own Husbands in that Love the Saints Felloweship
was in, having our Chaste Conversation coupled with fear, honuring and obaying
them in the Lord: This will make us a comfort, and true help meet to them which
is the and the Lord made Woman for, to serve him, and be a help-meet to her
Husband, and a Nursing Mother to her Children.

And now dear Sisters, I cannot but exhort you as One who through the Lords
mercy has been the Mother of many Children, and has trodden the path; to be
very careful and watchful over your Children while they are under your
Tuition, even from their learning to speak, to their Youth upward, for we may
remember it was the advice of Solomon, Train up a Child in the way thou would
have him to go when he is young, and he will not depart from it when he is old:
For I can truly say the Lord laid a Concern upon me when I was but Young in
years to Watch over my Childrens Words, even when they were but Learning to
Speak, that they might be taught truths Language, and as they grow up they may
be brought to Meetings amongst the Lords People, and kept in the form of truth,
out of the Vain Customs and fashions, and blessed be the Name of Isreal's God
who through his great Love and Mercy has made me to my great Comfort, reap in
Measure the fruits of my Labor, and has begotten Faith in me, of reaping
more, as they and I are preserved Faithful to the end; For 'its the end that
Crowns all, It is not Running well for a time, but continuing in well doing to
the end of Time, that gives us an acceptance with the Lord.

So Dear Friends, you that are Young and are Mothers of Children, the desire of
my heart is, that you may show forth your Love to your Children, by being
watehfull over them, that they get not into those things which you and your
Ancient Friends have known the Terrors of the Lord for, that none be sound
building that up in their Children which the Lord has pulled down by his
Righteous Judgments in themselves; for the good Apostle said, If I build again
the things which I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor. So dear Friends,
I dearly entreat you in the yearning bowels of my Fathers Love to you, and your
Children, desiring that you may be careful over your Children, in keeping them
from Pride, and those things which does not become Women proffessing Godleness:
So will they be made a Comfort and a Blessing to you, but if you be careless,
and give them their Liberty to speaks the Worlds Language, and get into their
Fashions and Customs, (as too many of the Libertine Spirits do, to the grief of
the Upright in heart,) then they will become your Sorrow, and you will not be
clear of their Blood: So to him that is the Wonderful Counselor, do I desire
to recommend you, with the keeping of my own Soul, and remain your Friend and
Sister in the Truth, and a Traveler for Sions Prosperity.

In my Measure Margaret Breckon.


