A FULL AND TRUE ACCOUNT OF A TOTAL VICTORY OVER THE TURKS WITH AN ACCOUNT OF
THE CORONATION OF THE KING OF POLAND
WHITEHAL, September 26. 1697. LAST Night arrived here one of His Majesty's
Messengers from Holland, being sent over with the TREATY of PEACE betwixt His
Majesty and the Most Christian King, in order to its Ratification; which being
dispatched under the Great Seal, was sent back this Evening. Hague, October 1.
N. S. On the 22. of the last Month, the Ambassadors of the Allies met again
with the French Ambassadors at Ryswick, where a Cessation of Arms was agreed on
between the Emperor and France, till the first of November. Cr^ (...) they
could to hinder, or at l^^st delay the Elector of Saxony's Coronation. To this
end they made several P^^^osals, and offered to come over to his side, in case
he would defer the Sole^^^ty till after he had called a General Diet, where
Matters might be ^^ttled wit^ ^utual Consent and Agreement. But all this being
looked upon only as an Amu^^^en^ (...) gain time till the Prince of Conti's
Arrival in this Kingdom; The Kin^ ^^th the Advic^ of the Great Men about him,
resolved to proceed to his C^^^^^tion. Accordingly on the 13 instant, he made a
public Entry into this Ci^^ ^n much State and Splendour, and on the 15 was
Crowned in the great Chur^^ by the Bishop of Cujavia, assisted by several other
Bishops; which was performed with all the Pomp and Ceremonies usual on the like
occasions, and in the presence of a great Concourse of the Nobility, among whom
were the Crown General, the Prince of Lubomerski Marishal of the Court, and
most of the Senators; and it w^^ particularly observed, that many of the
Gentlemen who were before looked upon to be engaged in the contrary Interest,
did assist at this Solemnity, which co^^^^ded with a great Entertainment, and
with firing of the Artilery of thi^ Plac^ ^^d with three Salvo's of all the
Saxon Forces encamped under the Wal^ (...) works, etc. Yesterday the Magistrates
of this City took an Oath of Fidelity to the ^ing, who it is believed will now
march toward Warsaw.

Vienna September 18. On the 14. instant Prince Charles of Vandemont arrived
here from the Imperial Army in Hungary, to bring the Emperor the good News of
an entire and glorious Victory they have obtained over the Turks with these
particulars. The Turkish Army having passed the River Theysse, under the
Command of the Grand Vizier, and posted themselves between the Imperial Army
and Peter-Warradin, by which means they endeavored to cut off our
Communication with the Danube: Prince Eugene of Savoy, who commanded in Chief
the Emperors Forces, resolved so soon as General Rabutin with the Troops from
Transylvania had joined them, to march toward the Enemy, and attack them in
their Camp; This was put in execution on the 11. instant, and with more
diligence because he was informed by some Prisoners, that the Turks to avoid a
Battle, were going to repass the Theysse: After several Hours march, the
Imperialists came up with the Enemy; whom they found posted near Senta, being
25000 Janissaries and 6000 Horses, having secured their Camp with a triple
Entrenchment, and a Bridge behind them. The Grand Seignior lay encamped with
the rest of his Army on the other side of the River: Our Troops with great
Bravery attacked the first Entrenchment, which they made themselves Masters of
in an Hours time; the Turks retiring within their second Entrenchment, where
they made a great Resistance but were likeways beaten from that, and from the
third, and fled in great Confusion; but being stoped by the narrowness of the
Bridge, and the crowd that endeavored to pass it, a great Slaughter was made
by several pieces of Cannon, which played upon them. Of the Enemy there were
found Killed upon the place about 12000, besides those that were drowned, the
number of which was likeways great, the Grand Vizier, Aga of the Janisaries,
and several Bassa's are among the Slain: We took all their Baggage, Wagons and
Tents, 72 Pieces of Cannon, great quantity of Ammunition, and a great many
Horse. The Grand Seignior seeing this Defeat of his Forces, abandoned his Camp
on the other side of Theysse, and retired with great precipitation toward
Temeswaer: The Imperial Horse and Hussars pursued the Enemy, killed a great
Number, and took all their heavy Artilery, Tents, Treasure and Baggage, which
they left in their Second Camp* and it'^ (...) are not above 900 or 1000
killed. Since this, se^^ra^ (...) Officers are ar^^^^d from the Army, who not
only confirm the Account bef^^^ ^entioned, but relate several further
Particulars, by which the Enemies (...) greater; that all their Foot is cut
off, and that we have tak^^ (...) c^ ^on, with an incredible Booty. The Count
of Di^trichstein is (...) ^ere this Evening, bringing with him a more ample
Relation, with the Sta^ (...) Colors that have been taken, and the Grand
Seignior's ow^ Tent. (...) has written to all the Princes and States his
Allies, to acquaint them wit^ (...) Success.


