A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the LATE REVOLUTION in SAVOY, and of the Motives
and Occasion of the Duke of SAVOY's Declaration of WAR against FRANCE, and for
Restoring all the VAUDOIS to their Liberties and Ancient Privileges, who are
joined with His Forces against the French.
As also of the several Defeats given to the French Forces, by the Vaudois and
Savoyards.
In a Letter to a Person of Quality, from Geneva, June 9. 1690.
LICENSED,

June 16. 1690. J. FRASER.

YOU know, that some time ago the French advanced toward Piemont, under the
Command of Monsieur de Catinat; their Number was reported to be 14000 Men, but
the truth is, they were not above Ten Thousand. The pretense of that Expedition
was to make War against the Vaudois; they attacked them the 1st and 2d of May:
The Vaudois defended themselves stoutly, and the French lost many of their Men.
After that Catinat made as if he had been willing to fall upon the Milaneze;
but he came back on a sudden, and posted himself in the Neighborhood of Turin.
The first thing he demanded from the Duke of Savoy, was, That he should give
him 3000 Men of his Troops to balance the Succors he had given the Emperor,
which was, of 100000 pounds sterling. The Duke answered, he had bought some Fiefs
of the Emperor, and that it was really a Bargain, and not any Succors he had
sent him, when he gave him the said One Hundred Thousand Pounds. Catinat not
being contented with this Answer, gave the Duke but twice Twenty Four Hours to
take his last Resolution. The Duke finding himself so closely straightened, made
as if he had a Mind to enter into a Treaty with France; and for that purpose
sent Couriers to Paris, and promised Catinat, in the mean time, he would give
him the Troops the French King was desirous of having. Catinat seemed as if he
had been satisfied with these Promises, and went back toward the Milaneze,
seized upon Carignan-Bridge, upon the River Po; and having left there 1000
Dragoons in Garrison, returned again toward Turin and declared to the Duke,
That h^ would see the Execution of his Promise, and that the King his Maste^
would have, for the security of his Neutrality, the Citadel of Turin and Verue
to be delivered up to him. The Duke, under pretense of Treaty, demanded some
time to know the Resolutions of the French King. Catinat's Nephew went
immediately to the French Court. During this Negotiation and delay, the Duke
got near a Months time, which he diligently employed in gathering secretly the
Militia of the Country, in Fortifying and Furnishing with Ammunitions the
Citadel of Turin, and the other Frontier Places, causing a good Guard to be
kept in the Nightime. He did likewise employ some of that time in disparching
Envoys to all the Neighboring Princes, and especially to the Diet of the
Suissers, where his Ambassador, and that of Spain spoke with so good success
against the Cheats and Violences of the French Court, that all the Assembly was
moved so far to compassion, as to shed tears: And the Diet resolved to acquaint
the D. of Savoy, That the intention of the Cantons was, That he should order
Catinat to draw back his Troops from Piemont, which if he should refuse to do,
the Suissers would not fail to give the Duke all the Assistance they were able
to do. The Courier, which Monsieur Amelot, the French Ambassador in
Suisserland, had sent to Monsieur Catinat, came to him by some hours sooner
than he that was sent to the Duke from the Diet; and hearing the Resolution of
the Cantons, he sent to Compliment the Duke, praying him to send him his
Chancellor, and telling him; that he hoped some Means should be found out to
accommodate all Affairs. The Duke, who knew nothing yet from Suisserland, of
what had been determined there in his Favor, sent him his Chancellor, with a
design to gain more time; but the Courier of Suisserland being arrived a little
while after; the Duke sent after his Chancellor to call him back, and having
Assembled the Council of Estate, and that of War, it was Resolved they should
have nothing more to manage with Catinat, but order him to depart the Dukes
Dominion within 24 Hours, which if he would not do, they would Attack him and
Charge him immediately.

You must know that when Catinat received that unwelcom News, his Army was
weakened, by a Detachment he had sent against the Vaudois, to keep the Valleys
of Pragelas; besides it was lessened by 2 Regiments of Suissers, who refused to
fight against the Savoyards; Monsieur Catinat to secure them, sent them to
Cazal, to have from thence 2 other Regiments, but the Suissers in their March
meeting with all the Savoy Militia in Arms, joined with them, and renounced the
French Service. On the other side, the Detachment which was sent against the
Vaudois had but a bad success: the truth is, the Vaudois were forced to retire
upon a high Mountain, after they had made a great slaughter of the French, many
Carts of wounded Persons were carried to Turin, where they arrived before the
Rupture. The Vaudois hearing the Dukes Intentions, they offered themselves to
him to go and serve in his Army against the French.

After the Duke had taken and declared in Council his Resolution of breaking
with France, he came out upon the Piazza, and made a fine Speech to the People,
which showed so great an Aversion against the French, that they offered to
employ their Lives and Fortunes for the Service of His Royal Highness; the
Priests themselves offered to give the Plate of their Churches, saying, They
could Officiate in Wooden Cups. There came Ten thousand Men from Mondovi, and
from the Marquisat of Seve; they demanded leave to Charge the French, and there
was such a thronging to take Arms all over Savoy, that they were not able to
give them all Powder and Ammunition. They set a Guard upon Monsieur Rebenac
Ambassador of France; When the Duke had the good News from Suisserland, he had
at the same time some likewise from the Italian Princes, who encouraged him
very much in the Resolution he has taken against France.

The Republic of Venice offered him 20000. Pounds Sterling a Month. After this
the Duke sent Couriers to acquaint all the Princes with his Rupture with
France, and caused to be Published, all over his Dominions, a Proclamation in
behalf of the Vaudois, which gave them leave to come into their Country again,
he caused the same Proclamation to be sent into Suisserland, and other Parts,
to Solicit the Vaudois to return, assuring them, that all the Violences and
Cruelties that were practiced against them did not come from him, but from the
French, who were the Authors and Executors of them. Acts of Hostility are
already begun, the Vaudois are come down from their Mountains, and have cut off
a Party of 100 French. They say Monsieur Catinat has lost 900 Men, which have
been killed by the Country People. The Merchants of Lions have at Turin Three
or four hundred thousand Pounds Sterling worth of Goods, which they have left
there to save themselves.

Troops advance from the Milaneze, and there are already 3000 Spainards at Ast.
Some Forces are drawing from Germany into the Milaneze, and they expect in
Suisserland with great impatience the return of King William's Courier, who if
he comes back with a good Sum of Money, without question in little time we
shall see an entire Revolution and change of Affairs there, from what they were
some Months ago.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1690.


