A Full and the Truest NARRATIVE Of the most Horrid, Barbarous and Unparalled
MURDER, Committed on the Person of John Knight, Apprentice to Mr. Arthur Worth,
Silk-man in Milk*street, London.

Which most Wicked and Cruel Murder was Committed by the desperate and bloody
hand of Nathaniel Bu^ler, his most Intimate and Bosom friend, as they lay in
Bed together, on Thursday, morning August 6. 1657.

TOGETHER, With the manner of his being Apprehended and Examined; and the
Confession from the mouth of the said Butler, word for word: And his earnest
Repentance for his desperate Fact.

ALSO, An Account of the Trial, Condemnation and Sentence pronounced against
him, which was Executed upon him, on Monday August 31. 1657.

And his last Speech upon the Ladder Immediately before his death, which he
desi^e^ might be printed after his Death; and to that end gave it at large in
Writing from off the Ladder, to Mr. Yearwood Chaplain to the Right Honorable
Sir Robert Titchbourn Lord Mayor of LONDON.

With Observations and Reflections upon the Whole.

Published after many Lying and false Relations both before and since his
Death, with a detection of many lies and absurdities; and that the truth may be
known.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb for J. Saywell, and are to be sold at the Pile of
Bibles, the co^ner shop of the East end of the F^sh-Market* in the Stocks,
looking into L^mbard-street, over against the Post house, between (...)

To the Reader.
Ingenuous Reader;
FOr such I presume thee as an inquirer after truth, and Truth seeks no
corners, yet is sometimes hard to be found, unless God give it in; as by the
substance of the following Narrative thou will perceive. How many in things of
the highest Account do believe truth to be no other thing, than what may be
bottomed in the shallowest skull? Even so has it fallen out in what we have now
in hand to discover. New, new, new, and true; is now adays (to ordinary
Readers) an authentication sufficient, for Relations of this or the like
nature. But Reader it is the Cry of Blood, of Blood! Therefore more seriousness
becomes our pen: in the perusal of this Relation, thou shall in a chain of
dependencies read the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; and as
such thou art desired to Read for thy satisfaction, what has fully satisfied
him, who is, what he hops, at least wishes thee;

A Lover of truth.

A full and the truest Narrative of the horrid, most barbarous, and unparralled
Murder, Committed on the Person of John Knight, Apprentise to Mr. Arthur Worth,
Silkman, in Milk-street, London.
NOt to trouble the Reader with a needless and tedious Introduction to a
Relation of this nature, which usually some do? and make a Porch bigger than
the house it self, which is ridiculous: But to come unto the matter before us.
It is a Narration of the most horrid, barbarous and unparralell'd Murder that
has been heard of in this age.

All sins offend the great, dreadful and just, yet Good God; and seldom escape
his punishments in this world, but without repentance and faith never in the
other. But the Cry of blood is loud! and Murder open mouthed! not to instance
in that of Cain at this time, since a clear Testimony of Gods Providence and
Justice has fallen out lately in Milk-street; in the discovery of a barbarous
Murder, and the Murderer Nathaniel Butler, who had his chiefest accuser
within himself, and was dogged by his own conscience. He was Apprentice by
Indenture to Mr. Monday in Carter-lane, and turned over to John Abbot a Drawer
of Cloth in the Old-change, and afterward turned over to one Mr. Goodday of
the same Trade in Carter-lane as aforesaid, in the time of whose service he
committed this horrid Murder, or, rather to serve the Devil he committed this
desperate Murder. And the manner how he did it shall hereafter in its place be
declared; but the opportunity and occasion in the first place was thus: Mr
Worth (one deserving his name) a worthy Citizen of London, a man industrious
and active; who upon the affairs of Trade or Merchandise being gone to Bristol
Fair, and having taken one of his Apprentices with him for his assistance; left
at home his other Apprentice John Knight to manage the affairs of his trade,
here at his shop in London. Now it is supposed that he was a youth somewhat
timorous, and fearing to lie alone, in his Masters absence he requested
Nathaniel Butler to be his Bedfellow until his Master and fellow Apprentice
should return from Bristol: Thirteen or fourteen nights they lay together, and
as it seems they were very familiar and intimate: All this while not any of Mr.
Worth's household (excepting John Knight himself) did know of Nathaniel Butler's
lying in the house with him, for things were so secretly carried between them,
that he came ordinarily toward Bedtime, about nine or ten of the clock at
night, and returned in the morning with the first up in the house, which was
his bedfellow. Whether Mr. Goodday Nathaniel Butler's Master, or his fellow
Apprentice at least did know thereof, rests much in suspicion. But that all
entrusted by their Masters or Mistresses, may henceforth be wary whom they
entertain into such familiarity: Behold! The sad issue! This new bedfellow
murders his intimate and bosom Friend for the base lucre of money, which
having thus got, he was as restless as before: The sight of some baggs of money
took his nightly rest from him, all Twesday night he could not sleep. On
Wednesday he makes show of love and friendship, and they agree to go a drinking
together, and then a Fishing: After this they Sup together; but what mischief
is at the bottom of that heart which dissembles Love? Let the issue prove.

On the Wednesday night he could not sleep.

On the Thursday morning by break of day he cut the mouth and throat of his
bedfellow, and strangled him on his bed, being both in their shirts. A sad
spectacle is discovered by a bloody shirt found (lying on the Counter in the
Shop in the morning,) by the maid servant of the house, who presently called in
some of the neighbors, who going to the chamber where the Appprentice lay,
they found him lying with his feet on a corner of the boulster, and his head
toward the lower end of the bed, in gore blood, and with a lock of hair in his
right hand, and some scattering hairs were found in his left hand also; they
were all struck with amazment! The house is raised! The neighborhood called
in! A tumult about the door! The murder visible! The Murderer unknown and
escaped in the morning, presently after the fact.

The Coroner Mr. Edward Moreton, being sent for, came immediately and having
summoned a Jury of twenty four Neighbors, did sit upon Enquiry, concerning
the Murder and Murderer: People were admitted of all degrees to go up into the
room and view the bloody murdered Corpse, and some were examined concerning the
same; whose innocencies were apparent.

On Friday the Murdered young man was decently Interred in the Church of
Magdalen Milk-street, accompanied with the sighs and tears of many of his dear
and good Relations, Neighbors and many others.

But all this while, the Coroner and Jury were at a stand, they found the
Murder, but not the murderer; yet endeavors for discovery thereof were still
used with much sedulity; and all persons laid hold on upon the least suspicion.
It happened that a young man who on Wednesday came down-wards by Water, hearing
of this Murder, did acquaint some Friends of Master Worths, that he did see
John Knight a Fishing on the same Wednesday; the Youth was further examined,
whom he saw with him? and he described the Person and Habit of the Person whom
he saw, as well as he could; in so much that one gazing at the door among
others, was taken upon suspicion, by his Habit, and under strict examination
until credible assurance cleared him; his Apparel being very like as the
youth had described.

But in a perfect and full discovery of the Murderer, the only hand of God was
manifest: though much search was made in pursuance thereof. Being informed by a
Neighbors servant that one Nathaniel Butler, was an acquaintance of John
Knights, and on supposition that he might know what other acquaintance he had,
not then having the least suspicion of him; and having learned that his Masters
house was in Carter-lane, the said Servant with an other young man were sent to
Master Goodday's house to enquire after this Nathaniel Butler, where they were
told, that he was gone to a Turners shop at the Corner of Bread-street, thither
they went and found him accordingly; and asking him whether he knew one John
Knight, he being as it seems smitten in his own heart, faltered in his speech,
and made out of the shop with a dejected Countenance; at first denying that he
knew him, but presently after confessed that he did know him; whereupon they
asked him to accompany them to Milk-street? but he pretended business and said
he could not go then, and went his way: In this discourse with him, having
perceived his hands to be scratched, they began to be suspicious of him, so
that they followed him at a distance, till they saw him in his Masters house in
Carterlane. After which they related what had passed to Mr. Worth at his house
in Milk-street, who presently sent one of the Martials men of this City, being
then about the door, together with those young men for his Assistance unto Mr
Gooddays house in Carterlane on Saturday in the Evening, who going to enquire
there for Nathaniel Butler, they spied him crossing the way from his Masters
door, going to a house over the way, they pursuing him, found him in the Entry;
and then the Martials man laid hold of him, and charged him with suspicion of
Murder; and straitway they brought him to Master Worth's house without any
resistance, where he was caused to be stripped, and in searching him, his Leather
Drawers were found to be bloody, and some blood about his Clothes; also stains
of blood on his Stockings, which with the scratches on his Face and Hands, were
strong presumptions, that he had a hand in this Murder, with which he being
charged, several times denied. During the time of this search of him, the
Martial of this City with another Gentleman went down to his Masters house,
and enquiring for Butlers Trunk, a new Trunk was showed them, which being
instantly broke open, they therein found two Bags of money, one of which Bags
had Mr. Worths Mark on it, which being brought by the Martial to Mr. Worths
house, and being thrown down upon a Table with acclamation! that they had not
only found out the Murderer, but the money also: The Martial's man then called
for a Cord, wherewith he bound his Hands; Some of his Hair being plucked off to
be compared with the Hair which was found in the young man's hand that was
Murdered; and being ready to carry him away: He then began in a crying manner
to Confess; the Coroner and some of the Jury with two Constables being
present, he began by degrees to acknowledge one thing after another; and at
last confessed the whole Murder, and the manner thereof before them.

After which the Martial and the Constables with the Coroner and some of the
Jury carried him before Sr. Robert Titchbourn, the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of London, where he voluntarily made the like Confession, and seemed to
be very repentant and deject in his mind: From whence he was Committed, and
strongly guarded to Newgate Prison about Nine or Ten of the Clock on Saturday
Night, the eighth of August, where he was put into safe Custody.

On Monday the tenth of August, the Coroner and Jury sat in the Parish Church
of Magdalen Milk-street, and did fully agree upon their joint Verdict, both as
to the Murder, and Murderer; Nathaniel Butler by name.

On this Monday also, it pleased the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London,
to send Mr. Yearwood his Lordships Chaplain unto this Prisoner in Newgate, with
whom came Mr. Venning also, both godly and able Ministers of the Word: And on
the afternoon, they had opportunity to speak with this sad but desperate
Murderer; and finding him very willing to make Answer to what they proposed;
they dealt very conscienciously and plainly with him, concerning the Point of
Repentance, as to the Truth and Realty of it; in consideration of his Offense
and sin against the just and righteous God: and not so much eying his own
present sad condition, or apprehension of the fear of after shame or
punishment: Master Venning closed the meeting with a comfortable Prayer, over,
and with the Prisoner, and so parted.

But now take the Confession from his own mouth, to the Questions then put; and
these were his very Answers, word for word to every of them.

Monday August 10. 1657.
NAthaniel Butler born in Alton in Hamshire seven miles beyond Farneham in
Surry, makes this confession, in the presence of Mr. Worth and others.

I have destroyed the Image of God in John Knight, no person Woman or maid had
any hand in the Murder of him but my self.

I saw the money on Tuesday morning last, when I was combing of my Hair in the
Shop, I looked into the Till.

I had then a Penknife in my Pocket, which John desired of me.

I had then in my pocket a knife of my fellow servants Thomas Falconer.

Wednesday morning last, we went to the Black-Sw^n on the back side of the
Shambles, and there drunk our mornings draught, and we concluded to go a
Fishing; and John bought me a Fishing ^od, and bought himself one that cost
four or five shillings; we appoin^ed to meet at two of the clock in the
Afternoon, at Paul's Wharff, at which time John came to my Masters house, and
presently within a quarter of an hour we met at the Sun-Alehouse at Paul's
Wharff, and there bought Bread to make ground-baits; and thence went a Fishing
till five or six of the Clock; after which we parted and I went home to my
Masters house: We appointed to meet together at eight of the clock that night,
which we did at Honey-lane end, and thence went into Fish-street to the
Maidenhead, and drunk three half pints of Sack, and eat a piece of Salmon of
twelve pence.

I never had but one Forty shillings of him.

There was One hundred and ten pounds in both Bags, and there is taken out
about seven pounds.

I came afterward about ten a clock to Mr Worths house, and was in the back
Warehouse when they came to see the Doors locked in.

We went to bed together, and I could not be at quiet till I had done the Fact.

I made proffer many a time with my knife to the intent to cut John's throat,
and once put my knife up again: And between three and four of the clock, on
Thursday morning, I took my knife and cut his Mouth to his Ear, at which he
schrieked out and cried Murder. Then I put my right hand into his Mouth, and so
lay struggling together for about half an hour, and at length I strangled him:
after which I looked about the Chamber, and the Devil instigated me to cut his
Throat, which I did with my right hand, we being both naked.

Then I slipped off my bloody Shirt, and wiped the blood off me, and put on my
clothes, and having taken the Keys of the Till, where the money lay, out of
John's pocket: I brought down my bloody shirt, and laid it on the Counter in
the shop, and opened the Till and took out two Bags of money, and went away
with them, leaving the Keys in the Till, and the shop door open standing a
char.

I went home to my Masters house in Carter-lane, which has two doors, and at
the back door in the yard, it being open, I went in and washed my hands and
face; and after took water in my hand and washed the blood off my stockings.

Then put off all my clothes and went to bed, and put the two Bags of money in
the Bed with me.

In the morning after I was up, I bought a Trunk, which cost eight shillings,
and put the money in that Trunk; I knew not what to do.

I came to Milk-street on Friday night, but knew not what to do.


BY all that is passed you may eye the Divine Providence of God in detection of
Murder. And now ex ore is he condemned, and a sure ground for Bills of
Indictment prepared, as to Murder and Theft; and as providence willed this
timely discovery: So likewise as opportunely did it fall out (that Justice
might not be delayed) that the Sessions in the Old-Balie London, did begin on
the Wednesday following, and he was there accordingly on the twelfth of August
arraigned for his life upon two Indictments, the one for the Murder, and the
other for taking away the money; to both which he pleaded guilty: Command was
given that he should be returned to Newgate. His guilt and condemnation lying
so plain before him, his only suit to the Honorable Court was, the favor of
some time for his repentance, and preparation for Death: It is said the Right
Honorable the Lord Major of the City of London (the Recorder being absent) did
answer, You gave the young man no time of Repentance, or to that effect;
whereat the Prisoner was dread and full of horror! yet nevertheless, favor
was granted him by the whole Court, for more than a fortnights time to the end
desired: Which that it might have its true end, and that it might be a means to
bring him to a true and through repentance of that his Capital and grand
crying crimson Crime; and of all other his sins, through the whole course of
his misled life; and that God would give him Faith and Interest in the Blood of
Christ, for the Pardon of all: Doubtless to God, who hears Prayer, were the
hea^ty desires and breathings of many godly and good Christians sent up on his
behalf.

On Friday August the fourteenth, he received the Sentence of Condemnation,
viz. That he should be led back again to the place from whence he came; and
from thence carried to the place of Execution (which was appointed to be in
Cheap Side, looking into Milk-street) and there be hanged by the Neck until he
were dead.

All the time of his Imprisonment, he had the assistance of many able and godly
Divines, Ministers of London, and elsewhere to converse with, almost every day
one or more (yea, the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London, himself
vouchsafed to confer and pray with and for him; as is said more than once) to
whom he was very open hearted, and condemned himself in his general ill led
life, as having been addicted to gaming, drinking, and abusing himself with
women, and other vices whereto the Devil had inured him, in order to this his
black or rather bloody sin of Murder.

He has been often heard to cry out of his too licensious course of life, And
as often has he cried out of the sight of the money, which led him into the
snare of temptation to this vile Act.

Withal he has declared some of his Accomplices, and what an ill instrument he
had been for them, with their wicked practices in wronging of their Masters,
and many other things tending to their Masters wrong, and their own ruins;
which in time will be further enquired into.

But now we shall attend him in the manner of his execution, and his deport,
last words and actions therein.

On Monday the 31th. of August 1657. No tree was ever more ready for the Axe of
Justice, than the peoples expectations greedy of seeing the execution thereof.
About seven of the clock in the morning the condemned prisoner Nathaniel Butler
was brought in a Coach from Newgate to Cheapside, where a Gibbet was erected on
purpose facing Milk-street, in view of the house where he had done his bloody
Act, where stepping out of the Coach, after a little while, he ascended the
Ladder, and began his last Speech unto the People; and but for the Press and
Noise of the Multitude he might have been heard afar off; for he stretched his
voice exceedingly to be heard, insomuch that spending himself in reading of his
Papers, he was seen to sweat very much, which occasioned his often wiping of
his Face, and increased delay, so that he was desired to abreviate himself in
what he had to say, which accordingly he did; and delivered his Papers into the
hand of Mr. Yearwood or some other of his acquaintance; the substance whereof,
in short was this.

That he did confess himself to have been a most grievous sinner, in the whole
course of his life; and desired that all others, especially all that had been
his Companions, to take heed of sin; showing them how horrid and bitter a thing
it was to sin against God; advising them likewise above all things to beware of
presumption, and that they would be more careful in their walkings hereafter,
and be warned henceforth by his present Example; for said he, If you will go on
in sinful practices and hope for Pardon, God will keep his Pardon, and you
shall keep your sins: And then declared that he hoped, yea was strongly
assured, that his own Pardon was sealed in the blood of Christ: Then he prayed
very audibly: Mr. Yearwood also the Minister there present did pray for him;
then himself also prayed again somewhat lower in his voice than he had spoke
and prayed before: For what he delivered at first, was with much Christian
boldness; then he commended his s^ul to God through Christ; and said, Now I am
lanching into the Ocean of Eternity, (and fitted himself for a turn off the
Ladder,) having in the close of his Prayer said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit:
Instantly, the Executioner performed his Office.

So soon as he was dead, he was cut down, put into a Coffin and carried away in
the same Coach wherein he was brought, in order to his interment, which at
night by the care of some of his Relations and Friends was decently performed,
in the Church yard of Gregory's by Paul's, and Mr. Yearwood who the night before
had sat up all the night with him, with other Friends and Acquaintance of his;
the night was spent in heavenly conference and prayer (excepting for about
three hours that the dying prisoner took some rest.) He, was pleased to make
an Oration over his corpse, when in the grave; and did then forbear to speak any
thing of or concerning him, as to the several conferences and discourses
formerly had with him in prison (but declared that possibly hereafter they
should be printed) only that he died as to his and others apprehensions a true
penitent, and in a hopeful condition as to his after estate.

Fiat Justitia aut ruat mundus.
Observations and reflections upon the whole, intended to deter others from the
sin of Murder, or any sin tending to the endangering both of body and soul.
1. ALl sins offend the great, dreadful, just, yet good God: Sin seldom
escapes punishment here.

2. Murder a Crying sin: Witness this example.

3. No good sign in a Servants often removes: The rolling stone gathers no moss,
and it is apparent, he removed not for the better, but for the worse.

4. That a man's lawful and just undertakings, may unawares become
disadvantagious unto him: Happening through the weakness or wilfulness of
servants, the first being in this case.

5. It is dangerous to be too confident of a new acquaintance: The subject of
this Narration is a Comment.

6. It is commendable in a Family, that at night the Master or Mistress send
all to bed before them, see all fast, and then take up the Keys; and if
weakness or sickness hinder not, to be first up in the morning: This Order had
prevented this late sad accident.

7. Covetousness is the root of all evil: The sight of some ba^gs of money, and
a desire after them; caused him to Murder his Friend, to the hazard of his own
body and soul.

8. Youthful delights and pleasures may be bought at too dear a rate: Witness
their Drinking, Fishing, Feasting, etc.

9. Confidence and guilt inconsistent: Witness his sudden Change of
countenance upon denial.

10. Conviction and dejection usual: And a sign of more grace than obstinacy.

11. Penitents (though in the greatest sins) to be dealt warily with, for fear
of desperation: Such was the Honorable Lord Major of London's care to send his
Chaplain and others to confer and prepare the Prisoner for Death.

12. What Nathaniel Butler meant by the Image of God: If the inner man? what
horror should have possessed him, in consideration of his damnable act?

13. Accomplices usually strict in their appointments: Witness their Precise
meetings.

14. Moneys ill got, usually soon spent: As of one hundred and ten pounds,
about seven pounds gone ^n three days.

15. There is a lawful desire and use of money, but the love of money breeds
restlesness, and is too often got by Hook or by Crook: His rest and quiet
failed him upon the desire of the money, before and after the fact, and in the
enjoyment of his desires; for it is said he slept not in six nights after sight
of the money.

16. From the time of the enjoyment of our most earnest desires, especially if
unlawful; the Devil usually a disturber of enjoyment: He had got his desired
Devil in two baggs, in bed with him, then in a Trunck; and yet he knew not what
to do?

It is thought his coming to Milk-street that Friday night on which John Knight
was buried, was to have restored the money again and confessed the matter to
Mr. Worth, and referred himself to Justice, but he returned; not knowing what
to do?

A few lines will be requisite to detect the gross misinformations (though care
was taken to prevent them) which some Pamphleteers have spread in print to the
deceiving of people.
ANd first it is not to be believed by any wise man that there should be found
a mouth so black as to say, his being of opinion, that this Age has covered
and countenanced more horrid Murder than ever were committed since the world
began, and would make one believe that Murder was almost privileged, and that
the Sun has seen and smiled on such Murders, at which in modesty of former
times he would have started back, or withdrawn himself behind a Cloud rather
than to have beheld them; What an aspersion this is to the whole State in
general, and worthy what punishment, I leave to judicious men to infer?

Secondly, from Aspersion of the State in general, he descends to particulars,
and begins with as sad an Object as ever was (and yet as innocent) the Murdered
Servant of Master Worth, John Knight, who was about nineteen years of Age,
descended of Worshipful Ancestors (his Father having been a Justice of Peace
in Berkshire) born to a fair estate and beginning in his Trade of a Silk-man;
and as hopeful therein, for in one years time or there abouts, he was grown so
expert, that his Master did trust him with the sole mannagement of his Affairs
in his abscence; and he performed it to good liking, and might have continued
so to have done, had not this sad disaster fallen out. Yet a Sheet Pamphleteer
asperseth him with a presumption of the lending of great sums of money to
Nathaniel Butler, to endulge his opinion of him; and that he should defraud his
Master of forty shillings to lend the said Nathaniel Butler: Which aspersions
may posibly be examined in time, and what the Law and a considerate Jury will
award, will be the just punishment of such Defamers: For the Youth had a little
before received more considerately (then what he had lent,) from his Mother out
of the Country; so that he needed not to defraud his Master, nor does he charge
him in the least with such an act; as having clearer testimonies of his better
Service.

Thirdly, It Is spread abroad and thought that they were Christened in the same
Font, and had been School-fellows, but its evident they were born at too far a
distance each from other, that the first could not be; and its as certain that
until he became an Apprentice here in London, they knew not each other.

Fourthly, Another Pamphleteer endeavors for a sin in the Son to Asperse and
defame the Father; and to take a way his Name and Credit at once, this relates
to Nathaniel Butler his Father.

Fifthly, One Relator, or rather Paper-stainer, since his Death, has these
words; Who so shall read this engeniously, or have any discourse with him, will
etc. And in another place, prays; The Lord strengthen him, and stand by him,
with other absurdities, not a few.

Lastly, Other passages as well lying as Non-sensicall are spread though their
Pot Pamphlets, and Paper Murderers: for a man's good Name and Honor, is mostly
accounted as dear as his Life.

A POSTSCRIPT, OR, Remarks upon the whole.
THus good Reader, Thou have the whole truth of that horrid Murder unfolded
unto thee, and that by endeavors of some whose desires were more after the
knowledge and making known the Truth, than their hopes or desires of profit;
which is the usual bate of the paper-stainers of this Age. And as a further
assurance of the care taken to bring this to light, I will assure thee, on
Monday at night which was the tenth of August last, the Order (in words to this
affect) was left by the head City-Martial, directed to the Clerk of the
Stationers Hall, viz.

For as much, That there is care taken, that after the Execution of the late
Desperate Murderer Nathaniel Butler, there shall be Published a true and exact
Relation of his sad Act; as also of his Confession, and the legal Proceedings
upon the whole, etc. It is therefore (by Command from the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor) forbidden that any Person or Persons presume to put in Print any
Book, Pamphlet, or Ballad; of, or concerning the same. And it is desired, that
the Reader suspend his censure until then; for that in the last Monday and
Thursdays News Books, and in other Pamphlets there was some misinformation,
which order the said Clerk, to his commendation, punctually observed.

Great was his Lordships care herein, but greater his zeal; for the good of the
Prisoners Soul: and it will not easily slip out of memory, that a dying man, in
the letter of the Law, should be visited in order to his Souls-welfare, by Sr.
Robert Titchbourn Knight. and Lord Mayor of London: And often visited by his
Lordships Champlain Mr* Randolph Yearwood.

London. ss The names of the Jurors of the Coroners Inquest, upon the death of
John Knight, who was Murdered by Nathaniel Butler.
Richard Chaplyn. George Hawkins. William Drinkwater. Humphrey Kilby. William
Street. Christopher Hussy. Edward Lewis. John Holms. John Eaton. Thomas
Langham. William Holgate. Robert Moreton. Richard Brindley. Richard Aley.
Robert Peete. Isaac Hodgkins. John Tarleton. Edward Dickins. Robert Brierley.
Thomas Walton. William Beedham. George Pawlet. George King and Edward
Nettleship.
XXIV.

By me Edward Moreton Coroner


