THE FAME AND CONFESSION OF THE FRATERNITY OF R: C: Commonly, of the Rosy
Cross.

WITH A Praeface annexed thereto, and a short Declaration of their Physical
Work.

By EUGENIUS PHILALETHES.

Jarch: apud Philostrat: (...).

Veritas in Profundo. London, Printed by J. M. for Giles Calvert, at the black
spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1652.

THE Publisher to the Reader.
IT is the Observation of such as skill Dreams, That to travel in our sleep a
long way, and all alone, is a sign of Death. This it seems the Poet knew: for
when the Queen of Carthage was to dye for Love, he fits her with this
Melancholy Vision:

-- -- Longam Incomitata videtur
Ire Viam. -- --
Now the use I make of it, is this: I would be so wise, as to prognosticate. I
do therefore promise my present Work not only Life, but Acceptance: for in this
my Dream (and I know you will call it so) I travel not without Company. There
were some Gentlemen besides my self, who affected this Fame, and thought it no
Disparagement to their own: but it was their pleasure it should receive light
at my hands, and this made them defer their own Copies, which otherwise had
past the Press. I have, Reader, but little more to say, unless I tell thee of
my Justice, and now thou shall see how distributive it is. The Translation of
the Fama belongs to an unknown hand, but the Abilities of the Translator I
question not. He has indeed mistaken Damascus for Damcar in Arabia, and this I
would not alter, for I am no Pedant to correct another man's Labors. The Copy
was communicated to me by a Gentleman more learned then my self, and I should
name him here, but that he expects not either thy thanks or mine. As for the
Preface, it is my own, and I wish thee the full Benefit of it, which certainly
thou can not miss, if thou come to it with clear eyes, and a purged spirit.
Consider that Prejudice obstructs thy Judgment: for if thy Affections are
engaged* though to an Ignis fatuus, thou do think it a Guide* because thou
do follow it. It is not Opinion makes Things False or True: for men have
denied a great part of the World, which now they inhabit: and America as well
as the Philosophers Stone, was sometimes in the Predicament of Impossibilities.
There is nothing more absurd, then to be of the same mind with the Generality
of Men, for they have entertained many gross Errors, which Time and Experience
have confuted. It is indeed our Sluggishness and Incredulity that hinder all
Discoveries, for men contribute nothing toward them but their Contempt, or,
which is worst, their Malice. I have known all this my self, and therefore I
tell it thee: but what use thou will make of it, I know not. To make thee what
Man should be, is not in my power, but it is much in thy own, if thou know
thy Duty to thy self. Think of it, and Farewell.

E. P.

TO THE Wise and Understanding READER.
WIsdom (says Solomon) is to a man an infinite Treasure, for she is the Breath
of the Power of God, and a pure Influence that flows from the Glory of the
Almighty; she is the Brightness of Eternal Light, and an undefiled Mirror of
the Majesty of God, and an Image of his Goodness; she teaches us Soberness and
Prudence, Righteousness and Strength; she understands the Subtilty of words,
and Solution of dark sentences; she foreknoweth Signs and Wonders, and what
shall happen in time to come; with this Treasure was our first Father Adam
fully endued: Hence it does appear, that after God had brought before him all
the Creatures of the Field, and the Fowls under Heaven, he gave to every one of
them their proper names, according to their nature.

Although now through the sorrowful fall into sin this excellent Jewel Wisdom
has been lost, and mere Darkness and Ignorance is come into the World, yet
notwithstanding has the Lord God sometimes hitherto bestowed, and made
manifest the same, to some of his Friends: For the wise King Solomon does
testify of himself, that he upon earnest prayer and desire did get and obtain
such Wisdom of God, that thereby he knew how the World was created, thereby he
understood the Nature of the Elements, also the time, beginning, middle, and
end, the increase and decrease, the change of times through the whole Year, the
Revolution of the Year, and Ordinance of the Stars; he understood also the
properties of tame and wild Beasts, the cause of the reigning of the Winds,
and minds and intents of men, all sorts and natures of Plants, virtues of
Roots, and others, was not unknown to him. Now I do not think that there can be
found any one who would not wish and desire with all his heart to be Partaker
of this noble Treasure; but seeing the same Felicity can happen to none, except
God himself give Wisdom, and send his holy Spirit from above, we have therefore
set forth in print this little Treatise, to wit, Famam and Confessionem, of the
Laudable Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, to be read by every one, because in
them is clearly shown and discovered, what concerning it the World has to
expect.

Although these things may seem somewhat strange, and many may esteem it to be
but a Philsophical show, and no true History, which is published and spoken of
the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; it shall here sufficiently appear by our
Confession, that there is more in recessu then may be imagined; and it shall be
easily understood, and observed by every one (if he be not altogether void of
understanding) what now adays, and at these times, is meant thereby.

Those who are true Disciples of Wisdom, and true Followers of the Spherical
Art, will consider better of these things, and have them in greater estimation,
as also judge far otherwise of them, as has been done by some principal
Persons, but especially of Adam Haselmeyer, Notarius Publicus to the Arch Duke
Maximilian, who likewise has made an Extract ex scriptis Theologicis
Theophrasti, and written a Treatise under the Title of Jesuiter, wherein he
wills, that every Christian should be a true Jesuit, that is, to walk, live,
be, and remain in Jesus: He was but ill rewarded of the Jesuits, because in his
Answer written upon the Famam, he did name those of the Fraternity of the Rosy
Cross, The highly illuminated men, and undeceiving Jesuits; for they not able
to brook this, laid hands on him, and put him into the Calleis, for which they
likewise have to expect their reward.

Blessed Aurora will now henceforth begin to appear, who (after the passing
away of the dark Night of Saturn) with her Brightness altogether extinguisheth
the shining of the Moon, or the small Sparks of Heavenly Wisdom, which yet
remains with men, and is a Forerunner of pleasant Phoebus, who with his clear
and fiery glistering Beams brings forth that blessed Day, long wished for, of
many true-hearted; by which Daylight then shall truly be known, and shall be
seen all heavenly Treasures of godly Wisdom, as also the Secrets of all hidden
and unvisible things in the World, according to the Doctrine of our
Forefathers, and ancient Wisemen.

This will be the right kingly Ruby, and most excellent shining Carbuncle, of
the which it is said, That he does shine and give light in darkness, and to be
a perfect Medicine of all imperfect Bodies, and to change them into the best
Gold, and to cure all Diseases of Men, easing them of all pains and miseries.

Be therefore, gentle Reader, admonished, that with me you do earnestly pray to
God, that it please him to open the hearts and ears of all ill hearing people,
and to grant unto them his blessing, that they may be able to know him in his
Omnipotency, with admiring contemplation of Nature, to his honor and praise,
and to the love, help, comfort and strengthening of our Neighbors, and to the
restoring of all the diseased.

The Preface.
IF it were the Business of my Life or Learning, to procure my self that noise
which men call Fame, I am not to seek what might conduce to it. It is an Age
affords many Advantages, and I might have the choice of several Foundations,
whereon to build my self. I can see withal, that Time and Employment have made
some persons Men, whom their first Adventures did not find such. This sudden
Growth might give my Imperfections also the Confidence of such another start:
but as I live not by common Examples, so I drive not a Common Design. I have
taken a course different from that of the World, for (Readers) I would have you
know, that whereas you plot to set your selves up, I do here contrive to bring
my self down. I am in the Humor to affirm the Essence, and Existence of that
admired Chimaera, the Fraternity of R. C. And now Gentlemen I thank you, I
have Air and Room enough: me thinks you sneak and steal from me, as if the
Plague and this Red Cross were inseparable. Take my Lord have mercy along with
you, for I pity your sickly Brains, and certainly as to your present State
the Inscription is not unseasonable. But in lieu of this, some of you may
advise me to an Assertion of the Capreols of del Phaebo, or a Review of the
Library of that discreet Gentleman of the Mancha, for in your Opinion those
Knights and these Brothers are equally Invisible. This is hard measure, but I
shall not insist to disprove you: If there be any amongst the Living of the same
Bookish says with my self, They are the Persons I would speak to, and yet in
this I shall act modestly, I invite them not, unless they be at Leisure.

When I consider the unjust Censure and indeed the Contempt, which Magic even
in all Ages has undergone, I can (in my opinion) find no other Reasons for
it, but what the Professors themselves are guilty of by Mis-construction, and
this in Reference to a double Obscurity, of Life and Language. As for their
nice (or to speak a better truth) their Conscientious Retirements, whereby they
did separate themselves from dissolute and brutish spirits, it is that which
none can soberly discommend; nay, it is a very purging Argument, and may serve
to wipe off those contracted, envious scandals, which Time and Man have
injuriously fastened on their Memory. For if we reason discreetly, we may not
safely trust the Traditions and Judgment of the World, concerning such persons
who sequestered themselves from the World, and were no way addicted to the
Affairs or Acquaintance thereof. It is true, they were losers by this
Alienation, for both their life and their Principles were cross to those of
their Adversaries: They lived in the shade, in the calm of Conscience and
solitude, but their Enemies moved in the Sunshine, in the Eye of worldly
Transactions, where they kept up their own Repute with a clamarous Defamation
of these innocent and contented Eremits. The second Obstacle to their Fame, was
partly the simplicity of their style, which is Scripture-like, and commonly
begins like Solomon's Text, with Mi Fili. But that which spoiled all, and made
them Contemptible even to some degree of misery, was a corrupt Delivery of the
Notions and Vocabula of the Art: for Magic like the Sun, moving from the East,
carried along with it the Oriental Terms, which our Western Philosophers who
skilled not the Arabic or Chaldee, etc. did most unhappily and corruptly
transcribe, and verily at this day they are so strangely abused, it is more
then a Task to guess at their Original. But this is not all, for some were so
singular, as to invent certain Barbarous Terms of their own, and these
conceited Riddles, together with their Magisterial way of Writing ( for they
did not so far condescend as to Reason their Positions) made the world conclude
them a Fabulous Generation. Indeed this was a strange course of Theirs, and
much different from that of Trismegistus, in whose genuine works there is not
one Barbarous syllable, nor any point asserted, without most pregnant and
Demonstrative Reasons. Certainly Hermes as to his course of life was public and
princely, in his Doctrine clear and Rational, and hence it was that not only
his own times, but even all subsequent Generations were most constant
Tributaries to his Honor. On the contrary ( if we may conjecture by Effects)
there succeeded him in his School certain Melancholy envious Spirits, whose
obscure inscrutable writings rendered their Authors Contemptible, but made way
for that new noise of Aristotle, which men call Philosophy. I may say then of
these later Magicians what Solinus sometimes said of those contentious
successors of Alexander the Great: That they were born, Ad segetem Romanae
gloriae, non ad Haereditatem tanti Nominis.

It is equally true, That some skulking Philosophers whiles they enviously
suppressed the Truth, did occasionally promote a Lie: for they gave way to the
Enemies growth, till at last the Tares possessed the Field, and then was the true
Grain cast into the Fire. Nor indeed could it be otherwise, for this Bushel
being placed over the Light, the Darkness of it invited Ignorance abroad: and
now steps out Aristotle like a Peddler with his pack, the Triumphs of whose
petulant School had but two weak supporters, Obscurity and Envy. Both these
proceeded from the Malignancie of some eminent Authors, whom God had blessed with
Discoveries Extraordinary: These to secure themselves and the Art, judged it
their best course to blot out the path, that such as were unworthy might never
be able to follow them. It cannot be denied but this Mystery and cloud of the
letter carried with it both Discretion and Necessity, but what spoiled all was
the Excess of the Contrivers, for they past all Decency both in the Measure,
and the Manner of it. I could be numerous in Examples, and proofs of this kind,
but that I hold it superfluous to pause at a point which is acknowledged on all
Hands. To be short then, this Umbrage and Mist of their Text required some
Comment and Clearness, but few being able to Expound, the World ran generally
to the other side and the Schoolmen have got the Day, not by Weight but by
Number. This considered, it cannot be thought unreasonable and certainly not
unseasonable, if a Society conscious of the Truth, and skilled in the abstruse
principles of Nature, shall endeavor to rectify the world: for hitherto we
have been abused with Greek Fables and a pretended knowledge of Causes, but
without their much desired Effects. We plainly see, that if the least Disease
invades Us, the Schoolmen have not one Notion, that is so much a charm, as to
cure Us: and why then should we embrace a Philosophy of mere words, when it is
evident enough, that we cannot live but by Works. Let us not for shame be so
stupid any more, for it is a Barbarous Ignorance to maintain that for Truth
which our own daily Experience can assure us to be False. But some body will
reply, That the Antiquity of this Peripatism may claim some Reverence; and we
must complementally invite it abroad, not churlishly turn it out of Doors. This
in my opinion were to dance before Dagon, as David did before the Ark: to pay
that respect to a Lie, which is due only to the Truth, and this is Answer
sufficient. As for that Fraternity, whose History and Confession I have here
adventured to publish, I have for my own part no Relation to them, neither do I
much desire their Acquaintance: I know they are Masters of great Mysteries, and
I know withal that nature is so large, they may as well Receive as Give. I was
never yet so lavish an Admirer of them, as to prefer them to all the World, for
it is possible and perhaps true, that a private man may have that in his
possession, whereof they are Ignorant. It is not their title and the noise it
has occasioned, that makes me commend them; The Acknowledgment I give them,
was first procured by their Books, for there I found them true Philosophers,
and therefore not Chimaera's ( as most think) but Men. Their Principles are
every may Correspondent to the Ancient and Primitive Wisdom, nay, they are
consonant to our very Religion, and confirm every point thereof. I question not
but most of their Proposals may seem Irregular to common Capacities; but where
the Prerogative and Power of Nature is known, there will they quickly fall
even, for they want not their Order and Sobriety. It will be expected perhaps,
that I should speak something as to their Persons and Habitations, but in this
my cold Acquaintance will excuse me; or had I any Familiarity with them, I
should not doubt to use it with more Discretion. As for their Existence, ( if I
may speak like a School-man,) there is great reason we should believe it,
neither do I see how we can deny it, unless we grant, that Nature is studied,
and Books also written and published by some other Creatures then Men. It is
true indeed, that their Knowledge at first was not purchased by their own
Disquisitions, for they received it from the Arabians, amongst whom it remained
as the Monument and Legacy of the Children of the East. Nor is this at all
improbable, for the Eastern Countries have been always famous for Magical and
Secret Societies. Now am I to seek how far you will believe me in this, because
I am a Christian; and yet I doubt not but you will believe a Heathen, because
Aristotle was one.

Take then amongst you a more acceptable Ethnic, I mean Philostratus, for thus
he delivers himself in the life of Apollonius. He brings in his Tyaneus
discoursing with Prince Phraotes, and amongst other Questions proposed to the
Prince, Apollonius asks him, Where he had learnt his Philosophy, and the Greek
Tongue, for amongst the Indians ( said this Greek) there are no Philosophers?
To this simple Quaere the Prince replies, (...), and with a notable Sarcasm,
(...), etc. Our Forefathers ( said he) did ask all those who came hither in
ships, if they were not Pirates; for they conceived all the World (but
themselves) addicted to that vice, though a great one: But you Grecians ask not
those strangers who come to you, if they be Philosophers. To this he adds a
very dissolute Opinion of the same Grecians, namely, that Philosophy, which of
all Donatives is (...), the Divinest, should be esteemed amongst them as a
thing indifferent, and proportionate to all Capacities: And this, I am sure (
says Phraotes to Apollonius) is a kind of Piracy tolerated amongst you: (...)
which being applied here to Philosophy, I should make bold to render it
Sacriledg. But the Prince proceeds, and schools his Novice, for such was
Apollonius, who was never acquainted with any one Mystery of Nature. I
understand ( says he) that amongst you Grecians there are many Intruders, that
injustly apply themselves to Philosophy, as being no way conformable to it:
These usurp a Profession which is not their own; as if they should first rob
men of their Clothes, and then wear them, though never so disproportionate; and
thus do you proudly stradle in borrowed Ornaments. And certainly, as Pirates,
who know themselves liable to innumerable tortures, do lead a sottish and a
loose kind of life: Even so amongst you, these Pirates and Plunderers of
Philosophy are wholly given to Lusts and Compotations; and this I suppose is an
Evil that proceeds from the Blindness and Improvidence of your Laws. For should
any Man-stealer be found amongst you, or should any adulterate your Coin, these
were Offenses Capital, and punished with Death: But for such as counterfeit and
corrupt Philosophy, your Law corrects them not, neither have you any Magistrate
ordained to that purpose. Thus we see in what respect the Greek Sophistry was
with the Indians, and that clamorous Liberty they had to distract one another;
some of them being Epicures, some Cynics, some Stoics, some again Peripatetics,
and some of them pretended Platonics. It is not to be doubted, but the
scuffling and squabling of these Sectaries did at last produce the Skeptic, who
finding naught in the Schools but Opposition and Bitterness, resolved for a new
course, and secured his Peace with his Ignorance.

Phraotes having thus returned that Calumny, which Apollonius bestowed on the
Indians, to the Bosom of this conceited Greek, gives him now an Account of his
own College, I mean the Brachmans, with the Excellent and wholesome Severity of
their Discipline. And here I cannot but observe the Insolence of Tyaneus, who
being a mere stranger in the Indies, notwithstanding runs into a positive
Absurdity, and before he had conversed with the Inhabitants, concludes them no
Philosophers. These bad Manners of his I could (and perhaps not unjustly)
derive from the Customary Arrogance of his Countrymen, whose kindness to their
own Issue distinguished not the Greeks and the Sages: but the rest of the world
they discriminated with a certain Sheep-mark of their own, and branded them
with the name of Barbarians. How much an Aspersion this is, we shall quickly
understand, if we attend the Prince in his Discourse, for thus he instructs
Apollonius. Amongst us Indians ( says he) there are but few admitted to
Philosophy, and this is the manner of their Election. At the Age of eighteen
years the person to be elected comes to the River Hyphasis, and there meets
with those Wise men, for whose sake even you also Apollonius are come into
these parts. There he does publicly profess a very ardent desire and
affection to Philosophy; for such as are otherwise disposed, are left to their
own Liberty, to follow what Profession they please. This done, the next
consideration is, whether he be descended of honest parents or no; and here
they look back even to three Generations, that by the Disposition and Qualities
of the Ancestors, they may guess at those of the Child. If they find them to
have been men of a known Integrity, then they proceed to his Admission; but
first they try him, and prove him with several Tentations. For example, Whether
he be naturally modest, or rather acts a counterfeit Bashfulness for a time,
being otherwise impudent and lascivious: Whether he be sottish and gluttonous,
or no: Whether he be of an insolent bold spirit, and may prove Refractory, and
disobedient to his Tutors? Now those that are appointed to examine him, have
the skill to read his Qualities in his countenance; for the Eyes discover most
of men's Manners, and in the Brows and Cheeks there are many excellent Indicia,
whereby Wise men, and such as are skilled in the Mysteries of Nature, may
discover our minds and dispositions, as Images are discovered in a glass. And
certainly since Philosophy amongst the Indians is had in very great Honor, it
is necessary that those who would know the secrets of it, should be tempted and
proved by all possible Trials, before ever they be admitted. This was then the
Discipline of the Brachmans, and indeed of all the Magi in the Election and
Proof of their Pupils. But all this was News to Apollonius, and therefore he
asks Phraotes, if these Wisemen, mentioned in his Discourse, were of the same
order with those, who did sometimes meet Alexander the Great, and had some
Conference with him (...), concerning Heaven, for it seems they were
Astrologers. To this the Prince answers, that these Planet-mongers were the
(...), who were a people disposed* to the Wars: (...); And for Knowledge (says
he) they make a great Profession of it, but indeed they know nothing that is
Excellent. But he proceeds: (...)* etc. Those Wisemen (says he) who are truly
such, dwell between the River Hyphasis and Ganges, into which place Alexander
never came, not that he durst not attempt it, (...)* but as I think (says the
Prince) the Reverence due to their Mysteries kept him off. To this he adds,
that Alexander knew the River Hyphasis was passable, and that he might with
ease beleagure the City, wherein these Magi did dwell; (...), but their Tower
(says he) had he brought with him a thousand such Soldiers as Achilles was,
and three thousand such as Ajax, he could never have taken it. To this he gives
his Reason, namely, that the Magi did not make any sallies to beat off their
Enemies, but keeping quietly within their gates, they destroyed them with
Thunder and Lightening. Here was a story might have startled Apollonius, who
knew not the power of Gunpowder, but in these our days there is nothing more
familiar and credible. But notwithstanding the Improvements of this fatal
Invention are not known even to the present Generations, for the Pyrography of
Cornelius Agrippa, and the Powder of Friar Bacon were never yet brought to the
Field. And now let us hear the Friar himself, who discoursing of several
wonderful Experiments, tells us amongst the rest of a secret Composition, which
being formed into Pills, or little Balls, and then cast up into the Air, would
break out into Thunders and Lightenings, more violent and horrible then those
of Nature. Praeter vero haec ( says he) sunt alia stupenda Naturae: nam Soni
velut Tonitrus and Coruscationes possunt fieri in Aere: imo majori horrore quam
illa quae fiunt, per Naturam. Nam modica materia adaptata, scilicet ad
quantitatem unius pollicis, sonum facit Horribilem, and Coruscationem ostendit
vehementem: et hoc fit multis modis, quibus Civitas, aut Exercitus destruatur.
Mira sunt haec, si quis sciret uti ad plenum in debita quantitate and materia.
Thus he. But let us return to Apollonius, for now he trots like a Novice to the
River Hyphasis, and carries with him a Commendatory Letter to the Brachmans,
having requested the Prince to tell them he was a good Boy. Here these
admirable Eastern Magicians present him with such Rarities as in very truth he
was not capable of. First of all they show him (as Philostratus describes it) a
certain Azure, or Sky-colour'd Water, and this Tincture was extremely
predominant in it, but with much Light and Brightness. This strange Liquor (the
Sun shining on it at Noon) attracted the Beams or Splendour to it self, and did
sink downwards, as if coagulated with the Heat, but reflected to the Eyes of
the Beholders a most beautiful Rainbow. Here we have a perfect Description of
the Philosophers Mercury, but there is something more behind. Apollonius
confesses how the Brachmans told him afterward, that this Water was (...), a
certain secret Water, and that there was hid under it, or within it, (...), a
Blood-red Earth. In a word, they told him that none might drink, or taste of
that Liquor, neither was it drawn at all for any ordinary uses. After this most
mysterious Water, they show him also a certain mysterious Fire, and here for my
part I do not intend to comment. From this Fire he is brought to certain Tubs,
or some such Vessels, whereof the one was called the Vessel of Rain, and the
other the Vessel of Winds: all which are most deep and excellent Allegories.
But these Rarities imply no more then the Rudiments of Magic. Let us now come
to the Medecin it self, and the admirable Effects thereof. The Brachmans
(says Apollonius) anointed their Heads (...), with a gummy Medicine, and this
made their Bodies to steam at the pores, and sweat in that abundance, as if
(says he) they had purged themselves with Fire. This is enough to prove them
Philosophers. And now let us see what kind of Habitation they had, and how much
a parallel it is to that place or dwelling of R. C. which his Followers call
Locus S. Spiritus. The Wisemen (says Apollonius) dwelt on a little Hill, or
Mount, and on the Hill there rested always a Cloud, in which the Indians housed
themselves (for so the word signifies,) and here did they render themselves
visible or invisible, at their own will and discretion. This Secret of
Invisibility was not known to the Dutch Boor, nor to his Plagiary, the Author
of the Manna: but the Fraternity of R. C. can move in this white Mist. Ut
nobiscum autem convenias ( say they) necesse est hanc lucem cernas, sine enim
hac luce, Impossible est nos videre, nisi quando volumus. But Tyaneus tells us
something more; namely, that the Brachmans themselves did not know whether this
Hill was compassed about with Walls, or had any Gates that did lead to it, or
no; for the Mist obstructed all Discoveries. Consider what you read, for thus
some body writes concerning the Habitation of R. C. Vidi aliquando Olympicas
domos, non procul a Fluviolo and Civitate nota, quas S. Spiritus vocari
imaginamur. Helicon est de quo loquor, aut biceps Parnassus, in quo Equus
Pegasus fontem aperuit perennis aquae adhuc stillantem, in quo Diana se lavat,
cui Venus ut Pedissequa, and Saturnus ut Anteambulo, conjunguntur. Intelligenti
nimium, Inexperto minimum hoc erit dictum. But to clear the Prospect a little
more, let us hear Apollonius in a certain speech of his to the Egyptians,
describing this Elysium of the Brachmans: (...) I have seen (says he) the
Brachmans of India dwelling on the Earth, and not on the Earth: they were
guarded without Walls, and possessing nothing, they enjoyed all things. This is
plain enough, and on this Hill have I also a desire to live, if it were for no
other Reason, but what the Sophist sometimes applied to the Mountains: Hos
primum Sol salutat, ultimosque deserit. Quis locum non amet, dies longiores
habentem? But of this place I will not speak any more, lest the Readers should
be so mad, as to entertain a suspicion, that I am of the Order. I shall now
therefore proceed to the Theory of the Brachmans, and this only so far as their
History will give me leave. I find Jarchas then seated in his The One, and about
him the rest of his Society, where having first placed Apollonius in the Seat
Royal of Phraotes, Jarchas welcomes him with this unconfined Liberty: (...)
Propound (said he) what Questions thou will, for thou art come to Men that know
all things. Here Tyaneus puts in, and very wisely asks them, What Principles
the World was compounded of? To this the Brachmans reply, It was compounded of
the Elements. Is it made then (says Apollonius) of the four Elements? No (said
the great Jarchas) but of Five. Here the Grecian is puzzled; for besides Earth
(says he) and Water, Air and Fire, I know not any thing: What then is this
fifth Substance? It is (says Jarchas) the Ether, which is the Element of
Spirits: for those Creatures which draw in the Air, are Mortal; but those which
draw in the Ether, are Immortal. And here I cannot but observe the gross
Ignorance of Apollonius, who being a professed Pythagorean, had never heard of
the Ether, that famous Pythagorean Principle.

But let us come to his second Question, which of all others does most betray
his weakness and insufficiency. He requests Jarchas to inform him, Which of the
Elements was first made? To this Absurdity the learned Brachman answers like
himself: They were made (said he) all at once; and he gives this Reason for it,
Because no living Creature is generated (...), by peece-meals. This was a
wholesome and a rational Tenet, for the Chaos was first made, and in that all
the Elements at one and the same Instant, for the World was manifested, and
brought out of the Chaos, like a Chick out of an Eg. To this Apollonius replies
like a pure Sophister: And must I think then (says he) that the World is a
living Creature? (...) (says Jarchas) (...) Yes verily, if you reason rightly,
for it gives Life to all things. Shall we then (says Tyaneus) call it a Male,
or a Female Creature? Both, said the wise Brachman: (...) For the World being a
Compound of both Faculties, supplies the Office of Father and Mother in the
Generation of those things that have life. We are now come to Apollonius his
last Philosophical Quere, and sorry I am that he had not the wit to propound
either more or better Questions, but we must take them as they are. He asks
Jarchas, whether the Earth or the Sea did exceed in quantity? To this the
Indian replies, that if he only considered the Mediterranean, or some other
particular Channel, the Earth without question did exceed: but if you speak
(said he) (...), concerning Humidity, or Moisture in general, then verily the
Earth is much lesser then the Water, for it is the Water that bears up the
Earth. This indeed is sound Reason, and conformable both to Scripture and
Nature: for the very Spirit that animates and supports the Universe, has his
Habitation in the Water.

And now I suppose it is apparent to the understanding Readers (for others I
would not have) that the Brachmans were not a fabulous, superstitious Society,
but men of a severe Doctrine, whose Principles were answerable to the very
Rigor of Nature, and did not wanton beyond her Law. I could wish Apollonius
had been more able to deal with them, but so short was he of Philosophy, that
he knew not what to ask them, and that ample Liberty which they gave him, was
all of it to no purpose. This is clear to such as know any thing out of his
former Queries, which we have already mentioned: but if we look on the rest of
his Problems, they are most of them but so many Historical Fables, which he
brought with him out of Greece, and now he begins to shake his Budget. The
first thing comes out, is the (...), a Monster, which Mandevil could never meet
withal: and then he questions Jarchas (...), concerning a certain Water of the
color of Gold, and this indeed might signify something, but that he
understood it literally, of common, ordinary Well-springs: and therefore
Jarchas tells him, that he never heard of his Martichora, neither was it ever
known, that any Fountains of golden Waters did spring in India. But this is not
all: In the Rear of this strange Beast march the Pygmies, the Sciapodes, and
the Macrocephali: to which might be added all the Animals in Lucian's History.
But as we commonly say, that there is no Smoke without some Fire, so amongst
these foreign Fables came in some Indian Allegories, and probably the
Brachmans themselves had given them out, at once to declare and obscure their
Knowledge. These Allegories are but two, and Jarchas insists much upon them,
besides a solemn Acknowment: (...), There is no reason ( said he) but we should
believe there are such Things. The first of these two Mysteries is the
Pantarva, which Ficinus corruptly transcribes Pantaura, and of this Apollonius
desired to know the Truth; namely, if there was such a Stone at all, and
whether it was enriched with so strange a Magnetism, as to attract to it self
all other precicious Stones? This Question the Brachman satisfies
experimentally, for he had this goodly Stone about him, and favored Apollonius
with the sight thereof. But for our better Information, let us hear Jarchas
himself describe it, for he does it so fully, that a very ordinary Capacity may
go along with him. This Stone ( says he) is generated in certain earthy
Caverns, some four yards deep, and has in it such abundance of Spirit, that in
the place of its Conception, the Earth swells up, and at last breaks with the
very Tumor. But to look out this Stone, belongs not to every Body, for it
vanishes away, unless it be extracted with all possible Caution; only we that
are Brachmans, by certain practices of our own, can find out the Pantarva.
These are the words of Jarchas, where you shall observe, That he has
confounded the first and second Generation of the Stone, it being the Custom of
the Philosophers never to express their Mysteries distinctly. The second Birth
then he has fully and clearly discovered, for when the Philosophers first
Earth is moistened with its own milk, it swells, being impregnated with
frequent Imbibitions, till at last it breaks, and with a soft heat sublimes;
and then ascends the Heavenly Sulphur, being freed from his Hell, for it leaves
behind the Binarius, or Terra Damnata, and is no more a Prisoner to that Dross.
This first heavenly Sulphur is commonly called Petra stellata, and Terra
Margaritarum: but Raymund Lully calls it Terram Terrae, and in a certain place
he describes it thus: Haec est Tinctura ( says he) quae a vili Terra se
spoliat, and alia multum nobili reinduit se. But elsewhere prescribing some
Caveats for the Rorid Work, he expressly mentions the first and second Sulphurs,
commonly called Sulphura de Sulphuribus. Hoc ( says he) intelligitur de Terra,
quae non est separata a Vase, de Terra Terrae. This is enough to prove the
Affinity of the Pantarva, and the Philosophers Stone: Let us now return to
Jarchas, for he proceeds in his Instructions, and Apollonius hears him to no
purpose. The Pantarva (says he) after night discovers a Fire as bright as day,
for it is fiery and shining: but if you look on it in the daytime, it dazles
the eye with certain gleams or Coruscations. Whence this Light came, and what
it was, the Brachman was not ignorant of: (...). That Light ( said he) which
shines in it, is a Spirit of admirable Power; for it attracts to it self all
things that are near it. And here he tells Tyaneus, that if precious Stones
were cast into the Sea, or into some River, and this too confusedly, as being
far scattered and dispersed one from another; yet this Magical Stone being let
down after them, would bring them again together; for they would all move
toward the Pantarva, and cluster under it, like a swarm of Bees. This is all
he tells him; but in conclusion he produces his Pantarva, in plain terms he
showed him the Philosophers Stone, and the miraculous Effects thereof. The
second Secret which Apollonius stumbled on, for he knew it not as a Secret, was
the Gold of the Gryphons, and this also Jarchas does acknowledge, but I shall
forbear to speak of it, for I hold it not altogether convenient.

It is time now to dismiss Apollonius, and his Brachmans, and this I will do;
but I shall first prevent an Objection, though a sorry one, for Ignorance makes
use of all Tools. It will be said perhaps, I have been too bold with
Apollonius, who, in the opinion of many men, and such as would be thought
learned, was a very great Philosopher. To this I answer, that I question not
any man's learning: let them think of themselves as they please; and if they
can, let them be answerable to their thoughts: But as for Apollonius, I say,
the noise of his Miracles, like those of Xavier, may fill some credulous ears,
and this sudden Larum may procure him Entertainment: but had these Admirers
perused his History, they had not betrayed so much weakness, as to allow him
any sober Character. It is true, Philostratus attributes many strange
performances to him, as that he should raise the Dead, free himself from
Prison, and shake off his Chains, with as much Divinity as S. Peter himself:
Nay, that pleading with Domitian in a full Senate, he should suddenly vanish
away, and be translated in a moment from Rome to Puteoli. Truly these are great
effects; but if we consider only what Philostratus himself will confess, we
shall quickly find that all these things are but his Inventions. For in the
Beginning of his Romance, where he would give his Readers an Account of his
Materials, and from what hands he received them, he tells us, that Damis, who
was Apollonius his fellow-traveller, did write his Life, and all the
Occurrences thereof: but these Commentaries of Damis (says he) were never
published by Damis himself, only a friend of his, a Somebody, (...), a certain
familiar of Damis did communicate them (...), to Julia the Queen. And here
Philostratus tells me, that this Queen commanded him to transcribe these
Commentaries. It seems then they were originally written in the Greek, and
Philostratus is a mere Transcribler, and no Author. This I cannot believe, for
Damis was an Assyrian, and, as he himself confesses, a very ignorant person,
and altogether illiterate: but meeting with Apollonius, (...), and conversing
with the Greeks, he also was almost made a Grecian, but not altogether, not so
learned a Grecian as to write Histories, and in a style like that of
Philostratus. But this is not all: Our Author tells us of one Maeragenis, who
had formerly written the Life of Apollonius in four Books: but this fellow
(says he) was ignorant of the Performances or Miracles of Tyaneus. And what
follows this Ignorance? (...)* We must not therefore believe Maeragenis. And
why not I beseech you? Because forsooth he lived near, if not in the days of
Apollonius, but never heard of those monstrous fables which Philostratus
afterward invented. We must then believe Philostratus himself, for he is the
(...), not the familiar friend, but the familiar spirit of Apollonius: it was
he indeed that wrought all these Wonders, for Apollonius himself never wrought
any. Now for the Learning of this Tyaneus (since it is the pleasure of some men
to think him learned) I must confess for my part I cannot find it. The
Philosophy that he pretended to, was that of Pythagoras, for thus he rants it
to Vardanes the Babylonian: (...), etc. I am a Master (says he) of the Wisdom
of Pythagoras the Samian, he taught me the true form of worshipping the gods,
and who of them are visible, who invisible, and how I may come to speak with
them. How true this is, we may easily know, if we look back on his Education.
His Tutor in the Pythagorean Principles was one Euxenus, a not able Sot, and a
mere Ignorant, as Philostratus tells us. He was (says our Author) an Epicure
in his course of life; and for his Learning, he could only repeat some
sentences of Pythagoras, but did not understand them: and therefore he compares
him to certain Mimic Birds, who are taught their (...), and their (...), but
know not what the words signify. Now what Instructions he was like to receive
from this man, let any indifferent Reader judge. But we have something more to
say: for if Apollonius when he was at Babylon, could converse with the gods,
why did he afterward desire to be taught of men? For when he comes to India,
he requests the Brachmans to teach him the Art of Divination. Certainly, had he
been familiar with Angels and Spirits, he had not troubled them with such a
Question. These indeed are the slips of Philostratus, who had the Art of Lying,
but wanted the Art of Memory. In another place he tells us, that Apollonius
understood (...), all the Languages that men did speak, and which is more
miraculous, even their secret Cogitations. This is much indeed, but shortly
afterward he forgets these strange perfections: for when he brings him to
Phraotes, that serious Eastern Prince, there does he use an Interpreter; for
Tyaneus, who formerly understood all languages, could not understand the
language of the Prince; and so far was he from knowing his secret thoughts,
that he did not know in how many languages he could express those thoughts: for
when the Prince was pleased to express himself in the Greek Tongue, Tyaneus was
quite dejected, and did much wonder how he came to be a Master of that Dialect.
Now if any man will say, that the Brachmans did impart their Mysteries to him,
it is apparent enough they did not. This is it which even Damis tells us: for
Apollonius (says he) requested nothing of the Brachmans, but certain
Divinatory Tricks, by which he might foretell things to come. And here Jarchas
takes occasion to discourse with him about Revelations, for he speaks not of
any Prognosticating Knacks, which this Greek did look after. He tells him then,
that he judged him a most happy man, who could obtain any Fore-knowledg at the
hands of God, and preach that to the Ignorant, which he did already foresee. As
for Rules to divine by, he prescribes not any, for it was too gross an Error
for such a Philosopher as Himself: He only tells him, That he should lead a
pure life, and keep himself spotless from the Flesh. One passage indeed there
is, which I cannot omit: Jarchas informs Apollonius, that of all Gifts imparted
to Man by Revelation, (...); The chiefest ( said he) is the Gift of Healing, or
Medicine. But this Heavenly, and most Beneficial Truth, Apollonius was not
sensible of: for he was so great a stranger to the Secrets of Nature, that he
did not know what to ask for. For my own part, if I durst think him a
Philosopher, I should seat him with the Stoics; for he was a great Master of
Moral Severities, and this is all the Character I can give him. As for
Philostratus, if we were not even with him, I should think he had much abused
us: for when he penned his History, he allowed us no Discretion, who were to
come after him. I could be sorry for some Absurdities he has fastened on
Jarchas, did not the Principles of that glorious Brachman refute them. What
they are, I shall not tell you, for I am confined to a Preface, and cannot
proportion my Discourse to the deserts of my Subject.

And here some Critic may drop his Discipline, and bid me face about, for I am
wide of my Text, the Society of R. C. I have indeed exceeded in my service to
the Brachmans, but in all that there was no Impertinency. I did it, to show the
Conformity of the old and new Professors: and this is so far from Digression, I
can think it near a Demonstration. For when we have Evidence that Magicians
have been, it is proof also that they may be; since it cannot be denied, but
Presidents exclude Impossibility. I hold it then worth our observation, that
even those Magi, who came to Christ himself, came from the East: but as we
cannot prove they were Brachmans, so neither can we prove they were not. Now if
any man will be so cross, as to contend for the Negative, he shall have my
thanks for the advantage he allows me; for then it must follow, that the East
afforded more Magical Societies then one. But this point I need not insist on:
for the learned will not deny, but Wisdom and Light were first manifested in
the same parts, namely, in the East, where the first Man planted: and hence did
the World receive not only their Religion, but their Philosophy, for Custom
has distinguished those Two. From this Fountain also, this living, Oriental
One, did the Brothers of R. C. draw their wholesome Waters: for their Founder
received his Principles at Damcar in Arabia, as their Fama will instruct you at
large. It was not amiss then, if I spent my hour in that bright Region, and
paid a weak Gratitude to those Primitive Benefactors: for it is a Law with me,
Qui aquam hauris, puteum corona. But that I may come at last to the Subject
intended, I shall confess for my part, I have no acquaintance with this
Fraternity as to their Persons; but their Doctrine I am not so much a stranger
to. And here, for the Readers satisfaction, I shall speak something of it, not
that I would discover or point at any particulars: for that is a kindness ( as
they themselves profess) which they have not for any man, nisi absumpto Salis
Modio, till they first eat a Bushel of Salt with him. They tell us then, that
the Fire and Spirit of God did work upon the Earth and the Water; and out of
them did the Spirit extract a pure clear Substance, which they call the
Terrestrial Heaven: in this Heaven the Spirit (say they) seated himself,
impressing his Image therein: and out of this Heavenly clarified Extract,
impregnated with the Influx and Image of the Spirit, was formed that most noble
Creature, whom we call MAN. This first matter of Man (as they describe it) was
a liquid transparent Salt, a certain bright Earth, purified by a supernatural
Agent, and tempered with a strange unctuous Humidity, enlightened with all the
Tinctures of the Sun and Stars. It was and is the Minera of all Creatures; and
this Society does acknowledge it to be their very Basis, and the first Gate that
leads to all their Secrets. This Earth or Water ( call it which you will, for
it is both) naturally produces their Agent, but it comes not to their hands
without Art. By their Agent I understand their Fire, commonly called Mas Aquae,
Vulcanus, Sol invisibilis, Filius Solis, Astrum inferius, Faber occultus,
Intrinsecus; with a thousand other names. It is sans all Metaphors (...) and
that I may speak Truth even in the phrase of Aristotle, it is (...). This is
that Fire which Zoroaster calls (...). In plain terms, it is the Tincture of
the Matrix, a fiery, radiant Soul, that calls up another Soul like it self: for
it awakes the Anima of the Mercury, which is almost drowned in a cold and
phegmatic Lethe. And here Reader, let it be thy Endeavor to understand the
Philosophers: for they tell us, that God at first created the Chaos, and
afterward divided it into three Portions. Of the first he made the Spiritual
World, of the second the Visible Heavens, and their Lights; but the third and
worst part was appointed for this Sublunary Building. Out of this course and
remaining Portion he extracted the Elemental Quintessence, or first Matter of
all Earthly Things, and of this the four Elements ( for there is such a bold
Arithmetic) were made. Now Reader guess, if thou do know the Matter, for it
may be thou art one of those when conceive themselves to be Somebody. I tell
thee this Theory is Raymund Lully' s, and if thou can make nothing of it, I
can without a figure tell thee how wise thou art. There are in the World as
many sorts of Salts, as there are Species, and the Salts differ as the Species
do, namely, Essentially; for the Specific Forms lie in the Salt. Now learn of
me, that there is no true Physic, but what is in Salt: for Salt was never known
to putrify, nay it hinders Putrefaction and Corruption in all things, and what
hinders Corruption, hinders all Diseases. Now it is evident to all the World,
that Salt hinders Corruption, and a Solution of the parts, and this not only in
living Things, but even in dead Bodies: for if they be seasoned with Salt, then
are they preserved, and Corruption comes not as them. It is to be observed,
that Virgil in the Cure of Aeneas brings in his Mother Venus with a Panacca, or
an Universal Medicine:

-- occulte Medicans, spargitque salubres
Ambrosiae succos, and odoriferam Panaceam.
This word is much abused by certain Alchimists, as they call themselves: but
Servius upon the Place tells us, it is Nomen mire compositum, and he observes
out of Lucretius, that the Panacea was Salt. It is true, that if we could
putrify Salt, it would discover all the Mysteries of Nature, for it has all
the Tinctures in it: but to destroy this substance, is a hard task, for he that
would do it, must do something more, then Death can do, for even her
Prerogative comes not so far. Howsoever it cannot be denied, but some Wise men
have attained to the putrefaction of Salts, but this Key they received from
God, and it is the great Secret of their Art. What I admire most in it, is
this: That when it is killed, it dies not, but recovers to a better life, which
is a very strange privilege. On the contrary, if some Animal dies, if an Herb
withers, or if some metal be calcined and the parts thereof truly separated,
we can never restore them again: but this Mystical substance, this Root of the
world, if you bring his parts together, after they are separated, then will not
he be quiet, but run from one Complexion to another, from this Color to that:
as from Green to Red, from Red to Black, from Black to a Million of Colors,
and these miraculous Alterations will not cease, till he has worked out his
own Resurrection, and has clearly brought himself to a Supernatural
Temperature. I say then that Salt is the true Grain, the Seed not only of this
world, but of the next, and it is the Mystery that God has made. It is a
living water, wherein there dwells a divine Fire, and this Fire binds the parts
thereof to himself, coagulates them, and stops their flux, and Salt is the
water, that wets not the Hand. This Fire is the life, and therefore it hinders
Death; nay it is such a preservative against it, that the very gross Body of
Salt prevents Corruption, wheresoever it comes. But if any man would fully know
the power of this Fire, let him wisely and effectually dislodge him, let him
destroy his Habitation, and then he shall see, what course this Artist will
take, to repair his own House. Do not think now that I speak of common Salts,
though I confess they are great Medicines, if rightly prepared.

I told thee formerly, there were several sorts of Salts, and here I would have
thee study lest thy labors should end with that Complaint of the Chimist in
Sendivogius: Lapidem ( says he) amissum deplorabat, and maxim condolebat,
quod Saturnum non interrogaverit, quale SAL hoc fuerit, cum tot varia Genera
Salium reperiantur. I shall advise thee then to consider the several Divisions
of the Chaos, which I have formerly mentioned out of Raymund Lully, for the
matter as it is there described, is not subject to many Complexions, and
therefore thy Mistakes cannot be many. And now let us touch at the Treasures of
our Saltish liquor, and our liquid Salt. Veniamus quaeso ( says one) ad illum
spiritus, seu Aquae gradum, qui nobis sensibilior, magisque familiaris est;
Naturaeque aereae vestigia diligenti Inquisitione scrutemur, in cujus Occulto
mirabilia delitescunt: videlicet, Angeli omnium Generum, Formae rerum
inferiorum Essentificae, Humidum radicale cujusque Viventis, Ignis spissi
Nutrimentum, Admirabiles Meteororum apparitiones, ventorum cujusque Anguli
violentae Irruptiones, and infinita alia Mysteria. And now perhaps thou do
begin to bless thy self: for is it possible ( say thou) that any bodily
substance should enclose such Mysteries as these? In this, my Friend, thou have
thy Liberty: trouble not thy self about it, for thy faith will add nothing to
it, and thy Incredulity cannot take any Thing from it. This only thou shall
do, be pleased to give way to my sauciness: for I must tell thee, I do not know
that Thing, which I may call Impossible. I am sure there are in Nature powers
of all sorts, and answerable to all Desires: and even those very powers are
subject to Us. Behold, I will declare unto thee their Generation, and their
secret Descents even to this Earth. It is most certain that God works by the
Idea's of his own mind, and the Idea's dispense their Seals, and communicate
them daily to the Matter. Now the Anima Mundi has in the fixed stars, her
particular Forms, or Seminal Conceptions answerable to the Idea's of the Divine
mind: and here does she first receive those spiritual Powers and Influences,
which originally proceed from God. From this place they are conveyed to the
Planets, especially to the Sun and Moon; and these two great Lights impart them
to the Air, and from the Air they pass down to the Belly or Matrix of the Earth
in prolific, spirited Winds and Waters. Seeing then that the Visible Heavens
receive the Brightness of the Spiritual World, and this Earth the Brightness of
the Visible Heavens, why may not we find something on Earth, which takes in
this Brightness, and comprehends in it self the Powers of the two superior
Worlds? Now if there be such a Subject to be found, I suppose it will not be
denied, but the Powers of the Angelical and Celestial Worlds are very strange
Powers, and what that is which they cannot do, is hard to determine. The
Subject then is the Salt I have spoken of formerly, it is the Body of the
Universal Spirit, (...). It is the Sperm of Nature, which she prepares for her
own Light, as if we should prepare Oil for a Lamp. A strange Substance it is,
but very common, and of some Philosophers most properly called, Salina virens,
and Mirabilis. And here it will not be amiss to speak something of the
Cabalists Linea viridis, or green Line, a Mystery not rightly apprehended even
by some of the Mekkubalim, but certainly the Modern Rabbis know it not at all.
It is the last Midah or Propriety of the Sephiroths, for it receives and
includes all the Influences of the Sphirstical Order. It compasses the
Heavens, and in them the Earth, like a green Rainbow, or one vast Sphere of
Viridity, and from this Viridity the divine Influences are showered down like
Rain through the Ether into the Globes of the fixed Stars: for what the Air is
to the Globe of the Earth, such is the Ether to the Globes of the Stars, and
here lies a Secret of the Mekkubalim, for they tell us, there is a double
Venus, in duplici Aere. But of this enough. I will now speak of the
Philosophers Secret, and blessed Viridity, which is to be seen and felt here
below. It is the Proteus of the old Poets; for if the Spirit of this green Gold
be at Liberty, which will not be till the Body is bound, then will he discover
all the Essences of the Universal Center.

Tum variae illudent species, atque ora Ferarum:
Fiet enim subito sus horridus, atraque Tigris,
Squamosusque Draco, and falva cervice Leaena:
Aut acrem flammis sonitum dabit, atque ita Vinclis
Excidet, aut in Aquas tenues dilapsus abibit;
Omnia transformat sese in miracula Rerum,
Ignemque Horribilemque fera^, Fluviumque liquente^.
But this is Poetry: let us now hear the same Scene described by a most
excellent, and withal a severe Professor of Philosophy. Ubi vero spiritus (
says he) excessit e fragilibus, per quos sparsus erat, meatibus, estque ab
omni prorsum Colluvie purgatus, in infinitas sese attollit formas; modo in
Herbam, modo in Lapidem, aut in Insolitum quoddam Animal: Interdum in Aequor,
aut Unionem, aut Gemmam, aut Metallum: dulceque rubentibus jam Flammis emicans,
in multas statim colorum Myriadas transit, vivitque portentorum semper
Effector, ac Magus, isto nequaquam fatiscens labor, sed vigore ac viribus
indies adoloscens. Thus he: And now Reader I must tell thee, that all these
Miracles grow out of a certain Earth, a soft red Clay, which is to be found
every where. It may be thou art much troubled at these Appearances which I have
mentioned, but what will thou say to Jamblichus, who tells us seriously, that
this Earth will attract Angels, I mean good Spirits? for so did he. But let us
hear this Auditor of Anebo, for thus he writes from Egypt to Porphyrius.
Omnium prima ( says he) and Antiquissima Entia, in Ultimis quoque subrutilant,
Immaterialiaque principia materialibus adsunt. Nemo itaque miretur, si quam
materiam esse dicimus puram, atque Divinam. Nam ipsa quoque materia, quum ab
Opifice, Patreque Omnium facta sit, merito perfectionem sui quandam acquisivit,
aptam ad Deos suscipiendos. Quinetiam quum nihil prohibet superiora Lumen suum
ad Inferiora diffundere: neque igitur materiam permittunt expertem fore
Superiorum. Quapropter quantumcunque materiae perfectum, and purum est, atque
deiforme, ad Deorum susceptionem non est ineptum. Nam quum oportuerit etiam
Terrena nullo modo Divinae Communionis expertia fore, ipsa quoque TERRA divinam
quandam portionem suscepit, ad capiendos Deos sufficientem. Non ergo fas est
omnem, Materiam detestari, sed solam, quae Diis fuerit aliena; Propriam vero ad
illos decet eligere, utpote quae consentire possit: Neque enim aliter Terrenis
locis, and hominibus hic habitantibus, possessio, portiove ulla ex Divinis
contingere potest, nisi TALE quiddam prius factum fuerit FUNDAMENTUM. Arcanis
itaque Sermonibus credendum est, Testantibus a DEIS per Beata Spectacula,
Traidtam fuisse MATERIAM QUANDAM, Haec ergo illis ipsis Tradentibus cognata
est. Talis ergo Materia Deos excitat, ut se demonstrent, etc. These are the
words of Jamblichus, in that profound Discourse of his, where he gives
Porphyrius an Account of the Egyptian, Caldean, and Assyrian Mysteries. I know
the Philosophical Earth discovers not those Forms I have spoken of in the
common, ordinary Process, which if any man knows, I shall not therefore call
him a Philosopher. There are several ways to use this Mystery, both first and
last: and some of them may be communicated, but some not. To conclude, I say,
that this clarified Earth is the Stage of all Forms, for here they are
manifested like Images in a Glass: and when the Time of their Manifestation is
finished, they retreat into that Center, out of which at first they came. Hence
came all Vegetables, all Minerals, and all the Animals in the World; even Man
himself with all his Tumult and Principality. This Soft Clay is the Mother of
them all: and what the Divine Virgil sometimes said of Italy, may be very
properly applied to this our Saturnine and Sovereign Earth.

Haec dedit Argenti Rivos, Aerisque Metalla
Ostendit venis, atque Auro plurima sluxit.
Haec Genus acre Virum: Marsos, Pubemque Sabella,
Assuetumque Malo Ligurem, Volscosque verutos
Extulit: Haec Decios, Marios, magnosque Camillos.
Salve magna parents frugum, Saturnia Tellus,
Magna Virum! --
Thus Reader have I endeavored to produce some Reasons for those strange
Effects, whereof this Society has made a public Profession. I did it not as a
Kindness to them, for I pen no Plots, neither do I desire their Familiarity. I
am indeed of the same Faith with them, and I have thus prefac'd, because I had
the Impudence to think it concerned me as much as them. And verily it is true,
that wheresoever I meet my own Positions, there have I an Interest, and I am as
much bound to the Defense of that Author, as I am to my own. Now for the Ground
here laid, it is the Art of Water, the Philosophers Clavis humida, and this
Societies Parergon. I dare not speak any thing of their Metaphysical Mystery,
but I can tell thee it is not the same with the Philosophers Stone, either in
Form or Matter, and let this satisfy thee. I know some Dispositions are so
cross to these Principles, I might write again to excuse what I have written,
but this I am resolved not to do. If thou art a malicious Reader, and do
think it too much, because it suits not with thy own Gingles, I must tell thee,
thou art none of my Peers: for I have known some Sciences which thou have never
heard of, nor thy fathers before thee. But to make an end, I would have every
man descend into himself, and rationally consider those Generations which are
obvious to our eyes. We see there is a power granted to man over those Things,
whose Original he does know: Examples and Instances we have in Corn, and other
Vegitables, whose seed being known to the Husbandman, he can by the seed
Multiply his Corn, and provide for himself, as he thinks fit. It is just so in
Minerals, there is a seed out of which Nature makes them, a first matter; and
this the Magicians carefully sought after, for they reasoned with themselves,
that as Nature by the Vegetable seed, did multiply Vegetables, so might they
also by the Mineral seed, multiply Minerals. When they had found out the seed,
they practiced upon it several ways: they did shut it up in Glasses, keeping
it in a most equal temperate heat, for many months together, but all was to
no purpose. Then did they fancy another Course, for they buried it in the
Earth, and left it there for a long time, but without any success. At last they
considered, God without all question being their Guide, that Nature had for
every seed a Vessel of her own, and that all her Vessels were but several sorts
of Earth: For example, The Vegetable Seed had the Common Earth for his Vessel,
for therein Nature did sow it. The Animal Sperm had the Flesh for his, and
flesh is but a soft animated Earth, as it appears in the Dissolution of the
Body. They saw plainly then, that both these Vessels were not appointed for the
Mineral Sperm, they were too cold for it, and common fire was too hot; or if it
were well regulated, yet could it not alter the Sperm, for it had not the
Qualities of a Matrix. Then did they try several new Heats: they exposed their
Matter to the Sun, they buried it in Dunghills and beds of Quicklime, they
placed their Glasses in the Moon-beams, they invented new Baths, they made use
of sand, ashes, and filings of Iron, they burnt Oil, and fancied all sorts of
Lamps, but all this was Error, and it ended in a troublesome Nothing. Now all
these Falsities shall a man meet with in their Books; for when they had found
out the Mineral Vessel, and especially the second Earth, wherein they sowed
their Mercury and Sulphur, then did they so confound the Work, that it is
almost impossible to get the Preparation out of their hands. This I thought fit
to touch upon, that those Difficulties, which great and aspiring Wits must
strive withal, may be the more apparent, and surely I think I have pretty well
cleared the way. Thus Reader have I given thee my best Advise, and now it
remains thou should rail at me for it. It may be thou have a free Spirit, but
if this Liberality concerns not thy Credit, keep thy Spleen to thy self, for I
would not have thee spend what thou can well spare.

Soli Deo Gloria.
Fama Fraternitatis, OR, A DISCOVERY OF THE Fraternity of the most laudable
Order of the Rosy Cross.
SEeing the only Wise and Merciful God in these latter days has poured out so
richly his mercy and goodness to Mankind, whereby we do attain more and more to
the perfect knowledge of his Son Jesus Christ and Nature, that justly we may
boast of the happy time, wherein there is not only discovered unto us the half
part of the World, which was heretofore unknown and hidden, but he has also
made manifest unto us many wonderful, and never-heretofore seen, Works and
Creatures of Nature, and moreover has raised men, endued with great Wisdom,
which might partly renew and reduce all Arts (in this our Age spotted and
imperfect) to perfection; so that finally Man might thereby understand his own
Nobleness and Worth, and why he is called Microcosmus, and how far his knowledge
extends in Nature.

Although the rude World herewith will be but little pleased, but rather smile
and scoff thereat; also the Pride and Covetousness of the Learned is so great,
it will not suffer them to agree together; but were they united, they might out
of all those things which in this our Age God does so richly bestow upon us,
collect Librum Naturae, or a perfect Method of all Arts: but such is their
opposition, that they still keep, and are loath to leave the old course,
esteeming Porphiry, Aristotle, and Galen, yea and that which has but a mere
show of learning, more then the clear and manifested Light and Truth; who if
they were now living, with much joy would leave their erroneous Doctrines. But
here is too great weakness for such a great Work: And although in Theology,
Physic, and the Mathematic, the Truth does oppose it self* nevertheless the old
Enemy by his subtilty and craft does show himself in hindering every good
purpose by his Instruments and contentious wavering people. To such an intent
of a general Reformation; the most godly and highly illuminated* Father, our
Brother, C. R. a German, the chief and original of our Fraternity, has much
and long time labored, who by reason of his poverty (although descended of
Noble Parents) in the fifth year of his age was placed in a Cloister, where he
had learned indifferently the Greek and Latin Tongues, who (upon his earnest
desire and request) being yet in his growing years, was associated to a
Brother, P. A. L. who had determined to go to the Holy Land.

Although this Brother dyed in Ciprus, and so never came to Jerusalem, yet our
Brother C. R. did not return, but shipped himself over, and went to Damasco,
minding from thence to go to Jerusalem; but by reason of the feebleness of his
body he remained still there, and by his skill in Physic he obtained much
favor with the Turks: In the mean time he became by chance acquainted with the
Wise men of Damasco in Arabia, and beheld what great Wonders they wrought, and
how Nature was discovered unto them; hereby was that high and noble Spirit of
Brother C. R. so stired up, that Jerusalem was not so much now in his mind as
Damasco; also he could not bridle his desires any longer, but made a bargain
with the Arabians, that they should carry him for a certain sum of money to
Damasco; he was but of the age of sixteen years when he came thither, yet of a
strong Dutch constitution; there the Wise received him (as he himself
witnesses) not as a stranger, but as one whom they had long expected, they
called him by his name, and showed him other secrets out of his Cloister,
whereat he could not but mightily wonder: He learned there better the Arabian
Tongue; so that the year following he translated the Book M. into good Latin,
which he afterward brought with him. This is the place where he did learn his
Physic, and his Mathematics, whereof the World has just cause to rejoice, if
there were more Love, and less Envy. After three years he returned again with
good consent, shipped himself over Sinus Arabicus into Egypt, where he remained
not long, but only took better notice there of the Plants and Creatures; he
sailed over the whole Mediterranean Sea for to come unto Fez, where the
Arabians had directed him. And it is a great shame unto us, that wise men, so
far remote the one from the other, should not only be of one opinion, hating all
contentious Writings, but also be so willing and ready under the seal of
secrecy to impart their secrets to others.

Every year the Arabians and Affricans do send one to another, inquiring one of
another out of their Arts, if happily they had found out some better things, or
if Experience had weakened their Reasons. Yearly there came something to light,
whereby the Mathematica, Physic and Magic (for in those are they of Fez most
skilful) were amended; as there is now adays in Germany no want of learned Men,
Magicians, Cabalists, Physicians, and Philosophers, were there but more love
and kindness among them, or that the most part of them would not keep their
secrets close only to themselves. At Fez he did get acquaintance with those
which are commonly called the Elementary Inhabitants, who revealed unto him
many of their secrets: As we Germans likewise might gather together many
things, if there were the like unity, and desire of searching out of secrets
amongst us.

Of these of Fez he often did confess, that their Magia was not altogether
pure, and also that their Cabala was defiled with their Religion; but
notwithstanding he knew how to make good use of the same, and found still more
better grounds of his Faith, altogether agreeable with the Harmony of the whole
World, and wonderfully impressed in all Periods of times, and thence proceeds
that fair Concord, that as in every several kernel is contained a whole good
tree or fruit, so likewise is included in the little body of Man the whole
great World, whose Religion, policy, health, members, nature, language, words
and works, are agreeing, sympathizing, and in equal tune and melody with God,
Heaven and Earth; and that which is dis-agreeing with them, is error, falsehood,
and of the Devil, who alone is the first, middle, and last cause of strife,
blindness, and darkness in the World: Also, might one examine all and several
persons upon the Earth, he should find that which is good and right, is always
agreeing with it self; but all the rest is spotted with a thousand erroneous
conceits.

After two years Brother C. R. departed the City Fez, and sailed with many
costly things into Spain, hoping well, he himself had so well and so profitably
spent his time in his travel, that the learned in Europe would highly rejoice
with him, and begin to rule, and order all their Studies, according to those
sound and sure Foundations. He therefore conferred with the Learned in Spain,
showing unto them the Errors of our Arts, and how they might be corrected, and
from whence they should gather the true Inditia of the Times to come, and
wherein they ought to agree with those things that are past; also how the
faults of the Church and the whole Philosopia Moralis was to be amended: He
showed them new Growths, new Fruits, and Beasts, which did concord with old
Philosophy, and prescribed them new Axiomata, whereby all things might fully be
restored: But it was to them a laughing matter; and being a new thing unto
them, they feared that their great Name should be lessened, if they should now
again begin to learn and acknowledge their many years Errors, to which they were
accustomed, and wherewith they had gained them enough: Who so loves
unquietness, let him be reformed.

The same Song was also sang to him by other Nations, the which moved him the
more (because it happened to him contrary to his expectation,) being then ready
bountifully to impart all his Arts and Secrets to the Learned, if they would
have but undertaken to write the true and infallible Axiomata, out of all
Faculties, Sciences and Arts, and whole Nature, as that which he knew would
direct them, like a Globe, or Circle, to the only middle Point, and Centrum,
and (as it is usual among the Arabians) it should only serve to the wise and
learned for a Rule, that also there might be a Society in Europe, which might
have Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, sufficient for to bestow them on Kings,
for their necessary uses, and lawful purposes: with which such as be Governors
might be brought up, for to learn all that which God has suffered Man to know,
and thereby to be enabled in all times of need to give their counsel unto those
that seek it, like the Heathen Oracles: Verily we must confess that the world
in those days was already big with those great Commotions, laboring to be
delivered of them; and did bring forth painful, worthy men, who brake with all
force through Darkness and Barbarism, and left us who succeeded to follow them:
and assuredly they have been the uppermost point in Trygono igneo, whose flame
now should be more and more brighter, and shall undoubtedly give to the World
the last Light.

Such a one likewise has Theophrast us been in Vocation and Callings, although
he was none of our Fraternity, yet nevertheless has he diligently read over
the Book M: whereby his sharp ingenium was exalted; but this man was also
hindered in his course by the multitude of the learned and wise-seeming men,
that he was never able peaceably to confer with others of his Knowledge and
Understanding he had of Nature. And therefore in his writing he rather mocked
these busy bodies, and does not show them altogether what he was: yet
nevertheless there is found with him well grounded the aforenamed Harmonia,
which without doubt he had imparted to the Learned, if he had not found them
rather worthy of subtle vexation, then to be instructed in greater Arts and
Sciences; he then with a free and careless life lost his time, and left unto
the World their foolish pleasures.

But that we do not forget our loving Father, Brother C. R. he after many
painful Travels, and his fruitless true Instructions, returned again into
Germany, the which he (by reason of the alterations which were shortly to come,
and of the strange and dangerous contentions) heartily loved: There, although
he could have bragged with his Art, but specially of the transmutations of
Metals; yet did he esteem more Heaven, and the Citizens thereof, Man, then all
vain glory and pomp.

Nevertheless he builded a fitting and neat habitation, in the which he
ruminaated his Voyage, and Philosophy, and reduced them together in a true
Memorial. In this house he spent a great time in the Mathematics, and made
many fine Instruments, ex omnibus hujus art is partibus, whereof there is but
little remaining to us, as hereafter you shall understand. After five years
came again into his mind the wished for Reformation; and in regard he doubted
of the aid and help of others, although he himself was painful* lusty, and
unwearisom, he undertook* with some few adjoined with him, to attempt the same:
wherefore he desired to that end, to have out of his first Cloister (to the
which he bare a great affection) three of his Brethren, Brother G. V. Brother
J. A. and Brother J. O. who besides that, they had some more knowledge in the
Arts, then at that time many others had, he did bind those three unto himself,
to be faithful, diligent, and secret; as also to commit carefully to writing,
all that which he should direct and instruct them in, to the end that those
which were to come, and through especial Revelation should be received into
this Fraternity, might not be deceived of the least syllable and word.

After this manner began the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; first, by four
persons only, and by them was made the Magical Language and writing, with a
large Dictionary, which we yet daily use to Gods praise and glory, and do find
great wisdom therein; they made also the first part of the Book M: but in
respect that that labor was too heavy, and the unspeakable concourse of the
sick hindered them, and also whilst his new building (called Sancti spiritus)
was now finished, they concluded to draw and receive yet others more into their
Fraternity; to this end was chosen brother R. C. his deceased fathers brothers
son, brother B. a skilful Painter, G. and P. D. their Secretary, all Germains
except J. A. so in all they were eight in number, all batchelors and of vowed
virginity, by those was collected a book or volumn of all that which man can
desire, wish, or hope for.

Although we do now freely confess, that the World is much amended within an
hundred years, yet we are assured, that our Axiomata shall unmovably remain
unto the Worlds End, and also the world in her highest and last Age shall not
attain to see any thing else; for our Rota takes her beginning from that day
when God spoke Fiat, and shall end when he shall speak Pereat; yet Gods Clock
strikes every minute, where ours scarce strikes perfect hours. We also
steadfastly believe, that if our Brethren and Fathers had lived in this our
present and clear light, they would more roughly have handled the Pope,
Mahomet, Scribes, Artists, and Sophisters, and had showed themselves more
helpful, not simply with sighs, and wishing of their end and consummation.

When now these eight Brethren had disposed and ordered all things in such
manner, as there was not now need of any great labor, and also that every one
was sufficiently instructed, and able perfectly to discourse of secret and
manifest Philosophy, they would not remain any longer together, but as in the
beginning they had agreed, they separated themselves into several Countries,
because that not only their Axiomata might in secret be more profoundly
examined by the learned, but that they themselves, if in some Country or other
they observed any thing, or perceived some Error, they might inform one another
of it.

Their Agreement was this; First, That none of them should profess any other
thing, then to cure the sick, and that gratis. 2. None of the Posterity should
be constrained to wear one certain kind of habit, but therein to follow the
custom of the Country. 3. That every year upon the day C. they should meet
together at the house S. Spiritus, or write the cause of his absence. 4. Every
Brother should look about for a worthy person, who after his discease might
succeed him. 5. The word C. R. should be their Seal, Mark, and Character. 6.
The Fraternity should remain secret one hundred years. These six Articles they
bound themselves one to another to keep; and five of the Brethren departed,
only the Brethren B. and D. remained with the Father Fra: R. C. a whole year;
when these likewise departed, then remained by him his Cosen and Brother J. O.
so that he has all the days of his life with him two of his Brethren. And
although that as yet the Church was not cleansed, nevertheless we know that
they did think of her, and what with longing desire they looked for: Every year
they assembled together with joy, and made a full resolution of that which they
had done; there must certainly have been great pleasure, to hear truly and
without invention related and rehearsed all the Wonders which God has poured
out here and there through the World. Every one may hold it out for certain,
that such persons as were sent, and joined together by God, and the Heavens,
and chosen out of the wisest of men, as have lived in many Ages, did live
together above all others in highest Unity, greatest Secrecy, and most kindness
one toward another.

After such a most laudable sort they did spend their lives; and although they
were free from all diseases and pain, yet notwithstanding they could not live
and pass their time appointed of God. The first of this Fraternity which dyed,
and that in England, was J. O. as Brother C. long before had foretold him; he
was very expert, and well learned in Cabala, as his Book called H. witnesses:
In England he is much spoken of, and chiefly because he cured a young Earl of
Norfolk of the Leprosy. They had concluded, that as much as possibly could be
their burial place should be kept secret, as at this day it is not known unto
us what is become of some of them, yet every ones place was supplied with a fit
successor; but this we will confess publicly by these presents to the honor
of God, That what secret soever we have learned out of the book M. (although
before our eyes we behold the image and pattern of all the world) yet are there
not shown unto us our misfortunes, nor hour of death, the which only is known
to God himself, who thereby would have us keep in a continual readiness; but
hereof more in our Confession, where we do set down 37 Reasons wherefore we now
do make known our Fraternity, and proffer such high Mysteries freely, and
without constraint and reward: also we do promise more gold then both the
Indies bring to the King of Spain; for Europe is with child and will bring forth
a strong child, who shall stand in need of a great godfathers gift.

After the death of I. O. Brother R. C. rested not, but as soon as he could,
called the rest together, (and as we suppose) then his grave was made; although
hitherto we (who were the latest) did not know when our loving father R. C.
died, and had no more but the bare names of the beginners, and all their
successors to us; yet there came into our memory, a secret, which through dark
and hidden words, and speeches of the 100 years, brother A. the successor of D.
(who was of the last and second row and succession, and had lived amongst many
of us,) did impart unto us of the third row and succession; otherwise we must
confess, that after the death of the said A. none of us had in any manner known
any thing of Brother R. C. and of his first fellow-brethren, then that which
was extant of them in our Philosophical Bibliotheca, amongst which our Axiomata
was held for the chiefest Rota Mundi, for the most artificial, and Protheus the
most profitable. Likewise we do not certainly know if these of the second row
have been of the like wisdom as the first, and if they were admitted to all
things. It shall be declared hereafter to the gentle Reader, not only what we
have heard of the burial of R. C. but also made manifest publicly by the
foresight, sufferance and commandment of God, whom we most faithfully obey,
that if we shall be answered discreetly and Christian-like, we will not be
afraid to set forth publicly in Print, our names, and sirnames, our meetings,
or any thing else that may be required at our hands.

Now the true and fundamental relation of the finding out of the high
illuminated man of God, Fra: C. R. C. is this; After that A. in Gallia
Narbonensi was deceased, then succeeded in his place, our loving Brother N. N.
this man after he had repaired unto us to take the solemn oath of fidelity and
secrecy, he informed us bona fide, That A. had comforted him in telling him,
that this Fraternity should ere long not remain so hidden, but should be to all
the whole German Nation helpful, needful, and commendable; of the which he was
not in any wise in his estate ashamed of. The year following after he had
performed his School right, and was minded now to travel, being for that
purpose sufficiently provided with Fortunatus purse, he thought (he being a
good Architect) to alter something of his building, and to make it more fit: in
such renewing he lighted upon the memorial Table which was cast of brass, and
contains all the names of the brethren, with some few other things; this he
would transfer in another more fitting vault: for where or when Fra: R. C.
died, or in what country he was buried, was by our predecessors concealed and
unknown unto us. In this Table stuck a great nail somewhat strong, so that
when he was with force drawn out, he took with him an indifferent big stone out
of the thin wall, or plaistering of the hidden door, and so unlooked for
uncovered the door; wherefore we did with joy and longing throw down the rest
of the wall, and cleared the door, upon which that was written in great
letters, Post 120 annos patebo, with the year of the Lord under it: therefore
we gave God thanks and let it rest that same night, because first we would
overlook our Rotam; but we refer our selves again to the confession, for what
we here publish is done for the help of those that are worthy, but to the
unworthy (God willing) it will be small profit: For like as our door was after
so many years wonderfully discovered, also there shall be opened a door to
Europe (when the wall is removed) which already does begin to appear, and with
great desire is expected of many.

In the morning following we opened the door, and there appeared to our sight a
Vault of seven sides and corners, every side five foot broad, and the height of
eight foot; Although the Sun never shined in this Vault, nevertheless it was
enlightened with another sun, which had learned this from the Sun, and was
situated in the upper part in the Center of the sieling; in the midst, in
stead of a Tombstone, was a round Altar covered over with a plate of brass,
and thereon this engraven:

A. C. R. C. Hoc universi compendium unius mihi sepulchrum feci. Round about
the first Circle or Brim stood,

Jesus mihi omnia. In the middle were four figures, enclosed in circles, whose
circumscription was,

1. Nequaquam vacuum. 2. Legis Jugum. 3. Libertas Evangelij. 4. Dei gloria
intacta.
This is all clear and bright, as also the seventh side and the two Heptagoni:
so we kneeled altogether down, and gave thanks to the sole wise, sole mighty
and sole eternal God, who has taught us more then all men's wit could have
found out, praised be his holy name. This Vault we parted in three parts, the
upper part or sieling, the wall or side, the ground or floor.

Of the upper part you shall understand no more of it at this time, but that it
was divided according to the seven sides in the triangle, which was in the
bright center; but what therein is contained, you shall God willing (that are
desirous of our society) behold the same with your own eyes; but every side or
wall is parted into ten squares, every one with their several figures and
sentences, as they are truly showed, and set forth Concentratum here in our
book.

The bottom again is parted in the triangle, but because therein is discribed
the power and rule of the inferior Governors, we leave to manifest the same,
for fear of the abuse by the evil and ungodly world. But those that are
provided and stored with the heavenly Antidote, they do without fear or hurt,
tread on, and bruise the head of the old and evil serpent, which this our age
is well fitted for: every side or wall had a door for a chest, wherein there
lay diverse things, especially all our books, which otherwise we had, besides
the Vocabular of Theoph: Par. Ho. and these which daily unfalsifieth we do
participate. Herein also we found his Itinerarium, and vitam, whence this
relation for the most part is taken. In another chest were lookingglasses of
diverse virtues, as also in other places were little bells, burning lamps, and
chiefly wonderful artificial Songs; generally al done to that end, that if it
should happen after many hundred years, the Order or Fraternity should come to
nothing, they might by this only Vault be restored again.

Now as yet we had not seen the dead body of our careful and wise father, we
therefore removed the Altar aside, there we lifted up a strong plate of brass,
and found a fair and worthy body, whole and unconsumed, as the same is here
lively counterfeited, with all the Ornaments and Attires; in his hand he held a
parchment book, called I. the which next unto the Bible, is our greatest
treasure, which ought to be delivered to the censure of the world. At the end
of this book stands this following Elogium

Granum pectori Jesu insitum. C. Ros. C. ex nobili atque splendida Germaniae R.
C. familia oriundus, vir sui seculi divinis revelationibus subtilissimis
imaginationibus, indefessis laboribus ad coelestia, atque humana mysteria;
arcanave admissus postquam suam (quam Arabico, and Africano itineribus
Collegerat) plusquam regiam, atque imperatoriam Gazam suo seculo nondum
convenientem, posteritati eruendam custo divisset and jam suarum Artium, ut and
nominis, fides acconjunctissimos herides instituisset, mundum minutum omnibus
motibus magno illi respondentem fabricasset hocque tandem preteritarum,
praesentium, and futurarum, rerum compendio extracto, contenario major non
morbo (quem ipse nunquam corpore expertus erat, nunquam alios infestare
sinebat) ullo pellente sed spiritu Dei evocante, illuminatam animam (inter
Fratrum amplexus and ultima oscula) fidelissimo creatori Deo reddidisset, Pater
dilectissimus, Fra: suavissimus, praeceptor fidelissimus amicus integerimus, a
suis ad 120 annos hic absconditus est.

Underneath they had subscribed themseves,

1 Fra: I. A. Fr. C. H. electione Fraternitatis caput. 2 Fr: G. V. M. P. C. 3
Fra: R. C. Junior haeres S. spiritus. 4 Fra: B. M. P. A. Pictor and
Architectus. 5 Fr: G. G. M. P. I. Cabalista.
Secundi Circuli.

1 Fra: P. A. Successor, Fr: I. O. Mathematicus. 2 Fra: A. Successor Fra. P. D.
3 Fra: R. Successor patris C. R. C. cum Christo triumphant.
At the end was written,

Ex Deo nascimur, in Jesu morimur, per spiritum sanctum reviviscimus. At that
time was already dead Brother I. O. and Fra: D. but their burial place where is
it to be found? we doubt not but our Fra: Senior has the same, and some
especial thing laid in Earth, and perhaps likewise hidden: we also hope that
this our Example will stir up others more deligently to enquire after their
names (whom we have therefore published) and to search for the place of their
burial; for the most part of them, by reason of their practice and physic, are
yet known, and praised among very old folks; so might perhaps our Gaza be
enlarged, or at least be better cleared.

Concerning Minutum Mundum, we found it kept in another little Altar, truly
more finer then can be imagined by any understanding man; but we will leave him
undescribed, until we shall truly be answered upon this our true hearted Famam;
and so we have covered it again with the plates, and set the altar thereon,
shut the door, and made it sure, with all our seals; besides by instruction and
command of our Rota, there are come to sight some books, among which is
contained M. (which were made in stead of household care by the praiseworthy M.
P.) Finally we departed the one from the other, and left the natural heirs in
possession of our Jewels. And so we do expect the answer and judgment of the
learned, or unlearned.

Howbeit we know after a time there will now be a general reformation, both of
divine and humane things, according to our desire, and the expectation of
others: for it is fitting, that before the rising of the Sun, there should
appear and break forth Aurora, or some clearness, or divine light in the sky;
and so in the mean time some few, which shall give their names, may join
together, thereby to increase the number and respect of our Fraternity, and
make a happy and wished for beginning of our Philosophical Canons, prescribed
to us by our brother R. C. and be partakers with us of our treasures (which
never can fail or be wasted) in all humility, and love to be eased of this
worlds labor, and not walk so blindly in the knowledge of the wonderful works
of God.

But that also every Christian may know of what Religion and belief we are, we
confess to have the knowledge of Jesus Christ (as the same now in these last
days, and chiefly in Germany, most clear and pure is professed, and is now
adays cleansed and void of all swerving people, Heretics, and false Prophets,)
in certain and noted Countries maintained, defended and propagated: Also we use
two Sacraments, as they are instituted with all Forms and Ceremonies of the
first renewed Church. In Politia we acknowledge the Roman Empire and Quartam
Monarchiam for our Christian head; albeit we know what alterations be at hand,
and would fain impart the same with all our hearts, to other godly learned men;
notwithstanding our handwriting which is in our hands, no man (except God
alone) can make it common, nor any unworthy person is able to bereave us of it.
But we shall help with secret aid this so good a cause, as God shall permit or
hinder us: For our God is not blind, as the Heathens Fortuna, but is the
Churches Ornament, and the honor of the Temple. Our Philosophy also is not a
new Invention, but as Adam after his fall has received it, and as Moses and
Solomon used it: also she ought not much to be doubted of, or contradicted by
other opinions, or meanings; but seeing the truth is peaceable, brief, and
always like her self in all things, and especially accorded by with Jesus in
omni part and all members. And as he is the true Image of the Father, so is
she his Image; It shall not be said, this is true according to Philosophy, but
true according to Theology; And wherein Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras and
others did hit the mark, and wherein Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Solomon did excel;
but especially wherewith that wonderful book the Bible agrees. All that same
concurreth together, and make a Sphere or Globe, whose total parts are
equidistant from the Center, as hereof more at large and more plain shall be
spoken of in Christianly Conference.

But now concerning (and chiefly in this our age) the ungodly and accursed
Gold-making, which has gotten so much the upper hand, whereby under color of
it, many runagates and roguish people do use great villainies, and cozen and
abuse the credit which is given them: yea now adays men of discretion do hold
the transmutation of Metals to be the highest point, and fastigium in
Philosophy, this is all their intent, and desire, and that God would be most
esteemed by them, and honored, which could make great store of Gold, and in
abundance, the which with unpremeditate prayers, they hope to attain of the
alknowing God, and searcher of all hearts: we therefore do by these presents
publicly testify, That the true Philosophers are far of another mind,
esteeming little the making of Gold, which is but a parergon; for besides that
they have a thousand better things.

And we say with our loving Father R. C. C. Phy: aurum nisi quantum aurum, for
unto them the whole nature is detected: he does not rejoice, that he can make
Gold, and that, as says Christ, the devils are obedient unto him; but is glad
that he sees the Heavens open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending,
and his name written in the book of life. Also we do testify that under the
name of Chymia many books and pictures are set forth in Contumeliam gloriae
Dei, as we will name them in their due season, and will give to the pure-hearted
a Catalogue, or Register of them: And we pray all learned men to take heed of
these kind of Books; for the enemy never rests, but sows his weeds, til a
stronger one does root it out. So according to the will and meaning of Fra: C.
R. C. we his brethren request again all the learned in Europe, who shall read
(sent forth in five Languages) this our Famam and Confessionem, that it would
please them with good deliberation to ponder this our offer, and to examine
most nearly and most sharply their Arts, and behold the present time with all
diligence, and to declare their mind, either Communicato consilio, or
singulatim by Print.

And although at this time we make no mention either of our names, or meetings,
yet nevertheless every ones opinion shall assuredly come to our hands, in what
language so ever it be; nor any body shall fail, who so gives but his name to
speak with some of us, either by word of mouth, or else if there be some let
in writing. And this we say for a truth, That whosoever shall earnestly, and
from his heart, bear affection unto us, it shall be beneficial to him in goods,
body and soul; but he that is false-hearted, or only greedy of riches, the
same first of all shall not be able in any manner of wise to hurt us, but bring
himself to utter ruin and destruction. Also our building (although one hundred
thousand people had very near seen and beheld the same) shall for ever remain
untouched, undestroyed, and hidden to the wicked world, sub umbra alarm tuarum
Jehova.

A Preface of the Confession to the Reader who is desirous of Wisdom.
HEre Gentle Reader, you shall find incorporated in our Confession thirty seven
Reasons of our purpose, and intention, the which according to thy pleasure thou
may seek out and compare them together: thou may also consider with thy
self, if they be weighty, and sufficient enough to bring and persuade thee for
to take our parts.

Verily it requires no small pains to confirm that which men have not yet seen,
but when it shall once com to light we doubt not, but they will then justly be a
shamed of such doubts, and conjectures. And as we do now altogether securely,
freely, and without any hurt call the Pope of Rome Antichrist, the which
heretofore was held for a deadly sin, and such in all Countries were put to
death for it. So we know certainly, that the time shall likewise come, that that
which we yet keep in secret, we shall openly, freely, and with a loud voice
publish and confess it before all the world; the which Gentle Reader wish with
us with all thy heart, that it may happen with speed.

Confessio Fraternitatis, Or, The Confession of the laudable Fraternity of the
most honorable Order of the Rosy Cross, written to the Learned of Europe.
WHatsoever there is published, and made known to every one, concerning our
Fraternity, by the foresaid Fama, let no man esteem lightly of it, nor hold it
as an idle or invented thing, and much less receive the same, as though it were
only a mere conceit of ours. It is the Lord Jehovah (who seeing the Lords
Sabbath is almost at hand, and hastened again, his period or course being
finished, to his first beginning) does turn about the course of Nature; and
what heretofore has been sought with great pains, and daily labor, is now
manifested unto those who make small account, or scarcely once think upon it;
but these which desire it, it is in a manner forced and thrusted upon them,
that thereby the life of the godly may be eased of all their toil and labor,
and be no more subject to the storms of unconstant Fortune; but the wickedness
of the ungodly thereby, with their due and deserved punishment, be augmented
and multiplied.

Although we cannot be by any suspected of the least Heresy, or of any wicked
beginning, or purpose against the worldly Government; we do condemn the East
and the West, (meaning the Pope and Mahomet) blasphemers against our Lord Jesus
Christ, and offer and present with a good will to the chief head of the Romish
Empire, our prayers, secrets, and great treasures of Gold.

Yet we have thought good, and fit for the Learned sakes, to add somewhat more
to this, and make a better explanation, if there by any thing too deep, hidden,
and set down over dark in the Fama, or for certain reasons were altogether
omitted, and left out; hoping herewith the Learned will be more addicted unto
us, and be made far more fitter and willing for our purpose.

Concerning the alteration and amendment of Philosophy, we have (as much as at
this present is needful) sufficiently declared, to wit, that the same is
altogether weak and faulty; yet we doubt not, although the most part falsely do
all edge that she (I know not how) is sound and strong, yet notwithstanding she
fetches her last breath and is departing.

But as commonly, even in the same place or Country where there breaks forth
a new unaccustomed disease, Nature also there discovers a medicine against
the same; so there does appear for so manifold infirmities of Philosophy, the
right means, and unto our Patria sufficiently offered, whereby she may become
sound again, which is now to be renewed and altogether new.

No other Philosophy we have, then that which is the head and sum, the
foundation and contents of all faculties, sciences and arts, the which (if we
will behold ourage) contains much of Theology and medicine, but little of the
wisdom of Lawyers, and does diligently search both heaven and earth: or, to
speak briefly thereof, which does manifest and declare sufficiently Man;
whereof then all Learned who will make themselves known unto us, and come into
our brotherhood, shall find more wonderful secrets by us then heretofore they
did attain unto, and did know, or are able to believe or utter.

Wherefore, to declare briefly our meaning hereof, we ought to labor carefully
that there be not only a wondering at our meeting and adhortation, but that
likewise every one may know, that although we do highly esteem and regard such
mysteries and secrets, we nevertheless hold it fit, that the knowledge thereof
be manifested and revealed to many.

For it is to be taught and believed, that this our unhoped willing offer will
raise many and diverse thoughts in men, unto whom (as yet) be unknown Miranda
sextae aetatis, or those which by reason of the course of the world, esteem the
things to come like unto the present, and are hindered through all manner of
importunities of this their time, so that they live no otherwise in the world,
then blind fools, who can, in the clear Sunshine day, discern and know
nothing, then only by feeling.

Now concerning the first part, we hold this, that the Meditations, knowledge
and inventions of our loving Christian Father (of all that, which from the
beginning of the world, Man's Wisdom, either through Gods Revelation, or through
the service of the Angels and spirits, or through* the sharpness and deepness
of understanding, or through long observation, use and experience, has found
out, invented, brought forth, corrected, and till now has been propagated and
transplanted) are so excellent worthy and great, that if all books should
perish, and by Gods almighty suffrance, all writings, and all learning should
be lost, yet the posterity will be able only thereby to lay a new foundation,
and bring truth to light again; the which perhaps would not be so hard to do as
if one should begin to pull down and destroy* the old ruinous building, and
then begin to enlarge the fore Court, afterward bring the lights in the
Lodgings, and then change the doors, staples and other things according to our
intention.

But to whom would not this be acceptable, for to be manifested to every one
rather then to have it kept and spared, as an especial ornament for the
appointed time to come?

Wherefore should we not with all our hearts rest and remain in the only truth
(which men through so many erroneous and crooked ways do seek) if it had only
pleased God to lighten unto us the sixth Candelabrum? were it not good that we
needed not to care, not to fear hunger, poverty, sickness and age?

Were it not a precious thing, that you could always live so, as if you had
lived from the beginning of the world, and moreover, as you should still live to
the end thereof? Were it not excellent, you dwell in one place, that neither the
people which dwell beyond the River Ganges in the Indies could hide any thing,
nor those which live in Peru might be able to keep secret their counsels from
thee?

Were it not a precious thing, that you could so read in one only book, and
withal by reading understand, and remember all that, which in all other books
(which heretofore have been, and are now, and hereafter shall come out) has
been, is, and shall be learned, and found out of them?

How pleasant were it, that you could so sing, that in stead of stony rocks you
could draw to the pearls and precious stones, in stead of wild beasts,
spirits, and in stead of hellish Pluto, move the mighty Princes of the world?

O ye people, Gods counsel is far otherwise, who has concluded now to increase
and enlarge the number of our Fraternity, the which we with such joy have
undertaken, as we have heretofore obtained this great treasure without our
merits, yea without any our hopes, and thoughts; and purpose with the like
fidelity to put the same in practice, that neither the compassion nor pity of
our own children (which some of us in the Fraternity have) shall draw us from
it, because we know that these unhoped for goods cannot be inherited, nor by
chance be obtained.

If there be some body now, which on the other side will complain of our
discreation, that we offer our Treasures so freely, and without any difference
to all men, and do not rather regard and respect more the godly, learned, wise,
or princely persons, then the common people; those we do not contradict, seeing
it is not a slight and easy matter; but withal we signify so much, that our
Arcana or Secrets will no ways be common, and generally made known: Although
the Fama be set forth in five languages, and is manifested to every one, yet we
do partly very well know, that the unlearned and gross wits will not receive,
nor regard the same; as also the worthiness of those who shall be accepted into
our Fraternity are not esteemed and known of us by Man's Carefulness, but by the
Rule of our Revelation and Manifestation. Wherefore if the unworthy cry and
call a thousand times, or if they shall offer and present themselves to us a
thousand times, yet God has commanded our ears, that they should hear none of
them: yea, God has so compassed us about with his Clouds, that unto us his
servants no violence or force can be done or committed; wherefore we neither
can be seen or known by any body, except he had the eyes of an Eagle. It has
been necessary that the Fama should be set forth in every ones Mother Tongue,
because those should not be defrauded of the knowledge thereof, whom (although
they be unlearned) God has not excluded from the happiness of this Fraternity;
the which shall be divided and parted into certain degrees; as those which
dwell in the City Damear in Arabia, who have a far different politic order
from the other Arabians. For there do govern only wise and understanding men,
who by the Kings permission make particular Laws; according unto which example
also the Government shall be instituted in Europe (whereof we have a
description set down by our Christianly Father) when first is done and come to
pass that which is to precede. And thenceforth our Trumpet shall publicly
sound with a loud sound, and great noise, when namely the same (which at this
present is showed by few, and is secretly, as a thing to come, declared in
Figures and Pictures) shall be free, and publicly proclaimed, and the whole
World be filled withal. Even in such manner as heretofore, many godly people
have secretly and altogether desperately pusht at the Popes Tyranny, which
afterward, with great earnest, and especial zeal in Germany, was thrown from
his seat, and trodden under-foot, whose final fall is delayed, and kept for our
times, when he also shall be scratched in pieces with nails, and an end be made
of his Asses cry, by a new voice: The which we know is already reasonably
manifest and known to many learned men in Germany, as their Writings and secret
Congratulations do sufficiently witness the same.

We could here relate and declare what all the time, from the year of our Lord
1378. (in which year our Christian Father was born) till now, has happened,
where we might rehearse what alterations he has seen in the World these one
hundred six years of his life, which he has left to our Brethren and us after
his decease to peruse: But brevity, which we do observe, will not permit at
this present to make rehearsal of it, till a more fit time: At this time it is
enough for these which do not despise our Declaration, having therefore briefly
touched it, thereby to prepare the way for their acquaintance and friendship
with us.

Yea, to whom it is permitted, that he may see, and for his instruction use
those great Letters and Characters which the Lord God has written and
imprinted in Heaven and Earths Edifice, through the alteration of Government,
which has been from time to time altered and renewed; the same is already
(although as yet unknown to himself) ours: And as we know he will not despise
our inviting and calling, so none shall fear any deceit; for we promise, and
openly say, That no man's uprightness and hopes shall deceive him, whosoever
shall make himself known unto us under the Seal of Secrecy, and desire our
Fraternity.

But to the false Hypocrites, and to those that seek other things then Wisdom,
we say and witness by these presents publicly, we cannot be made known, and be
betrayed unto them; and much less they shall be able to hurt us any manner of
way without the Will of God; but they shall certainly be partakers of all the
punishment spoken of in our Fama; so their wicked Counsels shall light upon
themselves, and our Treasures shall remain untouched and unstirred, until the
Lion does come, who will ask them for his use, and employ them for the
confirmation and establishment of his Kingdom. We ought therefore here to
observe well, and make it known unto every one, that God has certainly and
most assuredly concluded to send and grant to the World before her end, which
presently thereupon shall ensue, such a Truth, Light, Life and Glory, as the
first man Adam had, which he lost in Paradise, after the which his successors
were put, and driven with him to misery: Wherefore there shall cease all
servitude, falsehood, lies, and darkness, which by little and little, with the
great Worlds Revolution, was crept into all Arts, Works and Governments of Men,
and have darkened the most part of them. For from thence are proceeded an
innumerable sort of all manner of false Opinions and Heresies, that scarce the
wisest of all was able to know whose Doctrine and Opinion he should follow and
embrace, and could not well and easily be discerned; seeing on the one part
they were detained, hindered, and brought into Errors through the respect of
the Philosophers and learned men, and on the other part through true
experience. All the which, when it shall once be abolished and removed, and in
stead thereof a right and true Rule instituted, then there will remain thanks
unto them which have taken pains therein; but the Work it self shall be
attributed to the Blessedness of our Age.

As we now willingly confess, that many principal men by their Writings will be
a great furtherance unto this Reformation which is to come; so we desire not to
have this honor ascribed to us, as if such Work were only commanded and
imposed upon us; but we confess, and witness openly with the Lord Jesus Christ,
that it shall first happen that the stones shall arise, and offer their
service, before there shall be any want of Executors and Accomplishers of Gods
Counsel: yea, the Lord God has already sent before certain Messengers, which
should testify his Will, to wit, some new Stars, which do appear and are seen
in the Firmament in Serpentario and Cygno, which signify and give themselves
known to every one, that they are powerful Signacula of great weighty matters.
So then, the secret hid Writings and Characters are most necessary for all such
things which are found out by Men: Although that great Book of Nature stand
open to all Men, yet there are but few that can read and understand the same.
For as there is given to Man two instruments to hear, likewise two to see, and
two to smell, but only one to speak, and it were but vain to expect speech from
the ears, or hearing from the eyes: So there has been Ages or Times which have
seen, there have also been Ages that have heard, smelt, and tasted: now there
remains yet that which in short time, honor shall be likewise given to the
Tongue, and by the same; what before times has been seen, heard, and smelt,
now finally shall be spoken and uttered forth, viz. when the World shall awake
out of her heavy and drowsy sleep, and with an open heart, bare-head and
barefoot, shall merrily and joyfully meet the now arising Sun.

These Characters and Letters, as God has here and there incorporated them in
the holy Scripture the Bible, so has he imprinted them most apparently into
the wonderful Creation of Heaven and Earth, yea in all Beasts. So that like as
the Mathematician or Astronomer can long before see and know the Eclipses which
are to come, so we may verily foreknow and foresee the darkness of
Obscurations of the Church, and how long they shall last: From the which
Characters or Letters we have borrowed our Magic writing, and have found out,
and made a new Language for our selves, in the which withal is expressed and
declared the Nature of all Things: So that it is no wonder that we are not so
eloquent in other Languages, the which we know that they are altogether
disagreeing to the Languages of our forefathers, Adam and Enoch, and were
through the Babylonical Confusion wholly hidden.

But we must also let you understand, that there are yet some Eagles Feathers
in our way, the which do hinder our purpose. Wherefore we do admonish every one
for to read diligently and continually the holy Bible; for he that takes all
his pleasures therein, he shall know that he prepared for himself an excellent
way to come in to our Fraternity: For as this is the whole sum and content of
our Rule, That every Letter or Character which is in the World ought to be
learned and regarded well; so those are like unto us, and are very near allied
unto us, who do make the holy Bible a Rule of their life, and an aim and end of
all their studies; yea to let it be a Compendium and Content of the whole
World: And not only to have it continually in the mouth, but to know how to
apply and direct the true understanding of it to all times and Ages of the
World. Also, it is not our Custom to prostitute and make so common the holy
Scriptures; for there are innumerable Expounders of the same; some alleging
and wresting it to serve for their Opinion, some to scandal it, and most
wickedly do liken it to a Nose of Wax, which alike should serve the Divines,
Philosophers, Physicians and Mathematicians, against all the which we do openly
witness and acknowledge, That from the beginning of the World there has not
been given unto Men a more worthy, a more excellent, and more admirable and
wholesome Book then the holy Bible; Blessed is he that has the same, yea more
blessed is he who reads it diligently, but most blessed of all is he that truly
understands the same, for he is most like to God, and does come most near to
him. But whatsoever has been said in the Fama concerning the Deceivers against
the Transmutation of Metals, and the highest Medicine in the World, the same
is thus to be understood, that this so great gift of God we do in no manner set
at naught, or despise it. But because she brings not with her always the
knowledge of Nature, but this brings forth not only Medicine, but also makes
manifest and open unto us innumerable Secrets and Wonders; Therefore it is
requisite, that we be earnest to attain to the understanding and knowledge of
Philosophy. And moreover, excellent Wits ought not to be drawn to the Tincture
of Metals, before they be exercised well in the knowledge of Nature. He must
needs be an unsatiable Creature, who is come so far, that neither Poverty nor
Sickness can hurt him; yea, who is exalted above all other men, and has Rule
over that, the which does anguish, trouble and pain others, yet will give
himself again to idle things, as to build houses, make Wars, and use all manner
of Pride, because he has of Gold and Silver infinite store.

God is far otherwise pleased, for he exalts the lowly, and pulls down the
proud with disdain; to those which are of few words he sends his holy Angel
to speak with them, but the unclean Bablers he drives in the Wilderness and
solitary places: The which is the right Reward of the Romish Seducers, who have
vomitted forth their Blasphemies against Christ, and as yet do not abstain from
their Lies in this clear shining Light: In Germany all their Abominations and
detestable Tricks have been disclosed, that thereby he may fully fulfill the
measure of sin, and draw near to the end of his punishment. Therefore one day
it will come to pass, that the Mouth of those Vipers will be stopped, and the
three double Horn will be brought to naught, as thereof at our Meeting shall
more plain and at large be discoursed.

For Conclusion of our Confession, we must earnestly admonish you, that you put
away, if not all, yet the most Books written by false Alchimists, who do think
it but a Jest, or a Pastime, when they either misuse the holy Trinity, when
they do apply it to vain things, or deceive the people with most strange
Figures, and dark Sentences and Speeches, and cozen the simple of their money;
as there are now adays too many such Books set forth, which the Enemy of Man's
Welfare does daily, and will to the end, mingle among the good Seed, thereby to
make the Truth more difficult to be believed, which in her self is simple,
easy, and naked; but contrarily Falsehood is proud, haughty, and colored with
a kind of Luster of seeming godly and of humane Wisdom. Ye that are wise eschew
such Books, and turn unto us, who seek not your moneys, but offer unto you most
willingly our great Treasures: We hunt not after your Goods with invented lying
Tinctures, but desire to make you Partakers of our Goods: We speak unto you by
Parables, but would willingly bring you to the right, simple, easy, and
ingenuous Exposition, Understanding, Declaration and Knowledge of all Secrets.
We desire not to be received of you, but invite you unto our more then Kingly
Houses and Palaces, and that verily not by our own proper motion, but (that you
likewise may know it) as forced unto it, by the Instigation of the Spirit of
God, by his Admonition, and by the Occation of this present time.

What think you, loving people, and how seem you affected, seeing that you now
understand and know, That we acknowledge our selves truly and sincerely top
rofess Christ, condemn the Pope, addict our selves to the true Philosophy, lead
a Christian life, and daily call, entreat and invite many more unto our
Fraternity, unto whom the same Light of God likewise appears? Consider you
not at length how you might begin with us, not only by pondering the Gifts
which are in you, and by experience which you have in the Word of God, beside
the careful Consideration of the Imperfection of all Arts, and many other
unfitting things, to seek for an amendment therein; to appease God, and to
accommodate you for the time wherein you live. Certainly if you will perform
the same, this profit will follow, That all those Goods which Nature has in
all parts of the World wonderfully dispersed, shall at one time altogether be
given unto you, and shall easily disburden you of all that which obscureth the
Understanding of Man, and hinders the working thereof, like unto the vain
Epicides, and Excentrick Astronomical Circles.

But those Pragmatical and busieheaded men, who either are blinded with the
glistering of Gold, or (to say more truly) who are now honest, but by thinking
such great Riches should never fail, might easily be corrupted, and brought to
Idleness, and to riotons proud living: Those we do desire that they would not
trouble us with their idle and vain crying. But let them think, that although
there be a Medicine to be had which might fully cure all Diseases, nevertheless
those whom God has destinated to plague with Diseases, and to keep them under
the Rod of Correction, such shall never obtain any such Medicine.

Even in such manner, although we might enrich the whole World, and endue them
with Learning, and might release it from Innumerable Miseries, yet shall we
never be manifested and made known unto any man, without the especial pleasure
of God; yea, it shall be so far from him whosoever thinks to get the benefit,
and be Partaker of our Riches and Knowledge, without and against the Will of
God, that he shall sooner lose his life in seeking and searching for us, then
to find us, and attain to come to the wished Happiness of the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross.

A SHORT ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
This Advertisement, Reader, invites thee not to my Lodging, for I would give
thee no such Directions, my Nature being more Melancholy, then Sociable. I
would only tell thee how Charitable I am, for having purposely omitted some
Necessaries in my former Discourse I have upon second Thoughts resolved against
that silence.

There is abroad a bold ignorance, for Philosophy has her Confidents, but in
a sense different from the Madams. This Generation I have sometimes met
withal, and least they should ride, and repent, I thought it not amiss to show
them the Praecipieces. The second Philosophical work is commonly called the
gross work, but it is one of the greatest Subtilties in all the Art. Cornelius
Agrippa knew the first Praeparation, and has clearly discovered it, but the
Difficulty of the second made him almost an enemy to his own Profession. By the
second work, I understand not Coagulation, but the Solution of the
Philosophical Salt, a secret which Agrippa did not rightly know, as it appears
by his practice at Malines, nor would Natalius teach him, for all his frequent,
and serious entreaties. This was it, that made his necessities so vigorous, and
his purse so weak, that I can seldom find him in a full fortune. But in this,
he is not alone: Raymund Lully the best Christian Artist that ever was,
received not this Mystery from Arnoldus for in his first Practices he followed
the tedious common process, which after all is scarce profitable. Here he met
with a Drudgerie almost invincible, and if we add the Task to the Time, it is
enough to make a Man old. Norton was so strange an Ignoramus in this Point,
that if the Solution and Purgation were performed in three years, he thought it
a happy work. George Ripley labored for new Inventions, to putrify this red
Salt, which he enviously calls his gold: and his knack is, to expose it to
alternat fits of cold and heat, but in this he is singular, and Faber is so
wise he will not understand him. And now that I have mentioned Faber, I must
needs say that Tubal-Cain himself is short of the right Solution, for the
Process he describes has not any thing of Nature in it. Let us return then to
Raymund Lullie, for he was so great a Master, that he performed the Solution,
intra novem Dies, and this Secret he had from God himself; for this is his
Confession. Nos (says he) de prima illa nigredine a paucis cognita, benignum
Spiritum extrabere affectantes, pugnam ignis vincentem, and non victum, licet
sensibus corporis multories palpavimus, and oculis propriis illum vidimus,
Extractionis tamen ipsius notitiam non habuimus quacunque Scientiarum, vel
art: ideoque sentie bamus nos adhuc aliqua rusticitate excaecatos, quia nullo
modo eam comprehendere valuimus, donec alius Spiritus prophetiae, spirans a
patre Luminum descendit, tanquam suos nullatenus deserens, aut a se
Postulantibus deficiens, Qui in somniis tantam claritatem mentis nostrae oculis
infulsit, ut Illam intus and extra, remota omni figura, gratis revelare
dignatus est, insatiabili bonitate nos reficiendo, demonstrans ut ad eam
implendam disponeremus corpus ad unam naturalem decoctionem secretam, qua
penitus ordine retrogrado cum pungenti lancea, tota ejus natura in meram
Nigredinem visibiliter dissolveretur. Here lies the knot, and who is he that
will untye it? for says the same Lully, it was never put to Paper, and he
gives this Reason for it. Quia Solius dei est ea revelare, and homo divinae
Majestati subtrahere nititur, cum soli Deo pertinentia vulgat spiritu
prolationis humanae, aut literarum serie. Propterea operationem illam habere
non poteris, quousque spiritualiter pruis fueris Divinitatis meritis
comprobatus. Quia hoc secretum a nemine mortali Revelandum est, praeterquam ab
Almo spiritu, qui ubi vult, spirat. It seems then the greatest Difficulty is
not in the Coagulation or production of the Philosophical Salt, but in the
Putrefaction of it, when it is produced. Indeed this agrees best with the sense
of the Philosophers, for one of those Praecitians tells us, Quiscit SALEM, and
ejus SOLUTIONEM, scit SECRETUM OCCULTUM antiquorum Philosophorum. Alas then!
what shall we do? whence comes our next Intelligence? I am afraid here is a sad
Truth for some body. Shall we run now to Lucas Rodargirus, or have we any dusty
Manuscripts, that can instruct us? Well Reader, thou see how free I am grown,
and now I could discover something else, but here is enough at once. I could
indeed tell thee of the first and second sublimation, of a double Nativity,
Visible and Invisible, without which the matter is not alterable, as to our
purpose. I could tell thee also of Sulphurs simple, and compounded, of three
Argents Vive, and as many Salts, and all this would be new news (as the
Book-men phrase it) even to the best Learned in England. But I have done, and I
hope this Discourse has not demolished any man's Castles, for why should they
despair, when I contribute to their Building? I am a hearty Dispensero, and if
they have got any thing by me, much good may it do them. It is my only fear,
they will mistake when they read, for were I to live long, which I am confident
I shall not, I would make no other wish, but that my years might be as many as
their Errors. I speak not this out of any contempt, for I undervalue no man; It
is my Experience in this kind of learning, which I ever made my Business, that
gives me the boldness to suspect a possibility of the same faylings in others,
which I have found in my self. To conclude, I would have my Reader know, that
the Philosophers finding this life subjected to Necessity, and that Necessity
was inconsistant with the Nature of the Soul, they did therefore look upon Man,
as a Creature originally ordained for some better State then the present, for
this was not agreeable with his spirit. This thought made them seek the Ground
of his Creation, that if possible, they might take hold of Liberty, and
transcend the Dispensations of that Circle, which they Mysteriously called Fate.
Now what this really signifies not one in ten thousand knows, and yet we are
all Philosophers.

But to come to my purpose, I say, the true Philosophers did find in every
Compound a double Complexion, Circumferential, and Central. The Circumferential
was corrupt in all things, but in some things altogether venomous: The Central
not so, for in the Center of every thing there was a perfect Unity, a
miraculous indissoluble Concord of Fire and Water. These two Complexions are
the Manifestum and the Occultum of the Arabians, and they resist one another,
for they are Contraries. In the Center it self they found no Discords at all,
for the Difference of Spirits consisted not in Qualities, but in Degrees of
Essence and Transcendency. As for the Water, it was of kin with the Fire, for
it was not common, but athereal. In all Centers this Fire was not the same, for
in some it was only a Solar Spirit, and such a Center was called, Aqua Solis,
Aqua Coelestis, Aqua Auri, and Argenti: In some again the Spirit was more then
Solar, for it was super-coelestial, and Metaphysical: This Spirit purged the
very rational Soul, and awakened her Root that was asleep, and therefore such a
Center was called, Aqua Igne tincta, Aqua Serenans, Candelas accendens, and
Domum illuminans. Of both these Waters have I discoursed in those small
Tractates I have published; and though I have had some Dirt cast at me for my
pains, yet this is so ordinary I mind it not, for whiles we live here we ride
in a Highway. I cannot think him wise who resents his Injuries, for he sets a
rate upon things that are worthless, and makes use of his Spleen where his
Scorn becomes him. This is the Entertainment I provide for my Adversaries, and
if they think it too coarse, let them judge where they understand, and they may
fare better.

FINIS.

