The Faithful NARRATIVE OF The late Testimony and Demand made to Oliver
Cromwell, and his Powers, on the Behalf of the LORDS PRISONERS, In the Name of
the Lord Jehovah (Jesus Christ,) King of Saints and Nations. Published by
Faithful hands, Members of Churches (out of the original Copies) to prevent
mistakes, and misreports thereupon. To the Faithful Remnant of the Lamb, who
are in this Day of great Rebuke and Blasphemy, engaged against the BEAST and
his GOVERNMENT, especially, to the New Nonconforming Churches, and Saints in
City and Country, commonly called by the Name of Fifth Monarchy-men.

Numb. 16.5. Even to morrow the Lord will show who are his, and who is holy,
and will cause him to come near to him, even him whom he has chosen will he
cause to come near to him: therefore take you Censers, etc.

Genesis 42.16. And ye shall be kept in Prison, that your words may be proved.

Printed in the year 1654.

To the little Remnant of the Lamb, against the Beast and his Government.
Some may wonder what we mean (the meanest of all the flock) to be so public,
and it may be our Dearest Brethren the Lords prisoners (at Lambeth, Windsor,
and elsewhere) but they know Necessity (by experience) is the most absolute
plea now up, and a prevalent Argument to all parties interest and purposes,
good and bad (we wonder, the Heathens worship her for a Goddess, for she does
great things now adays too in England) but we leave the Heathenish Necessity,
or Court craft-Principle, and to take up the Heavenly Necessity, or
Conscience-Principle, which they explode; They themselves who use to create
necessities for themselves, have created some for us too, by their ordinary (or
rather extraordinary) disease amongst them, viz. the flux of words, and running
Fistula of Lies, or blasphemies of abominable savor. Our faces blush, whilst
our hearts turn within us, at the whorish Impudence and Imprudence of such
politic State-Professours, who with their Stage-Devotion dare blaspheme the
name of Christ, to make Lies their Refuge, as they do at this day. We had
interded this following Discourse (for all us) should have lain a while in
silence, had not some (who thought us and this fast asleep) sought to murder
and cut the throat of the truth and of this Testimony, with their notoriously
false and oblique Reports; but that they may see the Truth, though like the two
witnesses ( for three years and a half) may lie for slain, yet) it shall rise
again, and stand upon its feet, yea, in such a manner, (with life from God) as
will put all the Time-servers to their trumps too, and throw this self-seeking
Generation of pitiful Muck-worms, mercenary, carnal and Court affected
professors into a pannick fear, and ague- agony-fit, (ere long) but in the
interim, Truth is sweet to us, (because it is Gods, not ours) and the more it
is persecuted, we entertain it, and trust (through grace) to live and die with
it, because the Kings (Christ's) image is upon it, (though Cesars be not) nor
will it take the gross impression of the present Army; for the metal is too
good to take the stamp of Apostates; Therefore with all tenderness,
candidnesse, and faithfulness, without respect to any one man more than
another, and merely for the poore-persecuted Truths-sake, whose sighs and
cries and groans and tears, (by reason of those unsupportable injuries,
inhumane abuses, and violences offered her) have pierced our hearts, and
prevailed with us (whether we will or no) or rather, we think, we may say, the
spirit of Christ in us) to this faithful Publication those passages in Isa.
59.14 and 13,14,15,16. being often repeated in our minds, to wit, viz None
calls for Justice, nor any pleads for the truth, they all trust in vanity
and speak lies, they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, they batch
cockatrice eggs and weave spiders webs, etc. In transgressing and Lying
against the Lord, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and
revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of Falsehood, and Judgment
is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off: for truth is fallen in
the street, and equity cannot enter, yea, the truth fails, and be that
departs from evil makes himself a prey, and the Lord saw it, and it
displeased him, that there was no Judgment. And he saw that there was no man,
and wondered that there was no intercessour, therefore his arm brought
salvation unto him, and his righteousness it sustained him, etc. But besides
other Reasons, should we be longer silent, the three following would fall
foully upon us.

1. For that some of Satan's Surrogates, the Court Pensioners and Pamphleters
have let fly many filthy lies and false reports, about City and Country, to
possess them with prejudicate apprehensions and mis-informations about us: For
it is Machiavils principle and Court policy, as soon as their false reports are
given against the truth by mercenary creatures, to second the charge, and make
way for their Masters to fall upon the bones of the truths Abbettors and
Fautors: This we find State Policy in all Histories and Ages, and the practice
of proud Tyrants, Pedagogues, and persecutors; first, creating lies against the
Saints, and then bringing them into sufferings (when once they had made them
sufficiently odious, so that no eye might pity them) thus Isaiah was reported
for a liar: Jeremiah a traitor; Daniel a rebel; Christ a blasphemer; Paul a
pestilent fellow; the Apostles stirers up of sedition, and preachers of new
laws and doctrine, and such as would subvert all Magistracy and Ministry, laws
and Customs, and all then present: This principle and practice is revived again
under this Government Nero like to inrobe the faithfullest of the assertors of
the truth and testimony of Jesus with Bear-skins, then to bait them with their
Mastiffs or Blood hounds; like men that will report their dogs mad, when they
have a mind to hang them? so doubtless the lies raised against the poor Saints
trampled upon and traduced (now) every where; especially, the Lords prisoners,
Mr. Feak, M. Rogers, and others etc. are precursory to some base (if not
bloody) design against them: Therefore it is, they give out, that they are
railers, liars, stirrers up of sedition and tumults, enemies to Government,
Magistracy, Ministry and Laws, and Evill-doers, and what not? as Persecutors
use to do of old: What is pretended against Mr. Rogers, may appear in what
follows, who refused to make a full or formal reply without it were in an open
Court by a just and legal trial, according to honest and known laws:
Therefore (and for no other reason) as he declared to them, in our hearing; was
it that he declined to Answer, and not because he was non-plust, not able or
afraid to answer, or the like, as the Court-creatures (who have made it their
employment for some days to blaze lies about.) have most wickedly and untruly
reported; but the truth is, they all seem to be given up over head and ears
into strong lies and delusions: For sometimes they said he was too hold and
played the Antic (like Caple) and at other times (to contradict themselves
sufficiently) they said he was so pusillanimous, that he stood and trembled
before them, and what not? etc. Now although it is notoriously known (by us and
others) that they are all most gross forged untruths, and Court devices,
fetched from the Father of lies, who is now more busy than ever, against the
Lords faithful ones, to render them odious and obnoxious; yet not with any
desire to vindicate his or their persons, for we commend them to the God of
truth, in whose eyes, we (and thousands, we think, we may say in England) are
persuaded they are very precious, their God who is the Saints refuge
especially, when they be in sufferings, prisons, persecutions, or the like for
them; they must look to lie under the lash of all men's tongues almost; and no
wonder if Mr. Rogers do now more than ever (by the great man himself, as well
as by his creatures) since that day of his Appearance before him suffer so
much: But the great God that hears prayers for him and his, suffering
brethren will (doubtless) deliver them, avenge them of their Adversaries, and
judge righteously (as Psalm. 37.6.) to bring forth their righteousness as the
light, and their innocence as the noon day; with a Daniels Answer, cap. 6.2. My
God bath sent his Angel and shut the Lions mouths, that they have not hurt me:
Forasmuch as before him innocence was found in me; yet we say, for the truths
sake, lest the testimony should suffer, We shall and must Declare against that
Generation of liars and deceivers (as Apostates use to be) who go about, and
spread abroad false reports of the ways and People of God (by Letters,
messengers or Pamphlets) purposely to poison poor people with-all (knowing the
advantage they have by our forced silence; seeing we are not suffered to print,
or any other ways publish the truth for our selves:) If it were not lawful to
commit Fornication with the Moabites, to draw them to the true Religion; or if
it be unlawful to steal to relieve the poor; it is much more unlawful by
lies, obloquies or blasphemies to win the poor people to their false way.
Wherefore in love to the Lord Jesus, and this his blessed testimony now up, we
bring the truth of the whole Matter of the discourse to light; whereat none we
hope will be offended, but those that love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil, John 3. For the honest Tradesman is content to have his
Wares carried into the Sun from a dim shop-board.

2. It is (and has been but) now more than ever (since the Court-glosses have
been printed and published upon it) the earnest desire, expectation and indeed
Call of many of the Saints, to have as true a Narrative of the late Testimonies
as we could publish; but seeing as Jer. 9.3. says, None so valliant for the
truth (whileft the wicked Apostates proceed from evil to evil) and knowing no
other are so well accommodated to undertake it, as some of us, who were either
ear witnesses or Writers hereof, we reso've to publish it, and therefore have
compared the papers together that were taken in Characters, and have given this
account, which we believe is as well taken as could be in such a crowd, and
among such interruptions, confusions and disturbances; we do not say to every
individual word, point, or circumstance, but in all the material passages, to
the best of our knowledge, observation, or remembrance.

3. It is of some concernment to all the Remnant of the Woman's seed, in City
and Country, to know how far the Remnant in London, with this Testimony of
Jesus, and Cause have gone and are engaged, and how high it is got up now, and
what kind of Esau-like Spirit it is that opposes it) which you may see in the
History following, by the variety of passages, providence, and occurrences)
and who knows, but it may a little warm them that are cold, and enliven them
that are dead; and stir up them that are drowsy, and comfort them that are
drooping, and unite them that are differing, and encourage them that are
fainting, whether in Churches, or out, in the Countries, to consider their work
also at this day, and what it is the Lord calls them to, (with their poor
Brethren that now suffer in the three Nations) for the Lord Jesus and his Cause
against the Mighty, left they also (by their sleepiness and silence) incur the
curse, Judges 5.26. which God forbid! for these and many other reasons are we
stirred up to this Narrative, seeing as Ahab did send for Michaiah (2 Chran.
18.) to see if he would say, Go up and prosper, as his own Prophets did say to
him, and as Ahab said, v. 15. I adjure thee say nothing but the truth, which
when he said he would not suffer, but said (as v. 25.) carry him back, put this
fellow in prison and feed him with the bread of affliction, so also was Mr.
Rogers remanded to his Bonds in Lambeth, with more Severity than before too.

Neither are we without our Temptations in this little business for the Lamb;
some of which that have assaulted us, arise from fear of giving offense, but
when we considered our Call, that was soon quelled, because offense is taken,
and not justly given by us herein, seeing we are commanded by Gods word to
remove the stumbling block (of Lies) out of our Brothers way. We had a holy
Jealousy over our own spirit, till we had tried them by Gods word, and the
Primitive practice of Saints, Apostles, Prophets and holy Men, inspired by the
Holy Ghost, who ever spoke and writ boldly in the name of the Lord for the
Truth, Jam. 5.10, and who are our example. We consider how eagerly our enemies
would gape for Advantage against us, should they find the least mistake, and
possibly they will find many for as there is no pen, so there is no man without
Errataes; yet for the Truths-sake (so far as the Copies taken in short hand,
and our friends have agreed in one, though we confess, it cannot be published
so exactly as we could wish, seeing we met with so much interruption as we said
before) the Lord knows we have been as faithful and impartial as we could before
our lives, and we bless our gracious Father, we fear not what Flesh can do
unto us, as long as the Lord is with us, and on our side, and as long as we can
claim protection from Jehovah our King by Covenant, interest, privilege and
propriety (however some censure that sit at Stern, as if we were ignorant of
the Covenant of grace, they shall find it other wise by the grace of our God,
ere it be long) in the mean time an honest Jury man would rather have brought
in an Ignoramus, than an unjust and wicked verdict, but we will wait with
patience, till the Lord appear to deliver us, and till then we apply Psalm.
60.4. Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed
because of the truth, Selah! Besides we do not (as the Court-Christians) set
our Dial by the Clocks of the time, (for so both would go false) but rather
set the Clocks that (strike now adays) by the Dials of truth, and according to
the Testimony of good Consciences, and then the Sun that is now risen with
glorious rays, luster and appearance (in this age) will show us the time of
the day, and what we have to do (like the Children of Issachar, 1 Chronicles.
12.32.) to keep all True, and to make the Clocks and Dials to center in one
period of hour and time. As Christ our Sun appears, we hope to appear with him,
and to rise with him, and shine with him, and sit with him on thrones, to Judge
those that have and do Judge us every day, Jude 14, 15. Rev. 20.4. though this
be their day, yet we are sure to have our day to Judge them, and then that
question (they are so cranck in) shall be put out of question, viz. whether we
are busybodies in other men's matters, that Christ and his Messengers have
nothing to do with, or in Christ's matters, that all true Christians have and
ought to have to do with, all that are followers of the Lamb, and for which
matters of Christ and all Saints against the Beast, our dear Brethren are so
barbarously abused, persecut^d, plundered and imprisoned, and for which we with
them (through the grace of our Lord Jesus) are resolved to stand, whether by
life or by death: And this we are sure of by experience (however they
unworthily censure us, as a blind man would not believe there was a Sun,
because he saw it not, though some effects might have convinced him, so some
effects (we hope in the Lord) shall lere long convince them, that we suffer for
the pure Testimony of a good conscience, and merely for Christ and his
Interest, and not for any man, Men, Thing or Interest whatsoever that is on
Earth.

This conscience feasts us (with very excellent viands from above, which we
believe no caterer in the Court can provide their Great Masters withal, but
theirs is like to have but sour Sauce, though it be out-landish-like, as when
Chirurgions open the dead bodies of Epicures, they find many indigested
crudities; so will the Ancient of days (ere long) when he sits to anatomize,
dissect and rip up their Consciences, find many a foul crudity, viz. the sculs,
blood and bones of thousands of the Saints to stick there; But the Lord have
mercy upon them (for the Plague is begun) if they be not past recovery or true
Repentance: But if they be, then the Righteous, and Holy just God, who is our
God will appear against them and their interest speedily, powerfully and
effectually, according to all the Faith, Tears, and Appeals of his poor Worm
Jacob, in whose hand we believe will be the New threshing Instrument, visibly
are long. And then this contemptible testimony, or course Barley-Cake of Truth,
will tumble from the Gideon Camp, and smite down all their Tents, according to
the Faith, and Prayer of Christ's and his poor Remnants, despised Servants,

To do or to suffer, to live or to die, with them; in this most glorious,
though clouded, precious, though Persecuted Cause of CHRIST JESUS. Hur Horton,
Christopher Crayle, Hugh Day, Edward Grove, John Pugh, John Durden, Samuel
Bradley, William Bragg, William Medley, Francis Young, James Wilson, Daniel
Ingoll,


List up a Banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the
hand that they may go into the Gates of the Nobles. I have commanded my
sanctified ones: I have also called my mighty ones; for mine anger, even them
that rejoice in my Highness.

Isa. 13.2,3.
A faithful Narrative to the faithful Remnant round the Nation, the new
Non-conformist-Churches, and Saints in City and Country, that go under the
name of fifth Monarchy-men.
THE Hope we have of fair weather arises from the Rainbow in the Cloud, though
the Cloud be black, the Sun is up, and looks ^ull upon it, which has produced
diverse colors, and put the poor Saints hard upon faith, groans and prayers to
make up that tremendous Judgment, and dreadful Thunderbolt that must fall out
of this black Cloud (and which begins to rattle already) over the heads of the
present Persecutors, as Rev. 4. and the 5. From the throne of the Lamb goes
thunders and voices, so in Chapter 8 and the 5. The Angel cast the Censer (for
he was before the throne) full of fire and incense, (viz. the Faith and Prayers
of the poor persecuted Saints) into the earth, and there were voices and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an Earthquake, chap. 16.18. and 19.6. and it
is well known the new Non-Conformists round the nation, are at it day and
night, etc. filling this Censer full, and before the Throne, giving the Lord no
rest; and though many have been as dead as dry bones, yet they begin to gather
Sinews apace now, and are like (may we speak it without Alaraming the New
Court) to be an exceeding great Army, for the witnesses are warm and begin to
stir, and benumbed senses by use get life apace, so that the Remnant of the
woman's Seed, are like to have their hands full. Ere long, and long they think
it, among them are those despised ones of the Lord, that walk in fellowship
with Mr. Rogers, now prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus at Lambeth, who after
several solemn days, and whole nights, did find it a present duty incumbent
upon them (and preparative to future) to go to Whitehall, (the revived Court)
and demand the Lords prisoners, and bear their Testimony against these in
present powers, for their gross sins and Apostacies, which the whole Body
agreed unto, (not one dissenting) with a loud Suffrage of Joy and alacrity,
blessing the Lord that they should be honored by the Lord Jesus, as to be
called to this Testimony, for his suffering Truth, and Saims at this day.

They sought the Lord earnestly two whole nights herein, though the first night
they were disturbed by some rude, abusive Ruffians, that seemed Zealots for
their Protector, they roughly handled, scurrilously miscalled and abused some
of the Brethren, that they hurried them away from Prayer, to prison, (for
night-prayers are reputed dangerous and disturbful to the Court interest, yet
for all that they kept another night, to have directions from the throne in the
management of so high and noble a Message, and that they might not in the least
dishonor the dear name of the Lord Jehovah, nor the cause and Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, that now suffers: So, after they found much of Gods presence, and
many sweet promises to apply, and concluded unanimously upon the number of
twelve, which is the Lambs number against the Beast, and the Root and square
number of the hundred forty four thousand, in Rev. 14.) to deliver the Message
in trust to Oliver Cromwell in person, in the name of the great Jehovah; and now
that God alone might have the choice of the men, another time was appointed to
seek the Lord, and then they all agreed to take their Call by Lot given in the
name of the Lord; so that after solemn looking up to heaven, the Lot was given
from the Lap, Prove. 16.33. and the 18.18. and fell upon twelve: but (to observe
the Lords wisdom) those that they in their wisdom should probably and
principally have pitched upon for parts, utterance and abilities, were (by the
Lords Lot) put by; yet this appearing so undeniably to be of God, the same
twelve were fully satisfied, and accepted their Call, afterward they agreed to
go (every one with his Bible in his hand) upon the Message of the Church,
accordingly upon the 29 of the eleventh Month, a solemn day of Prayer was
kept, and they were sent out in the name of the Lord Jesus, the Contents of the
Message with which they were entrusted, is; as follows.

THE MESSAGE OF THE CHURCH To O. C. by the Twelve.
WE are sent unto you ( twelve of us) in the name of our Lord Jesus, The
Message of the Twelve Brethren.
and of that Church Society whereof Mr. Rogers (now prisoner for the Lord Jesus
at Lambeth) is overseer (in the holy Ghost) although we be poor despised
worms, and the weakest and unworthiest of the Lords Number, or of the Body to
which we are related, and although we be not so able to speak, as others of our
Society might have been, yet after much seeking the Lord to be with us, and
trusting in the strength and name of our Lord Christ, by which we are come out
this Day, after the Seal of some promises upon our spirits in the strength of
the anointing) we are (as well as the Lord shall enable us) come to deliver our
Message to you from the Lord, and that,

First, Because the Lot of the Lord is cast upon us, The Reasons.
(above others.)

Secondly, Because the Lord has chosen the poor, and most despised things to
confound and appear against the wise and great ones of the world, 1 Cor. 1.27.

Thirdly, Because we are bound to sympathise with the Saints in Bonds, Heb.
13.3. in the defense of the Gospel, Phil. 17.14. and the Apostle blames them
that stood not by him in his bonds, 1 Timothy 4.16, but we are resolved (by the
grace of our God) to own and stand by these our Brethren, the faithful Servants
of the most High, and true and faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, who are now
persecuted and imprisoned by you and your Powers.

Fourthly, Because the Primitive Saints, who had a Primitive spirit (which we
pray for, and are in daily expectation of) spoke boldly in the name of the
Lord, Jam. 5. and the 10. and so must we to you, in the plainness,
foolishness and simplicity of the Gospel, without any Politic, studied, or
artificial frame of words or expressions after the wisdom of the world, or the
Princes of the world, 1 Cor. 2.6.8, 2 Cor. 2.17. therefore it is, we dare not
give flattering titles to any man (whose breath is in his nostrils) Job 32.21,
22. nor come we to make our petition to man (but to God we do) in these matters
of our Faith and Consciences, Nota.
for which we contend this day, and for which our dear Brethren are cruelly
imprisoned at Lambeth (meaning our Brother Rogers) and Windsor (meaning Mr.
Feak.)

1. Wherefore in the name of our Lord Jesus, and of that whole Society, who
have entrusted us on this errand, we are to DEMAND the Lords prisoners, those
prisoners of hope at Lambeth and Windsor, as due to Christ and his Churches,
whom ye have so unchristianly rent and torn from us, (we meaning the Churches)
and neither we nor they know for what to this day, but we are persuaded, The
Testimony. In the prison Mr. Feak, Mr. Rogers Mr. Spitle-house. Col. Overton
Col. Allured. Adj. Genesis Allen. with many others
it is for their Faith and Conscience in the truth and Testimony of Jesus
Christ, against the foul Apostacies and sins of the times in professors,
whether in Powers, Priests, Armies or others, that have cast off the true Cause
and Interest of Christ, and have taken up the Creatures instead thereof, which
can never stand. This demand we make according to Isa 42.22.2 Chron. 28.11.

2. And lastly, (though we never yet did it in public, yet) so long as you go
on thus, we dare not but join with our* suffering Brethren ( viz. in what
prisons soever) for their Consciences, and this Cause of Christ, and declare
and testify against you (and the rest; that adhere unto you, whether in Power
or out) so long as you are the Enemies of Christ and his Cause at this day,
which we must do with the words of truth and sobriety; Since that M. Genesis
Harrison, Col. Courtney, Col. Rich. M. Chary, imprisoned the 16 day of this
Month, besides all in other contries, and Scotland those there that are like
to lose their lives by bloody Trials, all these with many others suffering at
this day for and with the Testimony of a good conscience against men that have
betrayed the cause of Christ: Others have been imprisoned, as Mr. Vavasor
Powel, Mr. Jo. Simson, Col. Okey, etc.
for the Lord will rend you, and all up by the Roots, that are not plants of
his own planting, and the great God will appear (ere long) to confound and
destroy this spirit of persecution, injustice and Tyranny, which the poor
(Nonconforming) Saints feel so sorely, and we pray you consider that of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. though a good man, and a great General, and Conqueror, when once he
forsook the Lord, relied on an arm of Flesh, and began to imprison the Lords
Prophet, the hand of God was against him, (and so on others) and so will his
wrath be upon you, and those that belong to you, if you go on thus, and if God
give you not a true and timely repentance of these great sins which cry (day
and night) for vengeance against you, and yours, and so do thousands of the
poor persecuted Saints (however you are made to believe) therefore we pray you
see (if you will yet keep the Captives of the Lord) Jer. 50 33, but mark it v.
34. so Isa. 29.20.21. Psalm. 102.17, 20, 21. Psalm. 37.32, 33.34. Psalm. 79.11.
and says Christ, What you did unto these, you did unto me, and Acts 9. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me; so fee in Matthew. 18.28, 30, 34. see v. 35. Isa.
49, 24, 25. Mal. 2.11, 12. Now to conclude, the day of Christ is at hand, which
will set them free, and will (ere long) call you, and all about you to
Judgment, for all these things that you have done, and suffered to be done
against the Lord Jesus and all his Saints, and for all the blood of the Saints
that has been shed against this Interest, and these evil things, which you
have set up again, to the Joy of the wicked, the grief of the godly, and
reproach of pure Religion and undefiled; This is the sum of our Message,
which we are sent to deliver to you in the name of the Lord, and whether you
will hear, or whether you will forbear, we leave it with you, and to your
conscience, before God the Righteous Judge of heaven, and earth.

After long waiting, they obtained access, and all Twelve being present
together, one, (as the mouth of them) delivered the message, but the word
DEMAND would not go down well, but the Lord Cromwell told them, that Mr. Feak and
Mr. Rogers suffered not for conscience, but as evildoers and busy bodies in
other men's matters. One of the Twelve then said, if so, why were they not tried
by some known and just law, and convicted for evil doers, but to keep them
there in so long and cruel Imprisonment, without showing cause, was contrary
to Gods law, and the just laws of men, besides, they were sick, and weakly men;
but he said he would put it to an Issue upon Friday or Tuesday (as he said) Mr.
Rogers should be brought before him: On the sixth day of this twelfth Month,
being the third day of the week, the Brethren and sisters (many of them) of the
Society met together, (and with much difficulty) got into the prison to pray
with Mr. Rogers, which they continued till between three and four of the clock,
and then they were called away by the Jailer to go to White Hall, according to
his Lord Protectors Order; so that in the name of (another) the Lord Protector
of heaven and earth, the great Jehovah (whose face they had so solemnly and so
often sought for his presence with them) Mr. Rogers set out of Lambeth, along
with Harding his Keeper, Febr. 6. last 1654.
and the rest from the Church-society (twenty Brethren being the most) going
along with him, much rejoicing as they went (according to Acts 5.41.) that they
were so honored to be called before men, for the Name, Faith, and Cause of
Jesus, and when they came to Whitehall Bridge, others of the dear Saints of
several Churches, waiting with tears and prayers, and acclamations, partly of
joy, and partly of grief to receive him, and with an unamimous Suffrage, and
signal tokens of love to him, and to this blessed Cause he suffers in, they
prayed the Lords presence to accompany him; so we passed by, and Mr. Rogers was
by his Keeper carried into the Chamber hard by the Council Chamber, but the
Keeper only had admittance into the long Gallery, to give notice, that the
Prisoner was there, but by and by he came out again, and told Mr. Rogers and
his friends, that they must all go down again, and go through the Guard
chamber, but Mr. Rogers answered that was strange, being come so near, where
the Great Man was, they must now go down to go through the Guard Chamber, and
about again, but the Keeper answered, they must do it, he had order for it,
which he did, not in the least resisting, but the main end was as they found
afterward, to try whether they were sword-proof or no: So by force, Mr. Rogers
and his friends were carried the other way, back again through the
Guard-Chamber, many other people flocked about them, the Keeeper going
foremost, Mr. Rogers (and his wife next to him) and his friends following close
after him, until they came up to the Guard Chamberdoore, immediately was the
word of Command given to the Guard, who as soon as they saw them and us coming
in, fell foully upon us with their swords, and their Halberds, saying, The
harsh usage of the poor, persecuted fisth Monarchy-men.
Keep back, Keep back, to which Mr. Rogers answered with all his heart he would
go back, (but his Keeper would not let him) we also said, if they would give us
liberty we would go back as fast as we could, but they wruld not hear us, but
fell upon us with a word and a blow, slashing and striking in a most violent
manner, calling us Rogues, damned Rogues, and evacuating the most venomous
words in their bellies, etc. but we told them, not one of us had a weapon, but
the Bible, (in their hands some had) and so we told them, but some said, the
sword of the Spirit would be too hard for them one day, which occasioned them
to be the more violent, who struck (to choose) at their Bibles, hands, and
heads, and so followed them, sighting, slashing and beating the poor, naked
Christians all the way into the Court again, and there laying about them too,
and saying they cared not for their Bibles, still inculcating, insulting, and
calling us damned Rogues, and cursed dogs, and the like, but Mr. Rogers, and
two or three more were shut in among their swords, whiles the rest of the
brethren were kept without in the Court, and did with very much patience bear
all their railings, reproachings scoffs, scorns, flouts, jeers and injuries,
offered them all the while by the Soldiers, and others of the Court-creatures,
in the mean time Mr. Rogers, with two or three more, were brought into the
Chamber of Henry the eighth, where were many Gentlemen of the Court complexion;
some excusing the aforesaid violence and assault, saying it was by accident, to
which he answered, he conceived it not, but that it was rather a plot, and for
ought he knew, there might be a design to murder some or other, for the word
was given to fall on, and it is conceived by most, that they did it on purpose
to raise us to a mutiny, that so they might have had (at least in appearance or
pretense) some (or a more) Just Cause against Mr. Rogers and his friends in
Church fellowship with him, for the Guardians confess they did but as they
were commanded. Whilst some were excusing this affront put upon Christ and his
persecuted Churches, others said it was good enough for us, and it was pity we
were not worse used than we were, Mr. Rogers in the interim was talking with
others, and two of the Guard told him how sorry they were their fellows were so
rough, and drew their swords, slashing so fiercely, and what a mercy it was, no
more mischief was done, seeing they had the command given them to do what they
did, and that it was the readiness of some amongst them against us, especially
the outlandish. -- There was a short discourse between Mr. Rogers and some
others.

A.S. Why did you come up there?


Mr. R. We were sent for, and commanded to come; yea, brought by force upon
you, Nota.
and by your Masters Command, who fell a slashing us with your swords, so that
it is probable, it was a Design against us on purpose; else why should
peaceable men, that had no kind of weapons in their hands (or about them)
without sword or stuff, but only the Bibles with us poor naked men, and
women be forced (by Order and command to come before your Master) and be thus
abused, affronted, slashed and driven into dangers, but the Lord is righteous
who will judge!


W.F. But why came you with so many?


To. We were sent for and commanded, and those that came are Christians, and
Church Members, no ways uncivil or disor^drly.


A.S. Well, its well it was no worse!


To. It was the Lord that made it so, For so it was to to the late King and his
court when his Messengers, and Guardmen fell upon the Citizens with their
swords at the gate, there was his blood shed.
in whose name we came, and he has delivered us from your Fury, and the rage
of the sword, for they struck with rage, fury and high purpose, to do more
mischief than they did, but it is Heb. 11. By faith they obtained promises,
escaped the edge of the sword, etc. and so-have we escaped Yours. (though some
do bear the mark, but the Lord Jesus will reward them when he comes.)

And you see Gentlemen, your sword cuts bluntly, and does little execution upon
the poove fifth Monarchy men, though they be but naked, and unarmed, and it may
be, this business will be ominous to you in this place.


A.S. We wonder to see so many women, and what they meant.


To. And are ye so fearful? It may be, it is true then what we hear, that the
barking of a dog lately (running about the yard) gave you a very great alarm,
seeing the sight of a few women has frighted you so pitifully, as to draw your
swords upon them and hurt them: alas poor hearts! you are pitifully affrighted
it seems! what would you have done then at the sight of weapons, if a few white
aprons makes you fly to your swords and Halberds;


but by and by came a Gentleman Messenger to Mr. Rogers, saying, that his Lord
was at leisure to speak with him, but the Keeper at the door suffered none to
go in with him, save whom they listed. One of the Twelve that was sent for,
going in with Mr. Rogers, a Guard-man standing by, took him by the shoulders in
a very Hostile manner, and tore his cleak off his back, and abused him, but Mr.
Rogers, and three or four more, went into the Chamber where their Great Master
was, to whom some of his Court-Sycophants had told such tales, as they used to
do, to justify themselves, and complained first, which is the Machiavillian
Policy, and Principle, as if we had intended a tumult, which was a thing our
souls abhorred, and a most impudent untruth, for there was not one had a weapon
or staff with them, or spoke one uncivil word; but after Mr. Rogers, with
three or four more were brought into the Room by Sergeant Dendy, the Great man
had with him two Gentlemen more, who stood by the fireside, and a Pistol lay
prepared at the Window, where he himself at first was, then he came to the
fireside in great Majesty, without moving or showing the least civility of a
man, though all stood bare to him, and gave respect; by and by he spoke, and
bid one call in two or three more of the Church-Saciety, or of the Twelve that
had been with him before, when the DEMAND was made; whiles they were gone for
them, says he,

O.C. I sent for some of you; Mr. Rogers and some more of the Church, but you
bring with you about 250 men to make tumults and risings; therefore send them
away, or I will not speak one word,


to which Mr. Rogers answered, and to give him a civil respect, said my Lord,

To. You are ruled much by informations which you take upon the reports of them
about you, whether true or fulse, which brings the Lords people into so much
trouble by you, but there is no such matter.


O.P. Hi! You will talk I see, although it be nothing to purpose, who speaks to
you! with that he turns to one of his Creatures, saying, What say you, is there
not so many?


Servant, His Servant answered yes, and it please your Highness, there is above
100. below, and it is to be feared, they might have made a Tumult.

To. If they must be believed, they must, yet this I may say, I think there are
not thirty men that belong to us, and besides, they are all peaceable
Christians, related to us in the Faith of the Gospel, all unarmed, apprehending
your order and command to reach them, and they are only those with us, as have
been this day together, seeking the face of the Lord, and now according to your
Order at four a clock attending here.


But by this time Company was coming in apace into the room, The Room fills
with the Courtiers.
at both doors, but all were Court-Creatures, to the number of fourscore or
more (as we conceive) either of the Council, Army men, Lawyers and
Counselors, or of his Creatures that were his Ministers, or new made
Gentlemen, or the like, but not one of them related to Mr. Rogers, or that
Church-Society, till at last with much ado, two or three more were crowded in
of them, but all the rest were left waiting below in the Yard, abused, scoffed,
hissed and whooted at by some of the Soldiers, as will appear by and by.

O.P. I promised to send for you, He begins his long Speech with manifest
reproaching, and manifold untruths.
for some of your friends came and spoke sharply to me, as it I had Apostated
from the cause of Christ, and persecuting godly Ministers, naming Mr. Rogers,
and Mr. Feak, and spoke other things that were sharp enough, you might have had
patience in your words.

Now you have liberty to speak to those things, but do not abuse your liberty,
you told me Mr. R. suffered son the Gospel, I told you he suffered as a Railer,
s a Seducer, and a Busy Body in other men's matters, and a stirrer up of
sedition, which Rulers (led by just principles) might suppress, I told you Mr.
Rogers suffered justly, and not for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and indeed
in some degree it is Blasphemy, to call suffering for evil doing, suffering for
the Gospel, and if he suffers for Reailing, and despising those that God has
set over us, to say this his suffering ^ for the Gospel, is making Christ the
Patron of such things, but if it were suffering for the Gospel, something might
have been said, yet not so much, as saying uncharitably, he suffered for
evil-doing, so that I say, this is the thing in Scripture, and if we show you,
that you suffer for transgression, then you abuse that Scripture which I have
often thought on, that it is to make a man an offender for a word: I wish it
were better understood in the plainness of the spirit, for to interpret that
Scripture, it was the evil of those times, And is it not the evil of these
Times? so that he is condemned out of his own mouth, as in Luke 19.22.
which was to he in wait for words on purpose to catch at words without
actions, and that is a finne, but some words are actions, and words are
conjugall with actions, for actions and words are as sharp as swords, and such
things I charge you with, and you suffer not for the testimony of Jesus Christ;
I speak, God is my witness, I know it that no man in England, does suffer for
the Testimony of Jesus It seems when he said so, be called God to witness, M.
Rogers tiffed up his hand and his eyes, appealing to witness also, at which
Posture he was offended.
nay do not lift up your hands and your eyes, for there is no man in England
which suffers so; there are those that are far better than Mr. Rogers, though
comparisons are not good, and not near his principles, yet if they should
suffer for the Testimony of Jesus: But there is such Liberty, I wish it be not
abused, that no man in England suffers for Christ, and it is not your Fancy,
you must bring strong words to acquaint me of your sharp expressions.


After he had spoke, and all were silent, Mr. Rogers desired to know of him
whom he expected to reply, whether himself or some other, the answer to, who
would.

Rogers, Do you expect me to answer, I will promise this before I speak
further, I have been twenty seven weeks a prisoner, my (brother Feak above a
year) and there has been no Charge against me; but now I am brought before
you, I desire to know in what capacity I stand before you, as a Prisoner, or as
a Freeman, as a Christian to a Christian with equal Freedom that others have,
or as a slave.


O P. A Prisoner is a Free man, as Christ has made you free, and so you are a
Free man.


To. Its true indeed (my Lord) and yet I must say, as some Gentlemen here
present know I did before I was imprisoned) and when they would have had me
meet in Colemanstreet to discourse our Principles, upon which we suffer) that
it is unreasonable to desire it at the disadvantages we meet with, seeing they
who are our Antagonists have the advantage of a Law new made, Mr Rogers told
him, that Ordinance making Treason for words was such us Q. Mary her self (as
bloody as she was) would abhor, as appears in Hollinshed in the 1. year of her
reign, which made their Tyranny worse than the Roman Tyranny.
which they call an Ordinance of Treason, (to lash us with) as a Master has
his rod in his hand over-awing his School-boyes, so that it is a very unjust
and unequal thing, that they should speak as Free men, and we as slaves, under
an over-awing: but if that Law be repealed, though but pro tempore, during such
debates, and we be restored to our just and equal liberty with the Adversaries,
so as to engage on even ground, we are ready to argue it with them, when and
where they will, but till then it is unreasonable, for every word we speak, may
be a snare to us.


O P. I know not what snare may be in this -- Are you so afraid of Snares? what
need you fear, that will speak so boldly?


To. I bless the Lord, I fear them not, nor the force of any men or Devils in
these matters of my Faith and Conscience, for which I suffer, yet I should be
loath to run into Snares, which Disputes have been to the people of God; for
Stephen Acts 6. before he was tried for his life, he was first ensnared by
Disputes, and then brought to the Council, tried and arraigned for his life,
and they murdered and destroyed him: and in Queen Mary's days, before they
put any to death, they begun it cunningly with ensnaring discourses in the
Convocation-house, and so gathered matter to take their lives away, and murder
them.


O P. You are afraid of Snares and advantages taken for your life, when there
is no such thing, but I tell you upon your Friends Petition I sent for you to
saisfie them, that you suffer, as an evil-doer.


To. Say you so (my Lord) that is more than ever I heard before, nor dare I
take this liberty upon that account of Petitioning, for it, but that I believe
the Lord will help me by his own Spirit to answer, as indeed I have not studied
a Form of words for you, though you have prepared Matter That they seemed to do
all this in justice, and by appeal and free Courts. At this they were next and
look on one another.
against me (I hear) but I am in the strongth of the anointing) ready to
answer. O. was troubled at that word, and said Preparation ha! what? but it is
well known what for several days were the Informations (some lay on the Table)
a gathering against him, and the prisoners (put in for plotting) had by one
Measie a Charge to get all their papers read upon the 30. day of the 11. month
last, who were very busy to get them, and are we bear a gathering more; for
when Mr. Rogers is forced to preach out at the Window to the Members of the
Church, and those that come to bear him, these wicked and bloody beast-like
men, have liberty to come into a room under him to write what they can catch or
forge, or patch together, though all the week long they are in an other room,
at the further end of the house day and night singing, swearing, ranting,
drinking, fidling, blaspheming day and night, to go out in the night, yea
without a Keeper, to carry on the design.



O.P. Ab we know you are ready enough.


To. Yea, although I have made no other preparation, than Faith in the promises
(however some may scoff at them) yet I have (I bless the Lord) the comfort of
them, and hope I shall have the benefit of that promise, (which I have the Seal
of in my heart) in Mat. 10. Take no care what to say, for in that hour, shall
it be given unto you; therefore I doubt not, but to speak to you and them about
you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the demonstration of his holy
Spirit. [be was interrupted.]


O.P. Take head you do not abuse the Scripture, if you be such a Disciple, then
that promise shall be made good unto you, and then you may say, you suffer for
Christ.


To. I doubt not but that will appear, that I am his Disciple, who made me that
promise, and if we be not able to make it out to unbyassed man, that we suffer
for Christ and a good conscience sake, by Gods holy word, then chop off my
h^ad: but indeed (my Lord) we can clear it to all the World, would they hear
us, and not handle us so roughly as you do, for we have had a very dangerous
passage to you, this day, an ardua via through Swords and Halberds.


O. P. Indeed? says he ((...) a scoff) and I pray who was wounded?


To. It was a mercy there were no more hurt, though many were bruised, beaten
and hurt, and among others my Wife, but who the rest be, (as yet I know not.)


O. P. No so I think! but I have no time to dispute those things.


To. Why then, I say, as I said before, my way must be clear, before I can
proceed further, for if they petitioned I have done, and dare not answer a word
on that ground, because I represent thousands of the poor Saints, who are one
with me in this cause, whose Trust I cannot, I dare not betray.


O.P. Then we have done; -- for I tell you, you came here by adesire, I told
them I would put it to the issue this meeting, and that I would prove it you
suffered for evil-doing.


To. That will not be so easily done, But (my Lord) I speak as I hope, I am a
civil man, and in some measure a rational man, and I trust through grace, I am
a Christian, nor does Christianity destroy civility, and yet I must say again
that I care hither by the Desire or Request of my friends. I shall not, I will
not speak a word any farther, than to tell you my reasons; For I would not have
any friend petition for me, where in and to whom I cannot with a good
conscience petition for my self, now in the matters of faith and truth for
which we suffer) we cannot petition to you, for we are not Debtors to man, but
to God, who is the Law giver, and only proper judge therein, and therefore we
petition to the Lord Jehovah our Judge, then 2. If they did so, they did not
answer the trust, the Church, whereto they are related, reposed in them; for it
was set upon their hearts as an incumbent point of duty to Christ and his
Churches to make Demand of the Lords prisoners in the name of the Lord Jesus,
whom you and your powers have so unchristianly, and indeed with worse than
Roman Tyranny rent and torn from the Churches, so that if they made a petition
to you, I am silent, and shall say no more, as I said before.


B.C. (One of the Twelve) I shall lay open the whole state of the business,
for we are entrusted with a Message from our Society, and did but according to
our trust, make the Demand, and bear our Testimony, and made no request at all
to you, but when you said, our Brother Rogers suffered as an evil-doer, we said
then, why do you not make it appear, and you said, you would on Friday or
Tuesday, and this was all.


O.P. Well! Who says it is more? who says you Petitioned? I told you he
suffered as an evil doer, as a Railer, as a Seducer.


To. But your words are not proofs, my Lord! but yet seeing my way is more
clear now, I shall say somewhat more: there is no law of God nor yet of man,
that makes me such an Offender: But yours which is worse than the Roman Law and
Tyranny, that makes a man a See their Ordinance for Treason.
Traitor for words.


O.P. Who calls you a Traitor? I call you not: see, I believe you speak many
things according to the Gospel; but you suffer for evil-doing.


To. The Gospel of the Kingdom may occasionable be so accounted and judged,
for as Christ our Savior says, I came not to send peace but the sword, the
doctrine of Christ by the powers of the world has ever been reputed, sedition,
railing, lying and speaking evil of dignities.


O.P. I grieve that you call this the gospel, for every one is ready to come
and say, this is the gospel, with words in their mouths; and say, this is the
meaning of the Scripture; but there wants the power of godliness: for Christ
and his Disciples will not speak evil of no man.


To. Yea, they did speak against sinners as sinners, which is no evil
speaking: But who made you the Judge of the Scriptures (my board?) what ever you
say it shall never appear (I trust) to the Saints, or unbyased discerning men,
that I suffer as an evil doer, what ever you say, or suppose; I can make it
appear, it is an essential, Fundamental Principle of Faith, which is now under
Persecution, What the testimony is they suffer in.
and for which we suffer, viz. The Kingly Office of Christ, and those that deny
that truth (for, and in which we suffer) are indeed Heretics (and not we:) It
is true, this present testimony, for Christ's Kingly Interest has two parts,
viz. The Positive and the Privative; now for the last it is we suffer, and not
for evil-doing.


O.P. Why, who will hinder you Preaching the Gospel of Christ? yea, How knows
be that, for he hears him not preach?
his Personal Reign? who will hinder? you speak of high Nations, but you do not
preach the gospel to build up souls in Christ.


To. I know my Lord, that you are a Sophister, With that the Officers and them
present scoffed and some gnashed with their teeth at the Prisoner.
and so it seems for a part of the truth, we may preach, but not the whole, not
the Gospel of the kingdom preached for a Witness, as Mat. 24.14. to witness
against the crying sins of men in power, or out of power; for that seems to
strike at your Interest too much.


O.P. Why, what interest is mine?


To. A worldly interest which God will destroy.


O.P. Ha! -- and do you judge me?


To. Yea, by the word of the Lord in the majesty, might, strength, power,
vigor, life and Authority of the Holy Ghost, I can do, and dare. Judge you and
your actions, 1 Cor. 2. The spiritual man jugdeth all things, whilst he
himself is judged of no man; Besides, I am called by the Holy Ghost, which has
appointed me to preach the Gospel to judge sins.


O.P. And who will hinder you to preach the Gospel, or to do so? speak against
Sin as much as you will.


To. You do from preaching that part of the Gospel which decries the public
sins of the times or of men in Powers, Armies, etc. neither is it as you say, a
railing, lying, or speaking evil of dignities; for the word railing in Jude 9.
is (...), now this is no blasphemy to speak the truth or against evils, nor is
it railing to call a man as he is, to call a drunkard, a drunkard, is no
railing; to call a Whore-master, What sort of informers will serve against 5th
Monarchy-men.
a Whore-master, is no railing; to call a Thief, a Thief, to call an Apostate,
an Apostate, is no railing; but to call one so, that is not so is railing.


O.P. To call an honest man a thief is railing, to call an honest man a
Whore-master is railing; though I do know you have truths of Christ in you, yet
I will prove you suffer for railing, lying, and as a raiser of sedition; and I
told them that I would have you sent He said there was no such word in his
Speech, but see it p. 13. It is some satisfaction, if a Commonwealth must
perish that it perish by men and not by the hands of persons, (speaking of the
plotters) differing little from beasts.
for, to satisfy them.


To. If that you say, can be made to appear, it is fit I should suffer; but as
Reygnold said, Nihil est quin male interpretando possit depravari.


O.P. This will appear in the Informations that are upon the Table there, what
a rayler you are; and therefore let them be read (says he to some by him) for
there be many of them, the Witnesses and the Evidences all are ready, it will
appear easily, and out of the Prison such Informations, Evidences there are
brought in, let them be read.


To. Your Informations will not make it appear (ere the more) to just men: I
looked to have had a fair trial or a Christian debate; But this is otherwise,
seeing men that are hired or any other ways basely suborned do inform against
me: as for them out of Prison, it is a sign that your cause is not very good,
that needs such Informers; as the Prisoners at Lambeth, they are such as you
your self have put in for plotting against you, left they should cut your
Throat, and of whom you (your self) have said in your last Speech, that they
differed little from Beasts, Meaning, now another Paper of informations of what
was preached at Thomas Apostles, that also lay upon the Table with the other
out of Lambeth-prison At whose confidence Mr, Rogers with admiration lifted up
his eyes and hands
and yet you can take their Informations against me, yea, drunkards, swearers,
whoremongers, Cavaliers, Ranters, any men that make nothing to lie, swear,
drink, curse and banne, whore and blaspheme, day and night, and what not? and
yet these must inform against me to take away my Life, these are but bad
Evidences (my Lord) and besides, were they honest men, it were illegal.


O.P. Nay they are honest, godly men that mourn over you, and that are troubled
for you, that will witness these things against you.


To. I hardly believe honest men will accept of such an office, to inform
against the poor people of God, and to seek the blood of any one of Christ's
little ones, but I rather believe, they are some of your (...)

hired men, who seek for any stuff to gratify your Ears; But might I but
stand on even ground with equal freedom, I would undertake to any unbiassed
Christian to make it appear that the subject matter of our suffering for the
truth and testimony of Jesus (our infirmities excepted, which the Lord knows
are many) and therefore we must overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and the word
of the Testimony, Rev. 12.


O.P. Nay, but I know you well enough, I know you, and what your principle is
too, I know you that you never preached the Covenant of Grace, yea, I know it,
I have had some discourse with you formerly, I know you are ignorant of the
Covenant This being spoken in such confusion of others, and the Great man's heat
together, he was hardly heard but only of them who stood nigh and wrote. One
of his Courtiers made answer, but he went on in his heat.
nay for all your lifting up your eyes, it is so.


To. That is strange you should judge so; my condition were uncomfortable then
indeed, if I did not know the Covenant of grace, yea, fruition, whiles it may
be some, have a National disciplinary or barely intuitive knowledge, there be
many can testify whether I am so ignorant or no of the Covenant (of Christ)
who have been my hearers long ago, it is for a branch, yea a principal branch
of the New Testament-Covenant, that we are persecuted as Acts 2.30. viz. that
part that God has sworn unto, to exalt Christ over all his enemies, and to
make him King over al Nations; this Covenant of the Father to the Son, makes us
grapple with the Beast, and contest so as we do with the Powers of the world,
though others are ignorant of the Covenant.


O.P. Nay I tell you I know you well enough, and I know your principles though
you are but a young man, yet you have been in many places, and are known well
enough.


To. Yea, I am so I hope, known of Christ too, and amongst other places, I have
been in the Field too against the common enemies, (that are now gotten so high
again) where (I think) I have done more for nothing, in mere conscience for
the Lord Christ's sake, (never seeking wages, as your mercenary men) than any of
your Colonels can say. Raising men, arming himself and others, engaging in the
field in England and Ireland spending his estate, Killing his cattle, for the
Army freely exposing his person to great dangers freely.



O.P. You talk of that is nothing to the purpose.


Kiffen. I cannot see my Lord, there will be any danger to have those papers
read, we desired to hear how it appears that Mr. To. suffers as an Evil doer,
and if it please your Highness, let those informations be read, that are
brought in there, that we may hear how it appears as your Highness says.


O.P. Ah! so I say, let them be read.


To. My Lord, Which Gentleman was Mr. Kiffen, who since with some of his
Members) has slandered him behind his back.
that Gentleman spoke very smoothly, but we know now by experience, the
greatest Snares are couched under the smoothest words; so there is a great
Snares in his for he desires them to be read, that they may judge thereby
whether I be an Evil-doer or not; so that I thank the Gentleman for his
charity, he seems beforehand resolved to judge me according to them, whther
right or wrong, true or false, or whatever they be, and whoever informs, and
whether they can be proved or no against me, but I perceive by him he is some
mercenary man, that has some dependence upon you, and from such I look for no
other: But the most (my Lord) that can be said against me, is but an evil-
speaker (which by Gods assistance I trust in this matter, shall never be proved
against me neither) and not an Evil doer, for not withstanding your former
words, I can prove that the very heathens themselves abhorred to make words
matter of fact as you do.


O.P. It is matter of fact you are questioned for, Mark it out of his own mouth.
for speaking evil of Authority, raising false accusations; or if they were as
Nero, you are not to speak evil of them, for what has the Devil his Name for,
but because he is an accuser of the Brethren, and it is not for your good deeds
that you are punished, for what says Christ, for which of my good deeds do you
punish me, and so you say, but you shall hear if these be read, whether it be
for your good deeds, or for evil-doing.


To. And as they answered Christ then, so do you us, it was not for his good
deeds they would stone him, but for his blasphemy, and so pretended to do it
legally, for the Law would have a blasphemer stoned, but that which they called
blasphemy was indeed the truth, and good, and so it is now, what you call evil
is good and the Devil (my Lord) has his name from calumniating, slandering and
lying, and accusing the good So that the accusers of she good and grace of God
is on that side by the informers and persecutors.
or grace of God, but not for accusing evil, or declaring against sin, the
evils of Apostasy, persecution or the like, but if you will read the Articles
you may, yet expect not a word of answer from me, unless it be in an open and
legal Court, before a competent and fit Judge, which you are not (my Lord) nor
those about you, but those things which are my due Right) granted I am ready to
answer them in Westminster Hall, (where I believe the Lords remnant who are one
with me in this cause will stand by me) and at last you can have but a poor
carcass(that is every day dying) yet I am resolved (with the help of God) not
to throw a way my life, nor to betray this blessed cause, so as to answer to I
know not what Spurious and forged informations, or charge in a Chamber,
(grounded on malice, or that which is worse) nor will I be tried in
Hugger-mugger, but if I have offended, it is fit I should have open Justice.


O.P. Who tries you? and who says it is a Charge? who calls it a charge? I say
not so, and see! before you bear them, you call them Spurious


[with that he takes up one that was titled from Lambeth, and was going to read
somewhat.] One Abdy the chief informer, that very day be came with his Keeper
to look for his reward he was stabbed in Fleetstreet, being imprisoned -- for
Blasphe any, Adultery Ranting, Atheism, and the most horrid sins that ever
were beard of.


R. Yea, and I have good grounds so to do, seeing they come from such kind of
Informers as they are.


Then O.P. read one Article from Lambeth, as that he should call him Oliver
Cromwell, that great dragon that fits at Whitehall pull him cut, etc.

To. There is such stuff as I abhor to have in my mouth, but I shall for bear
to answer, and for that it is not worth the answering to.


O.P. These things will be proved.


B.H. (One of the Twelve,) We desire the things our Brother Rogers suffers for
may be publicly known to all, for we apprehend he suffers for the Truth, and
the things which you hear, you may that be misinformed in.


To. Therefore let me have a fair Hearing in a legal Court, and I hope the Lord
will make me ready for what ever I must suffer right or wrong, if it must be so,
but yet I tell you my Lord, I fear not any thing that you can lay against me
justly and honestly, but the truth is, you take up any thing, that your
Informers can handsomely patch together, who like the devil take a bit here,
and a bit there (that makes for their turn) and you take it (as it lies) for
granted presently. O my Lord I cannot but mourn for you, and your condition,
which is sad and to be bewailed, and the rather, for that you have so many
about you, who for their own ends, to get the world into their hands, do
deceive you, but the Lord will judge righteously (ere long) I am sure, and let
appear whether you or we have the best bottom to bear us up, for I bless the
Lord the comforter is with me! I think my condition (through grace) though a
poor prisoner a great deal better than yours, I would not change with you.


O.P. Well, well you are known well enough, and what spirit you are of, we know
you, and to call your sufferings for Christ, when they are for evil-doing is
not well, yea it is blaspemy, yea I say blasphemy again, (for all your M. Rog.
amazed at such language again lifted up his band and eyes toward heaven,
appealing to God to judge righteously.
lifting up of your eyes) and I tell you, yea you, that in a good box of
ointment, a little thing, a dead fly may spoil all, yea a little fly.


To. I dare not (my Lord) justify my self in my infirmities, but I bless the
Lord I can apply Christ's merits; I beseech you speak not so reproachfully of
the spirit of God, to call it fanatic or an evilspirit, for that is blasphemy
so to do, (and see Isa. 63.10.) neither call evil good or good evil, for that
is prevarication, Isa. 5.20. that which you judge Evil-doing, the Lord judges
well doing and my duty, yet I must tell you the Lord never made you a Judge
over our Faith, nor of his Scripture whereof you take upon you.


O P. Well, you know that the time was, there was no great difference betwixt
you and me; I had you in my ey, and did think of you for employment (and
preferment) you know it well enough.


To. True my Lord! and then you could say to me, you thought no man in England
so fit, but since, the case is altered indeed; but I pray consider, who it is,
is changed: surely, it must be conscience that makes me suffer then: through so
many temptations, as I have met with: and I have often said, let me be
convinced by good words, that I am an Evil-doer, as you said; and I would lay
my Neck under you feet for mercy; but till then, I must keep my conscience.


One of the Grandees (as we take it, it was G. Desborough) says, let the
Informations be read, let them be heard; and then Scobell was called to read
them (not those from Lambeth, but) those that were *brought in from Tho.
Apostle, The Informations from Tho. Apostles read.
from what Mr. Rogers prayed, what he preached, and what they sang in Hymns,
what he prayed, was for the Prisoners of the Lord at Winsor, and against the
Tyranny of all Antichristian Powers, and to that purpose; and that God would
hasten his Vials, out upon them. What he preached was out of Mat. 5. Agree with
thine adversay (Christ) quickly; The Articles against Mr To, as well as they
could be taken.
and be observed, Appostateadulterate professors must agree quickly with Christ
their Adversary: applying it to the present Powers as such; proving they break
the 10. Commandments: As the 1. In setting up Idols again, a golden Calf; so
the Army and fleshly strength and the like are idolized, whilst men say these
are the gods that brought us up out of Egypt.

2. Command. is, Graven images, and so are the Tryers, and high Court
Commissioners, such the inventions and graven images of men's making, with their
Seals, Parchments, black boxes, and pick-locks, These Articles are many of them
sals for matter and form, as can be made appear by hundreds.
Padlocks, and Keys, for your Hog-sties, Pig sties, and Goose-stals.

3. Command. Take not my name in vain, etc. Such as have broke all their
Declarations, Engagements, and abused his Attributes, using that name of God,
for their own ends, are guilty of this.

4. Command. Remember that thou keep holy the, etc. speaking of soul-rest, and
saying, that the present Powers, kept not the Sabbath, that rested in their
pleasures, slesh, etc. and not in Christ, but did their own work.

5. Command. Honor thy father and mother, etc. They brake this commandment in
their disobedience to God the heavenly Father.

6. Thou shall not murder, etc. Murderers are of many sorts, such as have
betrayed the Blood that has been shed against this kind of Government, etc.
And then he converted his discourse against Informers that come for blood, and
said, to hate a brother without a cause is murder.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery, etc. This they did with others, as Army,
Lawyers, Priests interest, and that which they before destroyed.

8. Steal not. Now there are great thieves, and little thieves; great ones are
now in present Powers, and Army thieves, Clergy thieves, Lawyers thieves, and
the great thief now in White Hall. But the other two he left to another time:
When he had done, he read a Letter from Mr. Feak, where was a Dialogue between
him and the Governor, and then he commented upon it: and said, It is worse now
then it was with the Romans, for then Paul might preach, though a Prisoner, but
now we are Now is Mr. Rogers forced to preach out at the iron bars of the
prison on Lordsdaies.
denied it. After that he sung an Hymn and the people joined with great
alacrity) against oppression and persecution, etc.

After this Information was read, Mr. Rogers said, My Lord, I had a purpose not
to answer one word hereto, this being no suitable place or time to answer a
charge, and no witnesses appearing against me to make it good; but yet I shall
tell you this, for I will not (with the Lords help) speak a word but what I
will own to your face; for I love to appear in the sincerity of my soul and
conscience, for my Lord and Master Jesus Christ plain to all men; and to lay
open my principles which I have no cause (though grace) to be ashamed of, the
matter of this is much of it true: but as to the form, there is a great deal of
patching and botching put in by your mercenary hirelings, which I will not own,
but as to much of the matter of it, I must dare, and with the Lords grace) I
will, though I die for it, and without you should cut my tongue out of my head,
I shall continue the testimony up, and tell you moreover (with the rest about
you here) that I regard your laws in the matters of my God no more than straws,
for Imperia Divina non sunt subjecta Magistratui, says one of the Martyrs, and
tell you, that I will not be accomptable to the Magistrate, nor submit to his
judgment in the matters of my Faith, which the Civil law can take no due
cognizance of.

One of his Council said, Ha! Imperia Divina.

To. So I say, Imperia Divina.


O.P. Says he, are these spurious Articles now? put in by drunkards, and
swearers, and whoremongers too? are they not? Ha! -- Ha! --


To. My Lord, They would fain have shisted off them from Lambeth (as it seems)
as if they were ashamed of them.
I know what I say? Those which were sent from Lambeth, put in by the Prisoners
there, those I say: a^e such, I did not say all, but those that I see there,
which lie upon the Table titled from Lambeth; and besides, there is Sergeant
Dendy knows this, that I say for hehimself (I thank him) sent in their
Informations against me to M. Thurloe, which he cannot deny. S. Dendy, I
delivered him none my Lord. To. I say not, you delivered them, but you sent
them by your man, who delivered them according to your directions.


S. Dendy But my Mother, my Lord, this was my Mother, for she Catechized me, my
Lord, and I told her.


To. So that is true, as I said before, that those from Lambeth-prison are
spurious, wicked and illegal.


Mr. Cre. Pray, my Lord, let M. Rogers have a copy of his charge, for the law
allows it him.


O.P. No, this is not his trial.


To. Why then, let me have it as you are a Christian, for is it fit I be denied
a sight of my accusation against me?


[but be turned away and would not hear.]

M.Cre. Then, my Lord, let us, have liberty of conscience; will you not give us
so much liberty as the Parliament gave?


[with that he turned about in anger]

O.P. I tell you, there was never such liberty of conscience, no, never such
liberty since the days of He confessed that Antichrists government is now up
in England, yet so that no wonder the Prisons are so full of precious Saints.
Antichrist as is now; for may not men preach and pray what they will? And have
not men their liberty of all opinions?


To. It is true, there is liberty enough, and too much too, for drunkards,
swearers, and men of vile debauched principles and evil lives,
Common-prayer-men, and such like (we know) round the Nation.


[then his creatures about him scoffed.]

O.P. Ha! -- Are Drunkenness, Swearing, opinions then?


To. I say not so, but I say, such men may have their opinions whiles we are
persecuted for the truth. But why do you not my Lord, let out my brother Feak
at Windsor, with my self (seeing we suffer in one cause, for one testimony, and
(I trust) by one Spirit of Jesus Christ) let us both out to answer for our
selves jointly together? and to make it appear to all uninteressed Christians,
that we are no evil doers, in the matters we suffer for, which if we do not
then, let us suffer.


O.P. M Feak, truly M Feak, (I think) less evil may be said of him than of
you: but there are many of different opinions, that come to me, and they know
they have all their liberty of their opinions.


To. Yea, every man almost that talks with you, is apt to think you of his
opinion, my Lord, what ever he be?


[ his creatures scoffed again.

O.P. Nay, you But some of that opinion do, as Mr. T.G. and others,
do not (says he) in anger?


[his creatures scoffed and laughed again.]

To. Some of this Judgment do, think you so, although as I said before the the
Privative -- (or negative) part of the Testimony you cannot bear.


O.P. Pish! here is a deal of positive and privative to show you are a Scholar,
and it is well known what you are, and where do you find that distinction? They
thought Mr. Rogers to be an antic, because he spoke in power and goeat zeal.



To. In Logic.


O.P. Ha!


To. I must tell you in the Name of the Lord Jehovah that your condition is
very desperate, and if you consult the holy oracles, you will find it for the
next vial which is to be poured out, is the scorching hot one, and must fall
upon the Apostate professors that have forsaken and betrayed the cause of
Christ, and look to it, it is like to fall heavy upon your heads, and those
that are about you, I pray, think of that in Hosea 1.4. the blood of Jezreel
shall be upon the house of Jehu, though Jehu did obey the Lord in doing Justice
on Ahab and Jezabel, yet because he fell into the same predicament of sin,
walking in the same steps of evil which Ahab walked in (the very blood of them
sell upon his head.


O.P. Your spirit is to Judge, but I regard not your words, look you to your
Conscience, and I will look to mine, yet for that of Jehu, Why, what was that
for? it was for fear lest the people should go back again to the House of David
(and so he was running into the story of Jeroboam) and to Jerusalem, but he was
corrected. Then Kiffen said, it is so, then said Mr. Rogers it is not so of
Jehu, but of Jeroboam, which he speaks of; then he corrected himself, and said,
well; but Jehu, can you parallel it now? Why his heart was hypocritical, and
by policy clave to the same sin of his Predecessors, and Baal again to please
the people.


To. True my Lord, and is it not so now?


O.P. Hah -- says he; and turned about to his Army men, and so he spoke of the
Army too, what can you say of them?


To. I say they are an Appostate Army, that have most perfidiously betrayed the
cause of Christ, broken their faith in so many Declarations and Engagements,
and are odious to the Saints; yea the very name of them will be odious to the
children that are yet unborn.


[With that the Army-men (for many Officers were by) were sorely vexed, some
grating their teeth, and laying heads together]

O.P. I tell you (says he, in a chafe) I tell you, and you! that they have
kept them all to a tittle, not one of you can make it appear that they have
broke one Declaration or Engagement, or a tittle of one, prove it if you can,
any of you.


To. Mr. Rogers did earnestly press for liberty, to instance in some, and with
much ado, said: My Lord, if you would have patience, I would instance in many:
[they scoff again.


O.P. Am I impatient? then let them that stand by see! nay, it is you are so
full like the Pamphleters.


To. They that write Pamphlets now, never printed more lies and blasphemies
since the world stood.


O.P. I think so too.


To. But my Lord, if you please to let me speak, for if I be extreme, is not
passio concupiscibilis, as we see in some men, who speak all for themselves,
whilst we seek only for Christ and his kingdom, but rather a passio
irascibilis (which it may, is my weakness, but sure it is my indignation to
sin and self, and that which I see set up instead of Christ: but if you For
there were many postures (...) actions tending to disturb and interrupt him.
will give me leave, I will instance in Declarations, as that in 47. for one,
page 9. where they Declare against any Authority or Absolute power in any
Person or Persons what soever during life; saying the people so subjected were
mere Slaves, and that you would not have it so in any; no, not in any of your
own Army; or of your own Principles; nor yet of whom you might have most
personal assurance? and that it was no resisting of Magistracy, to side with
just principles; and much more to that purpose: Besides, in several others, as
in Albans: and that when the Army went to Scotland against the Clergy and
Tithes.


[ But Master Rogers was interrupted and not suffered to insist on any others.

O.P. And who? Hear me: Who? -- Who? I say, bath broken that? Where is an
Arbitrary or Absolute power? (nay, hear me) Where is such a Power?


(...) To. Is not the Long-sword such? By what Law or Power are we put into
prison, my brother Feak above these 12 months, I above 28 weeks (and several
others of our Brethren) and we know not for what to this day: which, I say
again, is worse, yea worse then the Roman Law: And is not this Arbitrary? And
is not your Power, with the Armies, Absolute? to break up Parliaments, and do
what you will? But if you please, let me instance in others.


(But they would not suffer him.)

One of the Army, some say, L.C. W. Sir, (says he to Mr. To.) you say the Army
have broken all their Engagements.

To. Yea, every one of them: and if they make another Declaration, they will
hardly be believed again, by good people.


L.C. W. But I pray by what Rule do you resist Powers set up of God?


To. Sir, you are mistaken, we do not resist such as are set up of God; but we
resist sin in all men: and as Luther said, Invaniar sane superbus, etc. I may
be accounted proud, mad, or any thing: but be it so ne modo impii silentii
arguar, dum Christus patitur; rather then I be guilty of the sin of Silence.
But Mr. To. was interrupted, and forced to break off. whiles O. P. proceeded.
.


O. P. Now for the Army, they are resolved not to rest, till they have
performed all they engaged; and they are about it, as fast as they can do it in
order.


And much to that purpose he spoke. But then Mr. Her. desired to speak.

B. Her. I desire to speak a word.


O. P. Well, do.


Mr. Her. That Gentleman (meaning L.C. W.) asked by what Rule we resist powers:
We desire then to be satisfied, by what Rule you resisted the King, and warred
against him and his adherents, and destroyed the Governments before, seeing
they were accounted too a lawful Authority. And consider how much blood cries
under the Altar, How long, O. Lord, holy and true!


O. P. Would undertake to answer, by a long Narrative of the peoples
grievances, the Kings absolute power, and his seeking to destroy his subjects,
till they were forced to take up Arms for their own defense; so that it was a
defensive War and the former powers had broken their Engagements, and forfeited
their trust.


Much more was spoken by one or other thereto. But says he, looking upon Mr.
To. Ha!

O. P. I see he is full to speak.


To. Yea. my Lord, I am: for (ex concessis) our controversy is decided, and
the Case is plain on our side, and seems so now more then even; The
Controversy cleared, out of their own mouths.
for do not the poor people of God seel a Preragative-interest now up? As the
old Non conformists, or the good old Puritans were persecuted, imprisoned,
reproached, and denied protection from men, and therefore were forced to fly
to God by faith and prayer, and tears day and night, 1.
(not ceasing, till the vial of wrath was poured out upon the beads of the King
and his Prelates: so, I say, the new Non-conformists are abused, disowned, and
denied protection; persecuted, imprisoned, banished, and forced day and night
(yea thousands of them in City and Country) to their faith, tears, prayers, and
appeals; which are the Bombar da Christianorum, and will prevail (as sure as
God is in heaven) to bring down the next hot scorching vial of his wrath upon
these new Enemies and Persecutors.

Besides, 2.
in your own Declaration, p. 7. of that -- 43, you say it is no resisting of
Magistracy to side with just principles. And is it not just to side with that
Interest which the blood of so many thousands of the Saints has sealed to, in
the three Nations; and so many Declarations, Vows, and Engagements have been
made for, viz. for the Lambs, and against this your Interest, which we have all
engaged, prayed, bled, and fought against? Now, my Lord, let the loud Cries of
the blood shed against these things you have set up, be heard; and make
restitution of that blood, those lives, tears, bowels, faith, prayer, limbs,
and skulls, of us and our relations left in the fields, and laid out against
this kind of Government, whether in Civil or Ecclesiastical; or else let us
have what they were laid out for: otherwise we must and will, with the Lords
help, side with those just Principles that have been so sealed to, and owned by
the Lord. And this will be a most apparent defensive war as ever was in the
world, to defend what the blood, and bones, and estates of so many thousands of
the Saints of God have bought at so high a rate, which they are wronged: for
they never thought of setting up this. And therefore I say, (my Lord) if our
God the Lord Jehovah do give his Call, I am ready, for one, amongst the Lords
remnant, to side with just Principles, in the strength of the Anointing,
whether it be pradicando, pracando, or praeliando; by preaching, praying, or
fighting.


Sir Gilb. P. Said you not praliando?


Yea, says Mr. R. in the Spirit of the Lord: for the Case was never so clear as
now it is in the state of the Controversy. For the Controversy is not now
between man and man, The state of the Controversy is between Christ and O.P.
Christ's Government and Man's.
one Government of the world, and another Government of the world, or King and
People; but it is now between Christ and you (my Lord) Christ's Government and
yours: and which of these two, are the higher powers for us to side with, and
be obedient unto, judge ye.

O.P. Ha! Why who denies the Case to be clearer now? But I heard indeed, This
speech seemed to trouble them all.
it is some of your principles to be at it: you long to be at it; you want but
an opportunity.


To. The remnant of the woman's seed must be at it when they have the Call. For
I beseech you, my Lord, consider how near it is to the End of the Beasts
dominion, the 42 months, and what time of day it is with us now.


(But Mr. To. was interrupted.)

O.P. Talk not of that; for I must tell you plainly, An Ignoramus brought in
very honestly.
they are things I understand not.


To. It seems (my Lord) so, else surely you durst not lay violent hands upon
us, for the testimony and truth of the day, as you do.


B. D. (one of the 12) Why then do you imprison others for the light, if you
your self be so ignorant?


(But then some of the Court-creatures pulled him by the cloak, and laid
violent hands on him, and called him stinking base fellow, saying he knew not
whom he spoke to, nor where he was; giving him many uncivil words. But
afterward one of them said to him, Ask for Mr. To. out of prison; a^k for him,
and my Lord will let him out. But B. D. answered, No, Sir, we came not for that.

B. P. Great men are not always wise.


O.P. See! (says he, looking upon his Army-men.)


To. They are not always wise with the wisdom of God, though they may have much
carnal policy, subtilty, and reason of State. But the seed of the woman shall
break the Serpents head.


(Which Mr. To. speaking with a high voice, and great alacrity, it made the
Courtiers scoff at him, as if he were a Madman.

O.P. Ha! and thus they talk of the Ministry, and Commissioners for
Approbation, and say they are Antichristian. See your Ordinance, March 20,
1653. the ground is upon Patrons right to present to cure of souls; the
creator, is your L P. Cromwell; the matter, men of corrupt principles and
practices, and most of them of the National Church; the end is, to fill
Parish-cures, and get Tithes: all Antichristian.
.


To. Yea, my Lord, we do say so, and they are so, as to their standing upon a
wrong, un-Gospel foot of account; and I will prove them and your Tryers (I
speak not as to their persons, but as to their standing) Antichristian for
matter, and form, and rule (by which they sit) and end for which they sit.


O.P. You fix the name of Antichristian upon any thing.


To. Pray (my Lord) make no Law against that name; let it not be treason to use
the name Antichristian: for that name will up yet higher and higher; and many
things that you think good and Christian, will be found Antichristian ere long.


O.P. Being angry, looked on his Army-men: See! said he, and so all is
Antichristian, and Tithes are so too with you; but I will prove they are not.


To. My Lord, you were once of another mind, and told me you would have them
pulled down, and put into a Treasury.


O.P. Did I ever say so?


To. Yea that you did, in the Co^k-pit (the round place there;) and said
moreover, that the Poor should be maintained and put to work, with what
remained of them, that we might have no beggar in England.


O.P. Ha! there be many Gentlemen know that I have been for them, and will
maintain the justness of them.


To. But, my Lord, how can that be, that the National Ministry is not
Antichristian?


O.P. See now! how you run! It is not a National Ministry that is now
established, nor can you make it appear they are Antichristian.


To. Yea, my Lord, without any difficulty, out of your own Law which has
constituted these Tryers and High-Court-Commissioners to establish a worldly
Clergy.


O. P. I tell you, you and you, that you cannot; for they ordain none.


To. No: but if the Pope, Prelate, or Devil should ordain them, they must
approve of them, settle them in their Parishes, get them their Tithes, and what
not? if they be but conformable to


-- He is interrupted.

O.P. I tell you, I tell you, it is their grace they judge of, and not for
parts or learning, Latin, Greek, or Hebrew.


To. And who made them judges of grace, my Lord? At most, they can but judge of
the fruits of grace; and how dare they take upon them to be judges over Grace?
It is not you, but the Lord Jesus, that can make them such judges.


[With that, he turned away, as very angry.

B. H. My Lord, we are very much dissatisfied with what you have done against
these prisoners of the Lord Jesus, for so they are, and we must count them so:
for you have given us no sat is faction at all, in what you pretend them to be
as evil doers.


O.P. I cannot tell you then how to help it.


B. H. For my part, I must declare against you, and will venture my life, if I
be called to it, with these our brethren that suffer.


B. Cr. As for those Articles, we have heard them read, against our bro. To.
out of his Sermons preached at Tho. Apost. and from what he prayed at Th.
Apost. Set aside but what is put in by your Informers, which we will take our
Oaths that heard them (all preached) were never spoken by him: (only, I say,
that excepted) we will live and die with him upon those Articles, and will own
him with our lives.


-- Yea, said Mr. To. and I believe an hundred will, that heard and writ them.

O. P. Well, (says he) I Will send for some of you ere long: but I have lost
this time, and have public business upon me at this time: I had rather have
given 500 l. I tell you, there wants brotherly love; and the several sorts of
Forms would cut the throats one of another, should not I keep the peace.


To. Those you call Fifth Monarchy-men, are driven by your Sword to love one
another.


O.P. Why I tell you there be Anabaptists (pointing at Mr. Kifsin) and they
would cut the throats of them that are not under their Forms; so would the
Presbyterians cut the throats of them that are not of their Forms; and so would
you Fifth Monarchy-men. It is sit to keep all these Forms out of the Power.


To. Who made you (my Lord) a Judge of our Principles? You speak evil of you
know not what. For that Fifth Monarchy-principle (as you call it) is of such a
latitude as takes in all Saints, all such as are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
without respect of what Form or Judgment he is. But, Judiciuns fit secundum
vim intellectualis luminis


-- [He was interrupted.

O.P. What do you tell us of your Latin?


To. Why (my Lord) you are Chancellor of Oxford; and can you not bear that
Language?


B. C. My Lord, we have great comfort by the Ministry of our brother Rogers,
and great miss of him; and therefore we have demanded his Liberty, and desire
to know whether he shall be at liberty, or no.


O.P. I will take my own time: you shall not know what I will do.


B. H. Then let us have liberty to hear him preach.


S. Dendy. It cannot be, my Lord: for I have many prisoners and it is dangerous
And yet for all S. Dendy's baseness to the poor persecuted people of God, And
his readiness to prevent the great man's answer, he can let in as many as will
come, to the drunken profane prisoners and plotters; so that friends are glad
to use their names (if they know any of them) that come to see Mr. Rogers.
.


To. Pray, my Lord, consider that place in Isa. 49.24, 25, 26. for the Lord
will deliver the lawful Captive in that day which is coming: you can but have
my blood at last; and you had like to have had it already in the Prison ere
this: two of my children have died there since my imprisonment, and I have been
at Deaths-door.


B. H. It is unreasonable our brother To. should be kept prisoner so, in such a
place, and at such a charge as is (for him) above 200 l. per an. and we know no
cause for it, but his conscience.


Then S. Dendy was spoken to, to answer for himself.

S. D. Now, my Lord, I see one of my Accusers. I never demanded a penny of Mr.
To. nor of my Aunt his wife, who is one of Sir Robert Payne's daughters.


O.P. I knew her father very well.


S. D. But they have (my Lord) three rooms, and it cannot be allowed.


To. No more room then one prisoner had before, being divided into three little
rooms, and but one chimney in them All. The Plotter that went out before I came
into them, had them All. And for the Fees, though you in person demanded them
not, yet your man (old Measey) did, for you, several times, viz. 4 l. 4 s. per
week; which he did before witness, as I can prove under their hands: and he
said I should not go out till the Sergeant had it. And what besides I was to
pay you, I was not to know till I went out.


Mrs. To. said to Sergeant Dendy, It Is true, you have had but 5 l. yet of it.

O.P. Why he is your Nephew, who was accounted one that loved the people of God.


To. So were others as well as he, till this trial.


Mr. Cre. My Lord, will you not give us the liberty to hear him in the Prison
then, seeing you will not let us hear him abroad?


O.P. Is that the liberty you sought for? (says he, in a scoff.)


Mr. Cr. Yes, Sir, and that which we demand.


But then the Great man would be gone: and as he was going out, Mr. To. desired
him to remember he must be judged, and the day of the Lord was near, and that
he would, (ere long) and those about him find them that now he and they
counted false Prophets, in Windsor and Lambeth, true Prophets; and what they
have said, they should find come to pass ere many years yet: for that the
righteous Jehovah, who sits on high, hears all our prayers, sighs, groans,
and tears. But away he went, and would not hear.

As soon as we came out of the room, Sergeant Dendy in the Gallery threatened
what he would do, and how he would send them further off, and order them ere
long; Mr. Rogers receiving the threatening without impatience, or one word of
reply unto him.

That very night, a strict Order was sent after him to Lambeth-prison, that no
more then six may come to see Mr. R. at a time, (no such Order being made for
any of the other Prisoners, who have of lend company as many as they will at a
time.) And since that, the Jailer has been so strict, (especially upon the
Lords days) according to his Orders from Whitehal, that he will not suffer one
brother to come in to see him, or to pray with him, that is sent from the
Churches of Christ, (upon those days, if he knows him) to keep a holy rest with
Mr. R. In the mean time, the Contumelies, Contempt, and opprobrious abuses, the
members of Mr. Peak's, Mr. Rogers's, Mr. Raworth's and of some other Churches,
met with below in the yard, during the foresaid Discourse with O. Cromwell.
But to pass over that and leave it to the Judge of heaven and earth, who (we
are sure) will not overpass it.

During this Discourse between Mr. R. and the Great man above, the Brethren
that were below in the yard, had their share of reproaches and abuses. For the
members of the Churches of Christ who could not have access with Mr. To. were
kept below, and encompassed about with diverse of the deboist Soldiers; who
when they heard us declare against those barbarous actions which the Guard so
cruelly acted with their Swords, against our naked brethren and friends, those
aforesaid Soldiers began to question the occasion of our being there: which
when we had told them, they began to set up their voices, (many of them)
hooting and hissing at (...) as if we had not been Christians, or creatures of
the like make with themselves; telling us we had often risen, and they had
allayed us, and they made no question but they should also allay us at this
time, if we intended to rise. To whom we answered, that there was no such thing
in cur eye now, as to avenge our selves by or with external weapons: but said,
We have here Swords (showing our Bibles) which we believe will, in God's
appointed time, (being guided and accompanied by his Spirit) destroy and cut in
pieces your Swords, which now you draw against us and it.

Afterward we further observed, that whilst we were waiting below in the open
yard, for the return of our friend, and friends, there being of us (as near as
we can remember) betwixt forty and fifty persons, (men and women) that we
could find no place in the aforesaid yard, where we might have any quiet, or
be free from the uncivil reproaches, scoffing, jeers, blasphemous nicknames,
and what not? which some of the aforesaid Foot-guard threw upon us, with great
contempt and scorn, telling us, Bridewel and suchlike places were sitter for
us, So that we believe, the Lord bath a little remnant in the army also, whose
souls do secretly mourn for these Abominations: and it is observable, that the
Lord has by degrees pulled the choicest of them out of this Apostate-army,
that they might not partake of their plagues; as, M.G. Harison, col. Rich Col.
Okey, col. Alured, Adj. G. Allen, M.G. Overton, Maj. Wiggens, Dr. Day, and many
others.
then to be there?

But in the midst of their uncivil, unchristian-like, and very lewd language to
us, we cannot but remember that spirit of remorse and pity which seemed to be
in some of their Officers, to see us so abused: insomuch as some of the said
Officers told us they were sorry to see such things, namely, the uncivil
carriage of some of their Soldiers: yet (said they) we cannot expect better,
where it is not.

Thus, for the space of diverse hours, we were barried up and down, not being
suffered to be in quiet in any one place, without the company of diverse of
those unruly fellows, whom we should have been content to let hear our
discourse, would they have suffered us to stand still or in quiet: But they so
uncivilly and most ungodlily show their obscene and silt by speeches and
actions; yea, they pulled and haled diverse of the women and maids that were
there of our friends, and said that we made no conscience of our ways, and that
they were of light principles, using such words and gestures to them and us, as
we are ashamed to utter or express; besides manifold more provocations,
revilings, and filthy speeches, and threatenings, and sinful actions, wherein
they seemed to take great delight.

But after Mr. Rogers and the Brethren that were with him came down into the
Yard, many friends gathered about him. Whiles Mr. R. (being remanded again to
prison) was going to take water with his Keeper, he heard M.G. Harison, Col.
Rich, Mr. Carew, Qu.M.Genesis Courtney, Mr. Ireton, Mr. Squib, with many others,
were there, in the yard: so that Mr. To. went to them. And after joyful
Salutations, he told them he was going to Prison again ^ and that there were
Articles put in by wicked men out of the Prison against him, which he excepted
against as illegal, and as given in by Plotters, and men given to drinking,
swearing, and suchlike sins; and some others, which were read against him,
from Tho. Apostles. But as he was telling this, he was interrupted by one that
cried out, That is false, it is false. Upon which, he was silent, to look upon
the man that so said: and it was Mr. Kiffen, (who had crowded among us, to
listen for tales to carry to his Master) who then said, They were not Articles
put in by Drunkards, that is untrue, etc. but by honest Godly men that heard
you at Tho. Apostles. To which Mr. To. replied, that the Articles were of two
sorts: those read, were from Tho. Apostles; but those unread, (which he
excepted against) were from Lambeth, given in by such lewd men, and he saw them
upon the Table: and that his Lord Protector (besides) said they had
Informations from the Prison, and moreover read one of them, viz. that of the
Great Dragon; and Sergeant Dendy sent them to Mr. Thurloe, as was proved: so
that it was not false, but very true. At which Mr. Kiffen was so silenced, that
he could not say a word for himself. Which some of the Gentlemen by, seeing,
reproved him for his rashness: and so Mr. To. and they parted, perceiving
people to flock about them and without doubt, to have somewhat to inform their
Great Master against Mr. To. or some of the poor Saints; for that is the
principle and practice of self-seeking Sycophants and Court-Parasites, to make
themselves, and not care how they murder others, or what they inform against
them.

Whiles Mr. R. was carried away to prison again, M.G. Harison, Col. Rich, Mr.
Carew, Mr. Squib, Mr. Courtney, Mr. Ireton, and many others, continued up the
Testimony and the Demand to O. P. the very same night.
the foresaid Gentlemen (of much merit, and singular honor amongst the
choicest Saints, for their unspotted sanctity, and integrity to the betrayed
Truth and Cause of Christ) went up to the Great Man; although before they could
have any access, the Sword was drawn at them also, and set at Mr. Carey's
breast: but after eight or ten of them had liberty to O. P. they brought him the
some kind of Message from Jehovah, that was before delivered him by the
Twelve; making a Demand of the Lord's Prisoners, and bearing their Testimony to
his face, against Him and his Government.

In the mean time, Mr. Kiffen below had got a company together (in Mr.
Rogers's absence) railing upon him, and saying he was a wicked man, and had
told what was not true of the Articles, and spoke against his Lord. But Mr. G.
(a precious godly Christian, and a member of the Church at D.) then spoke aloud
to Mr. Kiffen (as Mr. K. did before to Mr. R.) saying, That Is false: for I can
(says he) no more be silent for Mr. Rogers, then you can be for your Lord
Protector: What Mr. R. spoke was truth, as he made it appear to your face; (and
then he told him how.) So that poor Mr. K. was silenced again the second time,
and could not go on, till a more private and clandestine meeting among his own
kind of Time-servers and Self-seekers, where he might tell his untruths
against Mr. Mr. R. M.G. Harison, and others, without control, (as we hear he,
with some that belong unto him, have done at large) and have them taken upon
the trust and credit of his word at a venture: it is but reason and gratitude
to his Great Master, to possess all he can against the poor persecuted Saints,
in the behalf of him to whom he is so highly obliged, (above any one man almost
in England) for his large favors, and beneficial Patentees. But ere long the
Merchants who were made Rich (by compliance with Babylon) shall weep and wail,
and say, Alas, Alas! Rev. 18.15, 16.

It is to be observed, somewhat observable.
that very day the Sword was drawn twice at the Witnesses and Woman's Seed. The
Providence is also admirable, at that very juncture when Mr. R. and the
Brethren were before him, to maintain the Testimony and Demand made by the
Twelve, that on that very day (many Assemblies of the Saints in several places,
being hard at the Throne) the Lord should call out one (unknown to any of us)
whole Meeting of the praying number (being about 34 men) to go to Whitehal, and
bear their Witness also.

The concurrence of the Testimony and the Demand is no less considerable,
seeing one had not the knowledge of the others Message, that M.G. Harison, Mr.
Carew, and the rest, should second the aforesaid Twelve, by a mere hand and
call of God, which they were obedient unto; (which is very exemplary and
encouraging to all the Saints and Churches in England, who are faithful to the
Cause of Christ) seeing so leading and calling a Providence.

The Demand and the Testimony is of a sudden gotten to a high pitch, The
Testimony up at a high pitch.
which does mightily raise up the expectations of the believing remnant.

It is not meet for us to publish the matter of their Testimony, (being of the
same nature with this Narrative) neither can we do it so accurately and
faithfully as we hope some others will; The present work of the Day, (to gag
the misreports thereupon) for the quickening and strengthening them that are to
follow us, calling for the publication thereof without delay, wherever it
lies. And the rather, for that Those choice servants of the Lord Jesus, M.G.
Harison Mr. Carew, and Mr. Courtney, sent away with a Troop of horse to prison,
we know not whither, the 22 day of the 12 month
M.G. Harison, Col. Rich, Mr. Carew, and Col. Courtney, are so cruelly used for
their Testimony and the Truths sake, (having no fact (but their faith) to
charge them with) and hurried away to Prison with a Troop of Horse, and we know
not whither. So that the man must needs be wilfully blind indeed now, that
will not see and say, The Saints are under Persecution.

Therefore let not the good People of the Nation be so shamefully abused and
deceived as they have been, A word of Caution.
with lying Pamphlets and Informers, whiles the Truth cannot, must not, date
not be printed, for fear of offending the men in Power, and suffering a Prison,
or worse. Of all, beware of that Abominable Oracle the late Ironmonger (but now
Parish-Preacher) A man so base and scandalous, as makes him horrible, and his
Name to stink among the Churches, as very unfit matter to be a member of a
Church, but rather fit to be excommunicated, and exploded the society of all
the Saints, for bringing so foul reproach upon Religion, which he has formerly
pretended to; till he followed this Trade of Merchant for Lies.
Walker, (his Weekly Proceedings) whose forehead has for many years been
plated and brazened in the Trade and Art of Lying, making it his Calling and
his Living (except the Tryers help him more easily to the Parish-Tythes.) This
drives the poor man to so much pitiful soraping among the Court-Clerks for a
few Lies to sell every week at an easy rate, that he and his family may live
comfortably upon the lying slandering, and traducing the Lords peculiar ones,
who are as the apple of his eyes. How lamentably he has abused Mr. Feak, Mr.
Rogers M.G. Overton and many others, is well known, and one day he must answer
before the just Judge of all hearts, with a wan countenance, and woeful
conscience, however he thinks to palliate it at present with a So't was told
me. But as Solomon says, Prove. 17. 4. A liar gives ear to a naughty tongue;
and the curse is threatened not only to them that make, but them that receive
and report Lies, Rev. 21. Therefore ( Exodus 23.1.) Put not thy hand to an
unrighteous witness.

These things are published in mere love to the Truth and despised Saints of
God, for whose sake we are contented to become a reproach in the world, and to
suffer any thing (by his Grace) that man can inflict upon us, so our dear Lord
Jesus may but reign, his Truth triumph, and his Kingdom be exalted. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

