HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, taking (...) of the manifold abuses and
injuries committed (...) rude part of Soldiers (especially where they quarter)
(...) great damage and prejudice of the People, and to n(...) dishonor and
scandal of the whole Army, nowithsta^^^^^ the wholesome Laws and Ordinances
to the contrary ma^^ and provided, and the severe punishments inflicted upon
the known offenders. For reformation whereof, and for the ease of persons,
that they may not be troubled to repair to the Headquarters for justice, has
therefore granted Commissions thereby enabling the chief Officers of each
Regiment to sit in a Council of War so often as need shall require, and to
punish Offenders, according to the Laws and Ordinances of War, in as large a
measure, to all intents and purposes as if the Offenders were tried before a
Council of War, at the Headquarters, (except in cases extending to life or
limb, which are to be tried at the Headquarters only. And to the end that
none should be ignorant of the ways for present justice to be had, where the
offense shall be committed, his Excellency has therefore commanded and
strictly charged every the said Colonels and chief Officers where they from
time to time shall quarter, to cause the same with these presents to be signed
under some one of their hands, and delivered to the chief Officers of
Corporations, and to High-Constables of Hundreds, to the intent that they
disperse them, and forthwith cause them to be published. Dated the (...) day of
(...) 164^


