A Fuller RELATION OF Sir Thomas Fairfax's ROVTING ALL The Kings Armies in the
West, UNDER Prince Charles, the Lord Hopton, the Lord Goring, and all the rest
at Torrington: With the manner of the FIGHT, and the number killed and taken on
both sides.

AS ALSO The blowing up of Torrington Church: Hoptons Horse shot under him; and
the great dangers His Excellency escaped during the Fight.

With Copies of LETTERS to Members of the House of Commons, and from
Scoutmaster-Generals quarters.

With a List of all the particulars since the coming of the former Letter.

Commanded to be Printed, and are Published according to Order to prevent all
false Copies.

London, Printed for Matthew Walbanck, Feb. 21. 1645.

The copy of a Letter from one of the Clerks of the Army to a Member of the
House of Commons.
Honored Sir,
ON Friday the 6. of Feb. instant, Prince Charles sent out Warrants to the East
hundred of Cornwall, and the West hundred confines, as far as Leistthiel and
Foy, to summon them in to send men to proportion a number for completing
parties to keep all the passes on the river between Saltash and Stratton, upon
Tamari ostium, and to all the other hundreds and parts adjacent, to send all
the Forces they could raise, to join with the Army at Blank Torrington, with
great threats to those that should fail them: The 7. instant diverse men were
pressed in those parts for both those services, and men dispatched for the
keeping of the passes aforesaid, and many were forced come in to join with
Hopton at Torrington: On the 8. instant, a party then at Liston were sent for
to come up to the general Rendezvous; they promise their Landlords, that if
they would disburse a sum of money to enable them to march, they would remove,
not letting them know the General (who is now Hopton) had sent for them,
telling the country people, they wanted shoes for their Horses, and their
Saddles mending, Bridles and Clothes, etc. very unfit to march: and by this
stratagem they got money, and yet advanced not before they plundered them; the
Enemy (to encourage the Cornish to come in) tell them that the King is coming
to them with a great army of eight or ten thousand horse and foot, and say he
has conquered all parts by the way; that Chester is relieved, and the siege
raised at Newark. On Monday the 9. the General had a resolution to crush the
Enemies new levied Forces at the first, and advance with all his strength for
that purpose, only leave Sir Hardres Waller with a sufficient strength to
maintain the siege against Exeter, viz. three Regiments of Foot, and two of
Horse, with the countenance of all the houses and Fortifications kept by them;
the Enemy in Exeter, as we are informed, Feb. 10. by some that came out from
thence, will be easily persuaded by pinching necessity to surrender; and if
those in the Field under Hopton had but any rout, then they would be the
readier in Exeter to deliver up that Garrison, points of Honor being the
chiefest thing that keeps them back from it; the poor in the City, many men,
women and children, are ready to starve, and many cry for bread, seeing nothing
but ruin before them, except they surrender, if relief come not (which is very
unlikely:) Feb. 10. the Prince sent out Warrants for those in Cornwall to
advance, so many as were ready, and with all speed to hasten to Torrington, and
those designed for the purpose, to help the passes on the Rere, to prevent our
Forces from breaking in upon them that way; they had then got about Fifteen
hundred horse to mount part of their Foot, for a design with the rest of the
horse to break through, if they could, over Exmore; and therefore the Cornish
had the charge of the guarding of their own county pressed upon them the more;
but many of them especially the Gentry, and those who had other thoughts
before, were much discontent that they would now leave the^ to themselves.
Friday the 11. the General went to Tiverton to secure those parts; and we had
news, that Hoptons Foot were come to Torrington, where they were strengthening
that Garrison, about eighteen miles from us: The Enemy had a general Rendezvous
within a mile and a half of Barnstable, the country teport them to be about
five or six thousand, some say more, horse and foot: but for our march, upon
notice of the Enemies proceedings, on Tuesday the 10. of Feb. we marched (as
was resolved Monday the 9. at a Council of War) from Chimley to Crediton, about
12 miles ill way, and hard quarters. Sir Hardres Waller, with Col: Butlers and
Col: Sheffields Regiments of horse, and one Regiment of Col: Weldens, and also
Col: Herberts and Col: Shaptoes, are left, with the rest of the Foot and
Dragoons in the Garrison, to continue the Leaguer before Exeter; powder, and
other ammunition proportionable for the Design left with them, and Orders for
the managing of the business there by Sir Hardres Waller. From Tuesday the 10.
till Friday the 13. our Forces staid at Crediton, expecting the coming up of
Major General Skippons Regiment, and Col. Overtons, and Col: Cooks Brigade,
either all or three Regiments of Horse, and the Dragoons, are to be with us
speedily. Saturday the 14. Col. Overtons Regiment are to follow with the
Generals Lifeguard, and the rest to speed after, we resolved not to stay for
them: we had with us, the Generals own Regiment, Col: Hamonds, Col: Harlows,
Col: Lamberts, Col: Fortescues, and Col: Ingolabies of Foot. The Lieutenant
Generals, Col: Sir Robert Pyes, and Col: Riches of horse. We have sent up Sir
Hugh Pollard the Governor of Dartmouth to London. The Enemy have made some
Sallies out of Exeter, but unwilling to engage ^orces, so that much has not
been done there, but we hope they cannot hold out long.

The General returning, we immediately advanced Saturday the 14. instant, our
head quarters were at Chimley, we had a Rendezvous on a Moor in our way, but
staid not, this gave the Enemy a notable Alarm, and therefore, to make the
Enemy the more secure, though Sunday the 15. we advanced with intentions for
Torrington, yet partly by reason of the ill weather, and partly to put the
Enemy into a careless posture, we retreated to our former quarters. Monday the
16. we had a, Rendezvous, wherein we spent not much time, but marched to
Stevenson, it being night at our coming thither, and glad we reached it so
soon; from thence we drew out our forlorn hope that night, resolving to fall
upon the enemy who thought themselves secure enough in Torrington, we had of
that party about 1000. which marched immediately to the Hill beyond the Park,
where they were engaged with the enemy, who received our forlorn, fought with
them, and we took some prisoners, and our body coming up, God gave a good
success. They had made many protestations the day before to keep Torrington
against as in case we did advance, having there three thousand horse or move,
and above two thousand Foot, some say seven thousand horse and foot at the
least: But on Monday, Feb. 16. about ten a clock at night by the light of the
Moon we fell upon them; they made very resolute opposition against us from the
Towns: Hoptons own horse which he charged with, was shot under him at the gate,
they kept it to push of Pike, but through Gods goodness we (at last) entered
the Town, and then so scattered them, they all ran away, some toward
Barnstable, vvhither Hopton is supposed to be fled: but most went Westvvard
toward Stratton, the Cornish having quit the passes on the river before, they
left their arms, which they had thrown down in the streets so thick, that
they troubled us to pass, we pursued still scattering them, we follovved
them, and scattered them in the pursuit: There was in the Church (which was
the Magazine) about eighty Barrels of Gunpovvder, in which place we put in
diverse of the prisoners that we had taken, but either by some accident or
desperately, the powder was fired, and blevv up the prisoners, the Church,
and all therein, and took diverse houses about it: some of the Lead fell into
the Generals quarters, but did not much hurt, God be praised: we are still
pursuing the victory: they opposed us in some Lanes, where diverse were slain
on both sides, but God gave the success to us, who are still pursuing the
Victory.

Torrington: 16. Feb. 12 at night.
Another Letter sent from the Scoutmaster-Generals quarters.
Honored Sir,
OUr head quarters were at Chimley on Saturday the 14 of this instant February,
which place the enemy had left before: On Sunday the 15. we advanced from
thence, with intentions to fall on the enemy in Torrington: but the weather
falling out wet, we retreated to our old quarters. Yesterday we had a timely
Randezvouzs and came to Stevenson at almost night: we drew out our forlorn
hope, and made a party of 1000. or there abouts, to the hill beyond the Park
our forlorn and theirs fought for it, we took diverse prisoners: The enemy were
in all 3000 horse, but they say 4000. The foot we 2000. they say they were
2500. which were all in and about Torrington, which place they had garisoned,
and were resolved to make it good. About ten a clock at night we fell on the
enemy, and began to storm the Town, and indeed (to speak truth) they did defend
it awhile very gallantly to push of pike; but God put such a courage into the
hearts of our men, that they went on, till at last it pleased God we entered and
beat them through the Town, and scattered them several ways: most part of them
ran away Westward, in the way to Stratton, we followed after them, and still
scattered them in the pursuit. After that we were entered Torrington, it so
happened that 80. barrels of Gunpowder was set on fire, by some of the prisoners
which we had there, blew up the Church and diverse houses: some of the lead fell
into the Generals lodging, which was about half Musket shot from the Church,
but God be thanked did us no hurt there: It is yet too soon to inform you of
the particulars what is taken, but of that I shall show you by the next.

Torrington, Feb. 17.1. in the morning.
Another Letter sent to a Member of the House of Commons.
SIR,
IT has pleased the Lord to give us further success against the Enemy in
these parts, and to thwart their great hopes of gathering the great Army they
so labored for. Yesterday, the General, Lieutenant General, and the rest of
our ^^^ces then at Chimley, advanced with a resolution to fall on Hopton in
Torrington, whether he had gathered all his strength. I must pass over many
things, to give you account of the most materials; which is in brief thus, That
before we went from Chimley, the General Ordered forty pound gathered by the
Constables of Chimley, for the Enemy, to be disposed of for the poor of the
Town, who had quartered our Soldiers. There was a Randezvouz of Horse and Foot
in Dunnington and Belvoir Moors, about a mile from Roborough, where they were
drawn up in Battalia: in which time, we had not the sight of any enemy; our
Forlorn of Dragoons being about 80 came in immediately after 200 of the enemy
were gone out of the Town, but they faced them on a Hill, but durst not
adventure to charge; our Forlorn of Foot, Horse and Dragoons pursued, alarmed
them at Squire Rolls House, which they were beginning to fortify: It is a fair
strong house about a mile from Torrington. Upon our approach 200 of the
Roysters Firelocks, and Musketeers, quitted the House; and they with a Brigade
of Horse fled before forty of our Dragoons, and about 200 horse. Our Army
drawing up upon a Heath near the house, had the first view of the Enemy, who
faced us with several parties on a Hill, not above half a mile or more
distance: after this, the Forlorn hopes on both sides met, and skirmished for
about two hours; our men made their Forlorn to retreat: whereupon they drew
forth a Reserve in the first Charge. One Reformado, Clerk of Col. Weldens
Regiment, was shot in the Privities, after he had charged a great part of the
Enemy, killed two, and was coming upon the third. Our men brought in prisoners
continually, and got ground of the enemy, 800 horse being sent after those
engaged, and a Regiment of Foot after them; by this it was dark. Whereupon, the
General, and the rest of the field Officers had a Council of War to debate,
whether we should fall on before day or no; by this we heard their Tattoo to
beat, by which we knew they were still in the Town: thereupon command was given
to march up, which was done with as much willingness and freedom as could be,
the foot marching almost up to the knees, sixteen Dragoons were sent to fire
under an hedge near the Enemy, to try whether they would defend the Town or no;
they gave fire very feebly upon our men again. Our first word was Emanuel, God
with us, and a Furr Bush in our Hats; theirs, We are with you, and an
Handcarchiff tied about their right Arms; but in regard they had taken some few
of our men prisoners, and got the Word and Signal, the word at this Onset was
Truly, and a Handcarchiff or white mark in our Hats, several parties were
drawn forth after eight of Clock at night, which were met by the Enemy; our men
disputed about six several Closes with the enemy, they still lining the hedge,
but still retreating when our men came to their Barracadoes and Works, the
enemy fired more close then ever, so that by the report of Commanders that have
been engaged in the service, it was as desperate a service as was in the most
violent storm that was made since the march of the Army, their men having the
advantage of strong Barr^cadoes, and Works, and Hedges, which much amazed our
men; at last our men got over, beat the enemy from their defense, and gave way
for the horse to enter, who disputed the streets with the enemy. Sir ^ohn
Digby, Brother to the Lord Digby often charging against our men, at last they
were beaten quite through the Town, throwing away their Arms for haste, which
was no sooner done, but about eleven of the Clock, the Church wherein the
Magazine was left, was blowed up, conceived by a train which they had laid on
purpose; there were 84 Barrells of Powder in it, besides other Ammunition: the
Church was rent all to pieces, both Stones, Timber, Lead, and Steeple; great
store of Lead was cast over the Houses into the street, one of which fell
within two Horses length of the General. The Generals Groom had his horse shot
under him, next to the General; the Enemies Horse sled several ways, some
toward Barnstaple, others tawards Cornwall; the Ammunition in the Church was
all or the most part they had for their Army.

Upon the blowing up of the Church, which was the most terriblest sight that
ever I beheld. A party of the Enemies horse fell again into the Town upon our
foot, who being amazed at this sudden accident, began to fly, till Captain
White told them our horse were coming, which caused them to retreat upon our
firing, and to appear no more. There were Three thousand foot in the Town,
being all their old Cornish foot, and Greenviles and Gorings old Soldiers. We
took near Three thousand horse, besides what our horse have taken in the
pursuit, which was last night. We have many prisoners, many of which were
blovvn up in the Church. We have some of our own men vvounded, but fevv slain;
about fifty of the Enemy slain, Three hundred Arms broken and whole taken.

Feb. 17. 6 in the morning.
The Report of the last Messenger from the Army, since the Date of the last
LETTER.
WHen the Forlorn hopes first met, which was about three of the clock on Monday
in the Afternoon; their Forlorn hopes came up the hill half a mile to meet us,
their horses and ours skirmished in the Lanes, and we routed them; after our
Forlorn, the body marched up, and beat them from thirteen several hedges, which
their foot made good with much resolutions to the outer works: they Retreated
back into the town, and afterward stood it out and fought very gallantly, till
our men got over the works, which was about ten or eleven at night, (the works
were only for winter Quarters, with some works made up to keep off our horse,
it being their head Quarters, the Lord Hopton lying there) we flancking of
them, and following the charge so hot, they threw down their Arms, and every
man ran for his life: which being in the night, most got over the back-sides
and so escaped, leaving the streets all bestrewed with Arms, and about half an
hour after we entered the Town: Colonel Hamond commanded the party that first
entered, who seeing the Enemy fly, endeavored to take so many of them as they
could. Some of the Prisoners we took were put into Torrington Church: The
number uncertain, some say, One hundred and fifty, others not half so many,
none being able to give an account of it; But they had not been any of them put
there prisoners above half an hour or therabout, but an unhappy accident fell
out (how none can tell, some supposing it might be the result of a train
intended to destroy our men: others, that it was a desperateness of the
Soldiers; yet some think it was only an accident by some fire that fell
casually and carelessly amongst the powder) about eighty barrels of Gunpowder
(which was taken in the Church) was blown up, with a great quantity of Match,
Bullet, and other Ammunition, to a great quantity, all things proportionable to
the said eighty barels of powder aforesaid. There were six of our men that were
upon the Guard then in the Churchyard, and three of them were killed
outright, and the other three dangerously wounded; one horse killed in the
street; the walls of the Church all fell and dispersed abroad, there standing
not above the height of six or seven foot, the Timber, glass, stone work,
lead, are all lost being dispersed and torn in pieces, and the men in the
Church lost by the vehemence of so great a blow, which was a most sad spectacle
to the beholders as ever was seen; the blow was like the shot of Grenades: We
feared a treachery; horses ran to and fro, for the blow was so great as any
Ordnance could give, Hell it self could not make a more hideous sulpher. The
General was then within pistol shot of the Church in the street: four streets
off the lead of the Church fell; in that street where the General was, all very
near to him, one street within five or six yards of His Excellency, but neither
the lead, stone, timber, nor any material of the Church did any hurt to any of
our men, save only those six in the Churchyard.

After this most sulpherous blow, young Digby with some others, were upon a
Retreat back into the Town, which our Centry perceiving, fired upon him, which
made him put spurs to to his Horse, wheeled about, and vanished, our foot still
pursuing their Victory, and so also did the Horse to the uttermost.

Our Horse pursued them after all this, to complete the Victory, if it were
possible; the Enemies Horse, some fled toward Barnstaple, others toward
Cornwall, both which ways they fled in a panick fear.

A List of the particulars of what was taken, and how many killed at this
Victory against the Enemy at Torrington.
100. slain in the Church. 50. or thereabouts slain besides. 80. taken in the
field before the taking of the town. 150. considerable prisoners. 2000. foot
gone home. 1000. dispersed in by places. 3000. Arms taken. Prince Charles was
then at Launceston in Cornwall. Sir Edward Hide was with him, and 100. of his
Lifeguard, with some other horse and foot. General Sir Ralph Hopton was then at
Supper, his horse was killed, he fled toward Barnstable. The Lord Capel fled
toward Cornwall in the way of Stratton. The horse fled several ways with the
Officers great and small, some toward Barnstable, but most toward Cornwall.
Hopton was at Supper when he fell flouting and jearing against Sir Thomas
Fairfax. 200. horse taken in the town all Hoptons Treasure there, and many
papers of great consequence. The General would not permit the Soldiers to
plunder the town, but set guards upon them to keep them off. There was no
Ordnance for it was only a winter quarters. 40. Colors, and Standards taken,
but very few of the Standards had any of the Colors left upon them, it being
conceived that they took them off, and the Standards were most of them broken,
we conceive purposely, because they could not carry them away. The foot are
totally quelled there being not above a thousand left, probably, ever to join,
and those we have taken say they were forced. Their Horse we are pursuing, we
hope to give a good account of them also.
FINIS.

