A Further ACCOUNT Of the Actions done at the Siege of MONS.
Published by Authority.
PAris, March 27. We have Advice of the arrival of the French Galleys before
Nizza, and of Monsieur Catinat's having taken two small Redoubts near that
place, but that a Reinforcement of 800 Men, with a considerable quantity of
Provisions and Ammunition, was got into the Castle in the sight of our Troops,
which had so discouraged them, that it was thought they would not attempt it,
but only attack Villa-Franca, where they expected to meet with less opposition.
They write from Piedmont, that 2000 German Horse had destroyed all the Forage
about Pignerol, which the Governor of that place designed to have got together
for the use of the French Troops, and that they had beaten several Parties of
that Garrison which were sent out to oppose them, two French Captains being,
amongst others, taken Prisoners.

Brussels, March 31. We hear by a Person that came hither yesterday from the
Camp before Mons, that the French after having been four several times repulsed
in the Attack they made on St. Peter's Mill, with the loss of a great many Men,
had at last on the 27th Instant made themselves Masters of it, but that the
Besieged re-took it the next day, and were still in Possession thereof when he
came away. That the Enemy had 40 pieces of Cannon and diverse Mortars in Battery
toward the Gate of Barlemont, but that their Cannon had not yet made any
Breach, nor their Bombs and Careasses done any great harm to the Town. That on
the 29th the French made a great Attack upon a Horn-work toward the said Gate
of Barlemont, but were beaten off with very great loss; He says likewise, that
the Enemies Troops are continually moving from one side of their Camp to
another, and that they plainly discover the uneasiness they are in upon the
News of His Majesty of Great-Britain's approach for the Relief of the Place.

Hague, April 3. All our Advices from Flanders say, that the Town of Mons makes
a very good Defense, the Besieged being very resolute and unanimous; That the
Mill was several times taken and re-taken, and was at last blown up by our Men,
when they found it could be no longer maintained, but what was said of Monsieur
Vauban's being killed, is not confirmed. On the 29th the Enemy made a great
Attack upon an Out-work near the Gate of Barlemont but were repulsed with very
considerable loss; They reckon that above 1000 of the French were killed in
that Assault, and in three Sallies which the Besieged made quickly after. The
Enemies Bombs have done little harm to the Town, having for the most part burst
in the Air before they reached the place.

The King went on Sunday last from Breda to Vilvord, from whence His Majesty
would go in a day or two to the Army, which has its general Rendezvous at Hall,
about 2 Leagues beyond Brussels, in the way toward Mons. The Elector of
Bavaria is still here.

Brussels, April 1. The Troops of the Elector of Brandenburgh, to the number of
11000 Men are arrived in our Neighborhood, and yesterday our Army began to
encamp between this place and Hall, where by Wednesday next there will be
together near 50000 Men. In the mean time the news we have of the Siege of Mons
is, that the French spent the first 8 or 10 days in raising their Lines, and
fortifying their Camp, without making any attack, but since the opening of
their Trenches, they push on the Siege with all the vigor they are able; and on
the other side the Besieged defend themselves as vigorously, being greatly
encouraged by the expectation of speedy Succor, of which notice has been given
them by some Officers that got into the Town, The Mill of St. Peter was taken
and retaken 5 several times, and at last quitted and demolished by our Men. And
on the 29th the Enemy made an Assault upon a Half Moon which covers the
Horn-Work toward the Gate of Barlemont, (on which side only they attack the
Town) but were repulsed with great loss. The king of Enland is expected this
Evening at Vilvord, where His Majesty will be met by the Duke of Zell, Prince
Waldeck, and the other Generals.

Vilvord, April 2. The King arrived here last night, and on Wednesday next His
Majesty will go and Head the Army at Hall, from whence they may march in 3 or 4
days to Mons. The Enemy in the mean time make no easy advances in this Siege;
The taking of St. Peter's Mill cost them a great many Men, and after all, it was
retaken by the Besieged, and demolished by them. On Thursday the French
attacked an Outwork near the Gate of Barlemont, but were repulsed with the loss
of 4 or 500 Men; but we hear this day, that in a second attack they have taken
it, the Enemy pressing the Siege with their utmost strength and vigor because
of the approaching Succor. But the bravery with which the Besieged defend
themselves, give us hopes they may hold out till the Succors come up to their
Relief.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1691.


