A WARRANT OF THE Lord General Fairfax TO THE Marshall General of the Army, To
put in Execution the former Ordinances and Orders OF PARLIAMENT, AND Act of
Common Council, Concerning the Regulating of Printing, and dispersing of
scandalous Pamphlets.

Whereunto is annexed the said Ordinances and Orders.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for JOHN PARTRIDGE. MDCXLIX.

A Copy of the WARRANT OF THE Lord General Fairfax TO THE Marshal General of
the Army.
BY Virtue of an Order of Parliament Dated 5. January 1648. desiring me to
Command the Marshall General of the Army to put in Execution the Ordinances of
Parliament concerning scandal^us and unlicenced Pamphlets; and having received
a Petition from the Masters and Wardens of the Company of Stationers, desiring
the putting in execution all Ordinances of Parliament concerning the same.
These are therefore to require and authorize Cap Richard Lawrence, Marshal of
the Army General under my Command, his Deputy and Deputies to put the Ordinance
of 28. Sept. 1647 for suppressing scandalous Pamphlets into speedy and
effectual execution. And likewise another Order of the Lords and Commons, dated
14. June 1643. for Regulating of Printing, and suppressing the great Abuses and
frequent Disorders therein; together with an Act of Common Council, dated 9.
October 1643. for prohibiting of all persons whatsoever from crying or putting
to Sale about the streets within this City and Liberties, any Pamphlets, Books
or Papers whatsoever by way of Hawking, and for punishing of the offenders
therein. And if any person or persons have offended, or shall hereafter offend
therein, contrary to the said Ordinances, you are hereby Required and
Authorized to take them into custody, and inflict upon them such corporal
punishments, and levy such penalties upon them, for each offense, as is therein
mentioned, and not discharge them till they have made full payment thereof, and
received the said punishments accordingly. You are further Authorized and
Required from time to time, to make diligent search in all places wherein you
shall think meet, for all unlicensed Printing Presses, any way employed in
Printing, Scandalous and unlicensed Papers, Pamphlets, Books, Ballads, or any
Copies of Books whatsoever, either belonging to the Company of Stationers, or
any Member thereof, without their approbation and consents, or otherwise; and
to seize and carry away such Printing Presses, Letters, together with the Nut,
Spindle, and other materials, of every such irregular Printer which you shall
find so mis-imployed, unto the Stationers Hall, London, there to be defaced,
and made unserviceable, according to Ordinance of Parliament, in that behalf:
And likewise to make diligent search in all suspected Printing Houses,
Warehouses, and other Shops and places whatsoever, for such unlicensed Books,
Papers, Treatises, Ballads, or other sheet or sheets of News whatsoever not
entered, nor signed with the true name of the Printer, being printed or
reprinted: And likewise any Book or Books, or part of any Book or Books
heretofore allowed, and granted to the Company of Stationers for their relief
and maintenance of their poor, by such as have no lawful Interest to them,
contrary to the said Ordinances; and to carry them to Stasioners Hall,
according to the said Ordinances; and in case of opposition, to break open,
according to the said Ordinances, all doors and locks, and to apprehend all
persons so opposing, and take them into custody, till they have given
satisfaction therein. And you are here Authorized, to dispose of one moity of
the Fine paid, by virtue of the said Ordinances, to the person or persons
apprehending the said offenders, and the other moity thereof to the poor of the
liberty of the Parish where the offense is committed, according to the said
Ordinances, and the oath of one credible witness taken before any Justice of
Peace, or Master of Chancery, shall be a sufficient conviction of any offender
in the cases mentioned in the said Ordinances. The same being produced and made
good to the Judge Advocate of the Army: and all Officers and Soldiers of the
Army under my Command, and all Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, the Master and
Warden of the Company of Stationers, and Mr Mabbot, (who, by Ordinance of
Parliament, is appointed Licenser of all Papers, Pamphlets, and other Books of
News,) and all other persons, appointed by the said Ordinance of 14. June 1643.
are hereby required to be ayding and assisting to you and your Deputies, in the
execution of the said Ordinances, and Act of Common Council, as they will
answer the contrary.

Given under my Hand and Seal this ninth of January 1648. T. Fairfax.

To Capt. Richard Lawrence Marshall General of the Army under my Command.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Against
Unlicensed or Scandalous Pamphlets, AND For the better Regulating of PRINTING.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking notice of the many
Seditious, False and Scandalous Papers and Pamphlets daily printed and
published in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, and thence
dispersed into all parts of this Realm, and other parts beyond the Seas, to the
great abuse and prejudice of the People, and insufferable reproach of the
proceedings of the Parliament and their Army; for the better suppression
thereof, and prevention of the like inconveniences in time to come, do Order
and Ordain, and be it Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That
what person soever shall Make, Write, Print, Publish, Sell or Utter, or cause
to be Made, Written, Printed, Published, Sold or Uttered, any Book, Pamphlet,
Treatise, Ballad, Libel, Sheet or Sheets of News whatsoever, (except the same
be Licensed by both or either House of Parliament, or by such person or persons
as shall be thereunto Authorized by one or both Houses of Parliament,) with the
Name of the Author, Printer and Licenser thereunto prefixed, shall for every
such Offense, suffer, pay and incur the Punishment, Fine and Penally hereafter
mentioned; that is to say, The Maker, Writer or Composer of any such unlicensed
Book, Pamphlet, Treatise, Ballad, Libel, Sheet or Sheets of News, shall forfeit
and pay forty shillings, or be Imprisoned in the Common Goal for the County or
Liberty where the Offense is committed, or the Offender shall be found, until he
shall pay the same, so that the said Imprisonment exceed not forty days; The
Printer to forfeit and pay twenty shillings, and suffer the like Imprisonment,
until he pay the same, the said Imprisoment not exceeding twenty days, and
likewise to have his Press and Implements of Imprinting seized and broken in
pieces; The Bookseller or Stationer to forfeit and pay ten shillings, or be
Imprisoned in like manner until he pay the same, the Imprisonment not exceeding
ten days; and the Hawker, Peddler or Ballad-singer to forfeit and lose all his
Books, Pamphlets and printing Papers exposed to sale, and also to be whipped as a
Common Rogue in the Liberty or Parish where the said Offender shall be
apprehended, or the Offense committed.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the several and
respective Members of the Committees for the Militia in London, Middlesex and
Surrey, and all Majors and other head-Officers of Corporations, and all
Justices of the Peace of the several Counties, Cities and Liberties within this
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, and every of them in their respective
Liberties and Jurisdictions, be hereby authorized and required to put this
Ordinance in execution; and all Constables; Headboroughs, and other Officers
and Ministers are hereby authorized and required, together with such assistants
as they shall call unto them, to enter into any Shop or House where they shall
be informed, or have good cause to suspect any such unlicensed Pamphlets and
Papers are printed, sold or uttered, and to take and seize the same, and
likewise all Presses and Implements of printing, and to bring them, together
with the Offenders, and all other Offenders against this Ordinance, before the
said Members of the Committees, Mayors, head-Officers and Justice of the Peace,
or any one of them, that the Fines, Pains and Penalties before mentioned may be
imposed and inflicted upon the same Offenders, according to the intention and
meaning of this Ordinances. And it is also Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That the view of any one Justice of the Peace, head-Officer or Member of the
Committees aforesaid, or the Oath of one credible Witness (which Oath in such
cases they and every one of them are hereby authorized to administer,) shall be
a sufficient conviction of any Offender in the cases before recited; And the
same Justice of the Peace, Major, or other head-Officer or Member of the
Committees aforesaid, have hereby Authority to dispose one Moiety of the Fine
paid by virtue of this Ordinance, to the Collectors for the poor of the Liberty
or Parish where the Offense is committed, and the other Moiety to the person or
persons who shall discover and prosecute the said Offenders. And finally it is
Ordained, That all persons acting any thing by virtue of this Ordinance, shall
be saved harmless, and indempnified by Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Provided always, and it is hereby Declared, That the penalties in this
Ordinance expressed, shall not extend to acquit any person or persons that
shall Make, Write, Print, Publish, Sell or Utter, or cause to be Made, Written,
Published, Sold or Uttered, any Book, Pamphlet, Treatise, Ballad, Libel, Sheet
or Sheets of News that shall contain any Seditious, Treasonable or Blasphemous
matter, but the Offenders in that kind shall be liable to such farther
penalties as by the Laws of the Land are provided, or by Authority of
Parliament shall be judged according to the penalty of such Offenses.

H. Elsynge, Clar. Parl. D. Com.

Die Mercurii, 14 Junii, 1643.
Whereas diverse good Orders have been lately made by both Houses of
Parliament, for suppressing the great late abuses and frequent disorders in
Printing many false forged, scandalous, seditious, libellous, and unlicensed
Papers, Pamphlets, and Books, to the great defamation of Religion and
Government. Which Orders (notwithstanding the diligence of the Company of
Stationers, to put them in full execution) have taken little or no effect: By
reason the Bill in preparation for redress of the said disorders, has hitherto
been retarded through the present distractions, and very many, as well
Stationers and Printers, as others of sundry other Professions not free of the
Stationers Company, have taken upon them to set up sundry private Printing
Presses in corners, and to print, vend, publish, and disperse Books, Pamphlets
and Papers, in such multitudes, that no industry could be sufficient to
discover or bring to punishment, all the several abounding Delinquents; And by
reason that diverse of the Stationers Company and others being Delinquents
(contrary to former Orders, and the constant custom used among the said
Company) have taken liberty to print, vend, and publish, the most profitable
vendible copies of Books, belonging to the Company and other Stationers,
especially of such Agents as are employed in putting the said Orders in
Execution, and that by way of revenge for giving information against them to
the Houses for their Delinquencies in Printing, to the great prejudice of the
said Company of Stationers and Agents, and to their discouragement in this
public service.

It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That no Order
or Declaration of both, or either House of Parliament shall be printed by any,
but by order of one or both the said Houses: Nor other Book, Pamphlet, Paper,
nor part of any such Book, Pamphlet, or paper, shall from henceforth be
printed, bound, stitched, or put to sale by any person or persons whatsoever,
unless the same be first approved of and licensed under the hands of such
person or persons, as both or either of the said Houses shall appoint for the
licensing of the same, and entered in the Register Book of the Company of
Stationers, according to ancient custom, and the Printer thereof to put his
name thereto. And that no person or persons shall hereafter Print, or cause to
be reprinted any Book or Books, or part of Book, or Books heretofore allowed of
and granted to the said company of Stationers for their relief and maintenance
of their poor, without the license or consent of the Master, Wardens, and
Assistants of the said company; Nor any Book or Books lawfully licensed and
entered in the Register of the said Company for any particular member thereof,
without the license and consent of the owner or owners thereof. Nor yet import
any such Book or Books, or part of Book or Books formerly Printed here, from
beyond the Seas, upon pain of forfeiting the same to the owner or owners of the
copies of the said Books, and such further punishment as shall be thought fit.

And the Master and Wardens of the said Company, the Gentleman Usher of the
House of Peers, the Sergeant of the Commons House and their Deputies, together
with the persons formerly appointed by the Committee of the House of Commons
for Examinations, are hereby authorized and required, from time to time, to
make diligent search in all places, where they shall think meet, for all
unlicensed Printing Presses, and all Presses any way employed in the printing
of scandalous or unlicensed Papers, Pamphlets, Books, or any copies of Books
belonging to the said Company, or any member thereof, without their approbation
and consents, and to seize and carry away such Printing Presses, Letters,
together with the Nut, Spindle, and other Materials of every such irregular
Printer, which they find so misimployed, unto the common-hal of the said
company, there to be defaced and made unserviceable according to ancient
Custom; And likewise to make diligent search in all suspected Printing-houses,
Warehouses, Shops and other places, for all such scandalous and unlicensed
Books, Papers, Pamphlets, and other Books not entered nor signed with the
Printers name as aforesaid, being printed or reprinted by such as have no
lawful interest in them, or any way contrary to this Order, and the same to
seize and carry away to the said common Hall, there to remain till both or
either House of Parliament shall dispose thereof: And likewise to apprehend all
Authors, Printers, and other persons whatsoever employed in compiling,
printing, stitching, binding, publishing and dispersing of the said scandalous
unlicensed and unwarrantable Papers, Books and Pamphlets as aforesaid; and all
those who shall resist the said parties in searching after them, and to bring
them before either of the Houses or the Committee of Examinations, that so they
may receive such further punishments, as their offenses shall demerit, and not
to be released until they have given satisfaction to the parties employed in
their apprehension for their pains and charges, and given sufficient caution
not to offend in like sort for the future. And all Justices of the Peace,
Captains, Constables and other Officers, are hereby ordered and required to be
ayding and assisting to the foresaid persons, in the due execution of all and
singular the Premises, and in the apprehension of all offenders against the
same; and in case of opposition, to break open doors and locks.

And it is further Ordered, That this Order be forthwith printed and published,
to the end that notice may be taken thereof, and all Contemners of it left
inexcusable.

Die Jovis, 9 Martii, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Committee
for Examinations, or any four of them, have power to appoint such persons as
they think fit, to search in any house or place where there is just cause of
suspicion, that Presses are kept and employed in the printing of scandalous and
lying Pamphlets, and that they do demolish and take away such Presses and their
materials, and the Printers Nuts and Spindles which they find so employed, and
bring the Master-Printers, and Workmen Printers before the said Committee; and
that the Committee or any four of them, have power to commit to prison any of
the said Printers, or any other persons that do contrive, or publicly or
privately vend, sell or publish any Pamphlet, scandalous to His Majesty or the
proceedings of both or either Houses of Parliament, or that shall refuse to
suffer any houses or shops to be searched, where such Presses or Pamphlets as
aforesaid are kept: And that the persons employed by the said Committee, shall
have power to seize such scandalous and lying Pamphlets as they find upon
search, to be in any Shop or Warehouse, sold or dispersed by any person
whomsoever, and to bring the persons that so kept, published or sold the same,
before the Committee; And that such persons as the Committee shall commit for
any of the offenses aforesaid, shall not be released till the parties employed
for the apprehending of the said persons, and seizing their Presses and
Materials, be satisfied for their pains and charges. And all Justices of the
peace, Captains, Officers and Constables, are required to be assisting in the
apprehending of any the persons aforesaid, And in searching of their Shops,
Houses, and Warehouses; And likewise all Justices of the Peace, Officers and
Constables are hereby required from time to time to apprehend such persons as
shall publish, vend or sell the said Pamphlets. And it is further Ordered, that
this Order be forthwith printed and published to the end that notice may be
taken hereof, that the contemners of this Order may be left inexcusable for
their offense.

13 March, 1642. At the Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations.
BY virtue of an Order made in the Commons House of Parliament, authorizing
this Committee, or any four of them, to appoint such persons as they shall
think fit, for the seizing of, and searching for scandalous Pamphlets, and to
demolish and take away such Printing-presses as shall be employed in the
Printing of such scandalous and lying Pamphlets as by the said Order appears.
These are therefore to authorize you, Felix Kingston, Samuel Man, George
Miller, John Bellamy, William Lee Junior, John Partridge, Christopher Meredith,
Robert Dawlman, Matthew Walbanck, Richard Coats, Joseph Hunscot, John Raworth,
Stationers of London, or any of you, or any of your Deputy or Deputies, to put
in execution the said Order of the House of Commons according to the power
therein given. And you are hereby required to omit no time, but withal speed,
fidelity and diligence, to proceed in putting the said Order in execution, and
to require the aid and assistance of such persons as are required by the said
Order to assist the Persons employed by this Committee in the said service.

An Act of Common council, for the prohibiting of all persons whatsoever, from
crying or putting to sale about the streets in this City and Liberties, any
pamphlets, books or papers whatsoever, by way of hawking to be sold, and for
the punishment of the offenders therein, according to the Custom and Law of
this City.
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guid-hall Civitatis London, nono die
Octobris, 1643. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli, nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
decimo nono, coram Isaac Pennington Majore (secundo tempore) Civitatis London,
Johan. Wollaston Milite and Aldermanno Majore Civitatis Londini electo, Johan.
Glyn, Armiger. ejusdem Civitatis Recordatore, Thoma Atkin, Johan. Warner,
Johan. Langham, Will. Gibs, Will. Barkley, ejusdem Civitatis Aldermannis, and
Johan. Fowke and Jacobo Bunce, Aldermannis and Vicecomit' ejusdem Civitatis,
Necnon Majore part Communariorum de Communi Concilio ejusdem Civitatis tunc
ibidem Assemblat.

THis Common Council taking into their serious consideration, a complaint made
by the Master, Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty of the Stationers, London,
against a multitude of vagrant persons, men, women and children, which after
the manner of Hawkers, do openly cry about the streets pamphlets and other
books, and under color thereof are found to disperse all sorts of dangerous
Libels, to the intolerable dishonor of the Kings Majesty, and of the high Court
of Parliament, and the whole Government of this Realm, and this City in
particular; And conceiving it very necessary by all due means to suppress the
evils growing by such unlawful selling of such Pamphlets and Libels, have
thought fit, and do Ordain, That from henceforth the Laws and Custom of this
City, which make a forfeiture of the goods that are carried about the streets
by way of Hawking to be sold; and also the Statutes made against Rogues and
Vagabonds, shall be strictly put in execution against such vagrant persons,
selling as aforesaid, being petty chapmen within the said Statutes: And for the
more sure execution of the said Custom and Laws, It is by this Court further
Ordered, That the Officers of the Chamber, for the offenses against the Custom
and Law of Hawking, and Marshals of the city, and the Constables of every
precinct within this city, are hereby straightly charged to do their utmost
duties in their several places and Offices, in apprehending and bringing before
some of his Majesty's Justices of the peace within this City, all and every
such person or persons which shall offend in crying, offering or putting to
sale by way of Hawking, any Pamphlets, Books or Papers whatsoever as aforesaid;
whereby they may receive such punishments, as by the Custom and Laws aforesaid
ought to be inflicted upon them. And that for neglect of the said Officers,
Constables and Marshals in their duties and places as aforesaid, informations
or indictments, as the case shall require, shall be preferred against them,
that they may be punished for their neglect therein according to the Law.

FINIS.

