A brief Historical RELATION Of the Empire of RUSSIA, AND Of its Original
Growth OUT OF 24 Great Dukedomes, INTO One entire Empire, Since the year 1514.

Humbly presented to the view and serious perusal of all true-hearted
Englishmen, that love and honor the peace and happiness of this their native
Country.

By J. F.

London, Printed by J.C. for William (...), at the Blackmoors head near
Fle^^-^^^ge. 1654.

READER,
THe clear Fountain of pure Justice, Judgment, and Mercy, springing forth in
its clear and free current, to all degrees of men without respect of persons,
is that which truly advances a Nation, brings glory to God, peace to the
minds of a distempered people, and true honor and safety to the Supreme
Ruler, who thereby becomes embraced by all in the arms of Love, and born upon
their hands of Sasety, and most freely on all occasions supplied with their
gifts of bounty.

The impartial observation and administration of this, by Borice the Elected
Emperor of Russia, made him so famous, and ingraved him so deep in the hearty
affection of all the people, as that they accounted themselves more happy and
safe in him, then in him or them whose right by birth at that time the Empire
was; as in the following Story will appear.

It was the impregnable Staff of Justice and Mercy, by which like a Shepherd
he led the people, and by which, like a most valiant Champion, he quelled and
beat down to the ground all his enemies, and all that ever dared in the least
to oppose or appear against him. It was That, that became a Wall of Peace and
Safety to him, and an unexpressible happiness to that Nation, during the whole
time of his happy Reign.

This happiness from my soul I wish and desire may ever attend him, whom God
has at present placed over us, and by whom, as by a second Joshua, the Lord
has done great things, and has brought mighty things to pass for us; yea,
such, as all our Chronicles, and all the Stories of Europe and Asia cannot
parallel.

For which select Instrument, duty binds us to return glory and praise to God,
and to beg, that the Lord in mercy to this Nation would keep his heart close to
himself, causing him to walk close to the Lord by the impartial Rules of
Justice, Judgment, and Mercy: knowing in some measure, by his own expressions,
that it is the desire of his soul so to do; even to walk close with the Lord,
and humbly with his God.

But methinks I hear some Christians say, That they dare not approve of these
high Titles of Honor to be attributed, seeing they do not reap the fruits of
Liberty and Justice according to the Reformation promise, for that they still
see Iniquity, Bondage, and Oppression, to bear the sway; the dens of Cruelty
upheld; the Law streaming forth in as corrupt a delatory chargeable current as
before; the Adversaries encouraged, and his and this Nations true Friends
slighted.

My answer and humble Christian desire to all such shall be only this, That
they would be pleased to possess their souls in patience: wait upon the Lord,
and doubtless are long their eyes shall see and behold the salvation of God,
deliverance wrought, yea mighty things brought to pass by him, (seeing new the
Lord has been pleased to put the power into his hand.) For it cannot enter
into my heart to think or believe, that ever his Highness, for whom the Lord
has done so great things, (and if this be not enough, will yet do greater
things) should so far dishonor God, and himself, and all that have taken part
with him, (by putting their hand unto the Work) as to suffer these Norman evils
to continue; or that ever he should fall off from the pious Rules of Justice,
Charity, and Love, so far, as to slight those his friends, who have ever been
faithful to him, and this their native Country, and have suffered for him.
Surely, Grace and Goodness teaches him, who is in mercy sanctified therewith,
far better things; and will enable him to bring this to pass, and much more,
mangre all his and this Nations enemies. Therefore let us not resist, lest we
be found fighting against God: and let him but keep close unto the Lord his
God, and then go on and prosper. I say as I said long before, Go on, and
prosper.

Now the God of all grace, mercy, and peace, who has bound up his life in the
bundle of his grace, sanctify him thorowout by his holy Spirit, perfect his
work by him, and by him make bare the arm of his mighty power for us, against
all the potent enemies of this Nation, who threaten his and our destruction,
and this Nation's ruin; and cause his Highness still to be the Lord's powerful
victorious threshing-instrument upon his and this Nations enemies, as also the
Lords happy instrument of justice and mercy to the people of God, and to all
the poor, distressed, oppressed, and enslaved; to the widow, the fatherless,
and strangers, in this Land; that so his fame may ring thorowout the world, and
his name become as a sweet odor in the nostrils of all men.

All which are, and ever shall be, the constant addresses to the throne of
grace in that behalf, for him, and the mo^^ hearty desires of

His Highness and this Commonwealths most humble and faithful servant in the
Lord, during life, J. F.

Most honorable, and Truly honored, and Beloved in the Lord Jesus:
THe Lord having caused me, in the days of this my Pilgrimage, even from my
youth up, to taste both of sweet and bitter waters, to partake in foreign and
domestic Princes Courts, abundance of Prosperity, and in my own Country the
like measure of bitter Adversity, for these fourteen or fifteen years past.

In which my days of travel, and residence at home some part of the Reign of
the two late Kings of England, I was diligent to note and observe the most
remarkable passages presenting themselves to my Genius, and in special some,
which happened in the vast and potent Empire of Russia, (to some of which
passages I was an eyewitness.)

Of which, as also of the original rise and growth of those people of Russia to
one entire Empire, I have been often, for many years past, by many solicited
to make some brief description or relation. In answer therefore now to their
earnest desires, and according to my best intelligence, I have adventured to
set pen to paper, for their further satisfaction, in brief, as follows.

The people now called Russians, or Moscovites, are said to be originally
descended from the ancient Scythians; and those of them now called Belorusians,
are said to be descended from the Ruthenians, whose chief City then was
Navagradia; and the Ruthenians principal City was then called Wolodeemer; who
upon the incursions made by Tamerlain the great Cham of the Tartarians into
those several parts, many thousands of them were scattered or sown abroad into
the remotest parts, and clodest climates of that vast Continent, and thereupon
entitled themselves Ros-seyans, which signifies, A people sown abroad upon
the face of the earth.

The people, in process of time, divided themselves into four and twenty
several Dukedoms; and so continued, until the year 1514.

At which time, John Bazilious Chercaskee the then-Duke of Volodeemer, most
subtly contrived and raised a discord amongst all the Dukes of Russia; by
means whereof, they having weakened and destroyed one another, the said John
Bazilious within very few years gained the Conquest of them all, together with
the Kingdoms of Cazan, Astrachan, Chorelia, and Sibiria; and uniting them into
one entire Empire, he was in the year 1524 declared and crowned Emperor of
Russa, placing his Imperial Throne in the City of Mosco, the then-chief City of
the Dukedom of Moscovia; where it remains to this day.

In his days, the Cham of the grim Tartars invaded Russa with an Army of Four
hundred thousand men, besieged the Imperial City of Mosco some three months,
burnt and spoiled all the Country many hundred miles in compass; and upon his
departure, he required Homage of the Emperor; which was, That the Emperor of
Russia should come forth of the City of Mosco on foot, attended by his Princes
and Nobles of Russia, bare-headed; and that the Emperor should then bring Oats
in his Cap, and present them to the Cham of Tartary his horse, (he himself then
sitting upon his horseback) and to feed the horse out of his Cap: All which,
for the saving of the lives of many thousands of his people, and utter
devastation of his Empire, the Emperor performed, feeding the great Cham of
Tartary's horse with Oats out of his own Cap, or Colpack.

This Homage being performed, the Cham of Tartary stroaked the Emperor of
Russia three times on the face and beard, presented him with a Cymiter, and a
Bow and Case of Arrows, and so departed, carrying many thousands captive.

This John Bazilious the Emperor, toward his latter days, grew a mighty
Tyrant, delighting much in blood, causing many of his Nobles (on the least
occasion) to (...) themselves upon their own swords, to (...) thrown alive unto
Bears, Wolves, and Lions: some he caused (both men and women) to be tied to
spits, and roasted alive, till they died; some to be torn asunder by horses: and
many other unexpressible inhumane cruelties were by him practiced; who, after
he had (like a second Herod) reigned 35 years, (being very aged) he died of a
Dropsy; at which time there was a Note of the names of seventeen persons under
his pillow, A Note sound of 17 persons by him appointed for death.
appointed to die.

To him succeeded his son Theodor, who being of a shallow capacity, and from
his youth addicted to blind devotion, and ringing of bells, did thereby
neglect the great affairs of the Empire, whereby the people, though acquitted
from his father the Tyrant, yet their burdens of Contention and Oppression by
his folly increased. They then, by and upon their humble Petition to the
Emperor, and by his consent and permission, chose the then-Lord General of the
Imperial Army, (Borice Feodorowick Godoonove) Lord Protector of the Empire; who
(though illiterate) was a man endowed with many excellent natural parts, being
of a deep judgment, a strong memory, and of a discerning spirit, endowed with
much sageness; being also a great lover of Justice: the last of these, crowned
all the rest of his virtues, raising him high in the hearty affections of the
people, so that to this day his fame rings through all that vast Empire, (like
that of Queen Elizabeth in this Nation.)

By him were all their exorbitant abuses of their Law regulated, and brought to
their pristine condition: all the Provincial Vayvodes and Chancellors were (for
acts of injustice and oppression) severely punished in their persons, and by
their estates compelled to yield satisfaction to all parties by them wronged by
false Judgment. Note this well.
The longusurped power of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Friars, in
Secular affairs, quite extinguished. And by fear and terror of punishment
without respect of persons, Justice in its purity was compelled from the
corruptest persons in Authority; which forced also the greatest refractory
persons formerly in power, to vail and crouch before the Lord Protector, seeing
the peoples affections thereby become as a wall of brass for his safety and
preservation from their secret plottings of his destruction, (by shooting their
secret arrows of detraction abroad, to his defamation) for which, many of them,
not long after, by his impartial hand of Justice were made exemplary.

Thus, after the Emperor Theodor had possessed the Imperial Diadem 15 years,
he died in the Imperial Palace at Mosco, 1566. At which time, the Lord
Protector Borice retiring to the Maiden Monastery, seemed to resolve the
leading of a Monastic life, and to wave the Government of that great Empire;
which occasioned his secret enemies (though before, seeming friends) to display
their Banners of reviling speeches against him, endeavoring both by themselves
and their instruments to render him odious to the people. Yea, many of his own
servants appeared then in their colors; which afterward caused many of their
heads to cleave to the block.

For, the Soldiery, over whom he still remained as Lord General during the
time of his Protectorship, and the Commonalty (whose affections he had gained
by acts of Justice and Mercy, exercised by him without fear or flattery) did
all unanimously make their repair to him to the said Maiden Monastery, and
there openly declaring his Paternal care, and prudential disposing of the
affairs of that vast Empire, with all the several conquered parts thereof, in
the days of their late Emperor Theodor Evanowiche, did press upon him the
acceptance of the Imperial Diadem. Upon whose acceptance, they forthwith
declared him for their Emperor: and soon after his repair to the Imperial
Palace, he was with very great magnificence and acclamation of the people,
crowned Emperor of Russia; being a Gentleman of an humble spirit, constant in
his resolutions, and carried always an open ear to the complaints of all poor
and oppressed persons, doing them speedy justice. His custom was to sit three
days in the fore-noons with his Privy Council, and in the afternoons to hear
and answer Petitions; causing his Orders and References always to be drawn up
in his own presence; punishing all Chancellors and other Officers for their
corrupt and partial dealing, and for their slighting of his Decrees, and
falsifying of his Orders and References.

He also called all the Provincial Judges and Chancellors to a strict account
yearly, and most impartially heard all men's complaints against them: and such
as were found corrupt and faulty, he punished severely in their persons, and by
their estates compelled them to give full satisfaction to all persons by them
wronged in Judgment, or any ways oppressed or defrauded.

He carried also a vigilant eye over all the Lords of his Privy Council; so
that none of them durst tread out of the path of Impartial Justice, either for
reward, favor or affection, to any of their nearest allies, or dearest friends.

He also ordered the determination of all Controversies and Suits in Law to be
within 40 days; and the charges of a Suit in Law not to exceed a Greevna, which
is 12 d. English: viz. 4 d. for the Citation, 4 d. for the Warrant, and 4 d.
for a copy of the Decretal Order.

And for any one that had commenced a false and vexatious Suit against any, he
was to pay treble damages, Pure Justice.
and to suffer the like punishment which he intended thereby to have inflicted
upon the person by him unjustly troubled.

O what happiness, what peace, what concord, would such a course of Justice
produce here in England.

And for the sale of houses and lands of Inheritance, he ordained a book to be
kept in every Province, called, The everlasting book, (or, as here in England
it was called formerly, when the practice of the Law ran in its pure current,
The Dooms daybook) which is there continued to this present. By which means,
all vexatious Suits, unjust Claims, and all Frauds, are prevented. The people
there, cannot mortgage nor sell their Land, Houses, nor Leases, two or three
times over, to several persons; as usually here in England: nor is any there
cheated of their Patrimonies, nor constrained to sell or mortgage their lands
or goods, or both, to maintain a long and tedious Suit in Law, by giving
content to their insatiable Cormorant-Lawyers, Attorneys, Sollicitors, as we do
here in England; where the recovery of a debt of 20 l. has cost some men above
200 l. in Law. Yea, some thousands of families have been ruined in defense of
their rights, by the present abusive practice of the Law.

Neither have they there (nor in any Country under the whole heavens, but in
cruel England) any murdering dens and dungeons of cruelty for imprisoning men
and women for debt, till they starve and die in prison: (contrary to our own
ancient Statutes yet in force. See the book entitled, Liberty vindicated
against Slavery, fol. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 25 Edw. 3. chap. 4. 21 Edw. 2. D.
172. 13 Edw. 3. B. 153. 8 Hen. 4. chap. 18, 20. 34 Edw. 1. chap. 4. 23 Hen. 6.
chap. 10. Magna Chart. chap. 35. Westminster. 1. chapter 26.3 Edw. 1. chapter 26.25 Edw. 3.
chap. 4.

Nor is there, any arrested nor imprisoned upon frivolous, false, and vexatious
Actions, unjust Orders, Reports and Decrees daily, as they are here in England.
Nor is there any such Horse-leeches to suck the vital blood of men and women
committed to their custody into Gaols and Prisons, as we have here. For all
which unexpressible cruelties, doubtless the wrath and vengeance of God will
ere long fall heavy upon the Nation, if not remedied, according to the several
Vows, Protestations, Declarations, and Manifesto's, made to God and this Nation
many years since, both by Parliament and ^rmy.

In this most noble, just, and famous Emperors days, the cruel, the mighty,
nor the oppressing Miser, durst not wrong nor oppress the poor, the widow, the
fatherless, nor the stranger. The Judges and Chancellors durst not step aside
our of the strait path of Justice, for money, favor, nor affection: witness
that exemplary just Sentence of his passed on the Chancellor of the Province of
Rezane, who for 100 Robles bribe, (which is 50 l.) had most unjustly decreed a
poor widows Land of Inheritance from her: whereof proof being by her made to
the Emperor, the Lord Chancellors was by him degraded, and sentenced to have
the like bag of money hanged about his neck, and to be whipped by the common
Hangman, from the great Chancery-Office to the Marketplace, and back to the
said Office; there the money to be melted, and poured down his throat. All
which was done accordingly.

O if this pure Justice and Mercy were exercised here in England, how
unexpressibly would it elevate his Highness in the affections of all the
people, and engrave him in their hearts! whereby he would then become like to
the famous Queen Elizabeth, who upon any motion abroad from her Palace, had
many thousands attending on the highways to congratulate her with their
loyalty, and loud acclamations sent up to heaven for her Majesty's long life,
health, and prosperity.

In her days there is said to be but one Sergeant at Law, at the Common Pleas
bar, (called, Sergeant Benlowes) who was ordained to plead both for the
Plaintiff and Defendant; for which he was to take ten Groats of each party, and
no more: and to manifest his impartial dealing to both parties, he was
therefore to wear a party-colored garment, and to have on his head a black Cap
of impartial Justice, and under it a white linen Coyf of Innocence. All which
was in the days of King James, turned to Injustice, Oppression, and Bribery.
Sergeants were by him made in abundance; and a Sergeants place was then sold
for 800 l. but in the days of the late King, the price of Iniquity was raised
to 1500 l. who at one time made thirteen Sergeants at Law.

I will wade no further into this sea of Wickedness, lest some of the old
stamp, and long Robe, should find themselves agrieved; but resolve to return
to the matter in hand.

The like punishment was by this famous Emperor most justly inflicted upon the
Great Lord Chancellor of Mosco; who for passing an unjust Decree, was degraded
and whipped, and had thirty lashes, by the common Hangman, upon the Cozoel, or
wooden Gate, before his own Office.

The like was by him inflicted on the Vayvode or Governor of Vasema, who for
injustice and oppression was also whipped, and his estate decreed to satisfy
the persons by him wronged.

I would instance many more the like acts of Justice which flowed from that
truely-magnanimous Prince; as also, how the subtle deceitful knot of a number
of grand oppressors was by him broken; who by their subtle contrivances, in and
by their accustomed corrupt practices, in and by their Law, had enslaved the
Nation to their corrupt wills, and ruined thousands of families: But I hop^,
that little that has been related, is sufficient for any to take consideration
of, and to make it their own most honorable practical example; to the glory of
God, the good of this Nation, and their own eternal honor.

And thus after the poor oppressed man's Patriot, even this famous Emperor,
had happily reigned 36 years, he departed this life: whose death was much
lamented by all the people for many years: to whom succeeded his son Theodore,
who being about 17 years old, reigned but six months.

In whose time, one Demetrius (who from his youth being brought up in the
Free School of Warsovia in Poland) gave himself out, and was credibly said to
be the son of John Bazilious the first Emperor; who having married Marinca the
eldest daughter of Sandomerskee, one of the Electors of Poland, was by
Sigismundus King of Poland supplied with 20000 horse; who thereupon entered this
great Empire of Russia with an Army of 240000 horse, encountered with the
Emperors great Host consisting of 50000 horse and 150000 foot, and after four
several set Battles, he overthrew this great Imperial Host, marched up to the
Imperial City, and after Summons (causing the young Emperor Theodor to be
strangled) he entered the City; and being forthwith crowned Caesar, or Emperor,
he possessed the Imperial Diadem 28 months.

He was a Gentleman very comely of personage, active of body, and a great
Scholar, highly affecting the English, Germane, and Polonian Nations; being
also himself, for his valor and generosity of spirit, greatly beloved of all
his victorious Army. But coming to possess the Imperial Throne, and the glory
thereof, he gave himself up to all manner of delightful pastimes, referring the
management of all State Affairs to his Privy Council: and being wholly led by
his chief Secretary Pan Boochinskee, he confined his ear to the said
Boochinskee, and some other few Polonian Flatterers and Parasites about him;
receiving also into favor some of the Russian Nobility, and conferring places
of Honor and Trust upon them, hoping thereby to win and endear them to
himself; who notwithstanding became as stinging Serpents in his bosom, and
proved the fatal instruments of his ruin.

But that which proved most advantageous to his enemies, and fatal to himself,
was, his not admitting any into his presence, (as that famous Emperor Borice
with all freeness used to do) but such only as those Parasites and Flatterers
pleased to admit, for affection, favor, or reward; and stopping his ears
against the cries of the poor oppressed Petitioners, he neglected to answer
their Petitions: whereby, the hearts of the people were exasperated against
him. The reins of injustice, tyranny and oppression were let loose to all
oppressors; the Lords of his Council acted by the Rule of their own wills; his
Secretary Boochinskee became lawless and graceless: none durst prefer a
complaint against him. Every one of these his Flatterers made hay for
themselves, whilst the prosperous sunshine of his Majesty's Imperial favor
displayed his rays upon them, without any real affection, or conscientious
care in them for his Majesty's honor and safety: the fruit whereof proved, not
long after, to be the fatal loss of their own lives, and great estates so
impiously gained.

For, the irreconcilable old Imperial subtle Nobility, Gentry, Chancellors,
and Clergy, having ingratiated themselves with him, did by their instruments
(at a distance incessantly in secret) render the Emperor odious to the people,
and guilty of all those grievous burdens of Injustice and Oppression, which by
their own unjust complotted practices they had laid upon the people; whereby
they most subtly accomplished their diabolical end, which was, the untimely
destruction of his Royal person, by the cruel hands of Basilius Shuskee, one of
the reconciled Nobility, who not long before, for some treacherous practice,
had his head upon the Block; yet the Emperor in his clemency pardoned him:
who not long after, through the intercession of some of the Russian Lords, was
made Privy Councellor, whereby he was the better enabled to compass his
resolved barbarous design, which was, the cruel destruction of the Emperors
person, and of the lives of all his victorious Army, consisting then of 25000
valiant men, being all Polonian, Germane, and Hungarian Horse, who were all of
them massacred the same day, and their houses rifled; their wives and children
exposed to misery, and very many of them cruelly butchered by the rude
multitude within the City of Mosco: which inhumane act caused a Sea of blood to
have its current through many of the streets within the said City.

Thus the glory of this victorious Heroic spirit, was extinguished in one day:
and all that truly adhered unto him, suffered with him, both in their estates
and lives, about the 20 of May, 1604.

Bazilius having thus butchered this gallant Prince, and removed all obstacles,
by destroying the Army, he was proclaimed Emperor of Russia, (by Mighayla
Scopeene General of the Russian Army) and speedily after, crowned: who being
scarce warm in the Imperial Throne, began forthwith to display the Banner of
Tyranny, in restoring the covetous Clergy to their former power and
jurisdiction in Secular affairs; and most perfidiously, contrary to his oath
and promise made to the people at the time of his election, he loosed the reins
of injustice and oppression to all the Vayvodes and Provincial Chancellors, and
began to lay great Taxes on the people; and, like Richard the third of England,
he beheaded some who were the primary instruments of placing the Imperial
Diadem on his head, causing also Mighaylo Scopeene the General of the Imperial
Army to be secretly destroyed by poison. Which acts of his, rendered him odious
to all degrees of men, exasperated the spirits of the Nobility against him, and
alienated the hearts of all the people from him; and chiefly, for that their
grievances were not heard, nor their burdens of oppression taken off, in all
the six years time of his Reign; which at length emboldened the Nobility and
Merchants of the City, with a resolute spirit, to lay hold of him, (wherein a
Citizen, one Theodor Andronave was a prime actor) who gagged him, bound him
fast in a Sled, and sent him post prisoner unto Sigismundus King of Poland,
laying to his charge the murdering of their late Emperor Demetrius: who being
arrived at Warsovia in Poland, he was ordered to safe custody, where he ended
his days most miserably, in the year of Christ 1610.

The Nobility and flattering Clergy forthwith proceed in electing Uladislaus,
the King of Poland's eldest son, for their Emperor; who thereupon sent one
Pan Zoltefskee with 10000 Horse, to take and keep possession for him: upon
whose arrival into the Imperial City of Mosco, the Citizens made some
opposition; but were soon appeased by the Lords of the Council. The Polish
General thereupon gained a greater strength into the City, which caused several
tumults; the Lords thereupon caused all the Citizens to be disarmed, and but
one hatchet left to every three houses to cleave their wood: which act did
mightily enrage the Citizens against the Lords and Polonians.

Zoltefskee well weighing the power of the Citizens, and weakness of his Army
to keep possession of so vast a City, did thereupon administer an Oath of
Loyalty to all his Soldiery, commanding them on the sixth day of the
then-month of May, every one at one of the clock in the morning to fire their
lodgings, and not to spare man, woman, nor child: which was done accordingly,
and above 130000 persons massacred, besides those that were burnt in their beds
and houses.

Thus the buildings of that famous City (said then to be 26 miles in compass)
were all turned into ashes in one day, except the three stone-walls environing
each other at a very great distance, and the Emperors Palace, with some
Monasteries, and other buildings of stone: but the fourth wall, which environed
all the rest, together with the suburbs without that wall, reaching above three
miles in length, were all burned; the wall being all of massy timber, and
earth.

But the unsavory fruit of this their bloody Tragedy, was by the just hand of
heaven returned into their own bosoms: for, the Country forthwith raised two
mighty Armies under the conduct of the Lord Troobetscoy and the Lord Pazarskee,
who besieged the Polonians in the City, close on every side, for the space of
two years; and, through extreme famine, enforced the Polonians to yield up that
famous Metropolitan City, and therewith the Prince of Poland's right to the
Empire of Russia: so as of 35000 valiant men, there returned not twenty persons
into Poland. Those few hundreds that yielded up the City, coming once to plenty
of victuals, died with meat in their mouths through mere weakness, having not
tasted a bit of bread in six months before. In which Siege, a loaf of bread
sometime was sold for a thousand Robles, which is 500 l. Sterling.

During the time of this cruel Siege, wherein I continued 22 months, being
lodged in the Imperial Palace, several objects of misery presented themselves
to my fight and observation, from the besieged; as the eating of the flesh of
horses, dogs, cats, and all sorts of leather, boiled in ditch-water; which
served in stead of Tripes. But that which took most impression of grief upon my
spirits, was, to see many Russian Ladies nobly descended, and brave young
Gentlewomen, who not long before scorned that the moist earth should have
touched the soles of their feet, were now become miserable, constrained to go
barefooted, and for food to prostrate themselves to every mean persons
disposal; yea, when they were discarded by some, I have seen them with tears in
their eyes profer their service to others, and all for a miserable livelihood:
which then called to my remembrance this old saying, Pride must have a fall:
and, Hunger will break stone-walls.

But after the famine grew very great, and all women, children, and aged
persons turned out of the City, to the Russians, (who received them very
courteously, ^ery much condoling their miserable conditions) there followed a
very great judgment of God upon the Polonians, (ob^^inacie and hardness of
heart) who all bound themselves by Oath, and receiving the Sacrament upon it,
not to yield up the City to the Russians, so long as there was a man of them
alive: which brought them to that extremity, that they by casting lots (who
should die next, to maintain the rest alive) did devour one another, from 3000
to 400 persons. And at the surrender of the City, diverse Commanders of the
Russian Army seizing upon sundry large chests, conceiving them to be full of
treasure, having them broken up, found in them nothing but the bodies of men
slain for food to the living.

Upon the regaining of this Imperial City in 1612. forthwith followed the free
election of Mighaylo Theodorowiche, (of the lineage of Borice, that famous
Emperor) by the two National Armies, consisting of 13000 Horse and Foot; who
was crowned the 5 of August, 1613.

This young Prince, for a time, walked in the path of that Princely myrrour of
Justice, Borice; under whose Government, (after a few years of trouble) the
Nation enjoyed Halcyon days of peace and tranquillity, after the cessation of
that long intestine War between the Emperors of Russia and Charles Duke of
Swethland, and his son Gustavus the late King of Swethland; which was
accomplished, and the Country of Scythia restored to the Russian, by the
mediation of King James, and the indefatigable restless pains and travel of the
truly-honorable sage Statesman, Sir John Merick, employed Lord Ambassador
there, for that work, for the space of three years and eight months; who
accomplished a League offensive and defensive between the two Crowns of Russia
and Swethland, in 1617. which is since ratified, by the now-Emperour Olexey
Michaylowiche, and the Queen of Swethland.

This worthy Statesman, Sir John Merick, was by King James employed upon a
second Embassy unto the said Emperor of Russia, in the year 1621. being
accompanied by six Gentlemen of quality, (of whom Robert Kelloway Esquire was first
in degree) and by 60 followers all in a rich Livery; who accomplished his
Embassy with content to the King, and very great honor to himself and this
Nation. In both which great Embassies, I had the honor to be with him, all the
time.

Thus after this peaceable Emperor had rei^ned 35 years, he died; to whom
succeeded Olexey his son, who being yet of tender years, and not knowing the
great and weighty causes and motives inducing his Princely predecessors to
grant that great Charter of Free-trade unto the English Company of Merchants
thorowout that vast Empire, free of Custom, and all other duties, has (as is
supposed) by the aggravation of some Dutch Resident there, deprived the English
of that Charter. But now, I hope, upon better information, and apprehension of
the constant love of the English to his Majesty and that Nation, and their
readiness on all occasions from time to time to serve and supply his
predecessors with all necessaries, even in the times of their greatest straits,
will be a sufficient motive to him, most honorably and freely to restore unto
the English Merchants the said Charter of Free-trade, and will thereby manifest
his Princely affection to our victorious Chieftain, or Caesar, who hitherto
has been the Lords threshing-instrument of terror to all the potent and
raging enemies of this Nation, both by land and sea. All which, the Dutch, as
well as others, have been made very sensible of, and of which they above any
others can make a most true Narrative, (if they please) to the glory of God,
the honor of his Highness, and this nation, and to their own correcti^e
instruction for the future; lest their insulting pride draw them down by a
second Duke d'Alva to the gulf of destruction, and enforce them once again to
entitle themselves to our Caesar, The poor distressed States of the
Netherlands, as they did in the days of Elizabeth Queen of England, who
purchased those United Provinces from the Spaniard, by the inestimable
lifeblood of more then 100000 Englishmen, besides Scots and Irish, and the
expense of more then two millions of treasure: Never to be fully satisfied by
the worth of all the Netherlands.

But if any shall be offended at these my foregoing expressions touching our
present^ victorious Chieftain, (or Caesar) I shall humbly desire them to look
back into the recorded transactions of all the Worthies in former ages, and see
if they can (comparatis comparandis) balance those many several noble and
victorious acts of his, with any of theirs, in the scale of Honor, and true
Magnanimity, by him accomplished, in three famous Kingdoms, viz. England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and all within the space of 3 or 4 years, without the
least foil or repulse at any time by him received from his and this Nation's
potent enemies.

Wherein (in my judgment) he surpasses the Roman Caesar's, the furious Goths
and Vandals, the valiant Scanderbeg Prince of Epirath, the triumphant Godfrey
of Bullein, and the victorious Gustavus Adolphus King of Swethland, who was the
terror of Germany. And as the Lord in raising him up, has thus by him brought
home peace to every man's door in these three Nations; so I desire and wish
from my soul, that with all due thankfulness he and we may return praises to
his great and glorious Name for those his rich and abundant mercies by this his
select instrument (Oliverus) conferred on us; it being the only true way for
the continuation of his showers of mercies on us; and, in stead of kicking
against the pricks, to rest satisfied, and wait patiently upon the Lord, and
then doubtless the salvation of God will appear: for, he that believes, makes
not haste.

For that sacred Power that has hitherto by him accomplished mighty things for
us, will assuredly perfect his work, even his own great work; so that the
enemies of God, and all that hate us, beholding it, shall stand amazed, and
shall be enforced to confess and say, that it is the Lords doings, and it is
marvelous in their eyes.

And when once, according to his sundry expressions at several times to that
effect, he appears mighty in pulling down the strong holds of Satan, and
advancing the thrones of Justice, Judgment, and Mercy, to the glory of God, the
good of this Nation, and his own eternal praise, then shall his enemies be
abashed, and England's enemies confounded; but on him shall the mercies of God
flourish. For, it is Justice and Mercy exalts a Nation, and the administration
thereof (without respect of persons) is the honor of a Nation, and of him that
is the Head of the Nation. Witness those unalterable decrees of the Medes and
Persians: and Solomon tells us, that the throne is established by justice, and
upholden by mercy, Prove. 20.28. For he that rules over men must be just,
honorable, and unalterable in his word and promise) ruling in the fear of God,
2 Samuel 23.3. And he set judges in the land city by city, and said to the
judges, Take heed what ye do for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
present with you in the judgment: for there is no iniquity nor respect of
persons with the Lord, nor taking of gifts. 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7. This
undoubtedly was the lesson which our just Alfred King of England gave to all
the County-Judges and Chancellors in his days: and this was the charge of that
renowned Emperor Borice; and this, I hope, will be the Rule and unalterable
Charge of our victorious Caesar: And in so doing, he shall assuredly retain the
favor of God, the love of the whole Nation, and make his enemies vanish like
the smoke. And so doing, go on and prosper; the Lord shall give thee thine
hearts desire.

O that the Lord in mercy to this Nation would turn the present tyrannous
destructive Norman law of England into a law of mercy and preservation to the
people thereof; that so they might not be thereby, in their estates, rights;
liberties, and lives, daily sold, as sheep are in Smithfield-market; and by
Bailiffs and Sergeants most spitefully daily haled like dogs to several
dungeons of misery, from their families and callings, and cruelly destroyed in
prisons, their estates by piecemeal torn and rent from them for a trifle, and
their wives and children enforced to beg their bread: yea, many poor hanged for
ten or twenty shillings; whilst those that rob this Nation of their estates,
liberties, and lives, and that by a Law, escape the halter.

Wherefore my most humble and earnest suit unto his Highness the Lords
threshing-instrument) 15, That he would be pleased to take seriously to heart
the misery of this Nation, as good Nehemiah did who accounted their misery his
misery, their bondage his bondage, their flesh as his flesh, and their children
as his children: And lo, (says he) you suffer to be brought into bondage your
sons and your daughters, causing thereby the enemies of God to blaspheme. Neh.
5.5, 9. and the oppressed to groan under the burden. The (works and) words of
the wicked are to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall
deliver the oppressed. Prove. 12.6. And also seriously to consider the
admonition of Solomon, saying, If thou forbear to deliver those that are haled
to death, (or dungeons of death) and if thou say, Behold, I knew it not; does
not he that pondereth thy heart, and keeps thy soul, know it? And so of the
Lords judgment denounced by Jeremiah against the Rulers of Judah, saying, Ye
have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, and
every one to his neighbor; nor loosed the bands of wickedness, nor undone the
heavy burdens, nor let the oppressed (nor enslaved) go free: Therefore will I
proclaim liberty unto you, even to the sword, to the plague, and to the famine,
Jer. 34.17.

And do we not see the anger of the Lord kindled against us, by troubles
abroad, jealousies at home, and fears on every side? Therefore take away the
Cause, (which is, Injustice, Cruelty, and Oppression) and the Effect will cease
assuredly. For when (in these things) a man's ways please the Lord, his very
enemies shall be at peace with him.

If therefore the Lord, in mercy to his Highness and this Nation, be pleased to
incline his heart to loose the bands of wickedness, (by abolishing the Capias)
and to let the oppressed go free; to pull down the thrones of iniquity, and to
break every yoke: Then shall his light break forth (to the Nation) as the
morning, and his health shall then spring forth speedily: his righteous acts
shall then be his vanguard, and the glory of the Lord (in the power of his
might) shall be his rere-guard. For blessed shall he be that considers the
cause of the poor, (especially those that are of upright heart) the Lord shall
deliver him out of his enemies hands, and he shall be blessed upon the earth;
yea, his enemies shall be destroyed: but he shall be established in
righteousness, and his seed after him; if he despise not the counsel of the
poor, whose trust is in the Lord; if he cleave not to the generation of cruel
men, but ease this Nation of this cruel Norman bondage, and deliver the
inslaved for debt out of the several dens of cruelty in this Land, causing
speedy justice to have its free current without respect of persons, that so all
that are oppressed and defrauded of their estates, lands, or goods, may gain
speedy restitution with damage for false imprisonment, or detention of their
estates unjustly.

All which once effected, will assuredly appease the wrath of God against these
Nations, unite the hearts of all this great people to his Highness, as the
heart of one man, and will enable him to go in and out before this great people
in the strength of the Lord, and the power of his might, in peace and much
safety, maugre all his enemies, and all that strive to disturb his and this
Nations peace. This will assuredly bring glory to God, honor to his Highness,
and tranquillity to the Nation: it will enforce (as in other Countries) honesty
and plain-dealing from all men and all Petifogging, deceitful, subtle,
oppressive persons, now shrouded under the Norman Law, will vanish; and the
words Peace, Quietness, and Industry, will be written over every man's door.

Such noble acts will revive the memory of Alfred, that just king of England,
who punished and hanged Four and forty County-Judges in one year, for
oppressing the people by false Judgment: and of Edward the fourth, who caused
Fifteen Gaolers to be hanged in one year, for exacting money from prisoners,
and defrauding them of the King's allowance of 4 d. per diem: And of Henry the
fourth, who caused Two and twenty Projectors, and six Aldermen of London to be
hanged at the then-place of Execution within London-walls, and buried under the
Gallows; where since the Church is built, and the place called Alderman-bury,
to this day.

It was the usual saying of that famous and just Emperor Borice, That Prince
or Ruler is most happy and safe, that lives least to himself, and most to the
honor of God, and the peoples good over whom God has placed him; and whose
legal and just power is the bounds of his will: whose olive branch of wisdom
springs from his heart, bloometh on his tongue, and bears fruit in his
actions; which will always direct him not to refuse counsel good cheap, lest
remiss security cause him to buy repentance too dear.

Thus having (through my real hearty affection, and well-wishes to his Highness
well-being, and love to my Countries freedom, peace, and tranquillity)
digressed from my intended Historical Subject: and being desirous not to weary
the Reader, but to draw to an end, I do again (in the close) become a most
humble and earnest suitor to his Higness, in the name, and by the mercies of
Jesus Christ, to let judgment run down as water, and justice as a mighty
stream; that so Mercy may embrace him on every side, and cause him to continue
in assured love and favor both with God and man, enjoying the good things of
this Land in peace, (internal, and external) with abundance of glory to God,
and honor to himself and posterity.

Not giving ear to the feigned words of some self-seeking persons, who having a
show of godliness, (yet deny the power thereof) do ( Babel-like) endeavor to
rear up to themselves everlasting tabernacles, and cry out, The Temple of the
Lord, The Temple of the Lord; The Law, the Law* Whereas the true Temple of the
Lord is this, To amend their covetous ways, and their unjust oppressive doings,
To execute judgment between a man and his neighbor, and not to oppress the
poor, the widow, the fatherless, nor the stranger, but to let all the oppressed
and enslaved go free: Nor to think, by tything Mint and Cummin, to fulfill the
law of God, as those several hypocrites, the Doctors, Lawyers, Scribes and
Pharisees did; against whom (in stead of a blessing) there stands upon record
for ever sundry terrible Woes denounced by him who is King of kings, and Lord
of life and glory, and who assuredly will, by the sacred Rule of impartial
justice, judge them according to their works.

There is a Word, which is clothed with death; the Lord grant it be not found
in the heritage of Jacob. Sometimes to abide in the shade, produces more quiet
to a poor man, then to have the bright beams of the Princes favor to break
forth upon him: for then Malice is forthwith enraged, Wrath like a Fury
assaulteth, and Revenge like a Crocodile (when seeming to weep over him)
destroys him most, in his credit, life, and good name; never ceasing (both by
himself, and all those by him seasoned for his ends) to traduce and backbite
him daily, thereby rendering him odious to the best of men.

Like those subtle Serpentine generation of men, who by lies and slanders, and
by the power of some by them then seasoned for the work, defrauded me of my
right, which by his Highness favor was most freely conferred on me; and who
also since have notceased to traduce, backbite, and slander me to those in high
place and Authority, hoping thereby to make their deeds of darkness to resemble
the light and truth, in the fight of his Highness and others. But to all such
shadows of Christians I shall say but this, That their Consciences (if they
have any) cannot but testify to their faces that they have done me much wrong:
The Lord rebuke them for it.

And this I was told long since, that if his Highness had not appeared so
vigorously for me in that, and another business since that, I had neither
undergone those calumnies and reproaches, nor had my endeavors proved so
fruitless as hitherto they have done to me.

This duly weighed, it cannot but be positively concluded, That although those
slanderous and reproachful arrows were shot at the low shrub, yet the venom
of them was intended to hit the tall Cedar, which by his branches of favor was
pleased to shelter the low shrub.

For at that very instant time, the better to set a face of credit upon their
slanders, and to carry on their design of defeating me of my right, they by
their instruments divulged it abroad in the City, and to diverse Parliament Men,
that I had forswore my self three times in one day before his Highness and the
Council, and that they had adjudged me to stand in the Pillory at the Exchange.
This was related with such a face of truth, as that diverse of my friends were
happily deceived, in going to the Exchange to be spectators of it.

Whereas the real truth is, that I was never called before his Highness nor
Council to swear at any time, for any matter, cause, or thing whatsoever: for
the truth whereof, I humbly appeal to his Highness and to the honorable
Council; most humbly praying for justice on these traducers, and satisfaction
for these injuries most wrongfully sustained.

But not resting in the center of these their calumnies, they or their
instruments do still persist by underhand plottings to accomplish my
destruction, and by raising of a lie against me, rob me of my livelihood: and
at the same time, in a most secret manner, spread a rumor in the City, that I
should conspire against my Lord Protector's life: A thing so horrid, so
detestable to my soul, and so far from the thoughts of my heart, as the
Crystalline Sphere can possibly be in distance from the earth.

And this clearly appears, by my constancy from the beginning, to the cause
of God, faithfulness to his Highness, and services performed for the State.

The first was, my discovery of the late King's intention to surprise Hull and
Plymouth, by private Letters sent out of Holland to Sir Harbottle Grimston and
Mr. Samuel Vassel, then members of Parliament: by means whereof, the Parliament
and Nation were preserved from the universal ruin determined, in 1641.

The second was, my discovery of the first Rebellion in Kent.

For both which, I never to this day received one penny, as a recompense or
reward, from any.

And what my fidelity, and many years cruel sufferings, have been, for
Parliament and Army, and in especial to his Highness, is well-known to
thousands in the City and Countries, and manifested by the several Tractates
written and printed by me in defense of the Cause, and of his Highness honor;
even at that time also, when black-mouthed envious Infamy had opened her mouth
wide against him: from which I shall never vary, nor cease to vindicate his
honor in the way of God: wishing from my soul, that all men were even as I am;
which is so far from acting, wishing, or thinking any hurt to him or his, as
that I shall spend my life, and be ready to be spent for him; yea, although he
should suffer me to be overwhelmed with sorrow, penury, and the raging power of
my slanderous adversaries.

For the real truth of all which, I appeal to the searcher of all hearts, who
knows that I lie not, and to whose sacred hand of justice and mercy I refer my
adversaries; concluding with David's words: Plead my cause, O Lord, with them
that strive with me: Fight thou against them that fight against me; and, From
evil and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me.

For they that work evil, shall be wrapped up in evil. Slander and reproach
proceed from the proud in heart; but vengeance lurketh for them as a lion: yea,
Anguish shall consume them before they die, and they shall be taken in the same
snare.

The tongue of the hypocrite destroys his neighbor by lying words; yea, he
works deceitfully without ceasing; (I wish this Age has not brought forth
many such monsters) who bend their tongues like a bow for lies, and take great
pains to do wickedly.

Witness the numberless number of backbiters, false accusers, Knights of the
Post, forgers of Deeds, tormentors of poor men and women by frequent vexatious
Arrests, Imprisonments, and tedious Suits in Law, of Ten, Twenty, Thirty, or
Forty years continuance.

I cannot but with grief of heart confess, that we live in the very last of
times, wherein Malice lurketh, Revenge rages, Cruelty sucketh the vital blood
of the poor, Envy suffers not the poor to live; Oppression stays the
needy; the poor is despised of his neighbor, his faithfulness contemned, and
his services not regarded, (if he be not armed with the spirit of boldness,
impudence, and base flattery) as many are, who have thrived best, and prevailed
most, since these distracted times, and have made great gain by the bare
profession of Godliness, but of true godliness small gain to themselves, (in
the practical part thereof.)

Some such are they, who have troubled me, perplexed me, persecuted me,
defrauded me, and endeavored to destroy me, by lying words. The Lord in mercy
forgive them, and give them hearts to walk more answerably to their profession,
and preserve his Highness from being deceived and deluded by any such Vipers.

It was the approved wisdom of that famous Emperor Borice, Not to trust any
reconciled Enemy, nor to entrust them in any place of power, nor to credit any
their Blemishes and Odiums in secret cast upon any of approved fidelity to his
person.

This Rule produced peace and safety to him, but confusion to his enemies, and
to all their Machavilian plots and enterprises against him.

On the other hand, Credulity, and Security, and favoring of reconciled
enemies, was the destruction of that Heroic Spirit Demetrius the Emperor, who
by their Flatteries lulling him asleep in their treacherous Cradle of Security,
made thereby his Friends appear to him to be his Foes, and themselves (that
were his mortal Enemies) to be his only Friend, by his confining of his ear
unto them.

An eminent Example we have for this, in the late King, who upon the
competition between the Spanish and French Faction of his Council, granted the
pre-eminence to the Spanish Faction, as to Cant', Arund', Cott', Wind', and
others, by confining his ear solely to them; which proved his confusion. For,
the Plot being laid long before, by the Pope and Jesuits, to make the King of
Spain UNIVERSAL KING, these Machiavels knew no surer way to accomplish this,
then in rendering the King odious to the people, by multiplying of Taxes, and
countenancing the several Judges in their corrupt practices. The Bishops, by
the High-Commission-Court, new invented Orders in their Churches, and the Oath
Ex Officio. Putting the King also upon requiring Knighthood-money, Shipmoney,
the Forests, and others of that nature: being confident, that this would move
the people (by them called Heretics) to rebel, and so cut the throats one of
another; and thus the Catholics might but stand by, and laugh at their
destruction; and then the King of Spain with much facility might of England and
Ireland gain the possession: which done, the Netherlands would soon follow, and
France also be brought into subjection.

How far they prevailed in this their hellish Plot, I appeal to all knowing
persons: and what good the Lord produced to this Nation out of evil by them
intended, is manifest at this day.

The Lord perfect this his Work of Mercy to us, by granting us the assurance of
his love and favor in Jesus Christ; which cannot but produce honor to his
Highness, and peace and happiness to this Nation: Which is the hearty desire of

Your faithful friend and servant in the Lord, J. F.

POSTSCRIPT.
For the help and enabling of all poor oppressed ^^eatures, that are not able
to wage Law, or to undergo the chargeable corrupt practice thereof for recovery
of their Rights;

THat his Highness would be pleased to cause a Proclamation or Declaration to
be made thorowout the whole Nation, thereby declaring that all Decrees made
against any person or persons, in any Court of Justice or Equity, without
hearing of the party, or Counsel for him, upon the making thereof, being
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Nation, shall become void. And that
those Judges that be living, of them which made the said Decrees, shall answer
and pay unto the party damnified thereby, his full loss and damage sustained by
reason thereof, within certain days to be limited, after Oath made of the
demand thereof: and upon failer therein, that then an Extent to issue of
course, without any circuit of Action or Suit at Law against the said unjust
Judge or Judges their estates both real and personal; and then to pay double
damages for their said failer. And that the said Proclamation or Declaration
shall be a sufficient warrant to any Sheriffs or Officers whatsoever to levy
all such money as shall appear to be due for the reasons aforesaid: any
Statute, Law, or Ordinance to the contrary heretofore made, in any wise
notwithstanding.

And whosoever has illegally, in the time of a prisoners restraint, intruded
and gotten into the possession of any of his lands or goods, and received the
profits thereof, and converted them unto his or their own use, and do still
unjustly detain them: If any such person or persons do not (after so many days
limited as aforesaid) upon demand deliver the possession of the said Lands
quietly unto the parties so wronged, or unto such as he shall appoint, with all
the profits thereof, and goods by him or them, or any of them, so taken away,
That then to restore fourfold: and for such as have no estates to give
satisfaction, may receive corporal punishment.

The Law of England being a Law of mercy and preservation, and not as it is now
in the practice thereof become a Law of rigor and destruction to the people;
therefore it is further humbly prayed,

1. That none may be arrested nor imprisoned for debt, but that after three
several citations, the debtor not appearing, judgment to pass, and execution on
his estate. This will make all men cautious of running into debt, and others
wary whom they trust. Whereby Trade will flourish as in Germany, Holland,
Flanders, and other parts of the world. It will preserve Gentlemen's heirs from
being ruined (before they can possess their estates) by Usurers, Brokers, and
Extortioners, as thousands have been.

2. That all Cheaters, and suchlike, may walk with their nostrills still, in
stead of a cropped ear; as in Germany, Russia, etc.

3. That none may be put to death for theft, it being consonant to the law of
God.

3. That all Wastes and Commons may be eequally divided among the poor of each
Perish.

5. That all groundage at sea may be abolished, goods imbezeled to be restored
freely to the owners. In which act of justice and mercy, Turks and Pagans
surpass us far at present.

6. That the Norman power (ad Conquestum) being at a period, therefore all
Villanage, Vassalage, Fines, and Heriots, to be abolished, together with
Court-Leets and Barons.

7. All controversies to be determined by three men in every Hundred and
Town-Corporate (and those to be changed yearly) with freedom of appeal to the
Provincial Court, for any act of injustice by them passed injudgement.

8. That a Register be kept in every County, for the sale of lands, leases,
houses, and farms; and all private sales to be accounted illegal.

9. That the yearly progress of the Prince may now again be founded on its
original basis, as in the days of K. Alfred, viz. to see justice have its free
and clear current thorowout the Land without respect of persons.

These nine particulars not varying much from the Armies Petition of July 14.
1649. will I hope find a favorable acceptance from him, on whom the Lord
has now conferred the power of all at present, and has I hope set him over us
for good, and not for evil; though the Royal party backbite him, and speak evil
of him daily, wishing and plotting his destruction, and the destruction of all
that love him, and adhere unto him. But that sacred mighty power which hitherto
has kept him safe, will still preserve him, causing his mercies to flourish on
him, maugre all those that hate him, If he do the work of the Lord thoroughly and
faithfully.

FINIS.

