A Friendly LETTER OF ADVICE TO THE SOLDIERS, FROM A QUONDAM MEMBER OF THE
ARMY.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

Fellow Soldiers!
WHen I consider with my self upon what grounds I withdrew from your society, I
cannot but bless Almighty God, for that his temporal Redemption; and pity that
sad and lamentable Condition whereinto you have been so subtly Enticed, and
held on for so many years with a strange Stupefaction. I confess, the Banner,
under which we first fought, was most gloriously Gilt with the fair and
specious pretenses of Religion, the preservation of the Laws, the liberty of
the Subject, the privilege of Parliament, and the safety of the KING: And
indeed, who would not willingly offer himself a sacrifice for so good a Cause?
But alas! how soon was this mask of Hypocrisy laid aside? how soon was the
beauty of this Good old Cause made odious by a rebellious Leprosy? was there
any one Motive, by which we were induced to fight made good? was Religion any
real cause of our Divisions? No; there was little appearance of the Truth
thereof to any sober discreet person, when, the Cannons of the Church (under
the color of zeal and sanctity) were abolisht, the Lyturgie abrogated, the
material Fabric (consecrated to the use and service of God) in some places
demolished; in others miserably profaned by the introduction of bruit beasis,
and the prodigious impiety of their Riders; the Metropolitan of the Church most
barbarously Beheaded, the sacred Order of Episcopacy extirpated, and their
Revenues together with that of Deans and Prebends sold; and the rest of the
Clergy tyrannically stripped of their livelihood, contrary to Law; this was not
enough they must be silenced too; and the Exercise and Administration of the
Gospel committed unto such persons as either were not qualified for that holy
Calling with Learning and holy Orders, or else had profaned their Function by
Perjury; or, Defaced their Natural parts by a snivling posture and nonsensical
doctrine. This was (I say) visible to all wise men at first; and (that men of
the meanest capacity might not plead ignorance either for not repenting for
their sins past, or persevering in them,) Behold, Liberty of conscience was
publicly declared by our grand Masters to be no ground of the War; Did not
this make you startle? were you no way sensible of the Cheat was put upon you?
did you perceive no reluctance for those Murders, those grand impieties into
which you were inveigled? I must confess I did; and could not but so much the
more detest and abominate the Mountebanks, by how much the more they had
deluded both my Reason and Conscience: Was it the preservation of the Laws they
endeavored to maintain? Nothing less; what one Action of theirs is consistant
with the Laws of the Land? As for the Law of God, it appears there is nothing
less in their hearts; since, they have absolutely suppressed the true Religion,
and made a fair and spacious Avenue, for Turks, Jews, Heretics, and
Schismatics: Was it the liberty of the Subject they insisted on? ask the City,
ask the Country, make enquiry into the Universities then tell me, whether any
one person will affirm himself to have that liberty, as, to dispose of or keep
his Estate according to his own pleasure? Alas! how can it be when they have
not their liberty to choose their Members? nay, they shall have no members at
all to represent their persons and promote their grievances: But, it is no
wonder they should thus fool the naked multitude, when they have cast the whole
Army into a Lethargy, and divested the supreme Officers and General himself of
their privileges, the disposition of Offices and places in the Army: Was it
the privilege of Parliament they so much contended for? Yes; and for the
justification and improvement of this, they entrenched upon the KING'S
prerogative, and the privilege of the House of LORDS, by the violation of all
the Laws in the Realm; they usurpt the Legislative power, and have exercised it
to the destruction of the three States of this Nation grounded upon Law, and of
every particular member thereof. Is this the Privilege of Parliament? Was it
the safety of the KING they so fiercely contended for? Truly, had they killed
him in fight, the uncertain events of War might have rendered the fate
accidental, as to a vulgar capacity; but for a company of Subjects to raise an
Army against their Prince, under pretense of reprieving him from his evil and
wicked Council, and having forced him into their own power to Arraign him at
the Bar, under the color of justice, to pass Sentence upon him, and
accordingly to Execute him, so maliciously, so scandalously, at His own Gates,
at Noon day, before the Eye of Heaven, and the Face of the whole world; This (I
say) was a thing without President, an Act so manifestly odious and Monstrous,
that our Nation is detestable to all our Neighbors; nay, it is a thing so
horrid and prodigious, that the poison is extended both to Turks and Infidels,
in so dismal and black a Character, that we are imprisoned in this Isle, we
have banished our selves into our Country, as having no liberty and safety
abroad: But, had they been such friends to themselves, as to spare his life,
and make the ignorant part of men believe, their only resolution was, to call
Him home from his wicked Council; it must be conceived their merit must have
challenged the honor to be his Council, what Church? what Government? what
Laws might we have expected? or rather what impiety? what tyranny must we have
not expected then, when the KING should have been made the stalking Horse to
bear the invisible Instrument of the peoples destruction, when they dare Act
such things now upon their own account, their own interest? a poor handful of
men, whose Fortunes were sometimes as despicable as their actions are
detestable: When they dare Act, who dare resist their Votes, when they have so
many, such active, such stout Soldiers to back them? It Is you then, it is you
(Fellow Soldiers) are guilty of all these Crimes, by complying with, and
asserting their designs; It Is you have destroyed the Laws, Murdered the KING,
and by heavy Impositions eaten the Bread out of your Countreymens mouths; and
to what purpose? to satiate (if it were possible) the lust, ambition and
avarice, of a few inconsiderable persons: They, have something to say for their
perseverance; they have got Wealth, and some thing like Honor; but what
benefit accrews to you? you are Night by Night upon the Guard; you are Night
and Day constrained (like so many Ca^chpoles) silently to steal through the
streets, whereby to surprise an innocent person, and bring him to Destruction;
and all this while you are poor and Beggarly without pay, you labor for
naught; and if you had your wages, 'twere no more then would keep you from
starving; yet this small pittance cannot be obtained; for want whereof, you run
upon the score to such persons, who are not able to forbear; Hence it is, you
are generally Despised, Contemned, cursed by poor Widows, Orphans, and all
honest people, for abetting the Commands of a Juncto of Tyrants; whose Design
is naught else, but to enrich themselves by the public ruin; a Company of
impudent persons, who assume the name of a Parliament, contrary to all Law and
Equity: It Is true; they were constituted by you: Can you call a Parliament? you
may enable them to Sit; but you cannot make their Convention lawful, nor
justify their Actions: well then; they Sit, and Act not by Law, but by your
power: truly, you exercise your power very discreetly; you take the pains, and
they reap the Profit; and it were well twould rest there too: are you so blind,
so stupid, so besotted, you can discern nothing? has your Commanders no
providence, no foresight at all? can they not judge of what is Acted? are they
not sensible of what they suffer? By setting up these Impostors, you have
Beheaded (as it were) the Army, and invested them with the power of a General;
not an Officer to be employed without their appointment; A glorious Army indeed
without a Head! But you are where you were; let you have your pay, you are well
enough; alas for you; do you see nothing? Is there not a Militia settling, what
is that for? does the ROYALISTS appear too Formidable for you? you see there is
not a man stirs; they raise jealousies and fears in you, without any real
cause; they invent Plots to cover their own designs; and make you the
instruments of your own destruction: It is apparent enough, you are the only
persons they fear: You pulled them down, and set up a Protector: you Degraded
the Protector, and Erected them; and they are conscious of so much guilt, as to
fear you may depose them again: From hence proceeds that insufferable burden
laid upon the Nation to raise Men and Arms; which once being perfected, you
must expect that power to be employed against you; and then a shameful
disbanding will be your undoubted pay, and reward; How contemptibly will you
then appear; every injured person will then be ready to spit upon you. No
(Fellow Soldiers) assume the hearts of Men; and as you are known to have
Courage, and Stoutness, so let your understanding be menifest also. It Is in
your power to make your selves Famous, and the whole Nation Happy: Consider
with your selves, how many changes and alterations of Government this poor
Kingdom has groaned under; consider the public pressures, the impoverishment
of the Commonwealth, the barbarous banishment of particular persons; consider
the sad and lamentable effusion of blood, which has been, and must of
necessity fall upon us, without a timely reconciliation: Lastly consider, and
lay to heart our brethrens deviation from the Word of God; and deliberate with
your selves how many Sects and Heresies they are run into and take notice, that
this pretended Parliament was the only Contrivers of all these mischiefs and
Misfortunes; and will be your Destruction also, unless timely prevented. Now,
there is no other way left to prevent your own, and the Nations ruin, but to
Dismantle the Garrison at Westminster; Disarm them of their Usurped power, and
Disperse their persons: This done, it is requisite to confider (being this
Nation cannot consist without a Supreme Magistrate) of some single Person, to
sway the SCEPTER; since Monarchy (after all these things) is Experimentally
found most congruous and suitable to the Genius of this People This being
granted necessary; God, and Nature has prepared a Person so agreeable to this
high Trust, that the whole World cannot parrallel him, CHARLES STEWART, KING of
Scotland; and (by Law and Right) KING of England and Ireland; a Person so
Innocent, that the very malice of those Usurpers durst never fix the least
scandal upon him. In a word, He is a Moses for meekness; and therefore, you
cannot distrust his mercy: He is a Solomon for wifedom; and therefore, cannot
be suspected to destroy his own Inheritance; (it being his Interest to preserve
his People, to enrich his Dominions;) and (by Acts of Grace and Mercy) to Court
the Love and Affection of his Subjects: Hezekiah, was not a greater Example of
piety, then this young PRINCE; who, being forced, in his tender years, to make
trial of the Charity of other Princes, could not but expect the frequent
assaults of Learning and Policy, to shake the Foundation of his Religion; yet
such was the strength of his Judgment, such his invincible Courage, in point
of Faith; that no pretended Reasons, no specious Promises, no hopes of a
temporal Setlement, (though never so fair) was of any validity to stagger his
spiritual Resolutions.

Lay your Heads (therefore) together, consult with your selves; and tell me
whether you can Fancy to your selves a Person whose parts are any thing near so
adequate to the Royal Trust, or your own desires and Interest? This is the
Person God has appointed; His person, his Parts, his Birth, do Challenge your
Fidelity, your Loyalty; and will you still kick against Heaven? and wound your
Consciences, by opposing his timely Admittance, into his own Inheritance? will
you Destroy three Nations, to gratify the Covetousness, pride, and ambition,
of a few inconsiderable persons? will you draw down the Curse of so many
Families without any Advantage, Emolument or Profit? Look upon the affairs
beyond Sea; you will find the Hands of all Christendom (united by God's
providence for the settlement of the KING) extended against you; should they
pour in their Forces upon us, and you persist in your Rebellion, what a
miserale Seat of War would you make this poor Nation? the Children unborn, as
well as the present Inhabitants, would have reason (from the bitterness of
their afflicted souls) to curse your memory, and poisonous offspring; but if
God will give you the grace, unfeignedly to repent for what is past; and
express the reality of your hearts, (by suppressing those Schismatics at
Westminster, and settling his Majesty, with the peace and quietness of the
Nations; you would by this Act, Secure your own Persons and Families, establish
your Estates, and render the three Kingdoms Fortunate; all Curses then would be
turned into Prayers; and your name (which now stinks in the nostrils of all
sober and unbyassed Men,) would then prove Glorious and Famous throughout the
World: Which that it may come to pass, You may as well assure your self of the
daily prayers; as the present advice, and request of

Your passionately affected Friend and Countreyman, J. F.


