A Happy Handful, OR Green Hopes in the BLADE; In order to a HARVEST, OF THE
Several SHIRES, humbly Petitioning, or heartily Declaring for Peace.

diadem

Psalm. 34. 14. Seek Peace, and follow after it.
LONDON, Printed for John Williams at the Sign of the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

TO His Highness The Lord General MONCK.
MY LORD,
WHat formerly was in single Arrows, is here bound in a Sheaf, I conceive it
good that by such conjunction, they might mutually reflect light one on
another. Posterity will probably be pleased to look back on such passages. Some
love to see the little coats they then did wear when children. Alas, these all
were the Essays in the Infancy of our Liberty, now grown a stripling, God send
it to be a Man! yet they differ rather in Sound than in Sense, variously
expressing the same matter. So many men, and but one mind, is admirable;
prompted certainly by the Spirit of unity inditing them. Factious Petitions,
gave the beginning, and Loyal Declarations must give the end to our Miseries.
But here is the difference, the first were made by the Scum, these by the Cream
of the Nation. Aeneas did beg the Boon of the Sybil, that she would not write
her Oracles (according to her usual course) in leaves of Trees blown away with
every wind.

These Declarations formerly were printed in Leaves or single Papers, which are
soon lost, not to say, The best of Papers so printed, are often consigned to the
worst of uses. This is a way to preserve, and to propagate them. I remember the
Verse of the Poet,

Singula cum valiant sunt meliora simul,
Take each of them asunder, good as either,
Then needs they must be best, all put together. What (as single Stars) was
good, must be best in a Constellation.

God happily perfect what is so hopefully begun by your Honor, though my voice
is too weak to be the Echo to the sound of the whole Nation:

Your Honors most humble Servant, JOHN WILLIAMS.

AN EXPRESS FROM THE KNIGHTS and GENTLEMEN OF CHESHIRE, Now Engaged with Sir
George Booth: To the City and Citizens of London, and all other Freemen of
England.
Worthy Citizens, and all other our English Freemen and Brethren,
AS we are Englishmen we are all incorporated into one Body, and though
distinct and different Families, Fortunes, and Qualities, yet fellow Members
and Coheirs of one and the same Birthright; not only by nature, as we are the
Sons of men (nature obliging all in one common and equal Bond of Freedom and
Unity,) but by certain sacred Laws and Customs of peculiar and inherent Right
to this Nation; general, equal, and impartial to all, without respect of
persons, rank, quality, or degree, derived through all successions of Ages, by
the Blood, Justice, and Prudence of our Forefathers to us their Posterity, as
ours, and the Right of our Children after us, not dis-inheritable: though this
Age were wholly made up of Apostates and Traitors to Common Justice and
Freedom, and should make sale of, and deliver up their Children as slaves and
Vassals, yet English Right abides, to wit, our just Laws and Liberties, and
may justly be reinforced as opportunity may present; Sometimes they sleep, but
never die, their total Extinguishment is not to be imagined, so long as any
Englishman, or English blood abides: and whoever undertaketh (though by Arms
or otherwise) their recovery and redemption is justified in that very Action by
the Laws of God, of Nations, Nature, Reason, and by the Laws of the Land; and
within the Bowels of our Nation amongst our selves no War can be justified, but
upon that score, the contrary is Sedition, Murde^ Treason, Tyranny and what
not, and the Instruments thereof no other in the Eye of English Freedom and
Right, but as Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts of prey.

Now right worthy and noble Citizens, and all other our English Brethren, let
us consider and lay to heart the sad and deplorable condition of our native
Country: Oppression, Injustice, and Tyranny reigns; division, discord, and
distimulation fomented and fostered; Trade and industry discouraged, our Land
rent into Parties and Factions, and the common Band of Unity Cancelled, our
fundamental Laws supplanted, High Courts of Justice introduced, the blood of
War sh^d in times of Peace; Arbitrary and illegal imprisonments, Patents,
Monopolies, Excise, and other payments brought upon us, and continued contrary
to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; no form or face of Government of
English Constitution amongst us; the Name and Athority of the People in
Parliament usurped and abused, and the stamp thereof put upon strange and
prodigious Actions, vexing and oppressing the People with daily Changes and
Alterations in government, as the Interest of some few ambitious Grandees alter
and change, or get advantages one of another, and all under the Name of a
Commonwealth, when as the Nature is not practiced or intended at all, it being
utterly inconsistent with their very temper and interest; they are wrapped up and
compounded of nothing but guilt-blood, and Tyranny; and equal and common
Justice (the essence of a Commonwealth) are utterly repugnant thereto; and
whatsoever they can do must be planted and maintained by Sword and violence
against the very Heart and Sense of the Nation; and they know not where or how
to center an Oligarchy, or something they would have to be Masters of the
People, and perpetuate their power and Tyranny, and therefore would amaze and
confound us with their New Debares of a Coordinate Power, or Senate for Life,
such as our English, Laws and Liberties know not of, and of pernicious
consequence to this Nation; so that from these men that thus handle the Stern
at Westminster, there is no expectation of any just settlement of Peace, or
Freedom from Oppression; especially considering the Apostasy, Hypocracy,
Deceit, and perjury of those men, their manifold solemn Engagements, Oaths,
Vows, Protestations, Appeals unto Heaven; Promises, Remonstrances,
Declarations, all by them broken again and again, never keeping Faith, Truce,
or Oath, being unbounded, unlimited, certain to nothing, not to be held either
by the Law of God or Man, of Conscience or Reason; And from such Persons in
Government, Good Lord deliver us, and all the good People of England; and that
all this is true of them, your Consciences (Noble Citizens, and all other the
Free-People of England) can witness, there is no tongue, no pen is able to
vindicate them in this point; it is known of all, owned by all, and can be
denied by none; how then can any honest or just man shed any blood in their
Quarrel, or lend them assistance? surely that blood will be required at their
hands, and we doubt not but you will be careful what you do.

And therefore from those Considerations and just provocations, that we have
taken up Arms in pursuance of, and Inquisition after our Government, Laws, and
Liberties, that every Englishman may be protected and secured in his Religion,
Liberty, and Property; and though it may be suggested, that we intend to
introduce Prosecution for Conscience into the Land again, we do hereby (in the
presence of Almighty God) protest and Declare against all Coercive power in
matters of Religion, and that to the utmost of our strength (through Gods
assistance) we will endeavor, to the hazard of our Blood and Fortunes, the
Freedom and Protection of all virtuous and religious People, by what Name
soever differenced from us, equal with our selves: and that no foreign, or
other Authority, save only the Civil be exercised in England: That the Practice
of the Law be reformed; all corrupt Statutes repealed; Annual Elections of all
Officers and Magistrates, with the constant Succession of Parliaments restored;
our fundamental Laws cleared and asserted; and whatever is contrary there to be
abolished: That no Trials be admitted in England for Life, Limb, Liberty or
Estate, but by the good old way of Juries; and that they be restored to their
original power and purity: That all Extrajudicial and Illegal proceedings by
High-Courts of Justice, or otherwise, with all Illegal and Arbitrary
Committees, be strictly provided against: that the Excise, and all other
Payments and Taxes, (such as our Ancestors never knew of) together with all
Monopolies and Patents destructive to Trade and the Common good of the Nation
be also abolished; And, that our Parliaments and Magistrates be secured from
all Force and Violence; and utterly cleared from all boundless Prerogative,
and unlimited Privilege: That the Right of the Poor in the Commons of England,
all Donations for Charitable Uses, and all Lands formerly belonging to the
People, be restored again: And that Mercy and Justice be truly established
amongst us. And for these ends, and what else may be of public good to the
Nation, we do desire, and indeed challenge, as of English Right, the speedy
Election of a New Free Parliament.

And thus, most Noble Citizens, Brethren and fellow Freemen of England, we have
dealt truly and plainly with you, and given you the real Grounds and Reasons of
our taking up Arms; looking upon you as the most concerned in the Nation, and
therefore hold our selves the more obliged to give you this Early Advice of our
Candid and just Intentions in this undertaking, that you may not be deluded or
frighted (though falsely) into any strange opinion of us, either through your
own mistake, or by the policy of those men who will leave no means unattempted
to render us as public Enemies, Rebels and Traitors, Plunderers, Tyrants and
Persecutors, or whatever is odious and monstrous, to engage you in Blood.

Believe us, right worthy Citizens, and Freeborn English Brethren, we have no
Design of Fire or Sword, or of Evil toward you or your City, or any part of the
Nation, or any Person in it: We know there are thousands amongst you that are
satisfied in us; it may be indeed that many or most of the Gathered separate
Churches may be fearful and jealous of us, and so may be induced to Arms
against us; but we do again and again protest before Almighty God, and the
whole World, that we have no other purpose toward them, but that they with us,
and we with them, may be bound up as Friends and Brethren in the Common Cause
of our Country, that every Englishman may have English Freedom and Right; and
we do not desire to wrong Man, Woman, or Child the worth of a Shoo-latchet:
Therefore we hope you will first well advise before you proceed in a new War,
lest you bring not only your own, but others blood on your heads, (for we are
resolved to presecute this to the last drop of our blood.) The Case of England
is laid before you, our Laws and Liberties, they are yours as well as ours, and
for which we have all engaged in the first War, and not to be so slightly
valued as to be set at stake against the private ends of some ambitious and
corrupt persons: Salus Populi, Suprema Lex; let the People live, and their
Enemies perish.

Therefore we beseech you, we conjure you as English men, to stand by your
Native Country, and your Countrey's Cause: Our Voice is, and it is no other
than the Consent and Voice of the People, A new free Parliament, A new free
Parliament; it is the English man's main Birthright, which we are resolved to
put the People in possession of, or to perish with our Swords in our hands. But
if you will not join, but degenerate, we hope notwithstanding (by Gods
blessing) to carry on this Work: Yet to that just and glorious Work we may
challenge your concurrence, it being your duty as well as ours to endeavor the
procurement thereof? And therefore to you make it our Proposal, to your
Militia, to the Army, and the whole People, for the prevention of a New War,
and the effusion of English blood, that you would be instrumental with us for
the speedy Election of a New Free Parliament, for the ends aforesaid; and in
the interim all hostility to be forborne; and that a day may be appointed, and
the People suffered to go to their free Elections, and we shall quietly submit
to their Authority; heartily desiring, that all revenge, division, rancor, and
animosity of spirit may be for ever buried in one General Act of Oblivion; And
that all Parties, Sects, and sorts, (now jarring and making up interests one
against another) may reconcile, cement, and concenter in the common Brotherhood
of English Freedom and Right; in, and for which we are.

Sir George Booth to a Friend of his in London.
SIR,
MY last to you of the second instant, I understand you have committed to open
view, the Publication whereof was of general Satisfaction to your Friends here,
and for which we all hold our selves obliged. I have sent you here enclosed an
Express from the Knights and Gentlemen engaged with me, and beg this further
addition to your former many Favors, that you would please to take the care
upon you, to get the same Printed and published, for the undeceiving of those
amongst you, and all other that are yet doubtful or unsatisfied in us. The
Messenger will inform you of the present State and condition of Affairs with
us, to whom I refer you. In haste I rest,

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend and Servant, George Booth.
Manchester Aug. 9. 1659.
Alleyn Mayor.
At a Common Council holden in the Guildhall, LONDON, On Tuesday the 20. of
December, 1659.
THis Court having taken notice of diverse Affronts put upon the Right Honorable
Thomas Alleyn, the present Lord Mayor of this City, with many false and
scandalous Aspersions cast upon his Lordship, and the Committee appointed by
this Court to confer with the Lord Fleetwood touching the Peace and Safety of
this City: as if they had deserted their Trust, or betrayed the Rights and
Liberties of this City. And in particular, that the said Committee seemed
satisfied with the Limitations of Parliament, called The Seven Principles, or
unalterable Fundamentals, printed in a late scandalous Pamphlet styled, The
Public Intelligencer. The said Committee here openly declaring; that they
never heard the said Principles, or had them any way communicated to them, much
less ever consented to the same, or any of them.

This Court being deeply sensible of these great Indignities, does declare,
That the said Lord Mayor is so far from deserving any of the said Affronts or
Aspersions, that he has highly merited the great Honor and Esteem of this
Court and the whole City, having in all things demeaned himself with much
Prudence and faithful Integrity to this City and Court, which does therefore
return his Lordship their most hearty thanks.

And that the said Committee in all their Transactions, touching the Peace and
safety of this City, have also discreetly and faithfully discharged their
Trust, to their own trouble, and great satisfaction of this Court.

And whereas this Court and City has been lately represented by some, as
having deserted their first Cause and Declarations in the use of all lawful
means for the maintenance of the true reformed Protestant Religion according to
the Scriptures; The support and maintenance of a settled lawful Magistracy, a
learned pious Ministry, and public Universities, with the ancient fundamental
Laws of the Nation, Just Rights, Properties and Liberties of all Persons: And
for these ends will endeavor, all they lawfully may, the speedy convening of a
Free Parliament to sit and Act without Interruption or Molestation, by any
persons whatsoever.

Sadler.

To the Right Honorable, our worthy and grave Senators, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Comonalty of the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
The humble Petition and Address of diverse Young Men, on the behalf of
themselves and the APPRENTICES in and about this honorable City.
Most humbly shows,
IT has pleased the good and only wise God, for our and the Nations crying
sins, to manifest his displeasure for many years together against these our
flourishing, now sadly divided, distracted and almost ruined Nations: and yet
blessed be God, this honorable City hitherto has been no proportionable sharer
in the Calamities which our Brethren in other parts of these now miserable
Nations have suffered, which are now aggravated by our Divisions, and such a
general decay of trading, as does exceed the worst of former times; all which
we look upon as a most sad presage of some art, and dismal judgment very near
at hand, if not our sudden ruin; together with the destruction and utter
dissolation both of Church and State, which will inevitably ensue as a just
reward upon our multiplied provocations, under the most signal manifestations
of Gods most gracious presence, and the most engaging Mercies that ever People
did enjoy (unless it please our most gracious God whose Name has been
exceedingly dishonored, by the violation of many sacred and solemn Oaths)
amongst us to work our deliverance out of this contexture of dangerous
mischiefs, into which we have already wound our selves: or which as the
innundations of mighty Waters may suddenly break in upon us: and being sadly
sensible of the Calamities under which the three Nations groan, for want of a
well-ordered and established Government. We being members in the same
pollitical Body, cannot but sympathize with the rest of our Brethren: and
forasmuch as our endeavors may contribute very much thereto, and the well or
ill management of your talents in the discharge of your Trusts may now make
these Nations happy, or else make them irrecoverably miserable. We hold our
selves obliged in conscience to God and our Country, both by the Laws of God
and the Land, in the behalf of our selves, and all good and peaceable People in
the Land, and the many thousands that know not their right hand from their
left; and in the behalf of the Children unborn, who in time to come may have
cause to bless or curse the day of their birth for your sakes, do make this
humble Address to you, as the only means under God now left us to redress
these growing mischiefs which make us and the three Nations in these times of
our great trouble cry unto you (as those of Macedonia did in the Apostles
Vision) Come and help us. And we beseech you, our most grave and worthy
Senators, as you tender the welfare of these bleeding Nations, to stand in the
wide gap of our breaches, with your Prayers, improving your Councils, and every
Talent (which God has reposed in you) for the honor of God, and the peace of
his Church, by a real reformation, and we question not but our most gracious
God will then break through the thick Clouds of these black and dark
providence, and return unto us our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors
as at the beginning, with the abundance of the blessings of peace, that
Judgment may run down our streets, and Righteousness as a mighty stream. And
we humbly desire the two great Pillars of the Land, Magistracy and Ministry may
be asserted and encouraged: in order unto which, we humbly present unto your
grave and serious consideracions.

First, the Privileges of the Gospel which we do enjoy at this day, in the
faithful preaching and dispensing of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, together
with the labors of so many of his faithful Servants in the Ministry, and the
liberty of these sacred Ordinances, being the best and choicest of our National
blessings; in respect of which, we may well say (with holy David) God has not
dealt so with any Nation: which with thankfulness we desire to ackowledge as a
great mercy to this Land: And should the Lord remove this Candlestick out of
its place, as we have just cause to fear he will, unless we do repent) Then
may we indeed complain with Phineas his Wife, the glory is departed from our
Israel, and a dark and dismal night of black and gloomy Ignorance, Error and
Profaneness will envelope our Valley of Vision. And to the end that this
choice Blessing (which we account more precious than our lives) may be conveyed
to Posterity, we most humbly desire the Ministry may be Countenanced and
encouraged, the Universities upheld and maintained, which have nursed many
famous Preachers for Piety and Learning in this and former Ages, and your
Authority used for the terror of evil doers, but the praise of them that do
well.

Secondly we esteem and assert, as our undoubted birthright, the Freedom and
Privileges of our Parliaments, as being the great Charter of the people of
England, which we account equally dear with our lives; in the enjoyment of
which we yet hope, under God, to see a happy and lasting settlement both in
Church and Scate. Therefore we most humbly desire, that a new Election may be
made, or else that those worthy Gentlemen chosen to serve as Members in the
late free Parliament, may be restored to their privileges, and sit without
disturbance or force from the Army, that they may consider in this evil time,
what England, Scotland, and Ireland ought to do, which (with submission to your
grave judgments) we humbly conceive to be the most probable means under God to
establish the true Protestant Religion, reform the Laws, secure our Liberties
and preserve our lives and outward concernments, to promote Learning end
encourage Virtue, whereby peace with our neighbor Nations may be renewed and
established, the Army satisfied, their Arrears paid, and Trading restored. In
all which, most grave and worthy Senators, your own concernments (as well as
ours) are so deeply engaged, that we persuade our selves you will be
instumental to further our desires, by all peaceable and lawful means, and we
hope it will put an end to our Divisions, which (if God in mercy prevent not)
may soon break out into another civil War, and render us as a prey to a
foreign enemy, For a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

Now we leave it unto you our most grave and worthy Senators, duly to consider,
if you part with these our great National Blessings, whether you will not
discover a palpable breach of trust, and leave your names for a reproach to the
generations following, who will in the Ages to come rise up and call you
blessed, if you be careful to preserve them now, and convey them to Posterity:
And now we beseech the Lord to strengthen both your hearts and hands, and give
you wisdom from on high to direct you in all your Consultations, as may be most
for the honor of God, the peace of his Church throughout the world, and the
settlement, safety and happiness of these poor Nations: And by his assistance
we resolve to stand by you and with you, to the utmost hazard of our lives and
all that is dear unto us, to promote the same.

Monday 5. December.
This day the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council being assembled, the
fore-recited Pitition was presented by several Young Men and Apprentices, in
behalf of themselves and several thousands which have subscribed the same; the
which being received, was ordered to be read, and thereupon a Committee chosen
to consider thereof, and to give their speedy Report unto the next Court
concerning the same.

At the same Court it was likewise Ordered, that the Lord General Fleetwood
should be desired to draw off the Soldiers, unto their several Quarters; it
being then also Ordered, that every Common Council man in his several Precinct,
should give notice to the Housekeepers within the same, that they should keep
their Servants and Apprentices at home, thereby to preserve the peace of the
City.

To his Excellency the Lord General MONCK.
The Unanimous Representation of the APPRENTICES and Young Men inhabiting in
the City of LONDON.
Humbly shows,
THat the Glory of our Nation, and the greatest Comfort of our Lives in our
Civil Interests, consists in the Privileges and Liberties to which we were
born, and which are the undoubted Inheritance of all the free people of
England, among which the grand and essential Privileges which discriminates
Freemen from Slaves, is the Interest which every man has in the Legislative
power of the Nation, by their Representatives assembled in Parliament: without
which, however we may flatter our selves, or be flattered by others, we are
truly no better than Vassals governed by the will and pleasure of those who
have no relation to us, or our common Interest.

Now how much this dear Privilege of the People has been assaulted by the
open violence of some, and secret artifice of others, and to what a deplorable
condition we are brought at this present period, when heavy Taxes are imposing
upon men's Estates, and new Laws upon our Persons, without any consent of the
People had in a free Parliament, and how generally, through the said
distractions in Government, Trading is decayed, and how much we are likely to
suffer thereby in our times and places, we cannot but remonstrate to your
Excellency, constrained through the sense of our present sufferings, and
apprehensions of greater, to implore your assistance, most humbly beseeching
your Excellency, by that ancient love you have born to your Native Country,
zeal to our Liberties, by that great Renown you have lately gained in opposing
the cruel raging of the Sword, by the common Cries of the People, and by the
hopes and cheerful expectation of all England now fixed upon you; and lastly,
by your own Personal Concern in the same common Cause as a freeborn English
man, that you would be pleased to use those great advantages Divine Providence
has now put into your hands, to the securing your Native Country from those
dangerous usurpations, and preserving us in those Liberties to which we were
born. That no Tax may be imposed, nor new Law made, nor old abolisht, but with
the consents of the People had by their Representatives in Parliament, freely
to be chosen without terror or limitations, and freely to sit without any Oath
or Engagement previous to their entrance, without which special Liberties the
Parliament cannot in any construction be esteemed the free Assembly of the
People; and by your Excellency's asserting of those our undoubted Rights in
your present advantages, you will certainly, by the blessing of God, and
unanimous concurrence of the People, accomplish our ends, and will thereby gain
the hearts and hands of the whole Nation, and the City in particular, and
purchase to your self a Name that shall make every true English man call you
blessed, and Posterity shall hereafter delight to recount the famous Acts of
their worthy Patriot.

This was delivered to his Excellency at S. Albans, on Thursday Febr. 2. 1659.
by persons elected for that purpose, and had a very cheerful Reception.



THE DECLARATION Of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, and Commonalty of the
County of KENT.
Together with the City and County of Canterbury, the City of Rochester, and
the Ports within the said County.
HAving with sadness weighed the multiplied calamities wherein we are at
present involved, how friendlesse we are abroad, and how divided at home; the
loud and heart-piercing cries of the poor, and the disability of the better
sort to relieve them; the total decay and subversion of Trade, together with
the forfeiture and loss of the Honor and Reputation of the Nation (what is
more dear to us than all these) the apparent hazard of the Gospel, through the
prodigious growth of Blasphemies, Heresies and Schism, all which own their
birth to the instability of our Governors, and the unsettlement of our
Government. Lastly, how in all these an universal ruin threatens us, and will
(if not timely prevented) doubtless overwhelm us. We thought it our bounden
duties, both as Christians, out of tenderness to our Religion; as English men,
to our Country; and as Friends, to our selves and our Relations, to represent
and publish to the world our just griefs for, and our lively resentments of
this our deplorable condition, and to seek all lawful and probable means to
remedy and redress the same.

Wherefore having the leading Examples of the renowned Cities of London and
Exeter, together with the Counties of the West, before our eyes; and the
clamors and outcries of the People always in our ears, (whereof the one
encourages, and the other enforces us to this our Declaration) we thought
that we would not be silent at such a time, when our silence would speak us to
be Assentors to our own ruin, or Abettors of such proceedings as have neither
Law nor Equity to support them.

We therefore the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, and Commonalty of the County of
KENT, together with the City and County of Canterbury, the City of Rochester,
and the Ports within the said County, do by these Presents unanimously declare,
That our desires are for a Full and Free Parliament, as the only probable
means, under God, to lead us out of this Maze and Labyrinth of confusions in
which we are at present engaged; that is, that the old secluded Members, so
many of them as are surviving, may be readmitted into the House, and that
there may be a free Election of others to supply the places of those who are
dead, without any Oath or Engagement previous to their entrance; these we shall
own as the true Representatives of the People; these we shall with our Lives
and Fortunes, to the uttermost of our power, assist, and with all cheerfulness
submit to, and acquiesce in whatsoever they shall Enact or Ordain.

Thus concluding, that all public spirited men, and good Patriots, will with
all readiness join and concur with us in a matter of so universal concernment,
and that we shall find opposition from none, but such as prefer their own
private Interests, and temporal respects, to their Religion, and Laws of the
Land; we shall as bodily subscribe our Names, as we do heartily declare our
Desires.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe forward zeal of some wel-disposed persons, to express their cordial and
unanimous concurrence with their Contrymen of the several Counties and
Cities of England, having caused a Declaration, imperfect in a very weighty and
material Clause thereof, to be printed and published, in the Name of the County
of Kent, etc. It was thought fit that the genuine and true Copy of the said
Declaration should be set forth, as it was intended to be presented to the
Speaker, and to the present great Arbitrator of the Nations peace and
happiness, General MONCK; but through the mis-informations of some unquiet
spirits, (who while they may have leave to accuse, will leave no man innocent,
nor the State without trouble) the persons of many Gentlemen are secured, and
others threatened, by a great force marched into the Country, the Presentation
was necessarily omitted, and the Names and subscriptions not exposed to public
view, for reasons very obvious and evident.

A NARRATIVE Of the meeting of some Gentlemen, Ministers and Citizens at the
Town Hall in Canterbury.
Together with their Declaration presented to the Mayor at the common
Burghmoote.
UNderstanding that the late procedure of some of the principal Gentlemen and
Citizens, Inhabitants of the City of Canterbury has been represented above as
a Malignant Design, tending to Tumult and Sedition; We thought fit to publish
to the World a brief Narrative of the same, together with the Declaration it
self, that both the one and the other being cleared from the malicious
aspersions and calumnies of our Adversaries; the whole Nation may judge between
them and us, and so give sentence according to the merit of the cause.

Whereas some peaceable and well-minded Gentlemen with some godly and sober
Ministers, perceiving the people generally bent for a free Parliament (as in
the following Declaration is expressed) and hearing that the Cities of London
and Exeter had lately declared for the same, thought it neither unmeet to
follow so leading Presidents, not unseasonable to join their Votes with the
general desires of the whole Nation; to which end it was resolved to present
this following draught to the Common Burghmoote, and to desire their
concurrence therein. Thus in an orderly manner, without tumult or noise,
without Arms in their hands or thoughts, or without Anger or Threats in their
looks; diverse Gentlemen, Ministers and Citizens went to the Town Hall on Jan.
24. the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council then sitting, and presented the
Declaration at the door, desiring that after a serious perusal thereof, they
would be pleased to join with them, in a business which they judged agreeable,
not only to the sense of that Court, but also of the whole County and Nation:
But when it was mentioned to be put to the Vote, whether the paper should be
read or not; some of the Bench protested against it, although they knew nothing
of its contents; and in conclusion (having a long time rather wrangled than
debated) the Dissenters (being but seven of twenty four) quitted the Court, not
leaving enough to make a Burghmoote Quorum; whereupon, the Gentlemen (who
though rudely treated, had quietly attended) withdrew Re infecta, and returned
home with as little tumult as at first they came: Thus was there nothing done
to surprise or disturb the Court, nothing to raise a tumult, nothing to cause a
second Kentish Insurrection, as our Adversaries give it out: No, the design was
not Arms, but Peace; not tumult, but settlement; not to surprise and disturb
the Court, but to desire an amiable correspondence with the same, to the end
that the intended Declaration might be made the more authentic by the formal
intervention and assent in open Court, of the Magistracy of so considerable a
Corporation; and that the Declarers themselves might not be thought to tread in
any oblique Paths, or to proceed in a Clandestine manner: But being
disappointed (as you see), herein, it was thought fit to strengthen and confirm
our Declaration, and to make good the Title it bears, by private subscriptions,
as well through the whole County as this City; wherein we had, in three days
time, proceeded so far, that many thousands were then collected; whereupon,
some Gentlemen (from the sly insinuations and false representations of our
Aversaries) were secured in several prisons, to the discouragement of
well-begun, and well-meant undertaking; neither can the Gentlemen understand
wherein they have offended, or how they should merit imprisonment, since there
was no order, nor prohibition to the contrary: Although they conceive, that had
they proceeded therein, they had not trangressed any known Laws of the Land; it
being the Subjects Birthright modestly to represent their grievances by way of
Petition, Remonstrance or Declaration. Wherefore lest (through our silence, and
the present suppression of our Declaration) the aspersions of our Adversaries
might be thought deservedly cast upon us; we thought fit to publish the same,
together with this Narrative, deeming that as we have done nothing herein
worthy the present severity, so the impartial Reader will in his private
judgment, absolve us from all guilt or demerit. Neither shall we answer our
Adversaries by way of recrimination, nor (although we can by undoubted
testimonies sufficiently prove it) say, that the same men who now appear so
zealous assertors of the Parliaments interests and proceedings, did as eagerly
join with the Army, crying them up as much, with whom they would live and dye,
as they decryed this present Power in their late interruption, as not
consisting with the interest of the Nation. No, though this might serve to
invalidate their Testimony, we shall enlarge no further, but refer to the
Declaration it self.

To the Right Honorable WILL LENTHAL Speaker to the PARLIAMENT.
By him to be Communicated to the MEMBERS sitting at Westminster.
WHereas We the Gentlemen and Freeholders of this County of Berks, were
generally met together at Abingdon, upon some intimation of an Election of a
Knight of the Shire, in pursuance of your Order, for the filling up of this
Parliament; and that some solicitations were used throughout the County for
Voices, and being jealous to be surprised therein by any Clandestine carriage
of the Writ: And whereas at this Meeting it was further taken into
consideration, that this County have with the rest of this Nation been deeply
sensible of many insupportable grievances and oppressions of late days,
occasioned through the want of a real, settled, and regular Government; and in
particular, that the Commissioners for the Militia having formerly charged the
Country to provide Arms, which was done accordingly, the said Commissiooners do
yet direct their Warrants for the bringing in of Twenty shillings for every
Foot Arms; which we are very confident is besides the intent of the Act which
impowers them, and are ignorant otherwise by what Authority they proceed
therein; That therefore having seriously consulted the Remedies which might be
proper for these and the like Inconveniences for the future, and by Gods
blessing reduce us unto a firm, free, and legal settlement of our Rights, Civil
and Religious: We conceived it to be our duty toward God and our Country,
without any private ends whatsoever, to declare our selves in this sense, That
we take it the most satisfactory expedient for it, will be the recalling of all
those members that were secluded in 1648. And that before the first force upon
the Parliament. And, that in the Elections which shall be of any other Members
in the vacant places, such due course may be taken, as that the Country may not
any way be surprised, or overawed therein: And that the secluded Members may
be admitted to Sit without any Oath or Engagement to restrain their Freedom in
the least; Wherein we shall be ready to defend You and Them with whatsoever is
dearest unto us, against all opposition: And pray unto Almighty God for his
assistance to the happy accomplishment of what may best conduce to the Peace
and Safety of this Nation.

[This is subscribed by most of the chief Gentlemen and Freeholders of the
County of Berks.]

A Concurrent Declaration of the Inhabitants of the City and Liberties of
WESTMINSTER: With the Declaration of the People of England for a Free
Parliament.
WHereas by a wonderful Revolution of the Divine Providence, those Members of
the long Parliament which were strangely brought in by the Army ( May the 7.
1659.) and as strangely outed by them ( October. the 13. 1659.) are now strangely
returned to sit in the House as before, we judge it our concernment to call to
mind the Act by them made and published, immediately before their forcible
Interruption, entitled, An Act against raising of money upon the people out
their consent in Parliament: Which Act of theirs proceeds in these words, And
be it further enacted, that no Person or Persons shall after the 11. of
October, 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect, Gather or Receive any Custom, Imposts,
Excise, Assesment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of Money, or
other Impositions whatsoever, upon the people of this Commonwealth, without
their consent in Parliament, or as by Law might have been done before the 3. of
November, 1640. And be it further enacted and declared, that every person
offending against this Act shall be, and is hereby adjudged to be guilty of
High Treason, and shall forfeit and suffer as in case of High Treason. Hereupon
we judged it meet and equitable to make this following Declaration.

We do therefore declare that we do freely, cordially, and unanimously assent
to the equity of this Act, as consonant to the fundamental Laws of our Nation,
the benefit whereof we doubt not but we may justly claim, as our
birth-priviledge in all such cases and concernments.

And accordingly we do declare that we are ready and willing, as soon as an
opportunity is given us, to make choice of such Persons as may Declare our
consent in Parliament, for the raising of such sums of Money, as by them shall
be thought necessary to defray the public charges, and manage the public
concerns of the Nation, seeing most of those persons that were formerly chosen
by us for this purpose, are either taken away by death, or by seclusion
debarred from sitting in the House.

And we do hereby declare further, that we neither do, nor shall ever give our
consent, that any Assesment should be made, or imposition laid upon us by any
person or persons whatsoever, until our consent be so declared by persons thus
chosen and entrusted by us for this end and purpose.

And therefore if any person or persons whatsoever shall contrary to the
forementioned Act, and the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, lay any Assesment
or Imposition upon us before our consent is thus declared, under what pretense
or color soever of authority or necessity it shall be done, we do hereby
declare to the World, that we are under manifest constraint and force, and our
Goods and Estates are violently extorted from us, contrary to Law and Justice,
which injuries we shall no longer bear than an opportunity shall be offered us
to right our selves, and repossess those privileges that pertain to us by the
Laws of our Nation.

And hereunto so universal and unanimous is our Concurrence, that it would be
endless for us to subscribe our Names (which neither this, nor any such papers
could contain) but yet if any doubt or mistrust of the truth of the matter
hereby declared should be conceived or pretended by any, and the Members of
Parliament now (whom we conceive it does in a special manner concern) shall
desire a visible Testimony hereunto, for their further satisfaction and more
full assurance of the truth and realty hereof, we shall be ready upon the least
intimation thereof by them given us, in the several Cities and Counties of the
Land, to own and subscribe to what is hereby declared, and act accordingly.

For some proof of the premises, We the Inhabitants of the City and Liberty of
Westminster, capable of the choice of two Burgesses to serve in Parliament,
have to this present Delaration subscribed our hands, and so much the rather
that we might hereby take occasion to signify to the whole Nation our cordial
concurrence with the Common Council of London, in what was done by that
Honorable Court, in the behalf of the City of London in their Declaration of
20. December. for a Free Parliament.

The humble desires of the Kinghts, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders and
Inhabitants of the County and Borough of LEICESTER.
Delivered to His Excellency, the Lord General MONK, At St. Albans the
Thirtieth of January, 1659. by George Fawnt Esquire, High Sheriff of the said
County, Willam Boothby, Richard Orton, and Richard Halford Esquires, entrusted
for that purpose by the whole County.
WE the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the
County of Leicester, humbly conceiving, that the first Force put upon the
Parliament, has been an encouragement and occasion to all the rest: And
finding that your Excellency (under God) has been the principal means, for
repairing the last interruption, are the more encouraged to desire your
assistance, in the promoting of these our just desires as a visible means of an
happy Peace and Settlement of these Nations. And whereas every freeborn person
of England is supposed to be present in Parliament, by the Knights and
Burgesses of the place where he lives, and thereby is presumed to give his
consent in all things that pass in Parliament; There is not (as we are credibly
informed) one Knight for all the Counties in Wales, nor for diverse Counties in
England, and some of them the greatest in England, as that of Yorkshire. We
therefore desire, that all vacant places be supplied, whether they became
vacant by death, or judgment of Parliament: And that those that were secluded
by force in the year 1648. may sit again. And that no previous Oath or
Engagement be put upon any, that is chosen by his Country to sit and vote
freely in Parliament.

That the fundamental Laws of England, the Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberties of the People, and the Property of Goods, may be asserted and
defended, according to the first Declaration of Parliament, when they undertook
the War; and no Taxes or Free Quarter imposed upon any, without Authority of
Parliament.

That the true Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, all Heresies,
Sects and Schisms discountenanced and suppressed; a lawful succession of Godly
and able Ministers continued and encouraged; and the two Universities, and all
Colleges in both of them, preserved and countenanced.

That a fitting and speedy course be taken, for the paying and discharging the
Arrears of such Officers and Soldiers as submit to Authority of Parliament, and
that they may be speedily reduced to a lesser number, for the easing of the
great Taxes and Burdens of these Nations.

The humble Address, and hearty desires of the Gentlemen, Ministers, and
Freeholders of the County of Northampton.
Presented to his Excellency the Lord General Monck, at his arrival at
Northampton, January 24. 1659.
WE the Gentlemen, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County of Northampton,
humbly conceiving, that the first force put upon the Parliament has been an
encouragement to open the way to all the rest; and finding that your Excellency
under God has been the principal means for the repairing of the last
Interruption, are the more encouraged, and (having the convenience of your
presence now amongst us) to desire your assistance in the procuring these our
just desires, as the visible means of a happy Peace and Settlement of these
Nations.

1. That whereas every freeborn Subject of England is supposed to be present
in Parliament by the Knights and Burgesses of the place where he lives, and
thereby is presumed to consent to all things that pass in Parliament: So it is
now, that there is not one Knight for all the Counties in Wales, nor for diverse
Counties in England, and some of them the largest in England, as that of
Yorkshire.

2. That no freeborn Subject of England may have any Taxes levied upon him,
without his consent in Parliament.

3. To that end, That all vacant places may be supplied, whether they became
vacant by Death or Seclusion; and that those that were secluded by force in the
year 1648 may sit again; and that no previous Oath or Engagement may be put
upon any that is chosen by his Country to sit and vote freely in Parliament.

4. That the fundamental Laws of England, the Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberty of the Subject, and the Property of Goods, may be asserted and
defended, according to the first Declarations of the Parliament, when they
undertook the War.

5. That the true Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, all
Heresies, Sects and Schisms discountenanced and suppressed, a lawful
succession of Godly and able Ministers continued and encouraged, and the two
Universities, and all Colleges in both of them, may be preserved and
countenanced.

6. That all the Soldiery that will acquiesce in the Judgment of a free and
full Parliament, in the promoting and settling a happy Peace upon those
foundations, may have their Arrears paid, and as many of them as the Parliament
shall think necessary, may be continued in the public service; and that as
many of them as have been Purchasers of Lands from the Parliament, may either
enjoy their Bargains, or their Money paid back with Interest, and some
considerable advantage over and above, for their satisfactions, as the
Parliament shall judge expedient for the public good of the Nation.

This Address was prepared by the Gentlemen, etc. abovesaid, to be presented to
General Monck, at his entrance into Northampton.

To his Excellency the Lord General MONCK.
The Congratulation and Address of us the Knights, Divines, Freeholders, and
others of the County of BUCKS.
Humbly shows,
THat with all possible Gratitude we admire the wise and gracious dispensation
of things by Almighty God, who has moved your self, and other the worthy
Officers with you to such just and honorable Resolutions, as to put your selves
into the breach then, when Tyranny, Irreligion, and all Confusion, like a
mighty Flood were ready to break in upon us. An occasion in which, whether the
nobleness of the Attempts, or the Happiness of the Success were more
considerable, after times will take pleasure to discourse: and we at present
congratulate these your Sentiments of Honor and Conscience. Sir, Our credit
abroad is impaired, our Trade at home is decayed, our Fundamental Laws are
violated, our primitive Apostolic Religion endangered: The cause of all which
we humbly conceive is the force and violence put upon the Parliament in the
year 1648. and since to obviate all which evils we request the total removal of
that force, and that all surviving Members so secluded, be restored to the
discharge of their Trust Vacancies be supplied by free Elections according to
Law, that no previous Oaths or Engagements be put upon any of them that shall
be chosen to sit and Vote in Parliament. Sir, this is our desire, and as we
observe it is the voice of the whole People, and that is the voice of God; we
doubt not but that you have been reserved for such a time as this: in pursuance
of which we are ready to hazard our Lives and Estates.

A DECLARATION Of the CITY and COUNTY of Gloucester.
BEing deeply affected, and most sadly sensible of the present Miseries, which
both our selves and the whole Nation lie under: We cannot be altogether silent
in the expressions of our Griefs, and Declaration of our Desires and Thoughts
of the most probable means (by Gods assistance) to give some remedy to our
present Sufferings, and prevention of our yet greater Calamities, which
threaten our speedy ruin: The cause of all proceeding (as we conceive) is from
that unhappy Disorder in that great Wheel of Government. And that after all our
great Sufferings and Trials, the vast expense of Treasure and Blood for our
Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of Parliament, (which we take to be the Good
old Cause) such persons in whom we have already lodged our Trusts, and who have
sufficiently manifested their endeavors to perform the same, namely, Nathaniel
Stephens, Esquire Sir John Seymore, Knight. Edward Steephens, Esquire John Steephens, Esquire
and the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, have been since December 1648. and
still are denied the freedom of sitting, and voting in Parliament.

The Restoration of which Members we desire with all freedom to their former
Capacities.

And Declare we shall not otherwise consent to pay Tax, or other Impositions,
or hold our selves bound by any Law to be made, without a Restitution of these
our Representatives, with a supply of all Vacancies, by a free Election,
according to the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this Nation, it being
the undoubted birthright of all the Freeborn people of England, that no Tax
or other Imposition be exacted from them, or any new Law imposed upon them, but
by their consents had by their Representatives, in a full and free Parliament.

And we further declare our hearty desires, for the burying all former
Animosities and Differences, by a full and general Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity, with satisfaction to be given to Purchasers, under any Act of Sale;
as by Parliament shall be thought fit.

And that no Officer or Soldier, that has ventured his life for the freedom of
his Country, and shall continue faithful to those Principles, may hereby
receive any Discouragement.

We also declare, That we shall freely and willingly consent, that all such
shall receive their Arrears, and be continued so long as the Parliament shall
think fit, in order to the safety and preservation of the Nation, and that such
liberty be allowed to tender Consciences, as is not opposite to the Scriptures,
or the established Laws of this Nation.

We also Declare, That in pursuance of these our just Desires, we shall not be
wanting to the uttermost of our powers, to engage our selves by all lawful ways
and means, with our Fellow Brethren, in the just Vindication of our Liberties,
and shall neither count our Lives or Fortunes too dear to hazard for the
Redemption thereof, and herein we shall not doubt the ready Concurrence of all
those in the three Nations, whose Peace, Prosperity and Safety is equally
concerned with ours.

This Declaration being subscribed by great numbers of considerable persons of
that County, was to have been presented to the Speaker by some of them; but
considering how Sir Robert Pie, and Major Finchers handsome behavior was
unhandsomly rewarded with imprisonment, for a particular of the same nature, it
was thought more proper to preserve the liberty of Personages of so much worth
til a better opportunity, and therefore it is thought fit thus to communicate
this, for the vindication of this County and satisfaction of the whole Nation.



THE REMONSTRANCE Of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of
GLOUCESTER.
WE do claim and avow it to be our undoubted Birthright and Liberty, That no
new Laws, much less any new Government, can or ought to be imposed upon us;
nor any Taxes, Contributions, or Free Quarter taken of us without ^he consent
of the People of this Nation in a Free-Parliament Assembled; which Liberties
have been often confirmed to us by the great Charter, the Petition of Right,
and many other Statutes: And Parliaments being the only Bulwarks and Defense of
our Liberties, as men and Christians ought to be, freely elected, and to sit
and Vote without interruption or opposition by any persons whatsoever: The
Privileges whereof we are all bound to maintain and defend, and to assist and
maintain each other in the defense thereof. And therefore we resolve, according
to our bounden duty, to join with the Lord Mayor and Common Counsel of the City
of London, and all other Counties in England in pursuance thereof. And we do
not doubt but all true hearted English men who love their own Liberties, and
are not willing to be made slaves, or to enslave their Brethren, will join with
us herein.

A Letter agreed unto and subscribed by the Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders
and Seamen of the County of SUFFOLK.
Presented to the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel
of the City of London, Assembled January 30. 1659.
Right Honorable,
PLease you to accept this Paper as a testimony, that we are highly and
gratefully sensible of those breathings and Essays toward peace, which your
renowned City has lately declared to the World: As we earnestly wish, that our
serious and unanimous concurrence may ripen them to a perfect Accomplishment.
We are willing to consider it as an Omen of Mercy, when we observe the Nation
in general, lifting up its Vows to Heaven for a free and full Parliament; it is
that alone in its genuine sense which our Laws prescribe and present to us, as
the great Patron and Guardian of our Persons, Liberties, and Properties, and
whatsoever else is justly precious to us. And if God shall by your hand, lead
us to such an obtainment, after-Ages shall bless your memory. It Is superfluous
to spread before you, your Merchandise decayed, your Trade declined, your
Estates withered. Are there not many within your Walls, or near them, that in
your ears deplore such miseries as ehese? Your Lordship may believe, that our
prayers and persons shall gladly promote all lawful means for our Recovery.
And we entreat, that this cheerful suffrage of ours may be annexed as a Label
to your Honorable intendments.

This Letter was delivered according to its Superscription, by Robert Broke,
Philip Parker, and Thomas Bacon, Esquires.

THE Declaration of the Gentry of the County of NORFOLK, And of the County and
City of NORWICH.
WE the Gentry of the County of Norfolk, and County and City of Norwich, being
deeply affected with the sense of our sad Distractions and Divisions, both in
Church and State, and wearied with the miseries of an unnatural Civil War, the
too Frequent Interruptions of Government, the Imposition of several heavy
Taxes, and the loud Outcries of multitudes of undone, and almost Famished
people, occasioned by the general decay of Trade, which has spread it self
throughout the whole Nation, and these Counties in particular; and having met
together, and consulted what may best remedy, and remove our, and the Nations
present Grievances and Distractions, Do humbly conceive, that the chief
Expedient will be, the recalling of those Members that were secluded in 1648,
and sat before the Force put upon the Parliament, (We of the County of
Norfolk) being by such Seclusion, deprived of any Person to represent us in
Parliament) and also by filling up the Vacant places thereof, and all to be
admitted without any Oath or Engagement, previous to their Entrance; which
being done, We shall be ready to acquiesce, and submit in all things, to the
Judgment and Authority of Parliament, without which Authority, the People of
England cannot be obliged to pay any Taxes.

This Declaration, subscribed by three hundred Gentlemen, was delivered to the
Honorable Will. Lenthall, Speaker of the Parliament, on Saturday the 28. of
Jan. 1659. By the Lord Richardson, Sir John Hobart, and Sir Horatio Tounsend,
Baronets.

A Declaration of the Gentry of the County of DEVON, Met at the General Quarter
Sessions at Exeter, for a Free Parliament: Together with a Letter From EXETER.
To the Right Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the PARLIAMENT.
WE the Gentry of the County of Devon, finding our selves without a Regular
Government, after your last interruption designed a public Meeting, to consult
Remedies, which we could not so conveniently effect till this Week, at our
General Quarter Sessions at Exon: Where we find diverse of the inhabitants
groaning under high Oppressions, and a general defect of Trade, to the utter
ruin of many, and fear of the like to others, which is as visible in the whole
County, that occasioned such disorders, that were no small trouble and
disturbance to us; which, by Gods blessing upon our endeavors, were soon
suppressed and quieted, without Blood. And though we find, since our first
purposes, an alteration in the state of Affairs, by your Re-assembling at the
Helm of Government, yet conceive, that we are but in part Redrest of our
Grievances; and that the chief Expedient for it will be the recalling of all
those Members that were secluded in 1648. and sat before the first Force upon
the Parliament. And also by filling up the vacant places. And all to be
admitted, without any Oath and Engagement, previous to their Entrance. For
which things, if you please to take a speedy course, we shall defend you
against all Opposers, and future Interrupters, with our Lives and Fortunes. For
the Accomplishment whereof, we shall use all Lawful Means, which we humbly
conceive may best conduce to the Peace and Safety of this Nation.

Exon 14. of Jan. 1659.
SIR,
THE Enclosed Copy of what this Grand Meeting, to which the most Considerable
of the Gentry have Subscribed. Mr. Bampfield, Recorder of Exon, is gone this
night Post to deliver it to the Speaker. That the Cornish men have done more,
is no News.

This City in very great numbers, Lordly expressed their desires for a Free
Parliament. The Apprentices and Young men of the City, got the Keys of the
Gates, and keep them locked, without taking notice of the Magistrates, and less
of the Soldiers.

A Letter and Declaration of the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Ministers of
the County of YORK, And of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the
Gity of YORK.
Presented to General Monck Feb. 17. 1659. at His Quarters at Drapers-hall
London, by Sir Thomas Wharton Knight, Brother to the Lord Wharton, John Dawney,
Thomas Harrison, and John Legard Esquires.
As also a Letter, with the said Declaration enclosed, delivered by the said
Gentlemen to the Lord Mayor directed to him, and to the Common Counsel of the
City of LONDON.
To His Excellency the Lord General MONCK.
My Lord,
WE find our selves constrained by writing to supply the Omission of
acquainting your Lordship with our thoughts and desires when you passed through
our County, which we had then done, if upon so short notice we could have met
for a mutual Understanding; Your Lordship will find in the Enclosed
Declaration the sum of our Apprehensions. We thought it not necessary to
multiply particulars, but leave all other things to a duly constituted
Parliament; neither have we been sollicitous to multiply Subscriptions,
trusting more to the weight of the Proposals, than to the number of
Subscribers; yet we may safely affirm this to be the sense of the Generality of
the County and City, as your Lordship sees it is of others. We have only to
add our earnest desires to your Lordship, that you would be pleased to further
the Accomplishment of what we have represented with such seasonable speed, as
that the fear of Friends, and the hopes of Enemies concerning a dangerous
Confusion amongst us, may be prevented.

Your Lordships very humble servants, Thomas Fairfax, Faulconberge, Bar.
Bouchier, Vicecomes. Christopher Topham, Mayor, etc.


The Declaration.
WE being deeply sensible of the grievous Pressures under which we lie, and the
extreme dangers we are exposed to at this time, through the violent alteration
of our Government, the Mutilation and Interruption of Parliaments: And having
no Representatives to express or remedy our grievances, have thought it meet
(according to the example of other Counties) to Declare and Desire, That if the
Parliament begun November 3. 1640. be yet continued, The Members that were
secluded in the year 1648. be forthwith restored to the Exercise of their
Trust, and all Vacancies filled up, that right may be done to their Persons, to
Parliaments, and the People that have chosen them. If otherwise, That a
Parliament may be presently called without imposing of Oaths or Engagements
(the greatest prejudice to Civil or Christian Liberty) or requiring any
Quallifications, save what by Law or Ordinance of Parliament before the Force
in 1648. are already established. And until this, or One of these be done, We
cannot hold our selves obliged to pay the Taxes that are or shall be imposed.
We not enjoying the Fundamental Right of this Nation to consent to our own Laws
by equal Representatives.

Subscribed by Esquires
Thomas Lord Fairfax, Tho. Lord Viscount Fauconberge, Barrington Bourchier Esquire.
High Sheriff, Christ. Topham, Mayor, Sir Thomas Wharton, Knight of the Bath.
Sir Christ. Wivel Bar. Sir John Hotham, Bar. Sir Tho Slingsby, Bar. Sir Will.
Cholmly, Bar. Sir Fran. Boynton, Bar. Sir Roger Langly, Bar. Sir Hen. Cholmly,
Knight. Sir Tho. Remington, Knight. John Dawney, Henry Fairfax, Tho. Harrison, John
Legard, William Fairfax, William Gee, William Osbalston, Robert Wivel, Thomas
Hutton, Gustavus Boynton, Henry Bethel, Metcalf Robinson, Henry Stapleton,
George Marwood, Robert Redman, William Adams, Col. Lancelot Parsons William
Daulton, James Moyser, Robert Belt, Henry Marwood, John Vavasour, John Gibson,
John Micklethwait, Bryan Fairfax, Bryan Layton, Thomas Lovel, Will. Rooksby,
Capt. Nicholas Bethel, John Jackson, Thomas Yarborough, Walter Bethel, John
Riccard, John Adams, Richard Levy, Cregory Crake, James Driffeild, etc.
Ministers.
Mr. Edward Bowls, Mr. Nath. Jackson, Mr. Witton, Mr. Waterhouse, Mr. Bentley,
Mr. Nasebit, etc.
The said Declaration was also subscribed by the Aldermen and Common Counsel of
the City of York.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor and Common Counsel of the City of
London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
HAving taken notice of some vigorous inclinations of your Lordship and the
City, toward the asserting your common Freedoms as English men, too much of
late violated, and being now also our selves constrained, from a like sense, to
manifest our Resolutions to the same effect, in a Declaration sent to General
Monk, whereof the Enclosed is a Copy; We have thought good to give your
Lordship an account of our intentions, as that to which we are most firmly
resolved to adhere, wishing it may effect the end by our selves, and (as we are
persuaded) by your Lordship, and all good people of that City intended. We
remain,

York Feb. 10. 1659. Your Lordship's very humble Servants, Thomas Fairfax
Faulconberge, Bar. Bouchier, Vicecomes. Christopher Topham, Mayor, etc.


Which Letter, with the Declaration therein enclosed, was also the same day
delivered by Sir Thomas Wharton, and the rest of the said Gentlemen, to the
Lord Mayor of London, desiring it might be communicated to the Common Counsel,
according as by the Letter it was desired.

The same day also a particular letter was presented to the Lord General Monk
from the Lord Fairfax, dated Feb. 14. in confirmation of the said Declaration,
which was delivered by Mr. Bryan Fairfax, who was sent up on purpose with the
said Letter.

THE DECLARATION OF THE Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders of the County and City
of LINCOLN.
WE the Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County and City of Lincoln,
being truly sensible of our Miseries and Grievances, namely the sad consequents
of Intestine War, the fear of Invasion from abroad, at this time of our
Distractions and Divisions both in Church and State, the violent alteration of
Government, the heavy imposition of unheard of Taxes; All which of late years
has ruined our Trade, and impoverished the whole Nation, and are all
occasioned by reason of the many Violences and Breaches made upon our known
established Laws and fundamental Liberties, Do therefore humbly propose and
declare (having first met and consulted, as other Countries have done) that the
only remedy for our said Grievances, will be for a Free, Full Parliament,
speedily to be called and assembled, to sit according to our said known
established Laws, wherein the Free Votes of all Free People of this Nation
might be included, since that such only have a legal capacity to enact Laws
and Statutes that may equally bind all the Free people of this Nation; And
therefore if any persons (how ever empowered) not having the Authority of such a
Parliament, shall take upon them to lay impositions upon the Free people of
this Commonwealth, or to prescribe or enjoin any Limitations, Restrictions, or
Quallifications whatsoever, not formerly agreed upon in full Parliament. We do
declare our selves not obliged thereto, as being destructive to the freedom
and undoubted Privileges of Parliament.

A DECLARATION Of all the WATERMEN In about the City of LONDON, between
GRAVESEND and STANES. OR, A Hue and Cry after Col. WHITTON and his Decoys.
WHereas it has been seemingly by the insinuatious of some few of us, cast on
our whole Company, that we would lay our shoulders, and stretch out our helping
hands, for the upholding of something, which to our selves is both unknown and
uncertain, and may likewise in probability be a cause of disturbance, if not
breaking the peace of the Nation: We, to manifest Our innocence in the one
particular, and vindicate our selves from the scandal thereof, as also to show
our real and hearty concordance with all other, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Citizens
and others, of the several Counties of England, whose Declarations are exposed
to the public view, do cordially, unanimously, and freely declare.

That the List annexed of our names to a Petition pretended by our consent to
be presented to the Members sitting at Westminster, is not at all by us owned,
neither do we know any other Authors or Abettors thereof, than some few here
under-mentioned our names in truth being gained by Colonol Whitton, under the
pretense to put down Hackny Coachmen; but by him converted to another use, and
that so contrary to our thoughts and intentions, that we would sooner have
quitted our nearest relations, than have consented to such ebulliences. For the
undeceiving therefore of the Gentry of this Nation, to whom many, yea, most of
us are obliged, and consequently not unknown; for the rectifying the judgments
of such as know us not, and for the satisfaction of the whole Freeborn
Subjects of England who with us claim a birthright in Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right, we do further, with one Consent, declare.

That we conceive it fitting, for the redressing the grievous wants and
pressures that lie upon all the good people of this Nation, that according to
Fundamental Right, the People in Parliament may have their Representatives, who
may receive their grievances, and present them in their behalf, whereby to
obtain a remedy.

And because Faction and Schism has already too great a root, that honest and
prudential men may be Elected, whose Estates (as to Temporals) and Religion (as
to Spirituals) may oblige them sincerely to endeavor a Settlement both in
Church and State.

The only means for attaining of which ends, we conceive by the blessing of
God, to be a full and free Parliament, which as we know the Nation groans for,
so we cordially desire, and we shall not acquiesce, till we have regained that
our undoubted Right, hitherto unquestioned Privilege, and never to be denied
Lawful Demand. In the defense whereof we shall account nothing too dear to
lose, being ready to quit not only our Employments, but to lay aside our
relations, and lay our lives at stake.

This Representation is owned by Ten Thousand of us (which if desired) shall be
acknowledged both with our hands and hearts, against all the malicious
underminings of Col. Whitton the Painter, and his Decoys: Who upon the tendering
that forged Petition to the Watermens Hall, being conscious that the rankness
of the Trepan would be presently sented, addressed themselves to Mr. Pryn, to en
their Protest against it, their names are hereunto annexed.

Viz. Will. Lemond. Josias Smith. Will. Crop. Will. Goodale. Thomas Slator. Tho.
Wasborn. John Howard. Will. Bugby. Robert Crop. Tho. Vincent. John Foster. John
Lee. Will. Sound. Jacob Meade. Will. Clerk. Martin Craul. Roger Phillips. Fran.
Borrick. Richard Thusee. Will. Butler.


The Remonstrance of the Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen,
Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, and Commons of the late Eastern, Southern,
and Western Associations, who desire to show themselves Faithful and Constant
to the Good Old Cause, the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, the Liberty
and Property of the Subjects, Laws of the Land, and true Reformed Religion,
which they were formerly called forth and engaged to defend by Declarations of
Parliament, the Protestation, and Solemn National League and Covenant.
WE the Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Freeholders, Citizens,
Burgesses and Commons of the late Eastern, Southern, and Western Associations
of England, whose names are hereunto subscribed, having for a long season with
bleeding hearts, perplexed spirits, weeping eyes, and overmuch patience and
silence, beheld the miserable public Distractions, intolerable Oppressions,
various Revolutions, great Tumults, and destructive Confusions, wherewith our
former most glorious, flourishing Churches and Nations (for want of a settled
Government, and Free Parliament) have many years bypast been violently rent in
pieces, wasted, consumed, made the very hissing, scorn, laughing stock of all
Neighbor Countries, whether Friends or Foes, Christians or Infidels; and
thereby exposed to the justly dreaded hostile Invasions of combined foreign
Romish Adversaries, whose Emissaries have been very active, instrumental in our
late Combustions and Changes; being now deeply sensible of the deplorable,
desperate condition and imminent ruin, not only of our own Persons, Families,
Posterities, but of our dearest, exhausted, enthralled, dying Native Country,
and Protestant Religion too, far dearer to us than our Lives or private
Interests, the preservation whereof is the Supreamest Law; and calling to our
minds the first public ends and causes for which we took up arms (since
totally perverted, subverted, oppugned by ambitious, self-advancing Commanders,
Officers of the Army, and others contrary to their Trusts and Commissions) with
the manifold Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Solemn League and Covenant, and other
Sacred as well as Civil Obligations lying upon our Consciences, engaging us all
in our several places and callings in this day of Englands trouble, and extreme
danger, to put our helping hands and best advice to obviate those Perils, and
remove those Disorders, Grievances, Confusions, which menace utter desolation
both to her and us, if we should any longer fit stupidly silent, or unactive in
our spheres, like persons altogether uninterested or unconcerned in these
perilous times of unprefidented exorbitancies, usurpations, tyrannies over our
Persns, Estates, Laws, Liberties, and Parliaments themselves, by ambitious,
turbulent Self-seekers and Incendiaries, and of universal decay of trade by Sea
and Land; Have thereupon conceived it our necessary bounden duties in this sad
posture of our Sacred and Civil Concernments both as Christians and English
Freemen, by this our joint REMONSTRANCE to tender to the rest of our English
Brethren throughout the whole Nation, of what rank, calling, or condition
soever; such just, legal, safe, rational, honest and Christian Proposals, as
through Gods blessing upon our and their unanimous, vigorous prosecution of
them against all self-ended Opponents, may redeem us from our present Bondage,
Dangers, Schisms, Confusions, frequent Rotations of public Government, and
restore our tottering Church, State, Kingdoms, Religion, to their pristine
Unity, Tranquillity, Purity, Stability, Dignity, Felicity, and secure them
against all future Concussions and Convulsions.

For which end we all passionately desire, and shall unanimously and cordially
endeavor by all lawful means within our Orbs,

1. That a legal, full and free Parliament of England may be speedily summoned,
according to the prescription of 16 Caroli, c. 1. enacted for this purpose, not
hitherto put in execution; and that free Elections of able Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, by and of all well-affected persons to Peace, and the old
Parliaments good Cause, to represent them therein, may be no ways disturbed,
nor restrained by force of Arms or otherwise.

2. That the said Parliament may safely, freely meet at Westminster on the
third Monday in January next, to consult of, vote, and settle the Peace,
Government of our distracted Churches and Nations, without the interruption,
disturbance, force or dissolution of any Commanders, Officers or Soldiers of
the Army, or other tumultuous persons whatsoever, under pain of being declared,
prosecuted, executed as Traitors and Enemies to the Public.

3. That the full power of the Militia both by Sea and Land be delivered up to
this Parliament, on the first day of their Convention therein, for the better
assurance of their free and peaceable Session, and not continued as a distinct
body or interest in opposition, contradistinction, or super-inspection, but in
real subordination to the Parliament and people.

4. That the whole frame and settlement of the Government of our Nations be
entirely referred to the Parliaments unanticipated consideration, the proper
Judges thereof, without any antecedent restrictions, presciptions, or
impositions, by the Army Officers, or any others.

5. That the Supreme* Management of all Civil, Politic, Military Affairs, and
appointment of all great Officers of State, and Ministers of Justice, shall be
in all the surviving Members of the long Parliament, without secluding any, as
in a General Council of State and Safety only (who are all desired to meet for
that purpose) till the New Free Parliament shall assemble, and no longer.

6. That the preservation of the Peace, Government of each County, shall be in
the hands of such Sheriffs, Conservators of the Peace, and other ancient
Officers, as the Freeholders of every County, shall publicly elect in their
County Court, according to their ancient Rights and Liberties; and of every
City and Corporation in the Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers
elected by them, according to their Charters, Customs, and in none other
Officers imposed on them, till the Parliament shall take further Order therein.

7. That no Taxes, Contributions, Excises, Imposts, New Customs, Militiaes, or
other Payments whatsoevet, shall be henceforth imposed, assessed, levied upon,
or paid by the people, but by their common grant and consent in free and full
Parliament, by Act of Parl. under pain of High Treason in the Imposers,
Assessors, Collectors, and voluntary payers thereof; this being the peoples
indubitable Birth right, acknowledged, declared, confirmed by manifold Acts and
Declarations old and new.

8. That such an Act of Indemnity may be agreed on and assented to in this
Parliament by common consent, as may secure and indempnifie all persons, whose
future peaceable deportment till this Act passed shall demerit it.

9. That care may be therein taken for the speedy satisfaction of all just
arrears of all Officers and Soldiers, duly listed before the 7. of May last,
who shall peaceably and dutifully submit to the free convening and safe sitting
of this desired Parliament. That all others who shall tumultuously oppose or
interrupt the Summoning, Assembling, or Sitting thereof, shall forfeit all
their Commands, Arrears, Indemnity, and incur the penalty of Traitors and
public Enemies to the Parliament and Nation.

10. That an effectual course may be taken for the settled old maintenance,
succession, protection and encouragement of a godly, learned, painful Orthodox
Preaching Ministry* throughout the three Nations.

11. That due care and order may be taken for the speedy detection, banishment,
and execution of the Laws against all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Freers, and
other Romish Emissaries, or Seducers whatsoever, employed to divide, corrupt,
seduce the people; and the Oath of Abjuration duly tendered by Justices of
Peace and other Officers, to all persons who shall be accused and justly
suspected to be such, for their better detection.

12. That the causes of the great extraordinary decay of all sorts of Trade,
Merchandise, Shipping, Scarcity of Bullion, Coin, with all frauds and abuses in
Manufactures, dilatory vexatious proceedings, extortions in Courts of Law and
Equity, may be diligently enquired into, redressed, punished, and the great
destruction and waste of Timber in all parts inhibited under severe penalties.

13. That all Treasurers, Receivers, Collectors, Farmers of any Moneys,
Customs, Excises, Rents, Revenues, Taxes, Imposts, Sequestrations, or other
goods, profits whatsoever to the use of the public, may be speedily called to
account in each County, by fitting unaccountable persons appointed for that
end, and all their frauds and abuses therein enquired of, and condignly
punished.

14. That all good Laws formerly enacted for the preservation and defense of
the Persons, Lives, Liberties, Properties of the Subjects, against illegal
Imprisonments, Banishments, Restraints, Confinements, corporal punishments,
execution by any Person or Persons, Powers, Committees, Council of State,
Military, Civil Officers, or Judicatures whatsoever, and against all unjust
Taxes, Confiscations, Sequestrations, Rapines, Plunders, may be ratified; and
the late and future violations of them exemplarily punished.

15. That every person who shall from henceforth Canvas for voices to make
himself a Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron of the Ports, in the next, or any
ensuing Parliament, either by Letters of Recommendation from Great men,
feasting the Electors before, at, or after Elections, Gifts, Bribes, or
otherwise, shall upon due proof thereof, be made incapable to sit or serve in
Parliament.

16. That all Members of Parliament, Officers of State, Justices, Sheriffs,
Mayors, Recorders, shall henceforth take a Corporal Oath, to the best of their
knowledge, skill, power, inviolably to preserve the Fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Franchises of the Freemen of England, and to give all Laws for the
defense of them in charge to the Grand Jury, in their respective Assizes, and
General Sessions of the Peace, that they may enquire and present all offenses
against, and violations of them, to be condignly punished according to Law.

17. That all unnecessary Garrisons, Supernumerary Soldiers, and Seamen, may
be speedily paid off, dismantled, disbanded, and all superfluous Officers,
excessive Fees, and extortions whatsoever, taken away, for the impoverished
peoples ease: and the manifold extortions, abuses of Gaolers, Marshals,
Messengers, and other detainers of Prisoners, punished and redressed.

18. That Able, Faithful Conscientious, fitting Persons, fearing God and hating
covetousness, may be preferred to all Offices, Places of public Trust, and
Administration of Justice; and detur digniori, made the only rule in all
Elections and Preferments whatsoever.

19. That all Universities, Colleges, Schools of Learning in our three Nations,
with all Lands, Rents, Annuities, Gifts, Revenues, for their support, may be
constantly maintained, preserved from rapine, and all mis-imployments,
substractions of them, and of any Lands, Rents, Ann uities, Moneys, Gifts,
Legacies to them, or any other public or charitable use whatsoever, diligently
enquired after and reformed.

All which Proposals we are resolved by Gods gracious assistance with
unanimity, constancy, and activity, in our several stations, with our lives and
fortunes, to prosecute and accomplish, to our powers, by all just and legal
ways, with what ever else may conduce to the Peace, Safety, Unity, Wealth,
Prosperity of our Lacerated, Macerated, Naufragated Church and State; wherein
as we shall constantly pray for Gods Divine assistance and blessing upon our
weak endeavors, without which they will be altogether succeslesse: So we
cannot but confidently expect, and shall importunately desire the cordial
concurrence, assistance, prayers of all other Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen,
Clergymen, Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, and English Freemen, without the
smallest opposition, that fo Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other, and
glory once more dwell within our Land, wherein they have been strangers
overlong: And let all the People (by their joint subscriptions) say, Amen,
Amen,

Amen.
THE DECLARATION Of the Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the County
of BEDFORD.
WE the Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the County of BEDFORD,
being truly sensible of the heavy pressures that we lie under, having all our
Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties daily invaded, cannot in this common
day of Calamity, be silent, but with the rest of the Nation, make some enquiry
after the way of Peace and Settlement: And having met, and considered, thereof,
do humbly Propose, as the most probable means, under God, to compose all our
Differences, and cement all our Breaches both in Church and State, the
Assembling of a Full and Free PARLIAMENT, without any previous Oaths, or
Engagements, or Qualifications whatsoever (saving what was in the year 1648.
before the Force put upon the Parliament.) Or the re-admitting of the Secluded
Members to the Execution of their Trusts, with a full and free Supply of their
Vacancies by Death. And until one of these be done, we do declare, We shall not
hold our selves engaged to pay the Taxes imposed upon us, without our Consents
so first had in Parliament.

THE DECLARATION OF THE Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of ESSEX.
WEre it not that our former too unhappy Zeal (in Idolizing those persons who
are now become, by far more oppressing than the Egyptian Taskmasters) at this
time seconded with silence, would bespeak us stupid and insensible; we needed
not to repeat the Sighs and Groans of an Oppressed and almost Ruined Kingdom:
But lest a tacit silence should render us complaint with Their Sacrilegious and
Regicidious Proceedings, we are necessitated to declare our present Thoughts
and future Resolutions. We cannot look upon our present Rulers without casting
an Eye upon a Militant Church, and there we find them converting a House of
Prayer into a Den of Thieves; an Orthodox, Learned and Reverend Clergy, by them
reduced to the extremest want, under pretense of propagating the Gospel; and
those (who are yet permitted to exercise their Ecclesiastical Function)
treatned to be deprived of Gods Allowance, except in effect, they will forsake
Him, and fall down to their Baal. We cannot look into our Clothing Towns, but
we behold Famine ready to assault them, the poor and diligent Labourer, for
want of work, not able to buy him bread, so that those, who before wrought with
their hands at home, are now forced to wander abroad, and work with their
tongues to beg life, whilst we, who although willing, are hardly able (through
the Oppression which lies upon us) to relieve them: And when we look upon the
Instruments of these our Miesries, and consider their Persons and
Qualifications, we cannot find one public Spirit (not one wise man) among
them; Their number is inconsistent with our Laws, and a large part of that
small number are reputed Relatives to Gaoles and Brothil-houses: Persons who
outwardly profess God, but in their lives and actions utterly deny him, who
through their most perfidious Treacheries, and reiterated Perjuries, have
blasted the honor of our Nation, and rendered our Religion contemptible to all
our Enemies; Who (while they pretend to strive for Religion and Liberties of
the people) have no other Cause but Cains, thinking their Sins greater than can
be forgiven; and therefore per fas, aut nefas, they endeavor to lay a
foundation for their own Security, although in the Church and Kingdoms
desolation. These Premises considered, we conceive our selves obliged, and
therefore readily and unanimously we do declare, That with our Lives and
Fortunes we will protect, abet, and assist all tho e worthy Remonstrators of
the most Renowned City of London, ansd the several Counties of this Kingdom,
in the pursuance of their several Declarations for a Full and Free Parliament;
which is the only means (under God) to bring us out of this miserable
Confusion, in which at present we are plunged. And we further declare, That we
will pay no Tax, or other Imposition whatsoever, but by Authority from our
Representatives in a Full and Free Parliament: Into whose hands we shall commit
our Lives and Fortunes, and into whose Results we will ever acquiesce.

Our eyes are up unto our God for Help, and thence our Hopes are fixed on
General Monk, that God has called him forth to be the Vmpier and Determiner
of our Divisions and Oppressions, by whom he will lead us through the
Wilderness of our present Confusion, and bring us to our desired Canaan. In
this Confidence we pray to God to Bless, Direct, and Keep Him.

Advertisement.
THis our Declaration had came forth a week since, had not the Trappanning
Diligence of an unworthy Member of our Country endeavored the surprizal of it
and us: Let not three hundred and thirty hands (an inconsiderable number for so
great a County) bespeak this Declaration forged, we being forced to do in one
day the work we had cut out for seven; had we had time, we had brought ten
thousand hands, such as upon a good occasion, will bring hearts suitable to the
merits of their Cause.

THE Declaration of the Gentry of the County of NOTTINGHAM.
And of the Town of Nottingham, presented by way of Address to his Excellency
the Lord General MONCK, the 28. of February, With a Letter to his Excellency,
and another to the Speaker of the PARLIAMENT.
WHat the people of this Land have suffered in their greatest Concernments,
both Religious and Civil, by the late Disorders, and frequent change of
Government, has for a long time been the Argument of a general and sad
complaint both to God and Man: What the most public sense of the Nation is, as
to the means of settling it in the possession of its ancient and native
Liberties, is sufficiently known by the several Declarations of so many
Counties already presented and published: What God in great mercy has done by
your Excellencies means, as his chosen Instrument, to revive our dying hopes,
in plucking us as a brand out of the fire, and that with so gentle a hand, is
the wonder and rejoicing of our souls.

In testimony therefore of our thankfulness to God, and our grateful sense of
your Excellencies most valiant and wise management of the Power he has
entrusted you with: As also to evidence as Fellow Members our concurrence and
sympath, with those other parts of this great Body: We the Nobility Gentry,
Ministry and Commonalty of the County of Nottingham, and of the County of the
Town of Nottingham do Declare,

That as it is our Judgment that the Nation ought, so it is our earnest
desire, and shall be our endeavor by the use of all lawful means that it may
be free in its Members in Parliament, deputed from all parts, empowered by
ancient and undoubted right to elect, the best Expedient whereto, at present,
we conceive to be either an admission of the Members secluded in 1648. and a
filling up of Vacancies by new Elections, or the speedy calling of another
Parliament with such Qualifications as were then agreed on before there as a
force upon the House.

We also claim it with the rest of the Nation as our uniquestionable right,
That nothing be imposed upon us by way of Tax, or otherwise, but by our
consents first given and declared in a Full and Free Parliament.

And now, considering how great things in prosecution of these just ends are
already done for us, as we do in most humble manner bless and praise his
glorious name that has thus far answered our desires, so we do most earnestly
beseech him to perfect in his due time what is so happily begun, and in order
thereto to bless and conduct your Excellency through all the remaining
difficulties that may obstruct our present necessary Settlement upon the true
lasting foundation of our known Laws and Privileges.

In the vindication whereof we beseech your Excellency to be confident, not
only of our best wishes and thanks, but also of our utmost assistance to the
hazard of our lives and fortunes.

My Lord,
THis enclosed was intended to be presented to your Excellencies before we had
notice of your Excellencies happy removal of all Force, excluding Members from
sitting in Parliament wherein though our desires are thereby granted, yet we
cannot but address the same to you, that it may appear what your Excellency
has done therein is according to our sense and desire, as well as those of
other Counties that have gone before us in time, though not in affection, and
that we shall in our places and callings be ready to make good what we have
publicly declared for, as the Parliament and your Excellency shall command us,
and remain

Nottingham, Feb. 23. 1650. My Lord, your Excellencies most humble and faithful
servants.

Mr. Speaker,
WE being desirous amongst other Counties to express our thanks to the Lord
General Monk, for his endeavors in our restitution to Peace and Settlement,
and to manifest our adherence to him, and those under his command, in the
further prosecution of those good ends mentioned in our Address to him, after
we had subscribed and ordered these Gentlemen to wait upon him with the same,
We received the joyful news, that all force was removed, and a free admission
given to all Members to sit in Parliament, whereby our desires are so far
accomplished, that we might have acquiessed therein, but only that we would not
have our intentions and desires, though obtained, buried in oblivion, We
thought fit to present that Address to the Lord General, and judge it our
duties to express our thankfulness to God for your readmission, and our
readiness in our places and callings, to assist you in what you have so happily
begun, and humbly desire that by your Authority our Militia may be so settled
that we may be serviceable to your Commands, and capacitated to defend our
selves against any discontented persons that may upon this change endeavor a
disturbance of the public Peace, or deny your Authority.

Nottingham, Feb. 23. 1659. Sir, Your humble and faithful servants.

THE DECLARATION OF Sir Charles Coot Knight and Baronet, Lord President of the
Province of CONNAVGHT: And the rest of the Council of Officers of the Army in
IRELAND.
Present at DUBLIN Concerning the Readmission of the Sucluded Members.
SInce the Authority of Parliament became openly violated, and that by their
own waged servants of the Army in England, by whom 41. of the Members of
Parliament were torn from the Parliament House in Dec. 1648. and imprisoned,
and a 160. other Members denied entrance into the House, and about fifty more
voluntarily withdrew themselves to avoid violence, making in all of secluded
Members about two hundred and fifty, when the remaining Members charged the
Army with the guilt of that force, and sent to the then General of the Army for
the restitution of those excluded Members which was denied them, how many and
manifold have been the miseries and calamities under which these Nations have
labored, and do still labor, is evident to all equal minded men. The godly
Ministers of the Gospel despised: The Ministry it self villified: Tithes, and
other means of their maintenance (particularly in Ireland) taken from them, and
mis-applied; the Protestant Religion shaken, and almost overturned;
Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sectaries set up and countenanced; Heresies and
Schisms increased; The fundamental Laws of the Land trampled upon, and an
Arbitrary Government endeavored to be introduced; The Civil Rights, Properties
and Liberties of the people in their persons and estates broken in pieces;
Impositions and Taxes on the people without example laid and increased in an
excessive manner and measure, whereby thousands of Families have been ruined,
and enforced to beg their bread; Manufacture at home discouraged, public Trade
and Commerce abroad interrupted; The Nations become deeply indebted, and
generally impoverished; the reformed Protestant Churches abroad exposed to
great danger, wanting the wonted support of England, which (under God) was the
Bulwark and chief strength of the Protestant Religion throughout all
Christendom, and finally the English Nation (which was always deservedly) in
so high honor and estimation at home and abroad, as it was a bridle and
terror to their Enemies, and a countenance and support to their Friends, and
Allies, is now become (we tremble and grieve to have so just cause to speak it)
a scorn and dersion to all Nations round about us; and all this is brought to
pass to satisfy the Avarice, Ambition, Lusts, and fears of a few
inconsiderable persons of Anabaptistical and other Fanatique spirits, who have
made it their business to occasion still one trouble on the neck of another, so
to imbroil and continue the Nations in Division, War, and bloody confusion,
that sober men might not have time or leisure (with maturity of judgment or
counsel) to look into the inwards of their designs or actings; And after we had
beheld all this with bleeding hearts, and calling to mind that when in
December 1648. the said force was put upon the Parliament, the then remaining
Members sent sundry times to the General to know why he imprisoned their
Members, and desired him to set them at liberty, which was not done; and we
gathering from all this, that if the House were once freed from the force of an
Army, and they again restored to Freedom and Liberty of sitting and and
acting, they would then upon the firmer grounds (in conscience of their duties
to God and their Country, and in testimony of their high resentment of that
breach of privileges of the Parliament, have taken into the House those
excluded Members, and filled vacant places by due and orderly Elections of the
People (and after so many years unhappy interruption unite again in a full and
free Parliament, and there assert the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of the people, which from the very beginning of the War of England
have been not the least ground of their contest with the late King, and ever
since, and join their counsels and endeavors for restoring these Nations to
peace and tranquillity.

And thence it was, that on the 14. day of December 1659. several Officers of
the Army here, on the behalf of themselves, and those under their Commands, by
their joint Declaration, declared and published their steadfast resolutions to
adhere to the Parliament in defense of its Privileges, and the just Rights and
Liberties of the people of these Nations as Men and Christians; In which
Declaration afterward concurred the whole Army of Ireland, but now finding
much contrary to our expectations, that when the Members of Parliament now
assembled at Westminster, were in December. 1659. (by an extraordinary
providence) restored to their Freedom and Liberty of sitting and acting as in
Parliament; and that diverse of those formerly excluded Members of Parliament on
the 27. of December. 1659. (as they had formerly done in May 1659.) offered
themselves to discharge their Trusts for the several Counties and places for
which they were Elected, and formerly served those their Fellow Members
assembled at Westminster, did not only deny them admittance, but also voted
and ordered the utter exclusion of all the excluded Members with this further
addition, that none of them should be chosen in future Elections to sit in this
Parliament, whereby they have a more unnatural violence taken away from above
the one half of the people of England, their Representatives in Parliament, and
limited and abridged in a high degree the Liberty and freedom of the people in
further Elections, which denial and order of theirs in a time when they were
under no force, is so much the more strange, in regard that in December 1648.
when they were under a force, they transferred that guilt for themselves to the
Army, and pretended a willingness to re-admit those Members if it were in their
power, as is formerly mentioned.

And whereas Lieut. Genesis Ludlow had placed in Ireland several Officers who are
Anabaptists, and persons of the like fanatique spirits, (many of whom had been
very active in the late conspiracies and actings of the factious part of the
Army in England, even against those Members of Parliament now sitting at
Westminster; of which Officers so placed by Lieut. Genesis Ludlow, it was found
necessary to purge the Army, and to put in their places persons more soberly
minded and well affected to the Parliament; yet after all that done, and after
Lieut. Genesis Ludlow stood justly deservedly charged with High Treason, the said
Lieut. Genesis Ludlow himself, and some others of the like principles with him,
were by a report from the Council of State proposed to be appointed to govern
not only the Army, but also the whole Nation of Ireland, to the astonishment
of the people and Army here, to the unsetling of those persons so well
deserving, to the hazard of the peace of the Nation and Army (and which is
above all) to the endangering even of Religion it self. And here it is
observable, that those Members now sitting at Westminster, by their Declaration
of 23. of January 1659. since their restitution to their present liberty of
sitting) have published that extravagant Councels and actions, have engaged the
Nations in a great debt and charge, which it seems necessitates their laying a
new increase of charge on the Nations, and yet so indulgent they are to those
persons, that in a high degree created that necessity of so unreasonably
charging the people, and whose estates might well bear a great part of that
burden, as without so much as any suit made to them by those Delinquents, they
granted them indemnity for their persons and estates, whereby it seems the
said Members now sitting at Westminster, hold it fit, that those who are of
sober spirits, and offended not the Parliament, should out of their estates pay
for those extravagant men's Delinquency, rather than the Delinquents themselves.
And although the said Lieut. Genesis Ludlow, and Miles Corbet Esquire. together with
Col. John Jones, and Col. Mat. Tomlinson, stand impeached from hence most
justly of High Treason, and that charge against them, being known to the House,
and there remaing, yet they have admitted two of those persons, namely the said
Lieut Genesis Ludlow, and Miles Corbet actually to sit in the said House.

And now the greatness of those miseries which have befaln these three Nations
in General, by such late actings in England, and those heightened with many
aggravations in the circumstances of them (too many and too long to be
repeated) as it has begotten in us, and in all good men in the three Nations
deep impression of astonishment and horror, so it is evident, that if it be any
longer continued, it will perpetually nourish dishonor to God, grief to all
god men, and (we doubt and fear) utter infamy and destruction to the three
Nations.

In contemplation whereof, and considering how God has in his justice blasted
all attempts that since the year 1648. have been made for re-setling of these
Nations in peace and tranquillity, and that after all the trials and various
changes of Government which we have in all that time with much longsuffering
and patience endured, there is no way visible to us under Heaven whence
deliverance may be probably wrought or expected, but from the care and wisdom
of a Free and full Parliament in England, which (by the experience of all
former ages has been found the best and only expedient for providing remedies
to be applied to so great and general mischiefs arising in Church or State. And
considering also that the marks of the true Reformed Religion according to the
Word of God, and of the fundamental Laws of the Land, and of our now dying
Liberties and Freedom, are not yet so utterly razed and defaced, but that some
footsteps of them do yet remain, so as (by the wisdom of a full and Free
Parliament) they may be again renewed and firmly re-established; and
considering likewise that our hopes of having the said excluded Members
restored, and of new Elections to be made for vacant places, whereby there
might be a full and free Parliament, as there was on December. 5. 1648. and the
ancient and long contested Liberties of the people might be asserted, are much
contrary to our expectations, and contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Land,
and indeed contrary to all justice and become frustrated; and considering
further how unjust and unreasonable a thing it is, that of above five hundred
Members, whereof the Commons House of Parliament usually consisted, there were
but four and forty or thereabouts, when that fatal Vote passed for the keeping
out the aforesaid excluded Members by the prevalency of a major part of the
said 44. persons (not much exceeding those who voted then on the contrary side)
which assumes to it self the Supreme Authority, not only of England, but also
of the three Nations, without president or example of any former age, there
being above two hundred and fifty which stand eleven years excluded, without so
much as the least offer of an Impeachment against them in all that time; which
unexampled and unparalled assumption in those men is not possible to continue
but by the force of an Army poisoned with Anabaptistical and corrupted
principles, to the continual grief and unsupportable burden and charge of the
three Nations.

And besides that act of the aforesaid persons chasing away (for so it now
appears) about two hundred and fifty Members, of above five hundred chosen by
all the several parts of England, according to the known Laws of the Land, to
represent the whole Nation in Parliament; and after the forcible exclusion of
so many, that the four and forty persons remaining (amongst whom we believe
there are some worthy Patriots who are not so fully concurring in the actings
of the rest of their number, as violently over-voted them, which is a further
aggravation of the others guilt) should dare to usurp to themselves as is
formerly mentioned, contrary to all the Laws, the Supreme power not only of
England, but also of Ireland and Scotland, is a thing which none but Conquerors
or Tyrants would attempt, and in all circumstances is so hideous and monstrous
to be endured by a Free people, formerly famous to all the world for wisdom
and valor, as the English Nation have been, as it will be incredible to all
posterity

And lastly considering, that as in all Ages, and more particularly since the
beginning of the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, our Brethren in England have
abundantly manifested a tender and compassionate sense of the condition in
Ireland, and were careful to relieve us in our lowest estate, as bone of their
bone, and flesh of their flesh; which we do, and shall ever acknowledge with
humble thankfulness, and (as a debt which we well know to be due from us to
them above all people in the world) shall be for ever as tender of their
happiness and welfare, as of our own, which indeed is involved in theirs, and
without whom Ireland cannot be happy. We therefore remaining constant in the
reasons of our said Declaration of Dec. 14. 1659. for adhering to the
Parliament in defense of its Privileges, and the just Rights and Liberties of
these Nations; all which we see now are apparently more and more violated by
the* not admission of the said excluded Members, and by not filling the vacant
Places, whereby the House might be full; and being freed from force, might
uninterruptedly Act according to their Judgments and Consciences, toward
re-setling the peace of these Nations, which otherwise in all humane
probability can never be restored to Peace and Tranquillity.

We do therefore declare for a full and free Parliament in England, consisting
not only of those that sat on Oct. 11. 1659. but also of all such of the
Members of Parliament imprisoned, excluded, or withdrawn in December 1648. as
are yet living, whom we desire may be restored to the freedom and liberty of
sitting, and acting according to the Trust committed to them by the several
Counties and places which did choose them, that so they may be no longer
debarred from discharging their said Trust, and that vacant places may be
speedily supplied by free and due Elections of the people, yet so as none of
the persons to be Admitted or Elected, be any of those who have been in Arms,
or otherwise aiding, abetting, or assisting the late King or his Son in the
late War against the Parliament, and that the House being so filled, may
proceed unanimously to consult the best means for re-setling the Peace of the
Nations, the re-establishment of true Religion (the surest foundaon, as of all
righteous Government, so of all the happiness of a Nation;) the fundamental
Laws of the Land (whereby all men's rights and properties are preserved) and
the liberties and freedom of the people which are supported by those Laws.

And for those ends, and in discharge of our duty to God, and to our Country,
We do resolve, by the blessing of Almighty God) to join with our Brethren in
England, Ireland, and Scotland, who have or shall join with us for the ends
aforesaid; and do resolve, for the maintenance and preservation thereof, to
hazard our Lives and Estates, and all that is dear to us: And we doubt not but
all our Brethren in the said Nations, who disdain to be made Slaves, will join
with us herein, as being with wisdom and reason desirous to deliver over to
their Posterity that Liberty and Freedom which was conveyed to them at so dear
a rate by our Ancestors. And then we trust, that by the great mercy of God,
will speedily follow a happy settlement of these yet miserable and distracted
Nations; and consequently that the true Protestant Religion, in the power and
purity thereof, may be established; the Godly, Learned, and Orthodox Ministers
of the Gospel maintained by their Tithes, and other their accustomed rights;
their persons supported and countenanced; the Universities and all other
Seminaries of Learning cherished; Heresies and Schisms suppressed, needless
Impositions and Taxes on the people removed, and no charge to be laid on any of
the Nations, without their own free consents, given by their Representatives,
in their several and respective Parliaments; Manufactures, and Public Trade
and Commerce, at home and abroad advanced; Justice in its due and wonted course
administered; the just debts of the Nation satisfied; the Treasure and Revenues
thereof preserved, and returned to their right and proper Channels; the
Arreares of the Army, and other public debts duly satisfied; the Armies and
Forces continued in due obedience to the Supreme Authority, and not presume as
some have done, to give Laws thereunto, which has been the root of a great
part of our miseries; the Nations enriched, united and strengthened; the
Reformed Protestant Chuches abroad supported and countenanced; the honor of
the English Nation restored, to the comfort of Friends, and terror of Enemies;
the Plantation of Ireland in the hands of Adventurers and Soldiers, and other
English and Protestants advanced, as a farther accession of honor and
greatness to the English Nation: and so by the blessing of God, all will
shortly terminate in the glory of God, the Peace and Tranquillity of these
Nations, the strengthening of them against foreign Invasion, and intestine
Rebellion, and the comfort, contentment of all the good People in these
Nations, Which the Lord of his mercy grant.

Dated at Dublin, Febr. 16. 1659. Sir Charles Coote William L. Cawfield Sir
Theo. Jones Sir Oliver St. Ceorge Sir Hen. Ingoldsby Sir John King Col. Chidley
Coote Col. John Cole Col. Will. Warden Col. Richard Coote Col. John Georges
Col. Hen. Owen Lt. Col. Tho. Scot Lt. Col. W. Purefoy Lt. Col. Oliver Jones
Maj. Tho. Barrington Maj. Alex. Staples Maj. Rich. Bingley Maj. George Pepper
Lt. Col. H. Smithwick Capt. Henry Baker Cap. Rob. fitz Gerald Cap. Cha. Wenman.
Cap. Adam Molineux Col. Hum. Barrow Cap. Sam. Foley Cap. John Salt Cap. Simon
Garstin Col. Cha. Blunt Col. Hen. Slade Cap. Ant. Stamp Cap. Art. Purefoy Cap.
George S* George Cap. Peter Purefoy Cap. Thomas Curd Cap. Tho. Newcomen Cap.
Tho. Newburgh Cap. Hen. Thrimpton Lt. Hugh Clotworthy Lt. Peter Flower Lt. Her.
Langrish Lt. Rich. Morrick Lt. Brian Jaques Lt. Richard Butler Lt. John Ottway
Lt. John Evelin Lt. Tho. Flint Lt. Edw. Harrington Corn. Art. Usher Corn. Donw.
Prothers Corn. W. Pinsent Ensign John Hiad Tho. Sheppard. Mar. Quartermaster
W. F. John Pain Comptr.


A DECLARATION Of the GENTRY of Somersetshire, Who were of the late KINGS
Party.
WHereas God by many gracious Appearances ha^h raised the hearts of this Nation
to a great confidence, that their tottering condition draws near to an
Establishment, by the Re-settlement of their ancient, just, and solid
Foundations; We do Declare, That in thankfulness to our great and good God, we
hold our selves bound to look upon, and with humble longings; to wait for the
accomplishment of this great Work, as the largest National blessing we are
capable of (being presented to our hope without blood and ruin.) And likewise
that we set up Pillars in every of our hearts to the honor of his Excellency
the Lord General Monck, who has not as others, either feared or affected the
Tyrannical greatness of our Oppressors; but as he undertook the Redemption of
his Country with singular Resolution, and has carried it on hitherto with
unparalled prudence, so we do not in the least doubt, but that by the good
hand of God he will perfect it with shining and glorious sincerity.

And because we find (as we hope) the last Engine of the Enemies of our Peace
now set on work for the embroiling of the spirits of the well-meaning people of
England, by suggesting an unchristian inclination remaining in us, of waiting
opportunities of Revenge: We do here in the sight of God, and to all the world,
disown and abhor all Animosity and Revengeful remembrance of Sides and Parties
in the late War: And do promise and resolve to cooperate within our Sphere
toward the public Settlement, with such faithfulness and constancy, as
neither to occasion or entertain the least jealousy upon the account of any
past difference whatsoever, fully resolving to submit to the Determinations of
the Parliament both in Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, which we hope will
remove all occasion of Jealousy and Distinction for the future.

John Lord Paulett. Sir Francis Paulett. Sir Amos Paulett. William Paulett Esquire.
Edward Phillips. William Helliar. Peregrine Palmer Henry Barkley. Charles
Berkley. Thomas War. John Brice. Robert Hawly. John Bonvile. Francis Windham.
Thomas Pigott. William Wandrond. George Waldrond. Edward Berkley. Francis
Hawly. George Speak. John Tynt. Sam. Gorges. George Syddenham. Francis Harvey,
etc.


AN ALARM TO THE COUNTIES OF ENGLAND AND WALES.
With the Ab-renunciatiation of the OATH.
By Tho. Fuller, B. D.
OUr Nation, which long since has lost the Luster and Well-being, now at
last-strugleth for the Life and Being thereof. Our many [ temporal] miseries
are reducible to two principal Heads.

Daily
1. Decrease of Trading. 2. Increase of Taxes: So that every hour the Burden
grows weightier, and the Back of our Nation weaker to support it.
2. It Is sad to see, in Clothing Countries, what swarms there are of poor
people, the true objects of Charity; if any were as able to give, as they
worthy to receive relief: for they would work, and can work, yet cannot work,
because there are none to employ them.

3. As for the Sea (which is the Land of Port-Towns) it returns small
benefit; for since Dunkirk was ours (more to the credit than benefit of our
Nation) the fire of Searobberies is removed out of the Chimney, and scattered
about the House, not less destructive, but more diffusive: So that our
Merchants could better guard themselves against that Single Staple of Pirates,
than many lesser ones sprung since every where, the cause why rich men will not
(as poor cannot) adventure.

4. Our second misery is, increase, yea, superfetation of Taxes, so long as so
numerous an Army is maintained: For though some of their Soldiers will preach
gratis (conscientious to take nothing for that which they know is worth
nothing) yet none will fight at so cheap a rate.

5. Some will say, that what the Soldier receives with one hand, he returns
with another, expending his pay in Victuals, Clothes, etc. whereby Coin, by
circulation, is continued in our Country. This I deny; for some Grandees
greatned by the Times, have made their Moneys over in Banks beyond the Seas,
which are put into MORTMAIN, or a Dead hand, whereby no profit accreweth to our
Commonwealth. Others having gotten the Estates of Lords, live after the rate
Yoomen, whose discretion therein is to be commended, for proportioning their
expenses (for fear of afterclaps) rather according to their original, than
present condition.

6. The increase of Taxes must inevitably cause the ruin of our Nation: For
though still there be wealthy men left (as they show it in their cowardice, and
fear to engage for the general good) yet they grow thinner every day whilst
such as are left no root of their own, rather than they will wither will turn
Suckers on the Stock of others. So that the greatest happiness rich men can
promise to themselves, is only to be last devoured, though the comfort of the
lateness will not countervail the sadness for the certainty of their
destruction. Indeed it is miraculous that our Nation has subsisted so long,
and few there are that would believe that the whole Candle of our English
wealth could last so long, as we have beheld it burning in the Socket, but now
giving the last blaze, if God be not merciful, and men discreet to prevent it.

7. Pass we from the sad Malady, to the sole Remedy thereof, I say sole, not
exclusively of divine miraculous power, but according to humane apprehension,
this is a Free and full Parliament. Indeed Free-Parliament is a Tautology, like
a Reasonable-man, who, if not reasonable, is no man; as the other, if not free,
no Parliament. But the late frequent forces put on Parliaments has made the
needless Epethite become necessary, to express what kind of Parliaments we
desire. Not such in which every word must be spoken under correction of the
Sword, but wherein every Member, without fear of violence (to interrupt or
dissolve them) may follow the dictates of their own judgment.

8. Nor ought a Parliament only be free from Force, but also from any
Abjurations, or previous Engagements. Let them take heed of renouncing any
thing, save what is simply sinful in it self, as the forsaking of the World,
Flesh, and Devil, as was solemnly promised for them in their Baptism. But it is
bad to be busy with other Ab-renunciations, especially of the Royal Family.

9. Look backward, and we may say with David, The Vows of the Lord are upon us;
I mean on so many of us as are of fifty years of age. The Oath of Supremacy
(not to mention the Covenant) is the eldest Brother, to whom the inheritance of
our Consciences do belong.

10. Look forwards, it limiteth Gods Providence, which is an heinous offense;
we know not what a day, month, year, etc. may bring forth. This Age has the
least reason of any to meddle with the edge-tools of such Oaths which in a
short (but strict) time has seen so many strange things, that now nothing is
strange unto us. Have we not seen O. Cromwell from a private Gentleman
gradatim ascend to be Protector of three Nations, and by his Courage and
Wisdom rather than any right) a more absolute Power possessed by, and larger
Tribute paid unto him than to any King in England. His Son and Successor
(counted bad by many for his goodness and mild spirit) for eighth months was
congratulated by the most considerable Persons of our Nation. Now if some
twenty years since an Oath had been tendered unto us to abjure the Family of
Cromwels from ever having the Supreme Magistraey in our Nation; such an Oath
would have seemed safe, but yet it was not lawful to take it, because none knew
what was in the Womb of Teeming Time, though utterly improbable to our belief.

11. Besides, the Imposers of this Oath may miss the mark they propound to
themselves, viz. assurance of their own, and discovery of the opposite Party;
for many now pass not for the taking or breaking of any Oath, and assurance of
such is hard in keeping, and indeed not worth the having. Other will behold the
Oath as temporary, and expiring with the power of the Imposers. As for the
conscientious indeed, Esfusing it out of pure principles of piety, it is a
barbarous act for persons in power, to turn Executioners to strangle tender
Consciences, whose cordial fear of an Oath should be encouraged.

12. As the Parliament must be free, no Vassal, but enfranchised from the
Sword, so must it be full, no Cripple, but entire and complete in all the
Members thereof. Our Land has lately groaned under the most grievous Monopoly
as ever was, or can be, when a handful of men have grasped to themselves the
representing of a whole (not to say three) Nation, most of them being but
Burgesses, who though equal in Votes, are not equal in their Representation
with the Knights of the Shires. If they presume that the rest excluded by them
(far more considerable for Birth, Estates, Number, Love of the People, and what
not?) are vertually included in them, it is an intolerable PRESUMPTION. That
what pertains to all should be handled by all, is a Truth so clear and
strong, that they must offer a Rape to their own Reason that deny it. Such also
is this Maxim, Vnrepresented, Vnconcluded: So that if so few have in them the
notion of a Parliament, it is a bare Notion indeed, especially seeing this
handful of men were (say the Cavaliers) dissolved by the death of the King;
dissolved (said Cromwell) by his Sword; dissolved (say some Great ones) by an
Act of their own (entered into the Journall Book of the Parliament) dissolved
must their own Consciences say, by their voluntary accepting of Elections in
later Parliaments.

13. Now the Members of a Free and full Parliament (the only Hope of Humane
help) ought thus to be qualified:

1. Let them be Godly, and Well-affected indeed, and not in the canting
language of the Times. 2. Men of Estates, who will be tender in taxing others,
as striking them thorough themselves, whilst such who bear nothing care not how
much they burden others, as if paying were as easy as voting, and Money as
free as words. 3. Men of spirits, no dull Souls, all the sparks of whose
activity are quenched in their own phlegm. 4. No Gainers by the continnance of
the Army. Demetrius the Silver-smith was no fool (what ever else he was) so
sticking for the shrine of Diana, by which Craft he got his Gain. 5. Men of
Moderation, a quality not opposed to Diligence, but to Violence, not unactiving
men, but regulating their Activity.
14. This their Moderation must appear in considering all Interests, seeing
there be no two Interests in the Nation so contemptible, which if united, and
twisting their discontents together, cannot draw trouble on all the rest:
Especially the Sectarian (though presented I believe by their party, through a
multipling Glass) are considerable on a politic score of their numbers and
pious account of their conscience; for, though many of them carry the latter in
their Purses, who when they find the moisture of Profit to fail them, will
fall off like leaves in Autumn; yet can I not be so uncharitable, but to
believe that many of them (having the heat of their affections above the light
of their judgments) follow erroneous Consciences; Besides, having gone loose
so long, they must needs swell, if hardly girded on a sudden.

15. This moderation also must be used by all other Persons, to work themselves
to be (if not pleased) contented with the decisions of a free Parliament. All
must sit down Losers save such alone, who can plead, that they have been no
Sinners in our Nation. The Grand design must be to have none, or, (if that be
impossible) as few as may be, utterly ruined. I confess two hungry meals makes
a third a Clutton, and such who have long fasted from their detained Estates,
will be not only greedy but ravenous to recover them. Yea, such will shrewdly
plead, that they now expect moderation from them, who never used moderation to
them. However, in such a general danger, men must depose their animosities,
laboring, first, to reconcile their spirits, then, their persuasions, the
later being at less distance than the former. And men must divide, where they
cannot get the whole, seeing few will pity his starving who will eat no bread
at all, because he can recover but half of his own loaf.

16. It will be objected that such a full P. is still but an empty Parliament,
having no House of Lords therein: But know, if both hands of a man be bound, no
hope of liberty from himself; but if one be untied, it may do the brotherly
office to unloose the other: Let us be content to row in a Sculler till we can
get a pair of Oars. And such surely is the Ingenuity and public spiritness of
the Peers, that laying aside personal Interest (which upon debate may appear
more) they will suspend their Rights, Immunities, and privileges, and submit
all to the determination of a Free Parliament to acquiesce therein.

17. God give our Nation seasonably to understand their own strength, that the
Wars begun may be ended amongst our selves before Foreigners become the
Arbitrators of our differences, who will demand great wages for little work,
yea and turn their own Paymasters thereof. And may that great General (whose
Intentions long have stood in the dark to our Nation, whilst our Nations
desires were all the while in light to him, understand that Vox Populi is Vox
Dei, and interpret, that God calls unto him by the Declarations of all
Counties, to be chiefly instrumental in asserting our Liberties, and we shall
have cause for ever to bless the day of his Nativity.

18. Indeed had Providence fixed our Nativities under the Duke of Muscovy,
whose List is his Subjects Law, we would (because we must) work our selves
patiently to the obedience of his power. But seeing God has given us, with St.
Paul, to be freeborn, Acts 22. 28. (though also, with the Centurion, we have
given great sums, not to obtain, but contrive this freedom) let us not tamely
lose our Birthright, and vigorously endeavor their preservation.

19. The Story is well known of the old Woman, who having but a small parcel of
Wood, would leasurably roast her Goose*stick by stick, till her wood was all
burnt, and her Goose still raw. If the several Counties singly engage one after
another, all will be overthrown, and nothing effected as to our relief. Let the
two and fifty Shires of ENGLAND and WALES (with the City of LONDON, which
eminently is two and fifty more) be all as one, and unanimously advance the
Work, and not do as they dealt with poor CHESHIRE, using it as Joab used
Vriah, putting him forward on action, then falsely ret, eating from him, and
leaving him a prey to his enemies. But I hope our old Shipwracks will be new
Sea-marks to us, documented by former nocuments, to steer a course for the
general good.

20. There is so Englishman so inconsiderable, but he may, at the least in a
single capacity, be contributive to the happiness of his Native Country, the
Wise with their Brains, the Rich with their Purses, the Learned with their
Pens, the Strong with their Persons, all with their Prayers. And if now they
suffer this opportunity which God puts into their hands, to slip through their
fingers, they may hereafter have more years to bemoan their folly, than minutes
to amend their misery; it being better now to say, We will not, than three
years hence to say, We cannot pay our Taxes.

THE DECLARATION AND ADDRESS Of the GENTRY of the County of ESSEX, who have
adhered to the KING, and suffered Imprisonment or Sequestration, during the
late Troubles.
May it please your Excellency,
WE the Gentlemen of the County of ESSEX, taking notice how industrious some
pernicious and desperate persons have been to raise a jealousy, that all who
adhered to the KING have such a a Settlement of rancour and revenge in their
hearts, against those who were of a different party, that the blessing of a
firm and lasting PEACE, so long wished for, and now hoped to be in a near
Propinquity, is not likely to take its due and desired effect, have thought fit
to express the true sense of our hearts, in a Declaration which we have
enclosed herein, Conceiving it very fitting, not to make the same more public,
till it has first arrived at the view of your Excellency, whom God has been
pleased to make so signally eminent in the delivering of this Nation from those
pressing miseries it has so long lay panting and groaning under; and for
which, as we can never enough magnify his mercy, so can we not sufficiently
express that high Honor and Respect which we retain in our hearts toward your
Excellency, the great and worthy instrument he has been pleased to make use of
therein.

MY LORD, We subscribe our selves, Your Excellencies most Humble and Devoted
Servants.
Chelmesford, April 17. 1660.
This was subscribed by the Gentry, whose names are expressed under the
subsequent Declaration, and superscribed To his Excellency the Lord General
MONCK.

The DECLARATION.
WHereas Almighty God has raised this distracted Nation to some hopes of
Re-settlement on Just, Known, and lasting Foundations: We magnify his mercy
from the bottom of our hearts, and shall ever pay a most grateful
Acknowledgment to his Excellency the Lord Genesis MONCK as the signal Instrument
of so great a Deliverance.

And whereas some pernicious and desperate persons have labored to raise a
Jealousy, that those who adhered to the KING do still in their hearts detain
Revenge against such as were of a different Party: We think our selves bound to
declare to all the World (in the presence of God) that we detest and abhor all
thoughts of Animosity or revenge against any Party or Persons whatsoever. For
as we could wish the late Divisions had never been begotten, so we desire they
may for ever be buried, and shall think those Persons the greatest and common
Enemies of our Country who shall offer to revive them. And we also declare,
That we will thankfully submit and attend the Resolutions of the next ensuing
Parliament, for a just and happy Settlement of Church and State, that so at
last (by Cods blessing) that so those odious marks of Sides and Parties may for
ever be blotted out, and a perfect Union may again be restored to this
distressed Nation.

Edward Russel, Esquire. Sir Henry Appleton, Baronet. Sir Benjamin Ayloff, Baronet.
Sir Denner Strutt, Baronet. Sir Humfrey Mildemay, Knight Sir John Tirell,
Knight Sir Granmer Herris, Knight Sir Edmund Pierce, Knight Sir Henry Wroth,
Knight William Ayloff, Fsq. James Altham, Esquire. Gamaliel Capel, Esquire. Anthony
Brown, Esquire. Charles Fytche, Esquire. Thomas Argal, Esquire. Stephen Smith, Esquire. Salter
Herris, Esquire. Henry Pert, Esquire. John Fanshaw, Esquire. Thomas Roberts, Esquire. Richard
Humphrey, Esquire. John Lynn, Esquire. Dr. John Michaelson, Richard Symons, Esquire.
Anthony Kempson, Esquire. William Herris, Esquire. William Bramston, Esquire. John Brown,
Gent. Nicholas Serle John Vavasour, Gent. John Green, Gent. James Cookson,
Gent. Fdmund Cool, Gent.

This Declaration and Address was agreed upon by the Subscribers at a General
Meeting, at Chelmesford in Essex, April 17. 1660. Sir Benjamin Ayloffe, and Sir
Edmond Pierce being then appointed and desired to present them to his
Excellency, which was done accordingly at St. James's the 19th. of the same
Month.



A DECLARATION OF THE KNIGHTS and GENTRY In the County of DORSET, Who were in
His Late MAJESTY'S ARMY.
UPon a due consideration of the dangerous jealousies which are promoted;
partly, by the cunning of a close, and malicious Faction of Separatists, and
partly, by the unwarranted Liberties of an heady and intemperate sort of
People, which falsely term themselves Royallists: -- to the great
dissettlement of Sober and well-minded persons, and sufficient to blast the
hopes we have of returning to our Ancient Freedoms, without a more than
ordinary appearance of Divine aid, to support, and reunite us in this our
Critical necessity.

We have thought it highly expedient to declare our Seuse, and Resolves, in the
particular of adherence to the largest Assurances of Amicable Agreement, and
Correspondence Imaginable: Looking upon our selves as Obliged by an
Indispensible Tie of Religious Charity, to compassionate and forgive one
another, as we expect to be forgiven: And we do further Declare, that we are so
far from justifying those Unchristian Animosities, which reign in diverse
turbulent Spirits, even of our own Party (by Reputation at least) that we
disclaim any Society with men of those wild Principles; and that to all honest
purposes, we will never put any difference, betwixt such as shall now unite
with us, in Order to the Public Peace, and those who first engaged in the same
persuasion with our selves, Submitting all to the Resolves of Parliament, upon
whose Determinations we beseech God to bestow his Benediction.

Sir Hugh Windham, Sir Gerard Naper, Sir John Strangwayes, Giles Strangwayes,
John Hardy, Henry Coker, Edward Hull, Henry Butler, Maximilian Mohune, Robert
Mohune, Henry Hoskins, James Hoskins, George Strangwayes, Nicholas Strangwayes,
Robert Lawrence, Bruen Lawrence, Arthur Fookes, George Brown, Major Vdvehall,
Rob. Chamberlain, Rob. Strode, Jo. Strode of Slape, Humphrey Bishop, John
Bishop, Robert Culliford, George Carry, George Penny, Tho. Turbervile, George
Tubervile, Tho. Paulet, Cap. Hoare, Major Dolline, Hugh Hodges, Rich.
Willoughby, John Pesing, John Gillin^ham* William Elsing, Robert Ernsly, John
Dawe, John Fisher, Ellis Collins.


THE DECLARATION OF THE GENTRY of the County of KENT, Who have adhered to the
King, and suffered Imprisonment or Sequestration during the late Troubles.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, after so many Trialls, and so long
Distraction, to raise us to large hopes of Resettlement of this Nation upon
Just, Known, and lasting Foundations; We therefore desire from our Hearts to
render to God the glory of his Mercies, and a full tribute of Honor to his
Excellency the Lord General Monck, who has been so eminently Instrumental in
these beginnings of Deliverance.

And forasmuch as we understand that some malicious and desperate persons
(regarding neither the mercies of God, nor the miseries of their Country) have
endeavored to beget a pernicious Jealousy, That those who adhered to the
King, do still retain a spirit of Revenge against all that were of a contrary
Party: We do therefore declare in the presence of God, that we utterly abhor
all Revengeful Thoughts and Actions against any Party or Persons whatsoever.
And as we have great reason to wish those Divisions had never been born, so we
hope, and will do our utmost they may never be remembered, and shall look on all
persons as the worst and Common Enemies of this Nation that shall offer to
revive them. In pursuance whereof we further Declare (as his Excellencies Army
has given us a noble Example) that we will thankfully acquisce in the
Resolutions of the next ensuing Parliament for a due and just settlement of
Church and State.

Col. Richard Spencer, Esquire, Thomas Lennard, Esquire, Thom. Peyton, Knight. and
Baronet, Roger Twysden, Knight. and Bar. Edward Hales, Baronet, Richard Hardress,
Baronet, William Man, Knight, Stephen Lennard, Knight, John Boys, Knight, Col.
Thomas Colpepper, Col. Edward Wilsford, Col. George Newman, Col. Henry Norwood,
Robert Barnham, Esquire, Daniel Treswel, Esquire, Thomas Collepepper, Esquire,
Thomas Herlackenden, Esquire. Francis Twysden, Esquire. John Best, Esquire. Edward Barham,
Esquire. Rich. Master Esquire. Francis Clerk, Esquire. Edward Darell, Esquire. William Rook
Esquire. Joh. Boys of H^ad, Esquire. Wi^liam Kingsley, Esquire. Richard Hulse, Esquire. James
Newman, Esquire. John Pownoll, Gent. William Somner, Gen^.


A DECLARATION OF THE NOBILITY and GENTRY that adhered to the late KING, in and
about the City of LONDON.
AFter the miseries of a Civil War, and the many vain and fruitless Attempts
toward Settlement upon several Interests and Imaginary Forms of Government, It
having pleased Almighty God by unexpected and wonderful means to give these
Nations a Probable hope of being restored to those Laws and Privileges which
have been transmitted to them from their Ancestors.

We do Declare, That we think our selves obliged, next to Divine Providence to
attribute this Glorious Work to his Excellency the Lord General MONCK, who as
he had the Courage to assert the Public Liberty, And the Prudence to carry it
on against so many difficulties, has also had the happiness to lead us thus
far through the Wilderness of Confusion, without Passing the Red Sea of Blood.

And because the Enemies of the Public Peace have endeavored to represent
those of the KING'S Party as men implacable, and such as would sacrifice the
common Good as their private Passions. We do sincerely profess that we do
reflect upon our past Sufferings from the hand of God, and therefore do not
cherish any violent Thoughts or Inclinations to have been any way Instrumental
in them; And if the indiscretion of any Spirited Persons transports them to
Expressions contrary to this our Sense, we utterly disclaim them, And desire
that the imputation may extend no farther than the folly of the offenders.

And we farther declare, that we intend by our Quiet and Peaceable behavior to
testify our Submission to the present Power, as it now resides in the Council
of State in expectation of the Future Parliament, upon whose Wisdom and
Determinations, we trust God will give such a Blessing, as may produce a
perfect Settlement both in Church and State.

And as his Excellency has not chosen the Sandy Foundation of
Self-concernment, but the firm Rock of National Interest, whereon to frame our
Settlement: It is our Hope and Prayer that when the Building comes to be
raised, it may not like Rome have its beginning in the Blood of Brethren, nor
like Babel be interrupted by the Confusion of Tongues. but that we may all
speak one Language, and be of one name, That all mention of Parties and
Factions, and all Rancour and Animosities may be thrown in and buried like
rubbish under the Foundation.

Subscribed by The Marquess of Dorchester The Earl of Northampton The Earl of
Devonshire The Earl of Barkshire The Earl of Dover The Earl of Peterborough The
Earl of Norwich The Earl of Cork The Earl of Carbery The Earl of Desmond The
Viscount Ogle The Viscount Grandison The Viscount Lumley The Viscount Brounker
The Lord Lucas The Lord Bellasis The Lord Loughborough The Lord Lexinton The
Lord Brereton Tho. Fuller Bp. of Kerry Sir William Compton Sir Francis Vane
John Russel Will. Ashburnham Edward Villers Thomas Howard Will. Howard Sir
Jarvis Clifton Knight and Baronet Sir Tho. Corbet Bar. Sir Tho. Littleton Bar.
Sir John Greenvil Knight and Baronet Sir Will. Thorold Bar. Sir Tho. Prestwich
Bar. Sir Orlando Bridgman Sir Ed. Pie Sir Lewis Kirk Sir Tho. Smith Sir Rob.
Stapleton Sir Will. Coney Sir Nich. Crisp Sir Hugh Cartwright Sir Sutton Cony
Sir Henry Chichley Sir Will. Morton Sir Ed. Savage Sir Tho. Armstrong Sir John
Stephens Sir Humph. Bennet Sir Will. Howard Sir Hen. Wroth Sir Will. Dacres Sir
Rich. Malevory Sir Arthur Gorge Sir Anthony Jackson Sir Robert Bolles George
Morley D. D. Tho. Warmstry D. D. Jer. Tailor D. D. Phil. King D. D. E.
Penrodock Will. Leg George Penrodock Tho. Lower Herbert Price Tho. Panton
Robert Ruthen Coll. Fretswel John Jeffryes Adrian Scrope Will. Burgh John Mayard
Ed. Rosecarack
And many others.

FINIS.

