THE DOCTRINE OF SCHISM Fully Opened and Applied TO Gathered Churches.

OCCASIONED By a Book entitled, Sacrilegious Dissertion of the Holy Ministry
rebuked: and Tolerated Preaching of the Gospel Vindicated.

By the Author of Toleration not to be Abused by the Presbyterians.

When once Parties are engaged by their Opinions in Anti-Churches and fierce
disputing: The Flesh and Satan will be working in them against all that is
Holy, Sweet, and Safe, Baxters Def. p. 57. London, Printed by S. G. and B. G.
for James Collins, and sold by Abisha Brocas in Exon. 1672.

TO THE READER.
GOOD READER, thou art made the Judge betwixt us: examine our arguments, and
observe the manner, how we handle them, and one another impartially; and then,
if thou have no favor, yet judge righteously, and I submit.

Or, if thou have any favor, I entreat thee to bestow it in reading those few
first Chapters, that are spent in Altercation. There thou will come to
Argument, and be there as severe as thou will.

I confess, I have taken the liberty sometimes to use a little pleasantness,
rather than be Angry with a Severe Adve^sary; that perhaps may incur thy
^ensure: Yet consi^er my provocations thereunto, and thou will either pardon
me, or condemn me with pity.

To trouble the READER with Personal Altercations, or to use any thing like
Drollery, in a serious Argument, I like not very well, my Self: And though I
know not why my own heart should condemn me for either; yet, I fear him, that
is greater than my heart, and knows all things; and judge it safest to say,
that, as I never wrote in this manner before, so, I hope, I shall not be
provoked to do so again.

May my Adverse Brother have the same mind: Yea, I hope he is so good a man,
that by his own better principles (if not by my Arguments) as also by
experience (the grosseness of his Brethrens Seperations, being far beyond what
he seemed to suspect) he has already suffered himself to be satisfied, of the
evil and danger of our gathered Churches, both by Reason and Sense.

The GOD of Peace and Truth be with thee, and with his poor Church,

Farewell.
Some single Sermons, and other Discourses touching the present Differences in
the Church; printed for James Collins.
1. Catholic Charity recommended in a Sermon to the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of London in order to the abating the animosities among Christians, that
have been occasioned by differences in Religion by Jos. Glanvil, Rector of
Bathe, price 6. d.

2. (...): or a seasonable Recommendation and defense of Reason in the Affairs
of Religion; against Infidelity, Skepticism, and Phanaticismes of all sorts, by
Jos. Glanvil. price 6 d.

3. The Christians Victory over Death, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of the
most Honorable George Duke of Albemarle, by Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum, price 6
d.

4. A Mirour of Christianity, and a Miracle of Charity; or an Exact Narration
of the Life and Death of the Lady Alice Duchess Dudley,by R. Boreman D. D.
price 6 d.

5. The General Assembly, or the necessity of the receiving the Communion in
our public Congregations: evinced from the nature of the Church, the Word of
God, and Presbyterian Principles, in a Sermon by Francis Fulwood D. D. pr^ce 6
d.

6. Miserere Cleri, A Sermon representing the miseries of the Clergy, and
assigning their true causes in order to a redress, by Edw. Wetenhal, BD. price
6d.

7. Vrim and Thumin; or the Clergies Dignity and Duty, recommended in a
Visitation Sermon, by Mal. Connant B. D. price 6 d.

A Discourse of Toleration, in answer to a late Book entitled A Discourse of
the Religion of England, price 6 d.

Indulgence not justified, being a continuation of the Discourse of Toleration;
in Answer to the Arguments of a late Book, entitled a Peace Offering, or plea
for Indulgence, and to another called the Second Discourse of the Religion
England, price 6 d.

Toleration not to be abused, or a serious Question soberly debated and
Resolved upon Presbyterian Principles, viz. Whether it be advisable,
especially for the Presbyterians, either in Conscience or Prudence, to take
advantage from his Majesty's late Declaration, to Deny or Rebate their
Communion with our Parochial Congregations, and to gather themselves into
dictinct and separate Churches? price 6 d.

The Judgment of the learned and pious St. Augustine; concerning poenal Laws
against Conventicles, and for unity in Religion, delivered in his 48. Ep. to
Vincentius, price 4 d.

Non-Conformists NEW-CHVRCHES SINFUL.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction. The Answers Title and the Impertinency of it.

THe Confident Questionist, as his Answerer calls him, in this will yet be
confident, that, not many will not take the task and burden upon them to read
the Answer; and that, but few of them that read it, will be able to understand
it: and that few or none of that small number, that shall think they understand
it, will be able to see the Consequence of it: or, lastly, if any shall chance
to be so lucky; they must be exceeding kind, as well as wise, if they can
endure, without very much patience and some indignation, its Undertaking,
Method and Manner of Reasoning: in all which, it pitties me to observe the
Author so like himself; and so deserving the Title, of the Episcopal Patron of
Presbitery, and the Independent Catholic Prelate of NonConformity.

The modest dress of the Body of the Book may answer for it Self; but it is
confessed, the Mouth of it speaks great Swelling Words: The Title is;
Sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry Rebuked, and Tolerated Preaching of
the Gospel Vindicated. What Conjuring is here? I am afraid the Spirits are
disturbed! Sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry Rebuked! The Holy
Ministry Sacrilegiously deserted? What impiety is this? a heinous Crime indeed,
and worthy a very severe Rebuke. But where are the Criminals? who are they that
have wrought this Abominable thing? Sure the Answerer himself, is in no wise
guilty: no, he presently assures you, that he is firmly resolved to the
contrary; and in this point, I believe, he will as easily answer for the
Questionist. Who then does he mean to Rebuke? not the Conformists; they have no
liberty to be Silent though others have to Preach. Besides, if they should,
especially the Usurpers among them; I presume, if way might thus be made for
the right Owners, our Author would not be much troubled. Without Controversy,
then, he means his Brethren the Non-Conformists: and have you, indeed, deserted
your holy Ministry? you are too too blame, and must be Rebuked: Or have you not
already done it? yet, it is to be feared, you may chance to do it: Or, though at
present you are every where found, rather too busy in the exercises of your
gifts; and are not unlikely so to continue, yet this Questionist has said
something, that in the Consequence of it, seems to persuade you to desert your
Office; or, at least hereafter you may possibly be urged thereunto, by some
silly reasonings, either of this Questionist, or some other such Pamphleteer.
Now this Desertion of the holy Ministry, is a thing of that dangerous
Consequence, especially in You, and at such a time as this; that, though it be
but in potentia remotissima, and only not impossible to come to pass, it must
be timely observed, by a wise Watchman; and as if it were already in Act, it
must be Rebuked.

For this Desertion of the holy Ministry is Sacrilegions: there is such a
thing, in our Authors Judgment, however some of his Brethren think as
Sacrilege, under the Gospel a Stealing ones Self, who is Consestated to God in
the Holy Ministry, from the exercise of it, is a plain robbing God himself of
his Service and consequently, Sacrilege: and I fear, this hint, especially if
practiced upon, may bring to our minds and observations too, another kind of
Sacrilege, that our Author was not well aware of: For are there not some
People Separated, Dedicated, and in a sense, Consecrated to God; and as justly
Sitled Gods-People, as the Preachers, Gods-Ministers? And if these should be
stolen away from God, in his Churches and Ministers, to whose care he has
committed them, is not God himself then robbed of them? and ought not this kind
of Sacriledg also to be feared and Rebuked? A worthy Prebyterian once thought
so and honestly gave the World warning of some small effects of it in these
words: This (said he) brings Strife and Envyings among Ministers, when others
steal Cawdry 's Independency farther proved, etc. p. 84.
away their Members; and bring Slightings and Contempt upon their Persons and
Ministry; and at last, a lamentable Separation, as we see at this day.

But the Answerer must crave your pardon; for indeed the excessive Fidelity of
his Brethren to their Preaching-Office, leaves no room or occasion for his
Rebuking-Office. Besides, Sacrilege has a tender Edge, and may chance to cut
ones fingers, if not warily handled. Therefore, though perhaps he had thoughts
when he wrote his Title Page, to have spoken something upon this Subject; yet,
his Mind it seems, is not priviledg'd from change; for, at present he has
waved that Argument, and Sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry, shall
escape his Severity till another opportunity.

Doubt it not, for if you turn over but one leaf, you are secured: he, there
as the use is, presents you again with the Title of his Book; but there you
find nothing of Sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry Rebuked: no, this
first Menace is now wisely omitted, either by the Author or the Printer:
Wisely, I say, for Desertion of the holy Ministry, is scarcely any more heard
of, much less Rebuked, throughout his whole Book. However, let not his Ministry
be deserted: the Sermon may be good, though both it and the Preacher forget the
Text.

CHAP. II.
Of the Answerers description of Himself: his Abusive Terms touching
Nonconformity, and his mistake of Armagh 's Reduction: those that offered it,
1660. were no less Presbyterians: his change of the Question.

HE worthily observes, the Questionists vanity in honoring himself with the
Name, of a Lover of Peace and Truth: and indeed 'twas saucily done: the
Answerer may promote the Truth by the liberty of Errors; and seek for Peace by
pleading for, if not practicing Divisions: but who are you, Sir Confident, that
you, should so much as pretend to the love of either.

But, pray Mr. Answerer what is your Name? there are many that say they know
you by your Reason and Passion, and by your Words and Works; but pray you let
me know your Name. You have told me already; and I find it at large in your
Title Page, attended before, with two great Titles to your Book, little to the
purpose but for Ceremony: and followed after with the train of three pompous
places of Scripture, to fill up the Page.

One that is Consecrated to the sacred Mininistry, and is resolved not to be a
wilful deserter of it, in trust that any Undertakers can justify him for such
Desertion at the Judgment of God; till he know better how those can come off
themselves, who are unfaithful Pastors, or unjust Silencers of others.

And, is this your Name indeed? Certainly his Grace at Lambeth has scarce a
greater. Here is Consecration, Resolution, Condemnation, against the unfaithful
of Pastors, and the Injustice of the King and Parliament for Silencing better:
But, as the Lion sometimes, is not so fierce as he is Painted; so, I hope this
is no Scripture Name, that indicates the Nature of the Person. But, so shall
the Man be honored, that loves not Himself, or Party, above Truth and Peace.

Reader, here is nothing but meekness and gentleness and humility worthy of the
Author, to be understood: however, the expressions sound a little otherwise,
it is the Questionist only is Confident and unintelligible, though one would
think at the first hearing, that this long Name is Monstrum, Horrendum, and I
cannot but add, Ingens, cui lum^n Ademptum.

Now what dare not the Man of this great Name, say or do? he dare say, the
Conformists are the Schismatics; and that many of them, that now hold the
places, that were formerly Non-conformists, are Usurpers; and that it is
faithfulness to the King to disown such kind of Usurpers, though established in
their Places and Power by the Laws of the Land. p. 39.

He dare say it is Impudence and Ignorance of the present State of England to
call those Presbyterians that did at the King's Return offer Archbishop Vshers
Form of Episcopal Government, as he calls it, for Concord: though Mr. Calamy
was one of that Number, whose Name is found in Smectimnuus.

He dare call that book a Form of Episcopal Government, contrary to the Express
Title of it, which is a Reduction of Episcopacy to the Form of Synodical
Government. Which, as Dr. Bernard well observes, was only an expedient for the
present Clavi Trabales. p. 54.
Necessity, occasioned by the Tempestuous violence of that time; as an
Accommodation, by way of prevention of a Total Shipwreck, threatened by the
Adversaries of Episcopacy, as appears sufficiently by the Title of it.

It is, therefore ingeniously argued by our Author, those that are called
Presbyterians did desire that Episcopacy might be reduced to the form of
Synodical Government, therefore they are no Presbyterians, they are not for
Synodical Government.

The plain truth is, that Reduction proposes a way for Union and Consolidation
of the two Governments; but that, such a Union, as should contain both, without
the loss of either; and least of all, as the necessity of that time required,
of the Presbyterian: And consequently, those, that would submit unto that
Reduction, might still be Presbyterians both in Name and Thing, however it
fared with Episcopacy.

For, all men are not bound to subscribe or swear unto the definition of a
Presbyterian, which our Answerer imposes upon the World: or to believe, that
the Divine Right of the Ruling Elder Vnordained is essential to the
Presbyterial Government; (p. 5.) for the Government may be Synodical without
it. And I need not give him Instances, that that kind of Government was
endeavored to be Erected, in the several parts of the Kingdom, by the
Agreement of several Eminent Ministers of that way, that yet denied the
Juredivinity of mere Ruling-Elders; and admitted them only as Prudential: and I
doubt not he very well knows it to be so.

But, as to that Application made in 1660. which he speaks of; it is too well
known, that in effect it rather proposed for the Presbyterial, than for the
Episcopal Government; and had it taken, the Bishop, should have had left him
little more than the Name; who was rather, to have been a Moderator, or
Chairman durante vita, than a Bishop, in a common acceptance: or if a Bishop,
such a one, as might well enough have consisted with Synodical Government, or
the design had been lost. But what need any more be said? the Proposers would
not allow him a Negative voice; and consequently, the Synod or Presbytery
should have Governed, either with or without his Consent: and is not this a
fair Apology, twice offered, by our Answerer; that therefore, because they
would have Admitted the Reduction of Episcopacy to their own Presbyterial
Government, they are no Presbyterians.

Again; It is nothing for him to say, that the Reasonings of the Questionist,
are weak and silly over and over: that they are Confident to Admiration: full
of Noise and Nonsense, Confused and Unintelligible, and Schismatical too. (p.
29.) These are his soft and gentle Strokes upon one that deserves to be called
Names, that would foul Paper, as he intimates more than once, as an Argument of
his unwillingness to offend his Reader and Himself; though he have no foul
mouth.

But he dare venture farther and say; that Mr. Fulwoods, Mr. Stilemans and Mr.
Hinckleys Books for Conformity are such Toys -- of factious Disputers. He dare
say; that his own flesh disputes in him more Cunningly, than all the Durells,
Fulwoods and Stilemans in England; and yet in one thing, methinks, his spirit
fails him, and he appears too much unlike the valiant Hero I ever took him
for. He, in one place, says, p. 32. Had he had leave to confute the Silly
Reasonings of Mr. Fulwood and other such Pamphleteers, he had long ago done
strange things. And in another, p. 39. he would have me procure him leave to
give his Reasons of Non Conformity. Alas, good man! that he should want Leave
to do such brave things; that he should want Will or Zeal to do them without
leave. He says, p. 31. that I knew that he must not give his Reasons against
Conformity. But who gave him leave to Preach before the Indulgence? who gave
him leave to Print this Answer? Or is it possible to speak bolder things
against Conformity if he had leave to do it, than he has done here? The
Conformists are Usurpers and Schismatics: those that Silenced the
Non-Conformists are Unjust, Cruel and Sacrilegious: Conformity is guilty of
Perfidiousness, Perjury and Persecution: Conformists are Proud, and contend who
shall be Greatest; and Covenant never in certain points to obey Christ against
the World and the Flesh* as he humbly insinuates, p. 74.

But in Earnest, can he that lets fly at this rate, persuade us, that it is
only want of leave, that has hindered his Answering the Books aforesaid? Can
he persuade us, that his Obedience to Man, can warrant his omission of so great
a Charity, as his effectual endeavor to rescue Conformists from these desparate
enormities? or can he think so honorably of our Governors, as to fear that his
strong Reasons would more offend and provoke them, if given without their
License, than these hard uncharitable, unconscionable insinuations, and unjust
accusations, against themselves, as well as us.

Away then with this childish passion of fear, it is altogether unbecoming our
Goliath, that defies the whole Army of Israel. You have Troops of Propositions
always at Command, and so many Yokes of Distinctions, that you doubtless are
able to make good what ever you have said, be it never so bad, if you durst, or
had leave. But what need of Leave? or why should you Fear? what quidlibet or
quodlibet can stand before you? p. 30. You are the Man of Art, that can do and
undo, prove and disprove the same thing; or else, many of your Friends as well
as Enemies have done you wrong.

I am one of his Friends, and I dare affirm of him, to his deserved honor;
that he never yet wanted Matter of Argument, against the Cause, or of Rebuke
against the Person of any Man that ever opposed him. He has one very strange
and wonderful piece of Artifice; that, be the Controversy what it will, he can
make his Adversary differ with him, about the Existence of a God and Christ, an
Heaven and Hell; that he may take occasion to tell the World, that some
Teachers need these plain Admonitions. p. 26.

But this subtle Answerer, has a more powerful Stratagem, never to be escaped;
for he can make his Adversary say any thing, that he, himself thinks he can
most easily oppose; or if he cannot make him say it, he can affirm and prove he
says it; and then, thunder out a Volume against him for saying so.

We have a very Notable Instance of his Skill this way in our hands. If the
Questionist dare say, that Toleration ought not to be abused by Presbyterians,
in gathering themselves into distinct Churches in opposition to the Parochial,
he will most strenuously and pertinently confute him, with a Book, called by
the hard Name above mentioned, Sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry
Rebuked: and Tolerated Preaching of the Gospel Vindicated.

And if it be too palpable, that that Author said nothing for the Sacrilegious
desertion of the holy Ministry fit to be Rebuked, he can, as we before
observed, quickly desert that part of his undertaking; but yet proceed to write
his Book in the Vindication of Tolerated Preaching; and persuade the World,
with no mean Confidence, that the scope of the Book he pretends to Answer, is
directly against such Tolerated Preaching. Yea, in the very beginning of his
Book, p. 2. And in another Character, on purpose to have the Reader note it; he
expressly affirms; that he finds -- the Questionist has the Face (though he
has not the mouth that spoke it, or the hand that wrote it) yet he has the
face to exhort them to desert their Office. But with how much Ingenuity and
Justice, God and his own Conscience must needs know already; and he must give
me leave to let the World know it also, in the Chapter following.

CHAP. III.
I did not exhort them to desert their Office as he Affirms. His manner of
Censuring less Errors. About Toleration. The Authors kindness to
Non-Conformists.

SIR, I will take leave to say; you may bless your self, that you have engaged
an Adversary that is a Friend; and has neither Wit nor Will to practice upon
you, as some have done upon less Provocation.

That you might have ground to run out upon me, as an Enemy to Tolerated
Preaching; you expressly affirm, p. 2. that you find I exhort you to desert
your Office: and that it seems, p. 60. that acknowledging us true Churches,
will not satisfy us, without What? Actual hearing us. We would stroke you into
silence and the neglect of your Office. p. 25. You ask, p. 58, 59. whether it
be Sin in you to Preach; and labor much, in the proof of the Necessity of your
Preaching. And you intimate, that if the Non Conformists should not Preach,
they should be Idle, Cruel, Sacrilegious and Perfidious: as are your words, p.
27, 28.

Now, Sir, in my silly way of reasoning, I must demand, whether you do indeed
find, those words, for which you persecute me, throughout your Book, in my
Book, or not.

If you shall say, you do find those words, or words to that effect; I am not
satisfied, unless you tell me where: for I solemnly protest, I know not. Why
did you not name the page, where they were to be found, as in other cases you
generally do? especially, this being the main matter of offense to you; that
provoked you to so much severity throughout your Book against me; for you begin
your Book to this purpose: that if it had been all my endeavor that the
Toleration should not be abused, you should earnestly have seconded me: but
when you found- that I had the fa^e to exhort you to desert your Office, etc.
that I come to you in Gods Name, to charge you to forbear His work: then, you
say, your Conscience bad you help to save the weaker sort that need, from such
Pernicious Fallacies

Sir, I do with all earnestness, and yet meekness, let you know; that I expect
you should make good your charge: show me these words, or words that carry the
same sense, in any place of my book, or confess you have wronged me, and I am
satisfied.

But yet, turn the Tables, and ask your self seriously, what lashes you would
have censured me worthy, should I have dealt so with you. Take an Instance of
your Spirit and Charity, upon a far less occasion given you, as you conceive,
in my Book; when, upon a Misinformation at most, I only Asked a Question, in a
matter of no great moment, viz. Whether the Presbyterians did not heretofore
refuse the Comprehension, because they could not have it without a general
Toleration? See, how you fly upon me, with all fury, and say, p. 62, 63, 64.
This has no bounds, and it grieveth me to read it. O Posterity! How will you
know what to believe? you should not by Question, have vented such a falsehood.
And yet, notwithstanding all this vehemence, in the next pages, you seem your
self to intimate, in my weak opinion, grounds sufficient for the Rumor and
Suspicion, and consequently the Question: But I am not obstinate in my own
Defense, leaving my Question and your Censure upon it, with your Discourse and
Concession about it, to the mercy of the Reader, who will judge betwixt us,
whether we will or not.

However, thanks be to God, (though by your charging me to have written things,
that I have not written, contrary to plain Truth and Justice, you have given me
far greater provocation) yet, I say, thanks be to God, you have not tempted me
to turn your own words upon you, and to say to you, as you do to me, [Repent of
such Calumnies, and study not to aggravate your fault by excuses -- we lament
his want of common sense or modesty -- what dealing is to be expected from such
men -- with what forehead -- is this Humility or ministerial Fidelity, to begin
your Book with so direct an untruth, and to stand to it, and repeat it so often
in the face of the World?

Lord! what have I ever said or done in order to the silencing of Non
conformists, as you frequently seem to charge me? yea, what have I not done or
said, as I was able and had any opportunity, that their mouths might be opened?
the World knows my several public endeavors to that purpose: I do not say my
silly Arguments, (as you meekely call them) but, perhaps, my Mediation (as some
persons will more ingeniously acknowledge) for the peaceable Non-conformists,
from the Kings Return to the day of the Indulgence, and since too, has not
been altogether ineffectual, and perhaps considering all that has been too
much, and my Superiors have been very candid if they have not thought it
troublesome.

I must take the boldness to add, that were I conscious to my self, that any
thing I ever said or did, has been so great a Remora in the way of
accommodation betwixt nonconformity and the Church of England, as the
boisterous reasonings and desires of some men, I fear I should carry it with
sorrow to my grave: If I err in this censure, I beg the pardon both of God and
them.

CHAP. IV.
It Is not fair to charge Consequences for Doctrines; much less to say, the
Consequence is asserted; let the Answerer be Judge. Mr. Baxter was not abused.

I Observed, that you charged me untruly with dissuading you to desert your
Office, and have cause to fear, you will make excuses your self, although you
will not allow it in others: and I cannot but expect you will say thus, or to
this effect; That though I do not assert in plain terms, or in words tha^ will
admit or bear that sense, yet the consequence of my Discourse, is to take you
off from Preaching, while I would dissuade you from Gathering-Churches.

For I find, after I have read long in your Book, and even toward the latter
end of it, you have patience thus far to explain your self. Because, say you,
p. 57. I would prove your separation sinful, I would therefore prove your
preaching sinful. Again, p. 59. if God say, preach, and the Law say, preach not
in Temples; we may conclude, we must preach out of the Temples. And because I
speak against erecting Separated Congregations to your selves, you say, p. 70.
I mean it is sin in you to exercise your Ministry: i. e. you mean, this is the
consequence of what I say against your separation: For, can we preach, as you
add, without Auditors? and can these Auditors be no Congregation?

Thus you do, (pardon me if) I think, not very accuratly mend the matter, nor
very intelligibly explain your meaning. But, I remember, you told me, p 33. the
Presbyterians do not love confusion: And also p. 4. that you are no
Presbyterian.

But, my Brother, I must needs mind you, that whether this consequence be
strong or not, I am sure the excuse is weak, and unwarrantable by the Laws of
all sober disputation.

1. For admit the consequence to be fair and just, your dealing with me is
neither, when you charge me with an assertion which only follows, or may be
drawn from my proposition. It is not allowable to say the consequent of my
opinion is my opinion, and that I hold it: much less has it any color of
candor or justice, to say, I assert it, and maintain it. How then can you
answer me, or give me satisfaction, for saying, first, that that which your
self has argued from my proposition, is my proposition; and then write a book
against me for it.

This is not too like a favorable Disputant, were the consequence most obvious
and immediate; whereas in the case in hand, it is neither so, nor so; but
contrarily, very doubtful, obscure, and remote, your self being Judge.

The Question here is, Whether I cannot write against gathering Churches out of
our Churches, and yet not exhort you to desert your Ministry? You hold it in
the Negative. Now, to fill up the va^ances of your former uneven Argument, to
make it good, there is need of the skill of a learned Propositionist to work
thus.

You must preach; you may not preach in the Temples, therefore you must preach
somewhere else: Here Is the place provided, but where are the People? Let Us try
again, if you must preach, you must have people to hear you: there are none to
be had, but such as belong to our Churches; therefore you must gather Churches
out of our Churches; therefore I that exhort you not to gather Churches out of
our Churches, exhort you to desert your Office and Ministry; and therefore, by
defending your Office, you answer my Book of Toleration not to be abused, by
gathering Churches out of Churches.

Thus strangers greet, and both ends are at length brought together; but their
firm friendship depends upon the strength of this golden Chain, or Rope of
Sand, which may come to be tried anon.

In the mean time let us change the Scene, and then make judgment of this way
of arguing, your self.

Suppose I should write a Book, and entitle it, Sedition Rebuked; and call this
a Reply to your Answer: taking it for granted, that every one would see the
consequence as well as my self; and thereupon, at every turn, I should charge
you with the Defense of Sedition, and labor against you to prove Sedition a
sin; meaning all this while, (though never observing any such thing, when I
purposely and largely, with about threescore Propositions endeavor de industria
to state the Question) that Sedition lies at the bottom, and in the consequence
and tail of your Discourse thus; in many places you intimate, the Priest is
intolerable; and there, whether the People will endeavor regularly to remove
him or not, you exhort them to disown and forsake him, and the place by Law
appointed for Public Worship, and to gather themselves into another Church,
under another (Nonconforming) Minister: This is to exhort the People to begin
a public Reformation without their Governors; this is Sedition, or the way to
Sedition, to say no worse; and this will therefore justify my manner of
writing against you, and my frequent charging sedition, and the defense of
sedition upon you.

Pray be ingenuous, how would you like this way of arguing? Whether the
consequence be true or false, you will not say this is fair dealing; you would
say you were highly injured, I am sure you would.

And now I am come so near it, I will present you with such an instance in your
Book; that will to the purpose convince you at once, both of your Ingenuity in
this way of arguing, and of the censure you give me, upon a false supposition,
that I had abused my worthy Friend Dr. Baxter, in affirming, that he had said
something that he never said. It Is thus:

You tell me, p. 48. that Baxter (as you familiarly call him) takes himself to
be abused by my Allegations, and provokes me to cite any of his words which
are against Non-conformists preaching as they have opportunity; and somewhat
sharply mind me, that he and Mr. Ball understand themselves better then I do
them.

Now, who would not hence conclude, that I had said, that that reverend Person
had written against Non-conformists preaching, as they have opportunity. But
where have I said so, or any thing to that purpose? I know your civility and
veracity will engage you to show it; therefore you refer your Reader to p 16.
of my Book: There, indeed, I find the place which you mean, but not one tittle
of the words or thing you say. My words there are these; Particularly the
Arguments of Mr. Baxter and Mr. Crofton, for communion with our Parochial
Congregations are still the same, and ought to be answered, before you begin
your work of Separation, and think of building new any Synagogues.

But is this to say, that Mr. Baxter has written against Non-conformists
preaching as they have opportunity? Yet if Mr. Baxter has writ nothing against
Non-Conformists Preaching, Cure of Church-Divisions, and Defense of against
Bagshaw.
which I never said; Mr. Baxter has written Arguments for Communion with our
Parochial Congregations, which I did say, and still maintain; and neither Mr.
Baxter no your self will deny it, except in Drollery.

And pray tell me, what reason has that learned and peaceable man to hold
himself abused by me, for commending his Arguments, to be considered by such as
he intended them for? did he not publish them that they might be considered? or
has he changed his mind, and thinks them now inconsiderable himself? or more
unseasonable now, then when he wrote them?

I think worthily of that reverend Author, but, Sir, what you can say for your
self, I know not: You ought, if I might be Judge, first satisfy the World that
I have not abused Mr. Baxter; and then, to acknowledge the Abuse you have put
upon your self and Mr. Baxter, upon me and the Reader, and the plain truth.

If the censure seem rigorous, judge your self, and mittigate it, if you find
cause; but consider, that you your self intimate, that Mr. Baxter never wrote
any thing against their preaching; and yet you know, that he has written much,
and that lately too, for communion with our Parochial Congregations: the thing
I affirmed. But this way of Reasoning, and undue accusation, is so familiar a
thing in the Book before me, that, I fear, I have abused my Readers stomach, by
staying himself so long upon one or two particulars of so gross a nature.

I confess, it is as lawful as it is usual, to confute a proposition from the
ill consequences and inconveniences of it; but this is one thing: and to set up
the ill consequence as the Doctrine of the Adversary, and under that form to
dispute and write a Book agrinst it, especially without showing the necessity,
if not the obviousness and immediateness of such consequence, in the stating of
the Question; all which you very skilfully think not fit to do: this I am bold
to say, is another thing; and such a thing as ought never to plead Indulgence
or Toleration, especially in a grave and grown, and practiced Disputant.

However, two things ought always to be remembered, that incommodum non solvit
Argumentum; and if any good may come out of evil, yet we must not do evil that
such good may come. It Is a good thing for any one to provide for his Family,
yet I may not steal that I may provide for my Family: nor thus argue, I must
provide for my Family, I cannot do it except I steal; therefore I must steal,
or thus I must preach; I cannot preach but I must gather a Church out of my
Neighbors Congregation; therefore I must gather a Church, etc. though I before
observed, there are some that call that stealing; and that not only from my
Neighbor, but God himself.

But more of this anon; in the mean time let it only remembered, that if you may
not preach in the Temples, as you acknowledge; and if you cannot preach in other
places, as you more then intimate, without gathering Churches, etc. and if this
be found stealing and unlawful, and therefore it follow, that without
conforming you cannot lawfully exercise your gift of preaching, I cannot help
it.

However, at present, I have a mind to relieve you, by doing you the kindness
to question the consequence of your Argument; and that I may also relieve the
Reader, and give him space to breathe a little, this shall be the matter of
another Chapter.

CHAP. V.
The consequence of deserting their Office from their not gathering, disproved
as not good either according to the Authors Principles, or the Answerers, or
the nature of thing it self.

J Hope, by this time, you perceive you have not dealt like a very fair
Disputant, in framing a proposition your self, and then publishing it to the
World as mine, and as asserted and defended by my Book; and accordingly
laboring to demolish it in the design and scope of your Answer, although that
proposition had been the necessary, plain, and immediate consequence of what I
had affirmed or denied.

But what shall I say if it indeed appear otherwise, and if that which you
impose upon me, and so zealously oppose in me; be not, in any sense, the
consequence of what I had said, either immediately or remotely, plainly or
obscurely, or any way necessarily. And that though I do assert, that it is
unlawful for you to gather new Churches, it will not follow, either from my
principles, or from the nature and truth of the thing, or from your own
principles, that I must needs hold it to be unlawful for you to exercise your
Ministry; or would persuade you to desert your Office, let each be examined.

1. To make your charge against me any way tolerable, you should make it appear
at least, from my principles, which is not possible for you to do: for, though
I judge it unlawful for you to gather new Churches to preach unto, I hold it
equally unlawful for you to desert your Office: It Is my plain opinion, you
ought rather then either of these, to attend upon the Ministry of the Temples;
and in order thereunto to conform: and be it known unto you, if you knew it not
before, that I am much of Mr. Fulwood's mind, who in three Books, published by
him to that purpose, has endeavored to convince you, that this is his
judgment, and that your duty.

Now, unless an endeavor to persuade you not to desert your Office, be to
exhort you to desert your Office; yea, unless I had declared, that I believe
there is no better, or no other way, for you to serve your Ministry, then by
gathering Churches, how can you affirm with honor to your wit and ingenuity,
p. 57. that by dissuading you from the latter, I exhort to desert the former.

2. Neither does it follow from the nature and truth of the thing; there is no
such indissoluble connection betwixt these two Propositions, that from my
asserting one of them, you should boldly charge me with the other.

I do say, you may not gather Churches; I do not therefore say, you may not
preach: or, if I did say that in statu quo you may not preach; I do not say,
you may not change your state, as before, and then preach; I do not say, the
King may not open the door of the Temple to you, that you might preach there;
or if I had said all this, yet I had not said, you should desert your Office;
for not to preach is one thing, and to desert your Office is another.

For no man may say, that a Minister deserts his Office, who living in a place
of Christian Government, and has no title, but sincerely desires it, though he
do actually preach, without public license, or the leave of a particular
Pastor; and he that acknowledges any thing of Government, cannot be sober and
believe that his Office obliges him to go into Houses for want of a Temple;
and there endeavor to draw the people from the public worship, without the
leave of their faithful Pastor; and that too, just at the times appointed for
the public worship, as the custom generally is, notwithstanding your example
and Edicts to the contrary, and this, forsooth, because he must preach.

Yea, once more, admit that a lawfully ordained Minister rightfully inducted
into his cure, should be suspended, justly or unjustly, by a lawful Authority;
(and I think this may venture to comprehend something of our present case:)
will any rule of good Policy, or regular Reason, allow this Minister to preach
within the bounds of that Authority that silenced him, before such Authority is
satisfied, either for the offense, or of the innocence of the Person, and the
unwarrantableness* of the sentence.

Neither can I see (pardon my dullness) how any Government can be secured from
the danger of General Confusion, that shall suffer this Principle [we must
preach] to bear it down. I wish heartily I may be found mistaken in this at
last; however, I am sure, if persons thus suspended shall (during their
suspension) forbear to preach, at least till the innocence of their Cause, and
the unjustness of their silencing be very clear and undoubted, generally to
persons unconcerned, they do not by their obedience and unvoluntary silence
desert their Office, though they be yet in the possession of their Cures: their
non-actual preaching in obedience to Authority, deserves a better name then a
sacrilegious desertion of the Holy Ministry; much less if Ministers have no
Cures of their own, may they be charged with deserting their Office, because
they gather not our people from our Temple-worship, that they may have Auditors
to preach unto, though without so doing they could not preach.

3. Let us now, lastly, try the strength of this consequence by your own
principle discovered to us by your concessions and purposes in your Book; but
more especially, in your advice given to the Non-conformists.

In p. 92. you say, In Parishes where all may hear the Parish-Minister, I would
not have you (Non-conformists) without necessity preach at the same hour of the
day, but at some middle time, that you may not seem to vie with him for
Auditors, nor to draw the People from him; but let them go with you to hear
him, and after come and hear you. I do acknowledge that in other places, though
you omit it here, you provide that the Minister of the Parish be faithful,
truly endeavoring the salvation of his flock.

I am not here to urge, or insist upon the inconveniences of such a practice;
and if the Nonconformist be an humble, discreet, and good man, for my part I
should not much fear them; but my business is to collect from this Advice of
yours, that you your self can hardly believe, that deserting your Office, does
necessarily follow the not gathering of Churches; and that not only in mine,
but in the common and usual understanding of the terms.

For thus, as you well observe, the Nonconformist would but hold a Chapel
meeting under, and be subservient in his work to the Parish-Minister; and such
preaching would in no ordinary construction be termed Schism, or a gathering a
Church out of, or distinct, much less in opposition to the Parish Church, but a
furtherance, if well managed, to the common interest and concern of it; as the
office of a Schoolmaster in Catechizing the younger sort upon the weekdays.

And could we find that this cause had been indeed taken upon the foresaid
conditions, as you advise, we should not have thought we had not had much
reason to endeavor to prevent the Abuse of Toleration by the Presbyterians, or
to complain as we do.

But it is sad to observe their practice quite contrary, generally so far as we
can learn, and particularly in the populous City where I dwell, that are most
conveniently ordered into Parishes, and the best provided of faithful
Ministers, for to such places the Non conformists generally resort, and set up
their meetings in direct opposition to the Parochial Churches, at the same time
with the public Worship; not endeavoring, in the least, any communion with it,
or the Parish-Minister; but to as much discouragement of him as possibly they
can.

And in those other places, where they have set up their Meetings, (there are
but few that think it convenient to venture in the Country Parishes) they take
the same course, without any regard to the distinction of faithful and
unfaithful Ministers; and this is the thing we call Schism and sinful
separation, and unlawful gathering of Churches out of Churches, and cannot see
how you can believe that the necessity of your Office can justify such
dividing practices, who seem to detest them.

Yea, if such as bear the name and license of Presbyterian-Ministers, would
follow your advice, and only gather temporary Assemblies (waiting for a fixed
better state, as you speak) in London, and in some Country Parishes, where the
Ministers are intolerable, till they are better provided for, though perhaps
we justly differ from you about the number of intolerable Ministers, and must
in reason judge, that your first endeavors should try to have such Ministers
removed; yet, I conceive, we should not have so great cause of lamentation, as
now is too too notoriously given us, by the unreasonable causers of our
Divisions.

Sir, give me leave to say and believe, upon the observation of the peaceable
Principles, I find now and then hinted, even in the midst of your heat against
me, in your Book, that did you rightly apprehend how matters are carried by
these Church-gatherers for the dividing, dissipating, and as much as in them
lies, destroying our Parochial Churches, you would return to your first
thoughts, and no longer oppose, but second me.

CHAP. VI.
The Question is first stated, not unintellgible. Now again cleared and freed
from his Exceptions.

YOu now perceive that the main of your Book is answered, by demonstrating how
little it is to the purpose, to say no worse: and thus you see, what trouble
you put me to, to answer Nothing. p. 40.

But Soft, Sir, What if enough be found besides, and, on the by, to Confute
you? perhaps, there is nothing in your Book, at least, your Answerer might
think so, sufficient to provoke so great a Man, to set his wit directly against
you. If it be so, I accept his mercy; for then, the Match being the more equal,
I do the better conceive a Confidence to defend my self: and, at last, to the
point.

In the State of my Question, I first supposed, that the Presbyterians would
not join with the Independents: but, therein, my Answerer intimates, p. 28. I
was mistaken; for it is an Article of his Faith (so far as faith is concerned
in the point) that the Presbyterian^ will join with (their now friends) the
Independents, not as a Sect, etc. Yea, p. 29. that they will join with the Sect
(as he is pleased to honor us) of the Diocesan Prelatists, in the Parish
Churches also. O the Charity of Presbyterians! and the length of their Arms,
that can embrace persons at so great a distance! But pray, Sir, what do you
mean, by joining with the Independents? Will you, indeed, join with them in
their Congregations? If this be not your meaning, you are again upon the point
of little to the purpose. But if it be, and yet you will join with them as a
Sect, your Judgment is as deep, as your affection is broad.

But to proceed, upon that mistake, my Question was shortened to this purpose;
Whether the Presbyterians, as things now stand, ought in Conscience or
Prudence, to Set up for Themselves, or to Worship God with the rest of their
Neighbors, in their several, proper Parochial-Congregations?

What I meant by their Setting up for themselves, was plained in the very
Question, as was Just before proposed: viz. A refusing our Communion and a
gathering themselves into distinct and separate Churches.

Now, rather, than I will run in a Maze, or venture my self in an Ocean of
Tempestuous Propositions, my Answerer shall pardon me, if I appeal to the
Reader, whether my Question was not intelligible without them.

For what man is so ignorant (unless his Knowledge has confounded and
Shipwrack'd his Reason) as not to know, who I mean by Presbyterians? p. 45.
Yea, who would not suspect the person guilty* that, when he is Indicted flies,
and plays least in sight, or so disguiseth him, as he cannot be known: or when
his friends return (as our Author for the Presbyterians) a Non inventus. But he
and the world must know, that the Presbyterians like non of his excuses or
subterfuges. They cannot so easily deny themselves; and methinks, he should not
deny his Brethren: they apply themselves under that Name to the King for
Licenses, as our Author acknowledges; and yet he more then Intimates they are
not, at least most of them, are not, what they tell the King they are. And then
what does he make them, if they are not Presbyterians? But let him be answered,
that such as deny themselves to be Independents, or Anabaptists, or Quakers, or
Papists, and scruple and mince their Conformity with us; whether they be Laity
or Clergy, will be called Presbyterians whether he will or no: and such, he
could not but know, I, especially meant.

2. Who knows not what I mean, by our Parochial Churches or Congregations? and
who knows not, too well, what is to be understood by Gathering-Churches; by the
former practices of the Independents; but more especially, by these
Presbyterians, since the Indulgence?

But, to talk of gathering Churches, and yet, of holding Communion with us, is
a Juggle, unworthy our Author: who either does, or should know; that it is
protestatio contra factum and questionem. I mean, it is generally so.

I have, as you cannot but see, both in the Question as proposed, and as
stated, and as prosecuted, set gathering of Churches in opposition to our
Parochial Congregations. And what you say to any thing else, is not to the
point. And the general practice of Church-gatherers, too well satisfies the
world what they intend; and also that the Question was rightly propounded, and
clearly stated to any unbyassed and unprejudiced Reader, what ever you say to
confound it, and with your wonted Elaborateness to render it unintelligible, p.
40. and then complain that it is so.

But the Learning of some men, is not ill compared to a Pedlars Pack; though,
not so much, for that there are many things that are difficult to be found; but
rather, because, if they look for any thing, every thing comes to hand.

But this be far from our Author; to whom we must now hearken dilligently. He
first sets down my Question verey honestly and entirely; p. 26, 27. then he
nibles a little at it, and at length, bites: and tells the World, that I join
two questions in one, which we must look to have distinctly Answered.

But what those two questions are, and where they are distinctly answered I
have looked, and find not. Would he not speak distinctly to them because he
hates Divisions? or was it his prudence to leave out Conscience? for he has
told us, p. 21. that to decide this case is a work of mere Christian Prudence:
but where is Conscience then? Excluded? by what Law? that shall be tried anon.

For I shall now address my self in earnest to review the whole Question: not
in two only, but in the several Cases depending upon it. A just examine whereof,
will give me occasion sufficient to consider, all that he has said to the
purpose against me, as I find it scattered up and down his Book.

CHAP. VII.
Gathering-Churches charged with Schism from the Church of England, and proved
to be so from the Definition of this Church. Wherein he is told what the Church
of England, and Schism from it is.

THe General Question betwixt us is this; Whether it be Lawful for the
Presbyterians to refuse Communion with our Parish Churches, and to gather
themselves into Distinct and Separate Churches.

And upon a Serious review of it, and Consideration of all that the Answerer
has said against me, and my Discourse upon it; I do renew my Charge; and
possitively affirm, that it is Unlawful; and as it is generally practiced, it is
a great and dangerous Schism both against the Church of England, and Particular
Churches: it is a Schism in its own nature, and sinful in it Self. It Is a Schism
in the Judgment of the old Nonconformists called Puritans; and also in the
Judgment of the Presbyterians before 1660. and lastly, that both in Conscience
and Prudence it ought at present to be avoided, or deserted, by all such,
especially, as are called Presbyterians. And all this, in in its several parts,
and in their order, as here set down, I undertake to make good.

1. Thus to Separate and to Gather Churches is a Schism, with respect to the
Church of England. Now, as Divines speak of a Schism in a Church, and a Shism
from a Church; so in a diverse respect, this practice is guilty of both. For if
you consider the Church of England, as particular Organized Church, it is a
Schism from: but if, as part of the Universal Visibe Church only, as the
Nonconformists use to term it, then it is Schism in it.

It is a Shism from the Church of England as such; by dividing from its
Governors, Members, Worship and Assemblies: as I more than Intimated in my
Book, p. 8. and this ought to have been distinctly observed at least, by my
Answerer: but instead thereof, how he stumbles and blunders! looking carefully
and making great Outcries after that, which I laid just before him.

You charge us, says he, p. 37. with Schism from the Church of England. Again;
p. 38. Tell us what you mean by Schism from the Church of England. Again; p.
35. We are told of Schism from the Church of England; as if it were a Monstrous
and unheard of thing: and then puzzles, pitifully puzzles himself and his
Reader, in an impertinent pursuit of the Head of the Church of England: as if
without a certain and infallible knowledge of that, there could be no such
thing as a Church of England, or Schism from it. Wearying himself, for five or
six pages, at his old game, of nothing to the purpose.

But, methinks, he labors with a very vehement desire after this great truth;
and could he be sure to have it, he will not say how much Money, as well as
Pains, he would give for it: yea he roundly offers me (how consistent with his
gravity I do not observe) but he roundly offers me all the Money in his Purse
to make him understand but what the Church of England is, p. 35.

Well, if you will promise me to be humble and teachable, and that you are not
too old to learn; though I have no mind to your money, I will show my
readiness, and charity at least, to relieve you in so great a Straight, though
my Judgment may fail, and my Definition be as despicable as my silly Arguments.

The Church of England, is a Community, Consisting of professed Christians,
United in the same Government, Doctrine and Worship: according to the 39.
Articles, and Homilies; Her Liturgy, and Canons and Laws; and divided into
Parochial Assemblies, for the more convenient Worshipping of God.

Might such a Notion of the Church of England have superceded all his Finesses
of Wit and Distinctions about the Constitutive Ecclesiastical Head, as he
speaks, (how learnedly I leave to his Friend Mr. Bagshaw) I think his labor
might have been well enough spared: For he may Consider we are United in the
same Government, and the Pars Regens; is the only part he himself requires to
be added to the Pars Subdita to Constitute a Church Organized, in a proper
political sense. p. 38. Now you will not deny, either of these parts; and
consequently, you have found the whole of the Church of England, as you say,
Organized in a proper political Sense.

And, it hence follows, that it is material to our point, to determine
certainly, what is the Ecclesiastical Head of this Church: whether, we that are
Members of it, are all united in the King as Persona mixta cum Sacerdote, and
not merely a Civil head as you insinuate; he being Supreme in all Causes and
over all Persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. Or whether, any think it more
proper to Radicate this Union in his Grace of Canterbury, as Primate over all
England: or whether in both the Archbishops who hold Communion in the same
Doctrine, Worship and Laws: and in whom, both the Provinces are United: or
lastly, whether we are not rather United in all the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church of England, as the Pars Regens; and our Government in the Church,
considered purely and abstractly from the Civil Government, be not rather an
Aristocracy than a Monarchy. Whether this, or the other be the true; to know it
is not necessary, nor of any use, that I can perceive in the present
Controversy.

But it is a certain Vanity, to say; because I cannot find the Head, I will
deny the Body, though I must withal deny my own Senses. Because you cannot know
certainly, who was your Father, will you deny your Mother which is the surer
side?

There is a Church of Engl^nd, and what it is I have endeavored to show: and
by the Nature of it, we may more easily conclude what Schism from it, is; and
who are guilty of this; whether such as Separate and Gather Churches or not.

CHAP. VIII.
What Schism from the Church of England is, and whether gathering of Churches,
a^ now is practiced, be not guilty of it.

1. WHat is Schism from the Church of England? sure it is not a denying its
Doctrine, or holding any thing contrary thereunto; he that holds perversum
Dogma only, is an Ad Tit. cap. 3.
Heretic, no Schismatic, as St. Hierom teaches.

Mr. Newcomen, a learned Presbyterian, as I observed in my last, lets the
Separatists know, that their agreeing with us and the Reformed Churches in
Doctrines that are Fundamental, their holding one Head and one Faith, does not
excuse them from being guilty of breach of unity, so long as they hold not one
Body, one Baptism. For he cites Beza, another learned Annotat. in 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Presbyterian. So that you may be willing to subscribe to the 39. Articles, and
yet be Schismatics from the Church of England.

It remains therefore, that such Schism relates to the other Bands of our union
and fellowship with this Church; to wit, her Government and Worship, and
consequent to the latter, her Members and Assemblies.

Thus you see we must return to our first determination; that Schism from the
Church of England, is a sinful dividing from, or a dissolving our union and
communion with her in her Governors and Members, Worship or Assemblies. This is
the least that we mean by Schism from the Church of England; and is called
Separation or Schism negative; which is made positive, and more formally such,
when those that have so separated, set up their Altar against hers, and erect
other Congregations in opposition to hers.

The Schismatic by Dr. Hamond Of Schism. Epist. 40.
out of Ignatius, is described to be Filius impius, etc. An impious Son, which
having contemned the Bishops, and forsaken the Priests of God, dares constitute
another Altar. And again Epist. 57. the Schismatics are they, that having left
their Bishop, set up for themselves abroad another false Bishop; and all their
adherents are involved in the same guilt, who join with the Schismatics
against their Bishops.

Two things here must be supposed, 1. That we are the pars subdita, and do ow
this communion and obedience to these Governors of the Church. 2. That they
impose no unlawful conditions of this communion upon us; though if they should,
how far we may separate must take its measure from such impositions, which is
another Question to be discussed anon in another place; and at present I shall
only add, that so far as I understand my Answerer, so far as the people are
concerned in the conditions of our communion, we are not likely to differ much
in this point. But for the first of these suppositions, if there be any force
in Scripture*precepts, requiring obedience to our spiritual Guides, or in Civil
and Ecclesiastical Laws, which are very severe to that purpose, nothing can be
more evident, than that all English Christians do owe communion and obedience
to the Governors of the Church of England, whose Government stands established
by both sorts of Laws, and is so acknowledged by the Declaration it self.

And your Friend Mr. Baxter is Defense of his Cure, p. 76.
not obscure in this point; We must own, says he, a National Church, as it is
improperly so denominated from the King, that is the Civil Head -- and as it is
a community of Christians, and a part of the Universal Church, United by the
Concord of Her Pastors; who in Synods may represent the whole Ministry, and be
the means of their Agreement.

He says; we must own the National Church: I say, then we must not disown Her.
And must we not likewise own the King, as the Head thereof? and all the Bishops
and Pastors and Governors under Him? And then, what liberty is left us to
disown, deny, or renounce their Persons or Authority?

Let such especially, as have taken the Oath of Supremacy, and received
Ordination from Episcopal hands, yet better consider, those solemn Obligations
upon them, added to the Laws; and take heed, in earnest, of Perfidiousness and
Perjury.

Let them consider, what is to renounce all foraign Jurisdiction: and to their
power to assist and defend all Jurisdiction (Spiritual as well as Temporal)
granted or belonging to the Kings Highness: and how well a renouncing Obedience
to the Government of the Church, consists with that which we have sworn therein.

It is true, all are not called actually to take this Oath; yet it is as true,
that the Ministers and Officers of all Sorts, generally, are; and all Graduates
in the University: and for others, as they are the Kings Subjects, they are
unquestionably taken to be, under the same Obligation, as to the matter of it;
and are born to the Duty as well as the Privilege of Subjects of this Realm:
and therefore, we find, that this Oath is Administered; not only to Oblige, but
rather, as a Test to try, and also to secure the fidelity of such, as take it,
as is evident in the Statute.

Again, let all Ministers Ordained by Bishops (I hope I have now to do with
one) in the Name of God, seriously consider, what they promised to do at their
Ordination; being most solemnly interogated by the Bishop in the Name of God
and of his Church, as the words are.

More particularly: the Bishop demands; Will you then give your faithful
diligence always for to Minister the Doctrine and Sacraments and Discipline of
Christ, as the Lord has Commanded; and as This Church and Realm has received
the Same, according to Commandments of God, so that you may teach the People
committed to your Cure and Charge, with all diligence, to keep and observe the
Same.

What Answer did you make hereunto? I will do so by the help of the Lord. And
thus, you, at once acknowledge that the Doctrine, Sacraments and Discipline of
Christ as received by this Church, are according to Gods Commandments; and that
you would give your faithful diligence always, so to Minister them, as this
Church has received them: and lastly, that with all diligence you would teach
your People to observe the Same.

Again, the Bishop demands; Will yoll reverently Obey your Ordinary, and other
chief Ministers, unto whom is committed the Charge and Government over you:
following with a glad Mind and Will their Godly Admonitions, and submitting
your selves to their Godly Judgment.

What did you Answer to this? I will do so, the Lord being my Helper. Wherein
you both acknowledge the Government of the Church over you, and promise
Obedience thereunto.

And, it is no pleasure to me, to observe; that one, that I dare not suspect,
not to be thus Ordained, should notwithstanding these sacred Obligations, seem,
even to Print, to Glory, that he never took the Oath of Canonical Obedience;
which is, to obey his Ordinary in all honest and lawful things.

Thus for the Ministers: and for the People, were they not generally Baptized
by the Ministers, and according to the Order, and in the Public places of the
Church of England? Have they not since, given their Consent, as Members, by
their public attendance upon the Worship of the Church of England? Have they
not generally owned, for a considerable time together, some many years, that
relation to their particular Churches and Pastors? Is all this nothing to
signify their Union with our Church, and Obligation to her Government? Is it
nothing in our Authors Judgment? I cannot believe it; I am sure it is something
in Mr. Baxters Opinion, as I shall show anon.

But wherein are we obliged to obey our Governors as we are Members of the
Church of England? The measure of this Obedience, are the Laws and Canons and
the Rubric in the Liturgy: and the main Scope and intention of all these, is
to direct you how you are to Worship God in our Parochial Assemblies; as also,
to demean your selves in all due Reverence to your Superiors, and Brotherly
love and fellowship together, as Members of the same Body, the Church of
England.

And to dissolve or renounce this our Communion with our Brethren (as well as
with Governors) in those Assemblies, and in that Worship, is so far to
renounce that Communion which we ow, and is due from us all to the Church of
England; and is that thing, which is deservedly branded with the black Name of
Schism from the Church of England: (which is the other Branch of that Schism
before mentioned) especially, if the Deriders proceed to the Erecting of Anti
Churches, as Mr. Baxter properly calls them.

For our several Parochial Assemblies, are Parts and Members of the Great Body
of our Church, into which, the Church is divided for our Convenient Worshipping
of God, (as you heard in the Definition) wherein, all individual persons are
bound to attend upon Gods Worship according to the foresaid Rules, quatenus
Members of this Church of England.

But I shall have an occasion to speak largly, of Schism from particular
Congregations, in another place; and at present, would fain hope, that some
thing has been said to show what Schism from the Church of England is.

This is the Sum. Schism from the Church of England is a sinful dividing from
Her, in Her Governors, Members, Worship or Assemblies. Which, and much more is
done by those that despise her Government, renounce her Worship and Communion
with Her Mombers in the Public places of it; and Erect New Congregations for a
new manner of Worship and Discipline, under other Governors, in opposition
thereunto; according to the Laudable practices now on foot.

By this time, I hope, my Answerer sees, after his long and ranging Scrutiny
for the discovery of this Schism, and all in vain, how pertinently he demands,
p. 38. Is every difference, in things unnecessary, from the Major part, a
Schism from them?

Again, p. 39. It Is our disobedience to the Church that is our Schism. This he
says, and then quickly wipes it off, with his own pleasant Answer; But
Fidelity to our King commands the disowning of Usurpers. But I might spoil
his Mirth, should I examine his meani^g.

Again, p. 40. he cries out; Whoever took any Act of Disobedience in a
Circumstance to be a Schism?

But, in earnest, had not these little frisks and extravagancies been happily
prevented, had he heeded me at first? is a sinful dividing from the Church, in
Her Government and Worship, and setting up Churches in opposition to Her, in
both, is this no more than a difference in things unnecessary from the Major
part, or than a bare Act of Disobedience in a Circumstance? I know you will not
say it: and it is vain to say, that you intend no more: I wrote against those
that do.

What has he more to Answer? Why, the Schism I mention, p. 39. is not such as
Martin and Gildas made? what then? if it be worse, it is not such. You should
rather have compared your Brethren in this new Work, to the other Martin,
called Mar-Prelate.

But this Martin, you say, Renounced Communion with the Bishops and their
Synods (all his life) who had prosecuted the Prissillianists with the Secular
Sword: and Gildas pronounced him no excellent Christian that called the
British Clergy in his time, Priests or Ministers, and not Traitors, as he did
himself: yet neither of these holy men are called Seperatists or Schismatics.

What follows? might they not be Schismatick^, though they were not called so?
You will find some advantage by the Argument, for I have not called you so,
yet. Perhaps Gildas might be bold with his Brethren, and call them Traitors;
but if unjustly, 'twas ill done, though no Schism. If justly; there may be
Proditores found of your acquaintance too, I make no doubt; though, if you do
not urge me much, I shall not call them so. You do not think that time is
returned upon us, and that he has not the Character of an excellent Christian,
that has not the gift, of calling the Priests Traitors.

So much for Gildas: But for his Companion Martin, I might have given him
Courser Entertainment, had it not been for the kindness of Another Gildas, that
not long since, spoke more in his favor, than you do now.

His words, on his behalf, are these; I have told you in the story of Martin,
how he separated from the Synods of those Individual Baxters Defense, p. 76.
Bishops; and from their Local Communion without Separation from the Office,
the Churches, or any other Bishop: And then for ought I know Martin might be a
good honest fellow. Do you all the rest, that he did, and by my consent, you
should be excused from sitting in Synods.

For Martin it seems denied not Communion with the Churches; much less set up
an Altar and Church of his own in opposition to them: If he had done so, I
would have said he had been a Rank Schismatic, though I spare you.

It is confessed that the Presbyterians do generally agree, that the Disciplinary
part, or Form of Government, Vid. Cawdry Ind^pend. Schism, page 172, 173.
is not Essential to a National Church; yet they affirm, that the Verity of a
Natioanal Church, consists in its Agreement in the same Doctrine and Worship:
and consequently, though differences in Doctrine are not, yet a breach of its
Unity, and making divisions in a point of Worship, is a plain Schism from a
National Church acording to the Principles of the Presbyterians. Mr. Cawdrey
spoke not his own peculiar opinion, when he said, p. 178. I believe those men,
that raise differences in a Reforming Church, he meant this National Church,
and persist in keeping open those Divisions, Seperating also into other new
Churches; do as well deserve the name of Schismatics, as those that make
differences, in one Particular Church.

Upon the whole, then, you perceive how aptly you ask, p. 42. Whether a
Minister may not remove from one Parish to another; or any man remove his
dwelling into another Parish, etc. and be no Schismatic? an old objection of
Dr. Owens, and answered by Mr. Cawdrey: that they remove to Churches of the
same Constitution; a thing never questioned, but always allowed, both by the
Union and Custom of this National Church.

Again, and alike pertinently you ask, Whether a Separation of one Parish from
another be Schism? or whether I mean by it, a Local Separation only, as you
gravely enquire, p. 33. Or, whether little differences in the modes of Worship,
particularly, in the manner of the Ministers Prayer (and he should have added,
in dividing his Text) be Schism? but he prevents my Answer, by denying these
himself. Those that differ thus, he says, and thereby doubtless very wisely
and to general Satisfaction determines; these, says he, p. 34. are not
Separated Churches, any otherwise than Local, and in such Modal Differences.

Thus, what the Church of England, and what Schism from it, is. But at the
beginning of the discourse, 'twas hinted; that if we would consider the Church
of England, not organice but entitative, as some speak; that is, as it is a
part or member of the Universal visible Church; even in this consideration of
it, Separation and the present practice of gathering Churches, is a Schism in
the Church of England, if not so from it. And by those intestine Ruptures and
rents it is causing in the midst of her, gives her too much cause to complain;
O my Bowels, my Bowels! While it tears in pieces her Old and Stated
Congregations; tramples upon her Liturgy; defies her Worship; renounceth her
Pastors; throws down all her ancient Landmarks and laudable bounds of her
particular Churches; and endeavors every where to Erect new Altars and
Separate Churches that were never before heard of in the Christian world, but
amongst wild and desperate and Schismatical Sectaries.

But, this will meet us in the next Chapter, when we speak of Schism from
particular Congregations.

CHAP. IX.
Gathering Churches, a Schism from particular Parochial Churches. The general
Nature of Schism.

THe present practice of Gathering Churches, is not only a Schism from the
Church of England, but a Schism also from our particular Parochial
Congregations.

This comes now to be evinced; and I shall take my advantage for the doing of
it, from an Observation of Mr. Cawdrey against Dr. Owen, and the Independ.
great Schis. p. 177.
Independents. There was, says he, and is, another Church State in England in
our particular Churches: from these, also, they have most of them, as once of
them, (or, they had been once of them) Palpably Separated.

I am now to charge the present practice, of our New Church gatherers, and
their Ne^ Churches, with the like Schism, from particular Parochial Churches,
whereof they are, or lately were, Members, and ought so to have continued.

To cut our work as short as may be; I shall confine my strength within one
Argument; which I conceive the cleerest, and most likely to put an end to the
matter in debate; and it is taken from the nature and definition of Schism:
wherein we shall show, what we are to understand by Schism; and how the present
gathering of Churches out of our Churches agrees with it; not doubting, but
then, the conclusion will find its own way well enough.

What is Schism then? I shall give you the easiest and the least controverted
definition of it; and such, as was never excepted against by any Presbyterian
that I ever heard of: It Is this; Schism is a causless, or as others, a
voluntary, unwarrantable separation from a true Church.

Here are two parts to be considered in the general; separation from a true
Church; and the formal, special and distinguishing part of it, coucht in the
words causless, or unwarrantable and voluntary.

1. Schism is a separation from a true Church; it is so, in the proper and
peculiar notation of it: the word (...), Schism, Cameron. cap. de Schis.
is a stranger to profane Authors, and the Old Testament, and is only to be
found in the New Testament; so that it only intends something about the
Christian Church; and what that is, must be understood by the New Testament,
and Ecclesiastical Writers, who have taken it thence.

It is commonly affirmed, that in the Scripture-use of it, it sometimes
signifies division among Christians in opinion only: but I have observed, that
usually those opinions, were such as had a tendency to divisions in practice,
as I am of Paul, etc. but it is generally acknowledged that differences in
practice, especially touching Divine Worship (whether from the signification of
the word, which is properly a rent or division, or whether from the more
frequent use of it that way in Scripture, or for some other reason) I say,
difference in practice about Divine Worship, has long since obtained and
appropriated to it self the name of Schism.

Sometimes such division in the Church, when there has been no actual
separation from the Church, is conceived to be called Schism in Scripture. 1
Cor. 1. 10.


And this notion exclusive of all other kind of Schism in Scripture, Dr. Owen
espoused, contrary both to Scripture reason, and the general apprehension of
the Ancient and Modern Divines, as Mr. Cawdrey has sufficiently argued.

Separation from a Church is a more obvious division, and consequently a more
notorious kind of Schism; and it seems more reasonable to argue, if the Holy
Ghost called the first buds and beginnings of separation, by the name of
Schism, it was to deter the dividers from the sin in its ripeness and accused
fruits, which more hainously m^rited that black title; as our Savior calls
lust, adultery. Schisma seperat ab Ecclesia; Schism seperates from the Church,
says St. Hierom.

To proceed, this separation from the Church, as a learned Presbyterian
asserteth, is from the Church as Catholic, which he calls Donatism, or from a
particular Church; and that, faith he, is properly Seperatism.

Lastly, this Schismatical separation is negative or positive; the former is
only Cameron. de Schis.
simplex secessio, when men do peaceably and quietly withdraw their communion
from the Church, in part or in whole, to enjoy their consciences in a private
way. The other, called positive separation, is when persons thus withdrawn, do
gather into a distinct and opposite body, setting up a Church against a Church,
to worship God in a separated way themselves; which St. Augustine calls, a
setting up Altar against Altar; alluding to that act of King 2 King. 16.
Ahaz, in setting up an Altar of his own making, after the fashion of that
which he saw at Damascus, besides the Lord's Altar. And this is it, says
Cameron, and most that write upon the point, which in a peculiar manner, and by
way of eminency is, and deserves to be called by the name of Schism.

Thus we see, that gathering our selves into new Churches, is the complement
and perfection of Schism; the very Apex and extrema Schismatis linea, as
Cameron. speaks.

This evil, as I lately hinted, has its beginnings, and usually goes on by
degrees to this perfection. In the Church of Corinth, it first began with a
factious esteeming of one Minister above another: One says, I His Def. of
Prin^. of Con. p. 2.
am of Paul, etc. at length it came to (...). Which Mr. Baxter renders
emulation, strife and separation, or factions, or dividing into several
parties. This appeared somewhat higher, Chap. 11. for they would not eat their
Love Feasts, and Pareus thinks, they would not eat the Lord's Supper together;
but those that were for Paul would communicate among themselves; so those that
were for Apollos, and those that were for Peter.

And though they did not gather themselves into stated Congregations, or
absolutely separate into several Churches, (for they came together, though to
little Chap. 11.
purpose) yet their divisions are not only called Schism, but a despising the
Church of God.

But if this progress of Schism was so smartly rebuked, we may the less wonder
to find the Apostles so very severe against the Gnostics, and those more
perfected Schismatics, that afterward drew Disciples after them wholly from
the Church, and made false Apostles and Anti-Churches. (...) extra terminos
Ecclesiae educentes, Oecumenius.
segregantes fideles a fidelibus, and Clem. Alex.
making distinct and separate, and opposite parties and meetings for the
worship of God. Mr. Hale observes these two things make Schism complete, the
choosing of a Bishop in opposition to the Tract of Schism, p. 3.
former, a thing very frequent among the Ancients, and which many times was the
cause and effect of Schism; and then the erecting of a new Church for the
dividing parts to meet in publicly, and this he calls Ecclesiastical sedition;
and Ames, peccatum gravissimum; a most grievous sin, both in its nature and
effects: For Division, so far as it proceeds, whether in Natural, Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Bodies, is the dissolution and destruction of it.

CHAP. X.
The differencing Nature of Schism. The Answerers Objections answered;
especially the Preaching of the ejected Ministers.

I Will suppose, we are agreed that the general nature of Schism is such a
separation from a true Church as we have showed; but to make it unlawful, and
to merit the evil and usual sense of the word, it must be causless,
unwarrantable, and as Mr. Hales term is, unnecessary; when it is so, is to be
carefully stated: for this indeed is the punctum difficultatis, and the very
hinge upon which this controversy turns.

Herein, that I may prepare to argue with due closeness, I shall continue to
aim at the sense of Presbyterians: And as I have before I shall here also
follow the steps of Mr. Brinsley, late Minister of Yarmouth, not only because
his Book of Schism seems to me judicious, and exact as to our point: and he
therein follow so excellent a person as Cameron. but likewise for that he was
an eminent Nonconformist (as a Minister only) for I have been well informed,
that though he ceased preaching at Bartholomew, 1662. yet he kept no private
meetings, but ordinarily attended on the public worship, in the place where he
lived: besides, his Book was licensed by Mr. Cranford, with a sufficient
commendation; and was Preached and Printed in the Presbyterian Service against
the Sectaries; and no doubt, his Brethren of that persuasion did then heartily
concur with him in the point.

This Mr. Brinsley, p. 34, 35. states the matter thus; Separation is
unwarrantable, either for the ground or manner; the former an unjust, the
latter a rash separation, each a Schism; wherein he follows Cameron.

I shall vary his method a little, but keep close to his sense; and then an
unjust separation is twofold; either when there is no cause, and it is
absolutely causless; or when the cause is light, and not sufficient to warrant
it. Separation is rash, when there being cause supposed sufficient, yet it is
done in an undue manner.

1. Separation is unjust, when it is without cause given by the Church; and as
he enlarges, When there is no Persecution, no spreading Error or Heresy, no
Idolatry, no Superstition maintained or practiced, but the Church is peaceable
and pure, and that both for Doctrine and Worship; and in a good measure free
from scandals (which no Church ever wholly was) now in such a case to separate,
is an unjust separation, and Schism.

If this be indeed the state of the case, whether the parties think they have
cause to separate or not, I think it is not much material, except to aggravate
their crime: For, if they think they have cause, they are plain Seperatists;
and if they do not think so, and yet divide the Church by a separation
causeless, in their own opinion as well as truth, they are far worse. Neither
will any wantonness of spirit of this kind, though boy'd up by a distaste taken
at our Guides, or an higher esteem of other Teachers, or pretenses of greater
purity, much less an ill will to the state of the Church from which we shall
thus separate, admit an excuse from any sober and wise man.

2. There may be some causes of offense given us by our Church, but they such,
as may by no means warrant a separation: cause of offense is not always cause
of separation; which our Author calls a light cause. He enlarges; Possibly
some slight opposition, or persecution, it may be, by some small pecuniary
Mulcts; some lesser errors in Doctrine, not fundamental, nor near the
foundation; some corruptions in or about the worship of God, but those not
destructive to the Ordinances; being not in substance, but in ceremony; and
those such as the person offended is not enforced to be active in; scandals
few, and those only tolerated, not allowed. All tolerable evils, such as
charity may well bear with; this ground is not sufficient to bear a separation.
You see he is full and particular; and in all this, I believe he referred in
his thoughts to the state of our Church heretofore, as in the former he struck
at the Popish.

The learned Amesius, whose Principles were somewhat Congregational, has said
much to the same purpose in a few words. Separation from a true Church Cas. d^
Schism.
is sometimes lawful, if one cannot remain in its communion, sine
communicatione in peccatis, without communicating in her sins: if there be
manifest danger of seduction, and if we are compelled to depart by oppression
and persecution. Thus he. And we may suppose he thought he made a full
enumeration of all the just causes of departing from a true Church; and that in
any other case separation was unlawful.

Others indeed have more compendiously and fully drawn all the rules in this
case into one point, Separation is unwarrantable, if communion with the Church
may be without sin. And indeed what can justify a practice so contrary to love
and peace, and of so dangerous consequence, but the avoiding of sin? Our
general Answer to the charge of Schism by the Papists is, we must not partake
with your sins; and I think all parties consent in this common proposition,
where the conditions of communion with a Church are sinful, we are not bound to
that communion, for we must obey God rather then man.

I am sure this was current Doctrine with the Non-conformists, His ^^fence, 2.
Par. 22.
called Puritans heretofore, in the defense of communion with the Church of
England. Let the abuses (says Mr. Ball) be many or great, yet if I may be
present at the true worship of God without sin, (consent unto, or approbation
of such abuses or corruptions) in voluntary separation, I sin against God, his
Church, and mine own soul.

This was also undoubted by the late Presbyterians; in stead of many, let Mr.
Cawdrey against Dr. Owen Independ. a great Schism.
be heard, for methinks he speaks to the purpose. It is (says he) no duty of
Christ's imposing, no privilege of his purchasing, either to deprive a man's self
of his Ordinances for other men's sins; or to set up a new Church in opposition
to a true Church, as no Church rightly constituted for want of some reformation
in lesser matters. And Mr. Corbet, and the Author of Evangelical Peace and
Unity, if I understand him, puts the whole debate upon the same issue with us.
So Bagshaw also, etc.

Among these light causes, which will by no means warrant a separation, Mr.
Baxter has labored to Cure of Church Divisions, 291.
throw down these four Superstitious, as he calls them, which some religious
people have brought up.

1. That we are guilty of the sins of all unworthy communicants, if we
communicate with them, though their admission is not by our fault.

2. That he whose judgment is against a Diocesan Church, may not lawfully join
with a Parish Church, if the Minister be but subject to the Diocesan.

3. That whatsoever is unlawfully commanded, is See Cure of Church Divisions,
p. 194.
not lawful to be obeyed.

4. That it is unlawful to do any thing in the Worship of God which is imposed
by men, and is not commanded it self in the Scripture.

But enough of the false grounds of separation that render it causless; for
that they are either really none, or else light or insufficient.

The Second Exception against Separation was taken from the undue manner of
proceeding in it, for which it is termed Rash; and therefore Schismatical;
though the ground be Just. That is, as Mr. Brinsly explaineth himself, p 25.
When it is sudden and heady: without due endeavor and expectance of
Reformation in the Church: it is then Rash, and consequently an unwarrantable
Separation, in as much as it is opposite to Charity.

Mr. Baxters Advice is excellent here: If Corruptions blemish and dishonor the
Congregation; do not Cure of Church Div. p. 80.
say (let sin alone; I must not oppose it for fear of Division) but be the
forwardest to reduce all to the will of God. And yet, if you cannot prevail, as
you desire; be the backwardest to Divide and Separate; and do it not, without a
certain Warrant, and extreme necessity. Resolve with Austine, I will not be the
Chaff, and yet I will not go out of the Floor, though the Chaff be there. Never
give over your just desire and endeavor of Reformation; and yet as long as you
can possible avoid it, forsake not the Church, which you desire to Reform. As
Paul said, to them that were to forsake a Sea-wrack'd Vessel, If these abide
not in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. Many a one, by unlawful flying, and
shifting for his own greater Peace and Safety, does much more hazard his own
and others.

3. Ames gives me occasion to hint one thing more: Secessio vero Totalis, etc.
A Total Secession or Separation with absolute renouncing or rejecting all
Communion, cannot be lawfully practiced toward a True Church: but partial
only, quatenus Communio, so far as Communion cannot be exercised without sin.
Cas. de Schis. 307.

I Wish heartily, my Brethren would consider, whether not only renouncing all
Communion with, but setting up other Churches against our Churches, be not, in
his sense, a Total Separation; and consequently Sinful. Or whether you, that so
use us, do yet retain Communion with our Parish-Churches so far as you know you
may without sin. But this by the way:

The Sum is, when the Church gives no such cause of offense, as may justify
Separation; when the Conditions of her Communion require nothing of her
Members, whereby if they Communicate, they shall be Actual Sinners; when
persons, let the cause be never so just, shall unadvisedly, without due
endeavors and patient expectance of a Reformation: lastly, when they shall for
some few things, at which they take offense, totally forsake Communion with a
True Church, and gather themselves into Anti-Churches; they are, in all these
Cases, guilty of Schism, in the judgment of the most Non-Conformists, of all
sorts; and, indeed, of all men, that have considered the Point and the Nature
of Schism. The Assumption, we shall make hereafter -- and at present, only take
notice of what the Answerer has said to prevent it.

He gives us, p. 16, 17. eight Differences, betwixt the Old Seperatists and the
Present Non-Conformists; and then concludes in all these, they differ from
Seperatists, though they gather Churches. These differences are particularly
considered hereafter. The first three of these Differences, are a Complement to
us and our Parishes: the four next, are a Complement to themselves: in the
last, I think, he is in earnest for himself, but he has to do with a
headstrong party, that will not obey, either his Word or Example, in desiring
nothing more, than with Love and Concord, to carry on with us the same work of
Christ. But what is all this, to excuse them from being Seperatists, that run
away from us, and draw Desciples after them: that refuse (I am sure in fact,
what ever some may say) the least Communion with us, in our public Assemblies,
and gather New Churches for themselves out of them.

This they do, though you know we, generally, have not given them Cause to do
it: And they do it Rashly, and Totally, and all your little devices, will never
alter the Nature of things, or excuse it from gross Schism in the Judgment of
all that were not Seperatists, and spoke their mind, before the present
Temptation dazzled men's eyes.

It Is in vain to fly to your Common Refuge; the strength of this Argument will
not suffer you to be quiet in it; who ever before you made this a warrantable
ground of Separation, that they might Serve God better? if finding positive
faults in our worship, would not excuse them heretofore; much less will
negative ones excuse you from Separation. But they thought those were faults
and Just Causes of Separation which were not; true, and they were mistaken: but
yet, they had more to say for themselves, it seems, than you have, who do the
same things, without alleging so much ground, and think to be wholly free,
from the same charge.

Sir, Schism consists in practice; and whatever you think on it, or, however you
would palliate the matter, where that practice that truly answers the
definition of Schism is found, it will be Schism do what you can. Is there any
Institution of Christ, that they must gather Churches out of true Churches, to
make a purer Church? Ans. Mr. Cawdrey Indep. p. 198.

But I prevent my design: Shism, we have showed is a causeless unwarrantable
Separation, and it is true; and so my Answerer might have understood me, and his
Brethren, in my last: I spoke in the language of the Presbyterians, and a
little Candor, would have supposed that both, I and they, intended by
gathering Churches out of Churches, such as was causeless, unwarrantable and
unnecessary; for that, they were still ready, if need required, to prove the
Independent Separation such; as I shall be, anon, to do yours.

It is, therefore, some trouble to me to hear you ask, as if something of
Argument were lodged in it; Whether a persons removal from one Parish to
another to inhabit there, were Schism? p. 48. and yet I conceive, you have it
more than twice over in your book. You ask again, must no Churches be gathered
out of Rome? I fear not many for you: but for a full and plain answer to this,
I remit you to Mr. Baxters Cure of Church Divisions, p. 81, 82, 83. Which if it
seem not plain and full to you, it is because you understand not Christian
Sense and Reason.

Again, p. 44. did not the Parliament take a Church out of a Church when they
separated Covent Garden from Martins Parish? doubtless, 'twas either with cause
or not; 'twas warrantable or not; 'twas necessary or not: but the jest is
spoiled, if it were a Church of the same Constitution, with consent of the
persons concerned and by lawful Authority.

Had you no place to argue Schismatical but Covent Garden; I would advise you,
as a friend, to take a little more heed what you say about that place, for fear
of one of those Schismatics which in other places, you honor, as Usurpers,
concerned in your next Section.

But behold the Man at Arms fully Accoutred, without all fear, but a great deal
of wit and courage makes a challenge to the factions Disputers, as his
Catholic language is: and it is this, as you may read it under his own hand.

Obj. I undertake, says he, to prove, that Dr. Manton Dr. Seaman, etc. with
the People subject to them, as Pastors, were true Churches. Prove you, if you
can, that on Aug. 24 62. they were degraded, and these Churches were dissolved
in any reason, which any Churches for 600. years after Christ, would. If not,
you seem your self to accuse their Successors of Schism, for drawing part of
the people from them merely by the Advantage of having the Temples and Tithes,
and so gathering Churches out of true Churches.

Ans. A Mavelous Undertaker! he will undertake to prove one Proposition, and
let the rest shift for them selves.

Dr. Manton and Dr. Seaman, and their People were true Churches: and this he
will prove: but what if a man should venture to disappoint him, and not deny it?

Again; prove if you can, that these Pastors were degraded, and these Churches
dissolved Aug. 24. 62.

But what if a man has a mind to be friends with him here too? and should grant
that those Ministers were not degraded then, but only ejected and inhibited the
exercise of their Ministry within the Church of England: and that those
Churches were not dissolved by having New Pastors; no more, than the Kingdom
when the King dies. And yet, certainly the King and People, are as much the
Constitutive parts of a Kingdom; as Pastor and People of a Church.

Who will say, that considers what he says, that a particular Church is
dissolved by the death or removal of the Pastor. The River is the Same, though
the Lands on each side, change their Proprietors.

But what then? Suppose all this be quietly granted him, what then? then, those
that succeeded them are Schismatics; or you seem to accuse them of Schism: how
so? for drawing away part of the people from them. Whither? to another manner
of Worship which the Laws required; and which, the Ejected refused.

But how did they draw the People? by doing their duty in the Temples, as by
good Authority Instituted and Inducted thereunto. Instituted as Pastors to have
the Cure of Souls; and Inducted into the Temples and Tithes.

But lastly, why do you say they drew a part of the people only, and not the
whole?

Ought not the whole, worship God undivided, and with one accord in the
Temples? or must the place be removed with the Pastor? I quire not who made the
difference, but I know who makes the Division, let them answer it how they can,
to God and the King, the Church and their Successors.

Those Pastors were Ejected out of the Temples by lawful Authority: the People
are bound to worship God in the Temple, as they have opportunity; and no where
else, in opposition to the public Worship: (the Consequence here, I think may
vie with yours above) therefore, these Pastors had no opportunity to exercise
their Pastoral Office to those People; and where there is no opportunity, there
is no duty; in Mr. Baxters Divinity, Second Admon. to Bagsh. 96.

But you say, you must Preach, the Reverend Dr. Gouge says, No. The Inhibition
of Idolators and Infidels made simply against preaching of the Gospel, because
they Whole Armor of God. 570.
would have it utterly Suppressed in this case, he says, no sufficient
inhibition to bind the Conscience; it is directly and apparently contrary to
Gods Word. But when Christian Magistrates inhibite Ministers to Preach, it is
because they think them unfit and unmeet, either for some notorious Crimes, or
for some Erroneous Opinions, to exercise their Ministerial Functions. In these
Cases, Such as are so inhibited, so far forth as they are inhibited, Ought not
to Preach. Neither are particular and private men (much less the parties
inhibited) to Judge of the Cause of the inhibition, whether it be just or
unjust: but as they who are appointed by the present Government, to Ordain
Ministers, are to judge of their fitness thereunto; so likewise, of their
unfitness.

I have thought hitherto, that distinction of the Office, and of the exercise
of that Office, had gone uncontroled among Presbyterians: and that, though the
Ministers of Christ depend not, even upon the Christian Magistrate for their
Office, and he cannot degrade them: yet quoad Exercitium, as to the Exercise of
it, within his Dominions, they did; and that he had power to Silence such as he
Judged unmeet to Preach.

Mr. Baxter does much encourage me to persist in the same Opinion, more than
once. The Authority of the King and lawful 2d Admon. to Bag. 117
Magistrates, says Mr. Baxter, is more about the Circumstantials of Worship
(as whether Abiathar shall be High Priest, etc.) then the False Teachers were
about that Doctrine.

He, more than Intimates, that the Magistrates Power extends to the Appointing
who shall be High Priest; and who doubt, but that he has equal power to
appoint who shall be Pastor of Covent Garden.

Again, hear Mr. Baxter what he says, more largly upon the Point. Disput. 223.
Doubtless the Magistrate himself has so much Authority in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, that if he Command a qualified person to Preach the Gospel, and
Command the People to receive him; I see not, how either of them can be allowed
to disobey him; (though yet the Party ought to have recourse also to Pastors
for Ordination, and People for Consent where it may be done) And Grotius
commends the saying of Musculus, That, he would have no Minister question his
Call, that being quallified, has the Christian Magistrates Commission. And
though this Assertion need some limitation; yet it is apparent, that the
Magistrates Power is great about the Offices of the Church.

For Solomon, put out Abiathar from the Priesthood, and put Zadock in his
place, 1 King. 2. 27, 35. David and the Captains of the Host, Separated to Gods
Service, those of the Sons of Asaph and of Heman and Jeduther, who should
Prophecy with Harps, etc. 1 Chronicles. 16. 4. And so did Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 8. 14,
15. They were for the Service of the House of God, according to the Kings
Order, 1 Chronicles. 25. 1, 6. And methinks those those men should acknowledge this,
that were wont to style the King, in all Causes and over all Persons, the
Supreme Head and Governor. So far He.

And indeed I durst almost challenge this Answerer, or any man, to prove; that
ever any learned Protestant in this Church, whether Episcopal or Presbyterian,
did make it a question, (I mean before the Kings happy Return) whether Solomon
had not sufficient Authority to put out Abiathar from the Priesthood, and put
Zadock in his place. Or whether any might modestly say such must Preach, and
that those were Schismatics and Usurpers that did exercise their Offices
according to Law, in the places of such as were removed, by the Virtue of an
Act of Parliament of unquestionable Authority, and we must Preach though the
Law forbids us.

As for Dr. Gunnings, Dr. Wilds preaching fourteen or fifteen years ago, which
you so often hint at, it is sufficiently known, it was in such a time, when the
Case was far otherwise, both with the Church and State, in many Notorious
Circumstances: both as to Persons, Law, Government and Worship; and they could
easily answer their so doing, if it be not a matter too much below the Eminency
both of their Persons and Places. We must proceed:

CHAP. XI.
Provision for the proof of the Assumption, by four Propositions.

THat Schism is a Causeless Separation from a True Church: and what Separation
from a True Church is, and when it is Causeless, has at large appeared. And
there seems nothing left to prevent or remove the charge of Schism from the
Practices we oppose; but to plead, either that our Churches are no true
Churches; or that you are not of them, and ow them no Communion; or that you do
not Separate from them: or if you do, you have Cause sufficient, and your
Separation is not Rash or Groundless.

That the Contrary to all these, is the very Truth, I am now to manifest. The
Propositions accordingly, are these four.

Pro. 1. That our Parochial Congregations are true Churches.

2. That the people of England are, or ought to be, members of our Parochial
Congregations.

3. That the present practice of gathering Churches out of them, is Separation.

4. That such Separation is Rash, and without just grounds.

And all these shall be proved, not only from the Nature of the things, and the
judgment or others: but from the Public judgment of the former
Non-Conformists and Presbyterians; and then I hope my bold undertaking will be
found excusable.

CHAP. XII.
Parochial Congregations true Churches. His Exceptions, esp^cially about parish
bounds, examined.

FIrst, I affirm that our Parochial Congregations are true Churches.

They have the matter of true Churches. Professed Christians, Baptized. They
have the f^rm of true Churches, being Societies of such, as Ames says, in
order to the worship of God: and these fixed and Stated, and ordinarily
assembling actually together for that end.

According to our Author, they have; generally, both the Essential, and
constituent parts of true Churches; Pastors to govern, and people to be
governed by them, in order to Gods glory, and their Salvation.

And as their end, so the means, and their work in their public Assemblies, is
such as is proper and peculiar unto, and true, and undoubted indications and
notes of true Churches; the Ordinances of God, and their ordinary attendance
thereupon, in known, public, and fixed places, consecrated, and set a part
for that end. Wherein, also, there is nothing practiced, much less allowed,
that is contrary to these means, or does pervert that end; or with any
pretense, or color of reason, can be thought to destroy their being, or their
truth, as Churches of God.

For this we have abundant Suffrage voluntarily given by Nonconformity it
self, from time to time, and that not only in the acknowledgement, but even in
the defense of them against their enemies of the Separation: and what need
more. If Mr. Ball, Mr. Hildersham of old, and Mr. Bagshaw, and his friend, the
Answerer, be heard for the rest.

Mr. Ball is express for himself, and his Brethren: The Non-Conformists, says
he, can not only acknowledge, but prove the Religion and worship of the Church
of England to be of God; not by petty reasons, and colorable Ans. to Can.
part. 2. p 3.
shows, (which they leave to them which maintain a bad Cause) but by pregnant
evidence from the word of Truth, even by plain Texts of Scripture, and sound
reason deduced therefrom, against which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail.

Mr. Hildersham comes not a whit behind him: There is nothing done, says he,
in Gods public On John 4. p. 3
warship among us, but it is done by the Inst^tution, and Ordinance, and
Commandment of the Lord, as he very industriously and learnedly proves, by an
enumeration of the particulars of our worship, and thence presses the people,
not only to attend it, but to come to the beginning of it.

Mr. Bagshaw himself acknowledges the same: And therefore pleads, that they do
not separate, but forbear Antidote p. 6.
Communion, because of some conditims required; and so indeed does Doctor Owen,
and all sober Independents; and therefore I need not observe, that those
eminent Presbyterians, that wrote the Epistle before Mr. Balls Answer to Cann,
did own; or, that Mr. Cawdry, and other Presbyterians, have made it the
foundation of all their Arguments against Independent gathering Churches, that
our Churches, were true Churches.

Our Author does not so much as question the truth of our Churches in General:
what exceptions notwithstanding he has scattered about it, we shall briefly
examine.

Object. 1. Page 10. He tells us, like an Oracle, among the rest of their
Purposes and Desires, which are not a few, and they none of the best, that the
Non-Conformists think, that a Parish, quatenus, a Parish, is not a Church: nor
a Parishioner, as such, a Churchmember.

Well, and who ever said they thought otherwise? in some things, it seems, they
think, as others do. Yet we know, and they ought to think at least, that a
Company of Christians living within Parish bounds, and ordinarily attending
upon Gods public worship, in the place set a part to that end, are a Church.

Object. 2. But they think also, that Parish bounds of Churches are of Humane
prudential Constitution, and not of Divine Institution, or unchangable,

But pray think again; for you ought to think, that co-habitation of the
Members of a Parochial Church is according to the Law of Nature, and so Divine:
and that persons, whom Providence has so placed together, are bound to worship
God together in some public way; by virtue of the Law of Natural Religion, as
much as Families among themselves; were there no other institution of God or
man in the case.

Moreover, they ought to think, that co-habitation of Church members is so far
of Divine Institution, as the Examples of Churches in Scripture, always so
bounded, amount to Divine Institution. Which is almost as much, as is usually
urged for the Divine Institution of the Lords day This was the current Argument
of the Presbyterians heretofore, against the attempts of Independents to break
these bounds, and to glean up members in others fields, no matter what
distance, to make up their Churches. Churches and Cities in the Scripture, are
commensurate. Was not Cawdrey Schys page
the Church of Jerusalem and Corinth, so called from the places.

They ought, further to think, that the gr^unds of such parochial Churches,
were laid in Reason, and Scripture examples: though Ours were actually divided,
long since: and that our Parish bounds, in the general intention and scope of
those that first appointed them; notwithstanding some errors which will always
happen in such public cases) were made, upon the said reasonable and Scripture
ground of co-habitation.

They ought, also, to think, that though Prudence at first discerned these
grounds, and accordingly set these bounds of parish Churches; yet, it was not
the prudence of the People, but their Governors: who have not now left it in
the peoples liberty or prudence, whether they will ordinarily keep these bounds
or not. But have also bounded that vulgar extravagancy by the Laws both of
Church and State to the contrary:

Yet again, they ought to think, that they owe obedience to their Governors in
these laws; which obedience is certainly of Divine Institution, though I can
hardly find it in all your Books.

You ought, lastly, to think, of the fearful consequences of tearing these
hedges and ancient bounds, and thereby making inlets, or outlets, or both, to
all kind of licenti^usness in Religion, and confusion in the Church; while you
thus expose parochial Congregations to the directest means of their dissolution.

O that you would lay to heart those serious words of Mr. Baxter. The Interest
of the Christian Protestant Religion in England must be kept up, by keeping up
as much of Truth, Piety, and Reputation, as is possible in the Parish Churches.
his Defense of his Cure p. 36.

For the last word, that parish bounds are not unchangeable, it is acknowledged;
if the cause be just and Covent Garden be not Schysmatical, yet still the Rule
of co-habitation ought to be observed; and then our design is half spoiled.
Especially if we add, as we needs must, that this changing or altering of
parish bounds, lies not in the pleasure of private Persons: is not to be
attempted without the order of Superiors, nor to the prejudice of Gods public
worship: wherein, if all order be not quite forgotten, the practice of the
people should not ordinarily exc^ed, that which the known Union and C^mmunion
of Parishes, in the same Worship and Government, and the common Custom, and
consequently Allowance, of the places intended, will warrant: wherein London,
perhaps, if what you say be true, may claim some privilege.

He says, he does allow our par^chial Churches to be true Churches, vi^. p. 35.
Those of them that have true Ministers, other wise not. So that where there
are no Ministers, and where their Minist^r is not true; there the Parishes are
not Churches.

It Is likely some few small places, especially Cures, have no settled Ministers,
but the Law requires their Communion with their Mother Church, of which, in a
sense, they are reckoned Members, if they are Curacies.

And I hope there are fewer false Ministers than your charity supposes. How
far the people are bound to communicate with such as you call intolerable,
shall be examined in the next Chapter.

But if this be all to be found at the bottom of your exceptions, as it seems
to be, why do not your Brethren, confine their labor to such destitute places;
especially, if this be the great reason why they must preach. At least their
Charity should see them first provided for. Sure their voices will hardly reach
to them from ^ities, and Corporations, and places usually furnished well enough
without them, though here they generally pitch their Taberna^le: you and they
must think again and again, before you will be able to defend these practices
upon such principles.

CHAP. XIII.
The People of England, Members of Parochial Churches. Objections answered.
Especially that, from serving God better.

THe People of England, generally are, or ought to be (Members or Ministers) of
our parochial Churches, and consequently are bound to atttend upon the public
worship of God in our Temples.

Ordinarily: I mean, I am not so strict to think, that they ought never to be
absent, if they have reason, as the Statute intimates: or, that they may never
go out of their own Parishes to hear a Se^mon: provided always they keep
within the bounds of that latitude, which the Communion of Parish-Churches, and
the custom of the place, as in London, if it be so there, as our Answerer
affirms, will warant, as I said before.

But that generally, the people are of the Parishes Churches and ordinarily
ought to communicate with them, there is hardly any thing more evident in
reason or sense, and the judgment of the Non-Conf^rmists.

For they were baptized into these particular Churches, as well as into the
universal; and the known Laws, both of Church and State, oblige their
Consciences, to Communion with them. Besides, if they be not of the particular
Church wherein they live, they are of none: but their ordinary attending upon
the public worship as they generally do, or have done, concludes them by
their own consent to say nothing now, of the inconveniences that follow
separation from them; an Argument not to be despised till it be better
considered and censured.

Mr. Baxter speaks very well and home to the point thus He that is a Member of
the universal Church, is fit to be received into a particular Cure of Chapter div.
p. 89.
Church; and there wants no more but Mutual consent: and if he have statedly
joined with a particular Church, in ordinary Communion, Consent has been
manifested, and he is a Member of that particular Church -- Thus in Thesi.

Then he subjoines; This is the common case in England, the persons who were
baptized in Infancy, were, at once, received into the Universal Church, and
into some particular Church, and have held Communion at Age with both, etc.

In a case so plain, in the writings of the Old Non-Conformists, I shall only
give you Mr. Baxters Testimony for them all, especially finding an Emphasis in
his words, which are these.

Speaking to his Brethren, says he, much more should you have endured Defense
of his cure p. 14.
such, as the Non-Conformists of that age who used Parish Communion and pleaded
for it, against the Seperatists, f^r Sharper language than ever I used, as
their Books against Johnson and Cann and Brown, and Ainsworth, do yet visibly
declare.

Hence, it is, that worthy Non Conformist Mr, Hildersham, does not only Judge it
Lawful, and a Duty to attend upon the Parish Congregation, but uses many
Arguments against the Ordinary leaving our own Ministers, to hear more able men
in other Parishes: and for upon the fourth of John.
our coming reverently and at the beginning of the Service.

And Mr. Ba^ter persuades with many Arguments to Communion with the Parish
Churches which he would not have done, if he had not thought it, not only to b^
Lawful, but a Duty, yea he says expressly, that to some it is a Duty to join
with some Parish Churches, in the Lords Supper three times a year, Defense of
his Cure, p. 38. which he says, he proved by twenty Rea^ons, and by his own
example avowed in public, and his constant resolution so to do, he adds much
weight to his said reasons.

And to give my Answerer his due, in this, as he does not deny the truth of
most of our Churches, so he does much persuade, both by reason and his own
example, to communion with them, and therefore he believes (as I believe of
him) that it is a duty.

But for the Presbyterians and their judgment in the point before Ind. Schys.
page 143.
1660; let Mr. Cawdrey be heard at large.

Speaking against the Independants separation, says he, If they did not
suppose themselves to be of some particular Church, it was their Error and
their Fault; their Error because all the people of the Nation, were confined
to that Church, where they lived; and liable to censure for leaving that
Church, for partaking of Ordinances; and the Ministers for admitting them:
their fault, because they were bound by way of duty, both by the Laws of the
Nation, and also by the Law of God, to be of one or other particular
Congregation; meaning parochial.

Answerer against all this? he yields much no doubt, page 41. where he says,
the old Non-Conformists hold Lay communion with Parish Churches lawful: and so
do we. duty: prove the contrary if you can. I challenge him to show in any of
them, one word signifying it lawful, to hold Communion with any other stated
Church in England, besides the parochial, or that, ever they preached in
houses, as you unfairly intimate, when the people should be in the parish
Church; or, that any learned Presbyterian said so, before 1660: if not, what
signifies all your new-coined distinctions, page 34, 35.

Object. But in some places, we cannot profit by the Minister.

A^sw. You may profit by the prayers, and Sacraments. The old Non-Conformists
will not endure the objection, against all, or against ary weak, if honest
Minister. Let Mr. Hildersham's reasons against it be examined: says he, Our
Shame, our Sin, and just cause of humbling to us, if we cannot profit by the
meanest Minister On John 4. p 225, 226.
that God has sent. And the power of the Ministry depends not on the
excellency of the Teachers gifts, but upon Gods blessing: though sometimes he
thinks people may go to hear other Ministers of better gifts.

Object. But some Ministers are intolerable.

Answ. I grant the Non-Conformists, and particularly Mr. Hildersham, do allow
the people, in such cases, to go from their own Parish; yet he puts in three
Rules to the Case, that it be done without open breach or contempt to the
Churches Order, without contempt of their own Pastors, and without Scandal and
offense to them and their people.

But if no Ministers be intolerable, but such as our Answerer describes to be
so, I hope, there are but few such in our days; what ever there were in Mr.
Hildershams time.

By Intolerable, says he, I mean 1. Such as are ignorant of, or erroneous
Advice.
against the Essentials of Christianity. 2. Such as are unable to teach them
others. 3. Such as malignantly preach down the practice of an Holy life, or in
a word, such whose Ministry really tends to do more hurt than Good.

These are Intolerable indeed, and if there should chance to be found one or
two such within a Province (I hope not so many,) sure, some duty we owe
concerning them. But what is that? in the first place, we are certainly bound to
endeavor his amendment if that be not to be done, but he be found incurable,
he is the more intolerable, and our next duty to endeavor to remove him.

So far Mr. Baxters advice is wholesome and apposite; use all your diligence
Cure of Chapter div p 106.
to amend him: and if you cannot do that, use all your interest to get him out,
and get a better, indeed he adds, if you cannot do that, deliver your own soul
from him by removing to a better, if you are free: he means, if you are not
under the command of others, remove to another Parish, which none can except
against.

But all this while there is no room made for Separation: the Non-Conformists
never allowed this, the Holy Scriptures as Mr. Baxter tells us, has not a word
to that purpose.

Obj. But we are troubled again with his last refuge, which attempts us every
where, your Churches are allowed, and communion with them, when we have no
opportunity to do better: but to serve God better, we may leave your Churches
and gather others.

Answ. This has pirkt up to my trouble two or three times already; I will now
give it such a blow as I hope to hear on it no more.

1. If we may not refuse Communion with our own particular Church, while we can
do it without sin: the only condition allowed, by all that were pure
Non-Conformists; yea, and by the very Brownists themselves, then this pretense
is vain. But you grant you may continue such Communion with the Parish without
sin, by the tenor of the Objection.

2. This Objection, extends not only to the change of the Minister, but of the
very Worship, the public places of assembling, and the parochial bounds of
Churches: which as in the nature and consequence of the things themselves are
very dangerous, so they were all quite contrary to the reason and practice of
former Non-Conformists. They might think* they had reason sometimes to do
better, but they never meant it, in any way contrary to the public Worship,
and Assemblies; but only in some other Parish Church.

3. It Is in effect the same excuse that the Brownists had for their separation,
only, not quite so considerable,; they complained things were bad; and you
would have them better; and therefore separate, as they did.

3. The very same plea, that the Independents used in other words, more
plausable to their purpose. Namely, pretense of disorders in the Church, and
pretense of reformation, and yet more near to the present pretense, that they
might worship with purer worship, all which Mr. Cawdry, the Patron of
Presbytery, has taken notice of and answered to Dr. Owen. Boldly appealing the
Dr. in the point, as I do my Answerer in his words.

I leave it to his own consideration, whether it be lawful for In dep further p
142.
people that are Members of true Churches as ours are acknowledged to be.
(...). Upon some disorders in a Church, or pretense of Reforming themselves, to
separate from that Church and to erect another: when as they have done their
duty to reform it, in those disorders, notwithstanding which they may without
Sin Communicate with that Church? But rather to break true Churches into
pieces, than to bear with some inconveniences, and I desire a president of
such a practice in Scripture or Story, and as he says so do I.

But the pretense of worshipping God better, and therefore they may gather a
purer Church, out of a true Church the Presbyterian sems to deride it as not
worthy Ind Schy: p. 198.
a serious consideration or answer is there says he, any institution of
Christ, that they must gather members out of true Churches to make a purer
Church, if so it be?

4. But the Sting is in the Tail, gathering Churches out of our Parishes, that
they may serve God better, is an intolerable principle and practice; it
plainly puts Raines into the peoples hands, to Govern and reform themselves,
without their Bishops or Pastors: which, methinks, Mr. Baxter should not like
very well; and without the Civil-Magistrate, which the Presbyterians could not
endure.

To Reform themselves, I say, without the order of any kind of Governors, not
only in one single Parish, but throughout the Kingdom: nor only to reform
abuses in Administrations but in the worship and Government, yea even to the
utter dissolution of our Church State, and the bounds and places of our
Parochial congregations, and the setting up of other Churches, other Ministers,
and another Worship and Government throughout the Kingdom; so far as this Rule
takes.

For the Rule, in its practical Nature and use, is general. And if it be the
duty of one, it is the duty of another, and of all, to worship God better in
this new way; and consequently, all are bound to worship God better; and all
must join in these new Congregations while the Bishops and Ministers and
Temples are left useless, and there is no way which our Author can think of, to
prevent and stop this deluge but the peoples prudence: and how likely that is
to do it, let the wise consider. Was ever Nonconformist or Presbyterian
before, of this opinion or any one that was not a downright Seperatist?

Dr. Owen, having said, that, if a man cannot prevail to have the Church
reformed, he may dispose of himself, as to particular Church Communion, to his
best advantage: one would think this was modestly spoken in comparison, yet
observe how the Presbyterian takes him up.

This is liberality enough, and Dictator-like spoken, does not Ind. Schys. p
189, 190.
this open a door to all confusion in Church and State? And give every man as
well as any, liberty, if they judge any thing amiss in Church or State, to turn
Reformers, if Superiors cannot, or will not reform it?

In a State or Nati^nal Church, as that of the Jews; was it lawful for a few
men, when State and Church were all corrupted, to go and reform both, because
they that had the power in their hand, either could not or would not reform? I
think I may safely say, this is an Anabaptistical Munster principle at the
bottom. So he,

Besides, the rule has run equally in it, against the Reformers themselves,
every Sect will plead the same liberty to serve God better, and as Mr. Baxter
has well Item'd you, Separation will ruin the Separated Churches themselves,
Defense of Cure. p. 50,
(and not at all vary from their own light by which they ascended unto
separation) it will admit of no consistency: parties will arise in the
separated Churches, and separate again from them till they are dissolved, as
experience witnesses.

But because, my Author speaks of gathering Churches for the first three
hundred years after Christ, I shall not disturb him by enquiring out of what
Churches they were gathered, only shall give him a Presbiterians expostulation,
and conclude this Chapter.

Will he call that a peaceable proceeding which is done without the Authority
of the Christian Civil Magistrate: Cawd. Indep. further p. 1^1,
and to the disturbance of all the Churches of the Nation.

Were it granted, that in the first Constitution of a Church people might by
their own free Consent, join to walk together, etc: is this course tolerable
in settled Churches, to the confusion and overthrow of the very Constitution of
our Churches?

CHAP. XIV.
The present practice plain separation, Objections by the Answerer considered.

THe ^resent practice of gathering Churches out of our Churches is separation.

Though our Churches are true Churches: and the persons concerned, are or ought
to be Members of them; yet do they properly separate from them.

This is matter of Fact evident in it self, and to the senses of too many
ocular Witnesses.

1. They dislike, or distaste, our Parochial Communion: some, as Antichristian;
some, as corrupt; some, as defective; and not so good, as they would have it;
and some, perhaps, because they like not our Ministers: and some, as he
intimates for Communion, with their old ejected Pastors, what their several
reasons are, (for they are far from being all of a mind, as he acknowledges)
we can but guess, but they do all dislike our Communion, at least,
comparatively none can deny or doubt this.

2. Upon this dislike, Whatever the cause of it be, they do plainly forsake our
Parish-Churches, and public worship. Now, we do not say, that non-Actual
Communion, is properly Separation: yet all men say, that a renouncing
Communion, or denying to Communicate with any Church, much more our own, upon
any dislike, or for any cause, except sin, is properly Separation and schysm:
it is not actually not communicating with a true Church, but renouncing
Communion, that, we think makes the Shysmatick, In^. Schys. p. 188.
it is this, in which Amesius himself places the very formality Am. de Schys.
of Schysm.

Schysm is directly a breach of unity; as that is a breach of charity, refusing
to Communicate with a true Church, when I have opportunity, especially, my own
Church; is a plain breach of both: what ever my reason be, short of Sin.

3. But thirdly, they perfect their Schysm and separation, by gathering
themselves into other Congregations under other Ministers, and for another mode
of Worship than is allowed by our Church and Laws; and thus become
Anti-churches, and to make this new Church State, as opposite to ours, as may
be, they generally, meet at the same time that we do: and that, not only where
the Parishes are suspected, defective in parts, gifts, graces or
Administrations: much less intolerable, or where there are none at all, as was
noted before, and in such places as they suppose to be so ill provided: for we
hear nothing of their charity, but in places, where neither these Ministers nor
their followers have the least exception to the Parish-Minister.

And thus, they separate, not for sometimes and for some ordinances, but
constantly, and for all ordinances: the Word, Prayers, and both Sacraments, and
that generally, in all places near us, without any such distinction of Minister
or any thing else; so that though I have enquired, I can hear but of one
Minister, within a very large compass that takes the liberty of Indulgence, and
does not so abuse it. And I fear, they do so generally throughout England, if
we may guess at other places by the practice of these: except your good example
and advice have a better influence there, than here.

For, I cannot but let you know, that your Canons are so contrary to their
purposes and practices, that I have some reason to believe, that our new Church
gatherers here about are generally as much displeased with the rules whereby
you would bound their ex ravagant practices, as they seem to be pleased with
your Magisterialness over me,

And, by the way, give me leave to tell you, that two things especially, I
cannot take well at your hands. 1. That you would insinuate that such as call
themselves Presbyterians, which you say, are not so, you shuffle them amongst
the rest of the Sects, which are for gathering of Churches. 2. That you
intimate, you knew their minds; and that they would not separate and gather
Churches in the manner we see, by sad experience they generally do.

For, I do acknowledge you sufficiently discover, your own Inclination, hopes,
and desires are otherwise than we find their practices: yea, you seem to
intimate their practices to be otherwise: they have deceived you; as indeed,
you did me: who am sorry to find your pen employed for the Countenance, to say
no more of Separation and Schysm in the highest measure that this poor Church
ever yet experimented.

Why do I hear words to excuse and alleviate the Matter; when their deeds
declare the quite contrary to what you hope and intimate? all your prop^sitions
and purposes, can never make them either not Presbiterians or Seperatists;
unless, by their quitting their former principles, they are sunk into the
number of Independents: for it is hard to say which of the Congregations is
most Congregational.

Obj. Yo seem to wonder, p. 40. that I charged not your preaching before your
indulgence, with Schysm as well as now.

Answ. No doubt, if it were so before, as we see it is since, I might yet
venture to do it, but, Sir, let me tell you something, that I know will not be
easy to you. In the City where I am a Preacher, there might, perhaps thirty or
forty ordinarily meet by steal^h, and perhaps not at the same time of our
public worship, whereas, there are now six or seven allowed places; and
perhaps, they may share three thousand of our Members among them; that now, so
far as we can judge, totally separate: yet I think never any one of them
complained of the inability, infidelity, or scandal of the Parish-Ministers.
Now when we see such a T^rrent preparing to bear down all our Churches, I
think, it is time to speak, I would deliver my own soul, if I cannot save the
Church from the evil begun.

Speak in earnest, Sir, if the matter be thus indeed, is it not separation with
a Witness if you will not, let others speak.

The old Rule was the sincere Cawd. Indep. p. 161. 162.
preaching of the Word, and right Administration of Sacraments are the
Characters of a true Church, which we having, and they separating from us, how
shall this Crime be named, but by Schysm in the highest degree.

And the rather does this relate to Schysm, in gathering Churches. p. 180.
Because they do not only depart themselves, but draw off others also into a
formed Faction.

CHAP. XV.
The present practice of Separation and gathering Churches is causeless and
unwarantable. Objections of the Answerer considered.

BEcause, it is Separation from true Churches, by such as are, or ought to be
Members, of those true Churches; both negatively, and positively, and totally
so; and lastly, which only remains to be proved, because it is both Rash and
Unjust, and without sufficient grounds of offense given by these Churches.

For it has already appeared that such separation is sinful and Schysm, in the
worst sense of the word, when it is Rash or Unjust, without such grounds; it
only remains to be shown, that the present practice aforesaid, is both Rash
and Unjust.

1. First, it is, apparently a Rash Separation; for those that go from us, to
these new Churches could not foresee, or reasonably imagine this Liberty now
indulged, a Week, (if a day) before the Declaration was published.

And how suddenly, they did upon it, prepare for the work, and separate to
their new Congregations and Guides, it is too well known to insist on: and where
is the man (if one such there be, let him come forth to own it) that advised
with his Parish-Minister about his departure, or was so civil to take his
leave; much less, showed him any just occasion of his so sudden resolution; or
what gave him the offense in the person or Administration of his pastor; or in
the Worship and Communion or Conversation of his fellow Members, and moved or
disposed him thereunto, before he did Actually separate. Much less did he
exercise any patience or long-suffering, in order to his own Satisfaction or
the Reformation of the Church (of which he was a member) in what he thought
amiss.

If such separation is not Rash and sudden, if it fail not in the due manner of
proceeding, show your Reason, or else bear the Censure and charge of Schysm,
from all sound and judicious Casuists, let the pretense or cause otherwise, be
never so great and just.

Indeed, they generally gave up themselves, with all manner of diligence, to
obtain their Licenses: to contrive their Houses; to appoint their meetings:
conspiring in this, as appears by their practice, that they would hold their
Assemblies, at the same hour with the parochial; the directest method they
could imagine, to be opposite to us, yet, not so well considering, what might
be the consequences; as one of the soberest of their Ministers complained, who
observed it too late, which had they had patience and wisdom, first to have
consulted my Answerer, might in all likelihood, in many places, at least have
been happily prevented.

2. But, Alas! this is not the Burden of Ephraim; their separation fails in
the foundation and grounds of it, it is not accountable, upon any terms of
Charity, Justice, or Christian sobriety: strictly, the Churches, from which
they separate, has not given them any such offense, or cause of offense
sufficient, to justify their separation, either in truth or in the judgment of
any, but themselves: much less, the old Non-Conformists and Presbyt^rians; as
will soon appear in full light.

Our Answerer has set you a hard Game to play, here; for you must show us such
reason why you leave us, as will excuse you from separation, and yet justify
your gathered Churches.

Which, upon the suppositions already proved; that our Churches are true
Churches; that you are or ought to be members of them, and to continue in
Communion with them, while you live in them, if we have given you no just
occasion to discontinue it, seems to be a plain contradiction and your New
Churches are no better than stated seperations.

But, laying aside all little insignificant Artifices and modern evasions, the
question in short is this. Whether we can have any just plea for separation
from any Church of which we are members, while we may communicate with it,
without communion in sin. The negative has appeared, all set parties have
subscribed the negative: and hardly any but your selves, ever questioned it, if
yet you do so.

The Protestants by the Papists, the Brownists by the Puritans; the Anabaptist,
Independent, and Interpendent, by the Presbyterian, are all charged with Shysm;
and all without scruple, put their controversies to this Issue; if you that
charge us with Schysm, can prove that we may hold Communion with you without
sinning, we acknowledge the charge, therefore they allwaies defend their
separation, by chargeing sin upon their Communion from whom they separated
also. On the other hand, they endeavored to make the charge of Schysm upon
those that separated, by answering the objections of Sin, against their several
Communions, so that on all sides, this sense of Schysm, passed uncontrolled;
and was never I think disputed or doubted before, if it be so now, and Dr. Ames
has put it into the very Definition of Schysm: and makes it his great Rule, by
which he answers the Cases about it.

But, to prevent mistakes, I must speak with Caution; by discontinuing
Communion, I do not mean; only a not having Actual Communion with the Church,
for that may be involuntary, as when a man is excommunicated; or necessitated
by sickness, or if you will have it added, by too great a multitude of members:
yea, it may chance to be voluntary, yet not properly Schysm, when we do not
attend Gods worship, through neglect of our Duty, and a profane principle: but
of these we speak not here.

By discontinuing our Communion, I mean, a denying or refusing Communion with
our own Church upon any dislike or distaste of its Worship, or Minister, or
Members. Now whether this distaste arise from fear of Communicating in sin,
where there is no just cause of, or without such fear; such refusing or denying
Communion is Schysm, yea, as Ames advises, if there be real evil in some part
of Communion in a true Church, to depart farther from it, then that evil
requires, is Schysm. So when there is no real or pretended sinfulness in the
Communion of our Church, and yet, we take dislike and separate, and totally
separate, and gather our selves into new Congregations in opposition thereunto,
who dare say, this is no Schysm?

It Is not worth the question, though you some where make it, whether it be
Schysm to remove our dwelling from one Parish to another? Our civil necessities
may force us to it. we hold no such Matrimony, between Pastor and People, as
some talk of: but upon fair occasion, either may remove. All Parishes are in
Communion together, and are of the general Constitution of the Church of
England: by such a removal, you become a member of another Parish Church, and
are bound by the Laws of the Land, and by the Rule of cohabitation of
membership to hold Communion with the Church in which you live, you have still
real Communion with the former Church, not only in the substance, but mode of
its Worship, and its very Constitution: but by removing to these New Churches,
you do not, you cannot cease to be of a Parish at all, nor of a Parochial
Church, without Schysm from the Church in which yo^ live; and from all the
Parochial Churches in England; and from the Church of England it self. I mean,
unless you can prove that something is required in our way of Worship that you
cannot join in without sinning.

The question is, to bring the point home, what sin is to be found in our
Worship, wherein the people that join with us, must needs Communicate? If none
can be found we must write Schysm upon your separation and we cannot help it.

Use no delatory pleas: blind us not with wide discourses about what is fit to
be imposed, in order to peace, etc. and about the duty of Superiors, that
concern you not, or about the hard conditions of Conformity upon Ministers, as
such: we are speaking of Lay-Communion, wherein all that are not in the place
of Ministers are to look to their Duty. And if there be any thing required of
them, in order to their Communion with us, that is indeed sinful, say what is
it, and speak to the point.

In this Case (Sir) be Judge your self, you expressly acknowledge, that our
Worship is not such as no man may lawfully Communicate in: then, certainly you
believe, that there is nothing in it, that is really and materially evil, or
evil in it self; for then no man might lawfully join in it: but if it should
become evil accidentally, from the particular condition of any private man, let
him remove that evil, and not commit a greater by Separation.

But pray (Sir) why do you seem thus to limit your kindness and charity to our
Communion* if it be not such as no man, why is it not such as all men, may
lawful^y Communicate in? If you may lawfully Communicate in some of our
Churches (as in another place you speak) why not in all? or why do you leave
the people in such distractions? have not all our Churches the same Ordinances?
our Ministers the same orders? have they not all the same matter, and the weary
same Mode of Worship? you do not think the worth of the Minister goes into the
lawfulness of our prayers and Sacraments: or that we may not join with the
Liturgy that is not seconded with a good Sermon, I am sure you lay not the
weight of your limitation upon the manners of the people; that is a principle
you seem to abhor: neither can you make use of any exception against the
Diocesan Church, where in all our Churches are equally concerned, except a few
peculiars. I am sorry, to say I know not what you mean until you better explain
your self, give me leave to understand you indefinitely; especially while you
say, you do and will hold Communion with our own Parish-Churches your self, and
that you make it your business to advise and persuade others also, thereunto,
which I am very certain you would not do, if you did not believe, not only,
that our way of Worship is Lawful i. e. not sinful, but also* Good; and that
they in duty ought to attend it and Communicate with us, in it.

But, pray Sir, Why then do you p. 34. intimate, as if some Parish-Churches did
impose some things which God forbids? Indeed, when you speak seriously, you
seem to reduce all the peoples exceptions in this kind, to the two known heads;
kneeling at the Communion, and the Cross at Baptism.

1. For kneeling, you your self seem not only to allow, but to approve it, you
also practice it and you know, Mr. Baxter speaks handsomely for it, in his
dispute. p, 411.

2. For the Sign of the Cross, made at Baptism, this indeed is required of the
Minister; and it is his peculiar part to do it; and for ought I know, it is no
more to the people than his wearing the Surpluss, and if he knows it to be his
duty, why will you deny him his liberty to do it. Mr. Baxter teaches us, that
in such things, we ought to be guided by our Pastors, which is certainly
required; while they are only suspected, or at least they are not so certain,
that they are sinful; as we are Disput. 484.
certain, that we ought to obey, as he reasons well.

Especially, Signing with this Sign, being the Ministers own Act, you may
venture to give him so much power, as to do it, without offense to you, or, so
great offense, as to cause you to separate. Besides, if you cannot be persuaded
to like this one Action, yet you must remember the Rule of Ames, and separate
for this, in nothing else but what needs all this trouble? you have known a way
this ten years, to answer this scruple, by private Baptisms: and you will know,
how to serve your selves, in this of the Kings Declaration without my advice
but then, why should you separate, or gather into new Churches, for that, which
the Declaration removes without such doings? why do you stun and distract the
Church, by killing a Gnat upon her forehead, with so great a stroke.

Sir, you intimate, p. 35. the Case is altered: but surely, not much as to this
point betwixt us and the old Non-Conformists, yet you well know, all conformed
with the people in, and contended for Lay Communion, against the Brownists,
yea, it is a worthy observation of Mr. Baxter, that if there be any alteration,
it is for the better for the people, as he ingeniously confesses and accounts.
Take his words at large.

Though, says he, Ministerial Conformity be to us another thing Defense of
Cure of chapter div. p. 55.
(by reason of the new impositions) than it was to our predecessors, yet, to
the people Conformity is the same, if not easier (especially to them that I now
speak to) for it is the Lyturgy, Ceremonies, and Ministry that most alienate
them -- and the Lyturgy is a little amended as to them, by the change of the
Translation, and some little words, and by some longer Prayers, and the
Ceremonies are the same. And thirty years ago, there were many bare Reading,
not preaching Ministers, for one that there is now: therefore, our case of
separation being the same, with that it was of old, I take it to be fully
confuted by the Ancient Non-Conformists.

And I have so great a veneration for the worthy Names (much more an estimation
of the reasonings) of Mr. Cartwright, Egerton, Hildersham, Dod, Amesius,
Parker, Bains, Brightman, Ball, Bradshaw, Paget, Langley, Nicols, Hering, and
many other such, that I shall not think they knew not why they chose this
subject and wrote more against Separation than the Conformists did. Thus he
has given you a full Jury of old Non-Conformists, and their verdict against
Separation from our Parochial Congregations, and our present way of worshipping
God: and saved me much labor in that particular.

CHAP. XVI.
Further proof that the practice is Schysm, by way of Reply to his Objections
against it.

BUt for all this, gathering Churches is not Separation. Who will say so
besides? Refusing our Communion, and gathering themselves into distinct
Congregations, I am sure was that which the old Non-Conformists wrote against,
and called it Separation, and though other things occurred by way of Argument,
this was the main scope and bore the Burden of their Disputations.

Besides, you cannot in earnest accuse our Communion with sin, and what then
can excuse your leaving us and gathering new Churches; from Separation:
according to the judgment of all but your selves, the Seperatists themselves
not excepted, who, never that I ever heard of, ventured to question the major
proposition of this Argument, but denied the minor.

Those which separate from a true Church in whose Communion is nothing sinful,
are guilty of Schys^.

But you separate from a true Church in whose Communion there is nothing
sinful.

Therefore you are guilty of Schysm.

For all this, we may gather Churches and be neither Shysmaticks nor
Seperatists, and we have eight Reasons to prove it, a whole cluster of them: we
shall try their weight, especially, seeing they would bear us down in a point
contrary* to the sense of all mankind; for new reasons are not always best.

But they are clung together so that we take seven of them at once, or they are
spoiled.

1. The Non-Conformists, though they gather Churches are no seperatists: for
they will not pronounce any of your Parish-Churches Null, which have lawful
Ministers: not Null by any means, but they will make them as void as they can.

2. They will not say, that your Worship is such, as no man may lawfully
communicate in. We are beholding to you, perhaps one or two in a Nation, scarce
in a Parish, by your good will. 3. They shall hold that Parish bounds are very
convenient: they still hold this, what ever else they have let slip -- and none
ordinarily, but Parishoners, to be of the Church: but what Church do you mean?
the old or new, none of the Parish, if they can help it shall be of the old,
and as many out of the Parish, as they can draw in for ought I perceive shall
be of the new. 4. They are driven from the Parish-Ministry against their Wills:
and had rather hold their Ancient stations, and they will thankfully return
when they have leave. But must they therefore break ancient bounds and spoil
the Parishes to which they would return? and after they have taught the people
to go astray, they are not sure they will return with a whistle. 7. they set
not up the Church -Government of the people over the Pastors, but they dissolve
the government of the Parochial and Episcopal Pastor, and teach the people by
their countenancing of separation to despise and shake of both. 8. They desire
nothing more than as neighbor Ministers -- in love to carry on the same work
of Christ with us, and do nothing less.

But what of all this? therefore they are no seperatists: how so, because,
herein they differ in their principles from the old Seperatists; what then, if
they are the same in that very practice that made them Seperatists,

I am much of the mind still, that those that are guilty of sinful separation
are seperatists: and that those that voluntarily separate from a true Church
where they may communicate without sin, and gather Churches, in opppsition
thereunto, are guilty of a sinful separation, do with your reasons what you
will.

They may perhaps prove that the old Seperatists had some principles about
these things worse than the new: but, under your favor, I think if these
separate as they did and think themselves they have not so much to say against
our Churches as they of old did, their practice of separation is the worse for
this, and not a whit the better. Now give me leave to bring forth my reason
too. It Is this

If a great and real cause of separation does warrant and justify it in all
men's judgment but your own, the lesser the cause of separation is, the worse it
is, and the more schysmatical; and consequently where there is no real cause at
all, it is worst of all.

Therefore, I conceive the old Non-Conformists, as well as the late
Presbyterians, first charged those that separated with the error of the fact
viz. Separation: and in the second place, upon their reasons given for their
separation, from the Nullity of our Churches and Ministry, etc. they set
themselves upon the proof and defense of them but never took such their false
opinions to be of the essence of their Seperations; but only as their reasons
and excuses for their evil practices of Seperations. This ought to be heeded;
and then* what becomes of your lump of reasons* seven of the eight, you see,
are light and weigh very little, if the matter against them be weighed also.

But, what think you of the other reason, the sixth in number? truly that has
so great a Smack of the old separation, and self-esteem and admiration of their
own way that we threw it away before as worse then none, when ever it came to
our hands; especially in chapter 13.

If you suspect us, take it into your hand, as it is washed and rubbed and
presented to you in the best manner the Author can set it forth; he says, they
prefer their own manner of worshipping God as better than the Liturgy in their
opinion (no doubt of that) and therefore to be chosen when they may choose (but
who has given them this liberty! and freed their Consciences from the
obligation I know not, though they may sin unpunisht) but they account it not
the only acceptable worship, but are present with you in spirit, as the great
Apostle was with the corrupt Corinthians: but why only in spirit and not in
body. I had like to have thought that Communion in spirit in a bad worship, had
been the more dangerous of the two,) desiring a part in the prayers of all true
Christians in the World, and truly no more than need; if by such practices
they separate almost from them all, and think to be justified by such kind of
Reasons.

But who tastes not the smack of Brownism and Donatism here? for what is the
meaning of it but that our way of worship is not so good as it should be; for
certainly, theirs, ^s no better than it should be; yet they must leave ours, to
enjoy their own, as better; our way is therefore, defective, if not Corrupt.
But, wherein is it defective more than yours? have not we as many Psalms and
Chapters read, as many Sacraments Administered, as many Sermons preached, as
you, does not the Parish Minister, generally pray before and after Sermon, as
well as yours? and have we not the Common Prayer over and above? where is our
defect? away with these pitiful shows instead of reasonings. If we are corrupt
in our worship, say so, if that be the reason of your separation, say so, and
be Seperatists indeed say plainly it is a purer worship and reformation that you
leave us for.

But, let it be what it will, you your self think our way acceptable to God;
you join with us in it; you persuade others to it: so that what defects or
corruptions you find in it, cannot justify their separation from us, in your
opinion, and I see not, how you can avoid joining with us in this also; and to
say, they are Schysmaticks for so doing. Especially such Non-conformists, whose
Administrations you suppose as bad as the Liturgy. p. 16.

But you intimate one difference more (for your self alone, I suppose) betwixt
you and the Brownists in another place, where you ask, whether such gathered
Churches would be Schysmatical if the Common prayer were read in them? But,
what is the reading the Common prayer to Separation from the Church? or, why
cannot you better hear it in the Temple; the same mode of worship, is no
excuse, but an aggravation of division and separation; seeing they that use it,
say they like it; and so have no reason from the point of worship to forsake
our Communion. We have a Demonstration from the Church of Corinth; who, had all
the same Apostolical mode of worship, and yet are charged by the Apostle
himself, with divisions and Schysm.

Wherefore, though we take it kindly that you are moderate in your own
practice, and let the World and your brethren know it, and propose your advice
and example to your brethren so seasonably in it, I cannot but a little reflect
upon those words of yours p. 100.

But, though I will not bind my self (take heed of that) I here tell the World,
-- if opportunity -- I would sometimes pray freely without forms, and sometimes
use some part of the Common Liturgy: and sometime use the Reformed Liturgy,
which in 1600. was agreed on by Commissioned Non-Conformists, though being done
in exream have, it should be reviewed and perfected.

But why would you not use all these at once? then it is like some body would be
pleased. In earnest, must the Liturgy established by Law, and so long practice,
obtain no more with you, than the other two ways mentioned? Speak plain, were
the Non-Conformists then Commissioned for that purpose, to make a new Liturgy,
as you do more than intimate? Really, me thinks, until this new one be
amended, you should prefer our Liturgy, which was made by as good men, and with
less haste, and more deliberation.

But you may have some peculiar reason why you would honor this Reformed
Liturgy, as you call it, pray what is it? Because it is new? or because you are
for change? or for a third reason you wot of? Indeed Novelty, Change, and
Property are three great Arguments with some men, that are no small pretenders
to Antiquity, Resolution, and self-denial.

But all this concerns not you: pray what are your reasons for the use of it?
you have told us nothing of it yet, but its imperfections, and I do not hear of
any one hitherto that, from the worth and excellency of it, has been induced
to practice it: your reasons may possibly draw some one or other to join with
you in that new Liturgy: In the mean time pardon me in the mention of an odd
passage, I heard in the times of our late Confusions; what Church are you of
pray, (one asked another) I am, quoth he, of Mr. Barbers Church? Mr. Barbers
Church, a Church I have not heard of before, pray how many members have you?
truly, says he very gravely, we have none yet, but him and I; but we hope we
shall have more.

CHAP. XVII.
More direct proof that this practice is Schysm. With considering the
principles upon which they separate.

I Shall fix my foot and prove more directly, that such separation without Just
ground, is plain Schysm in all the Notion of Schysm we have hitherto received
in the Church of God, without any such consideration of the Brownists
principles, denying the truth of the Churches or Ministry, or lawfulness of
the worship, from which such separation was made.

1. First in the Scriptures, Schysm is condemned with dividing the Church into
parties; forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, seperating
themselves, drawing disciples after them, creeping into Houses, and leading
silly women Captive, and the like; without any such thing, as cuestioning, much
less denying the truth of those Churches, Ministry or Worship, as is evident
beyond all dispute and to a plain Demonstration, in those Schysmaticks in the
Church of Corinth: who kept in their public Assemblies, and indeed preferred
one of their Ministers in the same Church, before the rest: but denied not any
of them, except to hear them; and that was their Schysm, though they complained
not against either the Constitution of their Church, or the corruptions in it;
which yet were great and many, both in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, as is
well known.

Yea, though the Ministers in Corinth, walked in love together, and carried on
the same work of Christ, as you pretend with us, and made no such attempts of
drawing parties from their brethren, to themselves, and had no hand at all in
the Schysm, that we read of, but the great Apostle himself dislikes and
protests against it; because only the people too much admired some, to the
dislike of others of their Ministers, they are charged with Schysm, as before
was noted.

2. Shortly after, we have an account of Schism from Ignatius, and what was it,
but a not owning or submiting to the Government of their proper Bishops and
Pastors, without any ill reflections or denials of their office, or the truth
of their Churches, or any such thing.

3. Next, we read of that great Schysm both of the Eastern and Western
Churches, (for neither could be freed from the charge of it) about the time of
the celebration of Easter, upon this slight occasion, without any of the said
Brownistical principles, they separated from, by refusing Communion with one
another, for many years together; and though the occasion was so very slight,
it is noted for a great, yea therefore, for the greater Schysm in Church story.

4. After this, we read of the Schysm of Donatism: this, though it spread, and
run very deep into Naughty, and much like to our later Seperation-principles
about the Church at last; yet at first it was occasioned by a contention about
the Bishopric of Cecilianus, and therefore branded with the name of Schysm;
especially, when the Donatists much like our late Sectaries, refused Communion
with the Church, because corruptions were tolerated: contending that they were
the only pure Church and spouse of Christ; and this is little otherwise, than
what at present is pretended, by such as would not be called Separatists.

5. The great ground of Schysm observed from Church story by Mr. Hales, was
generally, contention Of Schysm p. 12.
about Bishops, as it is now without any Brownistical principles.

He notes, that at first there was but one Cathedral Church in one Diocese,
afterward, some had two some more, and it happened many times, that these
Cathedrals had distinct Bishops, and these by their differences many times came
to have distinct Churches: and these Churches refused to communicate with one
another for the sake of their Bishops which was called Schysm: though it was,
no Brownism it was a separation very like to ours in our Parish-Churches, this
was, says St. Cyprian, Erigere altar contra Altar, and to this does that
father impute (as Mr. Hales further observes) all Church-disorders, and if you
read him you would think he thought no other Church-tumult to be Shysm but this.

Indeed, Schysm is any unwarrantable breach of unity in the Church of God;
where you find this, you find Schysm, let the occasion be what it will, it is a
sinful practice, dividing the Church, by our selves or others and lies not in
the reason of that practice, unless it be considerable for the excuse of it: as
all Divines consent.

Hear St. Austine, Schysma Contr Faust. l. 20. c. 3. and de fid. and oper. c.
3. and contr. Cres. gr. l. 2. c. 7.
est, etc. Schysm is a late dissension or disagreement of a Congregation
arising from some Diversity in ^pinion; no matter what it be.

And again, more full to our purpose. Shysmatieos facit non diversa fides, sed
Communionis disrupta societas. Do you ask what is Schysm? it is not a differing
Faith, but a breaking the fellowship of Communion, which makes men Schysmaticks.

Yet more plainly, Schysma est eadem opiniantem and eodem Ritu utentem Solo
Congregationis delectari dissidio. Schysm is, when a man, that professes the
same faith and worship, is delighted only with the difference of an Assembly or
Congregation. You might have advised this Father a little better, had he been
now alive but, it seems, your objection was then urged by some that you are
loath to own,

And this same notion of Schysm kept its ground in the Church from St. Aug. to
Beza's time (...) sive (...) est, etc. Schysm or Division, says Beza An. in 1.
Co. 1. 10.
is this, when men are so addicted to some men or to some outward Rites, that
though they do agree in the chief points of Religion, yet they are estra^ged in
their minds, and engage themselves into parties and Factions. Thus Beza, and
yet he passes for a Presbyterian, and so does Mr. New comen, who uses all
these places of Authority, to my very purpose, against the Independents, who
would it seems, have excused their Schysm from the Moderation of their
principles, and the soundness of their Doctrine, He, therefore shall be the
next Presbyterian that we shall produce New commen. Sr. at Paul's. p. 14.
for this notion of Schysm, not necessarily inclusive of the Brownists rigid
principles.

He tells us plainly, as I observed in my other book, their holding one head
and one faith with us does not excuse them from being guilty of breach of unity
and downright Schysm, as long as they hold not one body, one Baptism. As if he
had said, let your principles be what they will, you are downright Schysmaticks
while you separate and break our unity.

As for Separation, Mr. Baxter tells us, that the mischief Ep to his Rest
printed 1669.
of it lies not in the bare error of judgment, but in the unchristian and
Church-dissolving division, and Alienation which thence follows.

Yea, let us know the man that did ever directly or by any clear consequence to
be drawn from his words, print such a Notion of Schysm, as includes the
Brownists rigid principles about our Churches, etc. in the Nature of it.
Examine Cameron, Ames, Hales, Brinsly, and if any others be dearer to you, and
see, whether their definitions take in any such thing; or can bear such an
exposition, as you would put upon them. See how Mr. Cawdrey and the London
Ministers, at Sion* College deal with the Independents in the point; and
whether you can possibly persuade your self, to continue in the belief, that
for the reasons you have alleged, the Non-Conformists may gather Churches and
not be Seperatists in the judgment of the Presbyterians, before the year 1660.
or any of the old Non-Conformists: you may see their Judgment in general by a
few quotations out of their writings.

CHAP. XVIII.
Testimonies of Non-Conformists for the same.

GIve me leave tousher in this worthy verdict, with an Argument after your own
mode.

I will undertake to prove, that the Non-Conformists, both Ancient and Modern,
before 1660. held, gathering Churches out of our Churches unlawful and
Schysmatical, and that absolutely, without any reference to the principles upon
which it is don, much less the Brownistical.

Do you prove afterward, if it be possible, that they supposed your New
distinctions and evasions, or that they, at any time let words drop from them
signifying an allowance of Separation from our Churches and setting up new
ones, upon such weak grounds as you stand upon.

Mr. Ball I had mentioned in Mr. Ball.
my last, as one of the old ^uritans, that had wrote for Communion with our
Parochial Congregations; you tell me subtly, that he speaks not against
Non-Conformists preaching, and that's an Answer. But I must now add, that, that
great Nonconformist does not plead for our Communion as lawful, but in a sort
necessary; and that to separate from us is a sinful Separation.

He tells you roundly, that such Separation is the Wound of Ep to his 1. vol.
Friendly Trial.
the Church, -- yea, whosoever seperateth from the body of the Church
seperateth from Christ in that respect. -- Voluntary Separation from the Lords
Table, and the Prayers (he reckoned upon more than hearing Sermons) of the
Congregation, what is but a willing Excommunicating of our selves from the
visible tokens of the Lords presence and love -- is it not a greater sin in
Members to deprive themselves (then in the Church Governors to deprive others)
of the same Communion for small occasions? you see he makes the smalness of the
occasion of Separation to be Emphasis and Aggravation of it.

Again more smartly in his Answer to Cann. Thus, Separation from the true
Churches of Christ,his Ministry Epistle.
and Worship (of which sort I shall prove that to be by the word of God, for
which I plead) meaning the Church of England) tends not to the overthrow of
Antichrist, but to the Renting of the Church, the disgrace of Religion, the
Advancement of Pride, Schysm, Contention, the offense of the weak, the grief of
the Godly, who be better settled, the hardening of the Wicked, and the Recovery
or rising again of Antichrist.

2. Let worthy Mr. Hildersham lay down his grave and weighty point clearly and
boldly, and like Hildersham upon 4. Joh. p. 149.
himself it is this; Those Assemblies that enjoy the Word and Doctrine of
Salvation; though they have many Corruptions remaining in them, are to be
acknowledged the true Churches of God, and such as none of the faithful may
make Separation from. (He will not allow you, upon pretense of purity and
serving. God better in your way, to separate and gather Churches, not any one,
none of the faithful) he proceeds to prove it largely: and it may be well known
how severe he is, against the faithful, that will ordinarily leave their honest
Minister, to hear those that are more able: upon pretenses of profiting better
by them: which is yet the best plea the present Separation has for it self.

3. M. Calvin speaks to the point with no mean Authority. Calvin Insti. li. 4.
c* 1 sect. 9, 10. 12.
He tells us, that wheresoever the Gospel is purely preached, and the
Sacraments Administered according to the Institution of Christ; there is the
Church of God. -- There appears neither a deceitful nor doubtful face of a
Church, of which no man may either despise the Authority, or refuse the
Admonition; or resist the Counsels or mock at the Corrections; much less depart
from it, breaks in sunder the Unity of it, and go unpunished.

For the Lord so highly esteems the Communion of the Church, that he counts him
for a Traitorous runaway, and forsaken of Religion; whosoever shall stubburnly
estrange himself from any Christian fellowship, so that it be such a one as
has the true Ministry of the word and Sacraments.

The fellowship of such a Church, is not to be cast off; although it swarm full
of faults, though there be faults in the Administration, either of Doctrine, or
of the Sacraments; yet we ought not to estrange our selves from the Communion
of it: for all the Articles be not of one sort: and therefore for every light
dessention we ought not rashly to forsake the Church.

4. The value which our Englesh Presbyterians just before the Wars, had of our
Church and its lay-Communion is not impertinent Letter of many Ministers in Old
England, to their brethren in new E. pub by Mr. Ash, etc 1643.
but very considerable: together, with the Censure they then passed upon such
as refused it.

They speak to their brethren in New England thus, if we deny Communion with
such a Church as ours; there has been no Church these 1400 years, with which a
Christian might lawfully join. Nay, that if such scruples as are now in your
heads may take place, it will be unlawful to hold Communion with any society
under Heaven.

5. Mr. Gifford an old Nonconformist, wrote a book Gifford Printed 1590.
called a plain Declaration; wherein he does not vindicate every thing in our
Church; but that there is no sufficient Cause of separation; Complains thus,
some are proceeded to this that they will come to the Assemblies to hear
Sermons and the Prayers of the Preacher; but not to the prayers of the Book;
which I take to be a more grievous sin than many do suppose. But yet this is
not the worst; for sundry are gone farther; and fallen into a damnable Schysm; and
the same so much the more fearful and dangerous, in that many do not see the
foulness of it; but rather hold them as Godly Christians; and but a little
over-shot in some matters.

6. We come now to review the Testimonies we gave in our last, from the late
Presbiterian Controversy with the Independents: we pitched upon some words of
the Provincial Assembly in London: and the Argument sent to the Assembly of
Divines by the London Ministers from Sion College, two eminent bodies of known
Presbyterians. And we yet see no reason to judge, but their words and Arguments
are very direct and full to the purpose; especially considering, the most
pitiful shifts of our Answerer about them.

As to the words, in the Divine right of Presbytery, be says, that Jus divin.
Reg. Eccl.
book was supposed to be penned by Dr Roberts now a Conformist. But what does
he mean? was he a Conformist then? or does not the book plead for the
Presby^ery, and its Jus Divinum? and in the same sense by which he himself
defines a Presbyterian? yea, was it not owned by, and published under the name
of the provincial Assembly of Presbyterians? and what matter is it then who
penned it? the like dealing you use about Mr. Trapp: you say he is a Conformist,
what then? has he not given a just account of the book written by the London
Ministers, as I said he did? their reasons alleged by me, were alleged by a
Conformist: yet they are theirs still. What manner of answering is this? It
were not pardonable with some Adversaries, but you are fallen into merciful hands.

The Authority of the persons then is clear: the words I cited out of the
preface to that book called, Jus Divinum regiminis Ecclesiastici, were these,
Parochial Churches are received as true visible Churches of Christ, and most
convenient for edification: gathering Churches out of Churches has no
footsteps in Scripture: is contrary to Apostolical practice: is the scattering
of Churches, the Daughter of Schysm: the Mother of Confusion and the
Stepmother of edification.

Observe, they condemn gathering Churches out of our Churches: absolutely, and
without any respect to the principles upon which it was done particularly, they
call it the Daughter of Schysm, separation in order unto the gathering of
Churches being Schysm it self, in the then Presbyterian opinion.

The Arguments, I took out of the Letter of the London Ministers Sion-Coll.
to the Assembly were these, the Independents are guil^y of Schysm. 1. Because
they refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments. 2. They erect
separate Congregations under a separate undiscovered Government: never charging
them with any Brownistical principles, but the fact it self, an undoubted proof
of what they undertook to prove.

Again to the same purpose, they charge them with three great Scandals, how you
will avoid either of them I cannot Devine. 1. That they separated from the true
Church. 2. That they endeavored by drawing Members out of it to make up their
separate Churches, to weaken and diminish the Church. 3. That they endeavored
to get a warrant to authorize both, viz. by a Toleration: and this, say they,
we think to be plainly unlawful.

Now, hereupon, I am bold to challenge our Answerer, or any one else, to prove
clearly, that any one Eminent Presbyterian before 1660. was not utterly against
all the three, against such separation, such gathering Churches, and such
Toleration. Convince me if you can: but not by telling me they are now for them
all. That they would Tolerate, things Tolerable, that is gathering Churches:
and persons Tolerable, that is Presbyterians, as you speak very intelligibly.

But no wonder, they are changed in their thoughts of these things: the case is
Altered, as you hint.

True, there are some new impositions upon Ministerial Conformity; but other
Alterations render our Lay-Communion more easily than it was before the wars,
when the Presbyterian denied it not; as was noted out of Mr. Baxter before; who
also assures us that he never heard of five Non-Conformists, besides the five
dissenting Defense of his cure p. 13.
brethren in the Assembly at Westminster; he means, they conformed as Ministers
of the Church of England before they sat there.

However, that Churches may not be gathered out of Churches is asserted not as
a Temporary truth, but moral: depending upon the Nature of a Church which never
alters: or gives any occasion of change, in the judgment, about this point.

The Books of Mr. Cawdrey, that Captain in the Presbyterian. Cawdrey.
Army against Dr. Owen, and the Independents, challenge you all. We may, says
he, prove them to be Schysmatical. 1. by a voluntary Separation from true
Churches; with whom we dare say, they may Communicate without sin, and so
consequently, causelessly rending the body of Christ. 2. By their renouncing
Communion with us, to set up a Church of another Indep. further proud Schys p.
73, 74
constitution; and so condemning our Churches ipso facto, as no truly
constituted Churches. Mark, condemning our Churches ipso facto. Their very Act
is enough; whether they avow such principles or not: and consequently, what
ever you pretend to the contrary; your very departure from us, and making new
Churches, does of it self condemn you of Schysm.

He concludes his first book bravely, they, says he, that Ind. great Schysm.
raise differences in them i. e. in our Churches: and draw disciples from them
and renounce Communion with them, say what they please or can to the contrary
are Schysmaticks quod erat demonstrandum.

I only assume, that generally the Non-Conformists make differences in our
Churches, draw Disciples from them, and renounce Communion with them, quod est
demonstratum, And now I beg leave of my Answerer to conclude with the words in
my last, that so much offended him; that I am sure the Presbyterians, (if they
walk by the principles of their Fathers before the Kings return) I am sure, I
say, that they have no reason to engage in a way of public worship,
contradistinct to our Parochial Congregation.

The Issue of the travers, says Mr. Brinsley, is no more but Of Schysm, p. 53.
this. If there be amongst us, a Separation from a true Church, and that both
voluntary and unwarrantable [as the present practice of gathering Churches by
the Presbyterians is] (which I suppose the evidences given in, have
sufficiently evicted) then must we give sentence, that there is more then
either crimen nominis, or nomen criminis, no less than a Schysm formally and
properly so called.

CHAP. XXI.
Gathering of Churches ought not to be practiced, as now it is, either, in
Conscience, or prudence. Objections answered.

YEt, we are not at a full Agreement: he seems every where, to take it for
granted, that, we are now, at perfect liberty, to gather new Churches or not,
which, by no means, I allow, while my principles stand undemolish't: Such as
these.

That our Church of England is a true Church that our parochial Congregations
are true Churches that the people of England are generally, Members of this
Church and Churches; or at least ought so to be. That they lawfully may, and
consequently are, in Duty and Conscience bound to Communicate with them. And
therefore, for them to Separate, and to gather themselves into new
Congregations, of another constitution, is plainly sinful and Schysmatical.

Upon the premises, I do conclude, that Conscience ought first to be consulted
in the case: and the many obligations thereof, effectually and totally removed,
before you can make it a matter of indifferency in it self, and of more
Christian prudence pro hic and nunc, as you seem to affirm.

Our Obligation to this Communion falls many ways upon us: from our Relation
to the Church; the laws of cohabitation of Church Members, the Laws of the
Kingdom, and the long continued practice of this Church: none of all which,
are in the least touched, much less Altered or Repeald by the Declaration of
Indulgence.

Besides, the many express Scriptures against our forsaking our (wonted)
Assemblies, Seperating our selves, making parties and divisions in the Church:
having our Teachers in too much Admiration, and heaping them up to our selves,
and receiving the faith with respect of persons: and drawing Disciples after
us, in all which, both the present case, and the several Consciences of the
Non-confomists, whether Preachers or people, are in my opinion, not lightly
concerned. Shake of the Burden as well as you can.

Until these things be better answered, I must add here; that the case is of
weight in p^int of Conscience, as well as prudence: and that gathering
Churches, as now you do, is a breach of the Laws both of God and Man; a Sin
against our Church in her Right, in our persons and fellowship: both with
respect to our Pastors and Brethren* and a plain breach of our Covenant with
them all; a breach of the Churches Unity, and Order, and Ancient bounds and
Customs, and in the Teachers that draw away our people, besides all that has
been said, a plain robbing of God, the Church and our Brother. To conclude, if
the Laws of Piety, Justice, Temperance, or Charity, can reach the Conscience,
every one of which are violated by this gathering of Churches, the case is not
a work of mere Christian prudence, and to be determined only comparing the good
and evil consequents together, as you say p. 21.

But supposing my foundations to stand firm, and Conscience in the point well
secured: we may parley a little upon it in point of prudence: especially,
seeing, you affirm p. 21. that, he that through imprudence mijsudgeth either
w^y does sin. Moreover you confess, that the case is now of so great moment,
that no Minister should rash'y determine it for himself, p. 20. nor upon the
desires of some of the people only; but should consult with wise and sober men
that are impartial, but, if the case be so difficult for the Readers, who you
say, must preach, how difficult is the case for the people? for it is, no where
said, they must separate, and leave us to hear you, yea, your self teach the
contrary. You state your nice Case, thus, p. 17, 18. whether in competent
parishes, which have Able and Godly conformable Ministers, the obligation to
hold Union and Communion with the Parish Church; or the obligati^n to exercise
a more regular way of Church -Discipline and worship, than the Parish-Churches
do or will do, should be judged the more prevalent; and consequently, whether
they should gather C^urches out of Churches in this?

A Case not so difficult, as you seem to make it, if there be as you have
heard, so much obligation upon Conscience to the former part of it touching
Communion with us: and none at all left, for their gathering-Churches for the
ends assigned by you, for they can neither leave us without sin; nor gather
Churches without sin; as, we hope it has appeared.

Your opinion is given upon a double supposition, and both of them false. 1.
That the case is indifferent; or, at least the obligation to both, so equal,
as, that it is to be weighed only by prudence. 2. That it is lawful and a duty
to be a Member of such a Parish Church (only) when we can have and do no better
[i. e. in our own opinion] and that when we can, we have liberty to forsake our
own Church, though, I confess your explication of having or doing better, has
some tendency to a right determination of this great point, viz: you say, we
cannot have or d^ better, when it cannot be without a greater hurt to the
public interest of the Gospel, the Church, and the souls of men, then the
benefit to us and others is like to countervail. But I must add (as the case
requires,) especially, when that benefit, cannot be had without sinning our
selves, and drawing others to sin with us by our endeavors, Scandal, and
example; which, I think, we too plainly and manifestly do, by gathering
Churches.

Now give me leave, to make a supposition; and I shall immediately take the
Scale and weigh the consequents, as you say, on both sides. My supposition is,
that this case which you call the difficult one, is the very case with most
Non-Conformists, who do now gather Churches, for as our Parish-Ministers are
generally, more Tolerable then you seem to allow them; so, especially are they
of the better sort, and truly able, and Godly, and our Parishes, in your own
sense, competent enough, where, for the most part, they have hitherto set about
this new experiment, which, it seems, renders the case so difficult in your own
opinion, that, I fear, you will have cause enough to censure the rashness of
their unadvised undertaking of it.

But now to the Scales, wherein we must weigh. 1. The Benefits to be hoped. 2.
The evils to be feared, will follow such gathering Churches.

You pitch upon three great Benefits. 1. The pleasing of God (when we know it
is his will) and the profit of men's souls by the most regular manner of
discipline and Worship. [But be sure you know it is his Will] you your selfmake
it very difficult to know this, even for the Teachers; how much more for the
people. The same Argument will put us upon the Reformation of the State too,
when we know it is Gods will. This we know to be Gods will; that we serve God
the best we can in our places: that we move for a Reformation in a peaceable
and regular way, that we preserve the unity and Communion of the Church. That
we obey our Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors: these things we know to be Gods
will: and we know that he is not the God of Confusion, but of order in his
Churches; and what tends to disorder and confusion, we know it is not Gods
will; but how we shall know that it is his will we should reform the Church
upon our own heads, and therefore Separate from true Churches and gather
Churches, in order to better Worship and discipline, if so it prove, this we
know not.

2. The second Benefit, is the setting up an imitable Example of right
Discipline, and worship to other Churches i. e. Setting up a Standard with the
former Narrative of the grounds of the War. But heads, severely, then woe to
them that set up a worse. And, in your Conscience, is not this woe likely to be
general? how many hundred years has our Discipline been exposed to
examination, and for the substance of it, what part can envy it self, find
fault with this? are the short Counsels of our new Reformers likely to mend it?
besides, how will you do, that are for Episcopacy? you will not regulate that
by having none; or by making other Bishops I hope. As for our Worship, I
presume, the Reformed Liturgy will not take place, except in your own
Congregation? and sure, that we have already, is better than none at all: as it
is with your brethren of the new Churches.

3. Your last benefit is a mavelous one indeed, the satisfying the
Consciences of honest mistaken people, who think it unlawful to communicate
with us. i. e. we must break the Churches in pieces, to feed the mistakes and
ill humors of honest people, if they are honest, remove their mistakes, teach
them truth, and wisdom, and peace, and duty, and persuade them to keep their
Station and Communion with us; and I doubt not, but that y^u and they will find
this to be the greater benefit of the two at last, as well as we.

You may see there is no good to be done by the practice, and you, in the next
place, see what a swarm of mischiefs attend it. I shall observe the things you
fear your self; and indeed, they are more in number, weight, and measure too,
then the benefits you mentioned.

1. This mischief is likely to follow their gathering-Churches as you well
observe: the exasperating the minds for number and quality considerable, and so
alienating from their brethren, and hindering them. 2. Thereby weakening the
Protestant Interest in a time which requires ^ur greatest concord. 3. Then
setteng of parties against parties, and Churches against Churches; and turning
of Religion into contentions and mutual opp^sitions. 4. The countenanceing of
unlawful Seperations; which will all shelter themselves under such examples,
and the Dividers will not see the different principles on which we go, while
our practice seems to be the same. 5. And so it may be injurious to future
ages, by seeming to give them Presidents for unlawful Seperati^n. 6. And it is
not the least evil consequent, that we shall cherish not only the error of
t^ose that think worse of the Parish-Worship and Assemblies than there is
cause; but we shall also accidentally nourish their pride, who will think
themselves a holier people, because they erroniously over-censure the persons
and practices of others

These are they evil consequents, which you wisely for^see will follow these
new Churches: and you cannot, I think, prudently avoid them, but by forbearing
that practice, and persuading your brethren to do so likewise. For you confess,
when the public good forbids it [as no doubt, it now d^th] p. 22. The
Tolerated Ministers must not gather distinct Church Assemblies, but join with
the public Churches, and help the people by their instructions at other
times. And not to b^y up the people in their weakness, which you well observe,
p. 23. inclines them to causeless seperations and dis^unctions.

But who shall now hold the beam? let any hand but your own, and, I am sure,
the inconveniences you have mentioned, must needs preponderate, those shadows
of benefit that the practice pretends to.

It Is the known and stated judgment of the Church in all Ages that defects, yea
and many corruptions (which you charge us not withal) are far more tolerable,
and not so hazardous to the Church, as Separation by the breach of unity; and
then what shall we think of the formal and positive Schysm in gather^d Churches.

The Novatians, Audeans, and Donatists had all the same pretense, of better
discipline and worship than the public; therefore, they gathered themselves
into distinct Churches for reformation and greater purity in Religion: but for
this, they stand recorded for Schysmaticks and P^sts of the Church, in the
writings of the Fathers and Church-Histori^ns.

You acknowledge, our errors are Tolerable, (else you would not Communicate
with us:) and this is a standing rule in the Church, si error est Tolerabilis,
non ^p^r^et ^er^ Secessionem. If the errors or scandals of the Church be
Tolerable, we ought not to leave it, and what is the reason? because of the
dangerous consequents that have ever followed Separation, and the beauty and
Cameron. de Schys.
holiness of unity in Religion.

Sir I perceive I need not endeavor to quicken your sense of the fearful
eff^cts of separation: and should I begin to speak of them there would be no
end; God grant we may never feel them; and therefore that you, and I, and every
man, may do our proper endeavor to prevent and heal them. Schysmate luxantur
Pareus.
membra Ecclesiae* Membra luxata inepta sunt ad sua muncra obcunda: membra
lu^^ta gravissimo d^lore corpus afficiunt. P. Mart.
Schysm in the Church puts the members out of joint: members out of joint are
unfit f^r service: and cause great dolours and disquietment to the whole body.

What sharp cont^n^ions and ruptures in the bowels of the Church, what Wars and
desolations in Nations, has Schysm been the original of? what sighs and
warnings did the separation of the Brownist draw from the Puritans? and of the
late Sectaries from the Presbyterians? all this cannot be torgotten, though in
the midst of our Bussles, and our new joys for our present liberty, we mind it
not.

I shall not repent my former inconveniences: the fear of which, at least, some
of them, is yet still upon us: notwithstanding, etc.

Dividing principles will give shelter to all kind of Heresies Vid Baxt. def.
of his cure p. 51, 52, 53. etc.
and Sects; of which experience is too full a proof -- and shall we stand by
and see this work go on, and neither lament their sin that drive men to this,
nor warn them of the passions and principles that lead to it? and who knows
not how fair a game the Papists have to play by the means of our Divisions?

CHAP. XX.
More particular address to the Answer, a friendly expostulation about his hard
words and dealing. We must preach. And we may gather Churches to serve God
better: two great cheats, a desire he would detect them.

Sir, I perceive, by some Golden lines, drawn here and there, upon your Rough
and Rugged piece (pardon the expressions) that though we differ in our
measures, yet, we intend the same end: and in general, by the same means. Let
us then, in cold blood, as friends f^ln out use to do, let us exp^stulate a
little, and be friends again.

I confess, I thought I could not reply to much of your book, but in Mirth or
Anger: the former I rather chose; and have sometimes used, but make it my
public request, that neither your self, nor any one else would take it in
contempt of your person or parts.

But if my pleasantness has, indeed, displeased you; pray, reflect a little
seriously upon the manner, how you dealt with me, without any provocation. And
consider both the Ex^mple and Rule, you give me. p. 4. and I am apt to
conceive, you will require no further satisfaction: yea, and that for the
future, you will learn this lesson; not to despise your Adversaries person or
parts; least of one you make two; and instead of Reason, you stir up and
provoke Folly and Madn^ss.

If any thing has missed my eye, and consideration, that you conceive to be
^rgumentative: believe me, it was not designed. I left your Method, because I
had a mind to review the point thoroughly, and once for all: and therefore you
are secure from any further trouble from me, in this matter (unless I see more
reason hereafter, than now I can foresee,) Yet I promise you, that if, without
Insulting, you will show me any Argument which was overlookt, I promise you
faithfully, I will either Answer it, or acknowledge I cannot.

Indeed, some parts of your Book I have wil^ingly declined to insist upon;
there being observable in them, the defects of Pertinence and Charity: which I
impute to your have and hastiness: and thank God, that I know how to allow
something to the best of men, for their Natural Temper.

Yet so far as we are virtuous, we cannot be unwilling to hear of our faults,
especially, with meckness of reason, and in a friendly expostulation: which, I
hope, may well enough admit me to tell you plainly, that I have found neither
kind words, nor fair dealing in your book.

For your Words: calling my Arguments silly; questioning my Wit and M^desty;
rendering me guilty of Noise, instead of Sense; of Confusion and immeasurable
considence; these, and such like, do not much affect me, but I confess, when
you speak of my pernicious fallacies, that goes something near me, as also when
you number me with factious disputers; when, God knows, I intended nothing, as
I said in my last, but to save the people from sin, and the Church from
confusion and ruin, by gross Separation.

For your fair dealing, I mean, not only, that you would make me affirm, what I
never said, or thought, for of that I have delivered my self before: or so much
that you seem to ly upon the Catch for little oversights, which concern not the
Controversy; though by the way take an Instance or two of this Nature.

Whereas I say, p. 28. they cannot but understand the Declaration to prohibit
al such private meetings as the law cal^s conventic^es. What an outcry do we
hear? you know not whose understandings you talk of -- and with* Scorn -- why
should you judge us to be as wise as your self.

But where is the victory? does not the very Declaration it self suppose
unlawful Conventicles? or what if I had slipped, and put in the word Law for
Declaration? was it unpardonable? it looks ill, when we design disgrace to our
Adversary, without any advantage to our Cause, and what have you gained by this
N^ble quarrel, but the name of Conventicles? and so branded by the Law; a name,
one would think, not much worth the contention, if we Admit the Learned Hale's
definition of it; a Conventicle says he, is nothing else but a Congregation of
Schysmaticks. Tract of Schys p. 14


Take b^t one Instance more; I had said, p. 14. that I thought I might safely
say, that the Declaration does not so much as uncommand any thing which the Law
properly commands. But had you heeded one word among the rest, you would hardly
have entered this exception: p. 46. I mean the word, properly; which you, to
seeming Advantage leave out in your Reflection, for who knows not, that the main
matter for which the Law is framed, is the thing properly, and directly
commanded by the Law? and that the execution of the penalty, and the command
thereof, are but in subserviency thereunto; and, only of force, conditionally,
in case the Law, in the proper matter of it, be disabused?

And your exception to the other paragraph, has yet l^ss color. I say, the
Declaration medles not with the law, either in the preceptive or punitive part
of it. But I still take it to be beyond your skill in the Law, to confute me in
this; and to be beyond dispute, that the Law in both these parts of it, had its
being from the Legeslative power; and the Declaration from the Executive power:
and that this cannot operate, to the change of that at all. The true internal
vigor of the Law is still the same; and it is your mistake to think that the
Declaration suspends the command, or so much as the punitive part of the Law:
it suspendeth only the Actual Execution of the Law, as poenal: and allows such
meetings, as break the Law, and incur its penalty, to abide unpunished; think
on it well, and you may be of my mind.

Of these by the way, which indeed had not found their place here, could I have
reduced them to any head of discourse above: yet now I am upon it let me
whisper it in your ear, without any great noise about it, that there is one
Paragraph of y^urs, that, could I take pleasure in such little p. 45 last par
or Sect
reflections, I could show, to have as many real Soloecisms in it, as you have
noted in my whole Book.

But, I am not careful for these things: you deal more hardly with me, when you
lay presumption and cruelty to the Non-conformists at my door, cannot I imagine
that they do not only desire to escape the penalty of the Laws, but erect
separate Churches to themselves; but I must be an Ithacian Master, and make you
feel my meaning, and give occasion to cry out as you do, but, my Brother, what
good will our sufferings do you? do you feel your self ever the more at liberty
when we are in the Common-Goales? are you the fuller because some
Non-Conformists want bread?

Is this reasonable, charitable, or candid? what ground have you for it, either
in my words or deeds? would you not think you had wronged me, if some
Non-Conformists should tell you, that I have run some hazards and suffered in
my Name for their Liberty? and if a peaceable silenced Minister should testify,
that he and his Family have many years together, had the greatest part of their
livelihood from my Charity? But I must forbear, though you provoke me, least
you should have just cause to impeach my Modesty, and think you have cause to
say, that I, in a sense, call you Persecutor.

But who am I, when, alas, the whole body of Conforming Clergy, (though you
have said, that many of them are pious, able, and faithful in their places
yet) you more than seem to load them, p. 74. with the unchristian like charge
of perjury, perfidiousness, and persecution, proud, contending who shall be
greatest, and Covenanting, never in certain points to obey Christ against the
World and the Flesh.

And, you cannot but know, this is no way Argumentative: unless you designed to
weaken the Affections of the people toward us, and so to prepare them for a
separation: which I am not willing to believe: for that I find, you, in many
other places, so earnestly persuading to the contrary.

Sir, I do not presume to advise you: but Sir, if you shall think to write any
more upon this matter, let me beseech you seriously to consider, whether your
own principles, and the present vile practices of separation, contrary
thereunto, would not more worthily and more seasonably draw your studies
another way.

I know, that the peace and reputation, and Integrity, of our Parochial
Churches are dear to you, however you were tempted to mistake me, and to let
some things fly, some things that may chance to prejudice them more than you
would.

There are two principles scattered up and down your Answerer, that I here
mainly aim at, and into these indeed, all its strength resolves. 1. That the
Non-Conformists must preach. 2. That to the end the people may serve God
better, they may gather themselves into other Churches. The first of these
would not concern me in the defense of my other Book, neither, does the
allowance of it, draw a necessity of gathering Churches, as we have made to
appear above the latter of them, indeed, lies at the bottom of all that you say
against me, and I have often spoken to it, even, where ever I met it I am now
making my Petition in the Churches behalf, that you would lay to heart the
certain Divisions and confusions that must needs follow, upon the practice of
both these principles, jointly received, and improved by the skill of Dividers,
and the cunning craftiness of such as lie in wait for that purpose.

The first of these, that they must preach, give me leave to say, as it is the
present Engine for division, is a plain cheat put upon the World, and not to be
countenanced by an honest man.

They must preach, but why? because of the Text, because of the necessities of
the people, and lastly, because of their Relation to their old Flocks, of each
a little.

They must preach, because the Text says, there is a necessity laid upon us,
and woe be to us if we do not preach.

Ans. But, my Brethren, what if you have no opportunity, and the Churches are
all full, must ye preach still? We have before noted, from Mr. Baxter, that
where there is no opportunity there is no duty, and consequently, there is no
necessity no Woe, and is it not plain enough, that while you have no particular
flock, especially, while the Law forbids you to have any, you have no
opportunity to preach publicly: can have no opportunity to be so busy in
another man's Diocese: nor warrant in Conscience without leave from the Laws,
which are still obliging, notwithstanding, etc, and the License of the Bishop,
or the Parochial Minister, to whose people you would preach.

It ought to be remembered, this Doctrine is perfect Brown^sm, and condemned as
such by the Old Non-Conformists, who held and defended against the Brownists,
that though themselves were only suspended, and had yet by Law the possession
of their places and no other could lay claim to their flocks, yet, being only
thus suspended, they ought not to preach publicly to their own people.

Whether suspended or degraded, their Doctrine was not the necessity to preach,
as you and the Brownist say, but to keep silent.

For so long said they, as the Bishops suspend and deprive according to Law, we
account of the Action herein, as of the Act of the Church, if they do otherwise
we have liberty given us, by the Law to appeal from them.

Obj. But we think in our Consciences that the causes of our Silencing are not
sufficient to justify it. This very Objection also the Brownists used to the
Non-Conformists of old, and received this Answer from them.

Ans. It lies say they, in them to depose that may ordain, and they may shut
that may open. And that, as he may with a good Conscience execute a ministry,
by the Ordination and calling of the Church who is privy to himself of some
unfitness (if the Church will press him to it) so may he who is privy to
himself of no fault that deserves Deprivation, cease from the execution of his
Ministry, when he is pressed thereunto by the Church. And indeed, if a
guiltless person put out of his charge, by the Churches Authority, may yet
continue in it, what proceedings can there be against guilty persons, who in
their own conceits, are always guiltless, or will at least pretend so to be;
seeing they also will be ready always to object against the Churches judgment,
that they are called of God, and may not therefore, give over the execution of
their Ministry at the will of Man.

Obj. But how shall we answer the Text, woe be to us if we d^ not preach? Thus
also the Brownists urged against the Non-Conformists, and were thus solidly
answered.

Ans. The case now, and in the Apostles times, is far different. First, they
that inhibited the Apostles, were known and professed Enemies to the Gospel:
Secondly, the Ap^stles were charged, not to teach in the name of Christ, nor to
publish any part of the Doctrine of the Gospel; which Commandment, might more
hardly be yielded unto, than this of our Bishops, who are not only content that
the Gospel should be preached, but are also Preachers of it themselves. Lastly,
the Apostles received not their calling and Authority from men, nor by the
hands of men, but immediately from God himself; and therefore might not be
restrained or deposed by Men: whereas, we, though we exercise a Function
whereof God is the Author, and are also called of God to it, yet are we called
and ordained by the hand and Ministry of men, and therefore may by men be also
deposed, and restrained from the exercise of our Ministry.

These three last objections and answers are taken out of a Book called a grave
and modest confutation of the errors of the Sect called Brownists or
Seperatists: Agreed upon long since by the joint consent of many Ministers then
standing out in the cause of Nonconformity published by Mr. Rathbang 1644.
par. 2. p. 41, 42.

2. They must preach, because the people need it, the necessities of thousands
of Souls require it.

Yet you ask, is the notorious need of many hundred thousand souls no reason?
-- is the releiving of many Godly Christians who are cast out of your Communion
because they dare not conform, no reason?

But I am still confident you have no reason, or no good ones: for, I believe
you have brought out the best you had, to make this vapor, and for the credit
of the Cause: for neither these, nor their fellows as has appeared, are worth
a fig: and yea, some would tell you they are rotten, they have great Worms in
them; and are only* fit to please Children.

Do but open these reasons, and you will presently find they are deceitful
wares, and nothing but skin. The sense of them is, Non-Conformists must preach,
upon a double reason, taken from the people. 1. from their numbers. 2. From
their quality.

1. From their numbers. Many hundred thousand souls, Souls. thousand souls,
hundred thousand souls, many hundred thousand souls and all these need,
notoriously need, Non-conformists preaching. Here is strength of Argument
indeed, and is this no reason? I am sure his Rhetoric, as sweet to some men's
palates.

But, I marvail at two things: first, that this great necessity should be so
notorious to none but your selves, and that a Christian Government should
notoriously be guilty of the blood of so many hundred thousand souls, by
suffering them to perish for lack of knowledge, had another said it, I should
have answered, this is a most notorious slander.

The second thing, I wonder at, is, how any Conscientious man dare say,
contrary to plain sense and Fact, that this is the Reason necessitating
Non-Conformist^ to preach, as they do. Seeing, in the places worst served, we
so seldom hear of your new Congregations. But, as some Mountebanks pretend to
cure the head by applications to the feet, you have skill to work by a quite
contrary method you will cure the feet by tampering with the head.

In plain English; all this is but a blind and a stawking-Horse, behind which,
these fowlers lurck, to catch their Game, and to draw our best and fattest
Partridge into their Net: it is Cities, Corporations, and the Wealthiest parts
of the Kingdom, where they Tincle their Bells and draw Swarms to their Hives
that will yield most Honey,

You seem some where p. 74. to tax my Charity or Verity in an intimation
tending this way; but my particular experience, as well as general, and not to
be controled, observation, was my Warrant. I will trouble you with a pat
Instance of two or three Non-Conformists in a place where I am well acquainted;
and I count them not a whit the less honest for their plain dealing in the
point,

One of them, that has a License to preach in a Country House, near the place
where he lives, told me himself, that, unless he should know, what they would
pay him, he would not preach among them: and I suppose, they differed upon that
point, for he is gone off, and joined himself with a Brother of another Church.
Another, licensed to preach in his own Parish, where he rents a Farm, told the
Minister of that Parish, that he would loose 50. pound by his Farm, that he
might remove, and place himself in a Corporation, that is indeed very well
furnished with Ministers, and better without his Company. A third, also licenced
to preach in his own House yet, one Lords day in three, as I am informed by a
pretty good hand, rides twelve miles to exercise his gifts in a great Town, not
meanly provided with public preachers. And all these three, within eight
miles one of another: and these are plain and honest men, and doubtless speak
their own and their Brethrens minds, for by this foot you may guess at Hercules.

I cannot forbear hereupon to commend the wit of that excellent man, who said
smartly, and ingenuously some years agon. I doubt, they see their Condition
would be woeful indeed, if they preached the Gospel there (in the Country Cures,
that are worst served;) and therefore they should have added two words to the
Apostles speech and said, Woe be to us if we preach not the Gospel in London,
(or in Bristol, or in Exon, or in Plymouth, Totnes or Dartmouth. There is
little to be got by preaching it to the poor Country folk* Those a^^ barren
places to sow the seed in, and will bring fo^^h small profit to themselves, and
so they would do well to say, in plain English (and I should think them
honester men if they did) Necessity is laid upon us to tell you the Truth, we
must preach, to get a living.

Many such Tricks there are, you know, to be done by Numbers; but when they are
one discovered, they are as sil^y as this.

2. But their quality may be considerab^ that is the other reason of necessity.
For y^ Ask, is the releiving of many Godly Christians, who are cast out of your
Communion because they dare not conform, no Reason?

Sr, will you say in earnest, that the Nonconformist should countenance such
in their Separation, and harden them in their sin? and that a necessity lies
upon them to do so? though you your self believe that these people may not only
lawfully, but that it is best for them to Communicate with the Parishes, if
their Scruples and mistakes were removed?

However, the Cheat here, will be too manifest, if we open this one box: who
are those that are thus to be releived. You canmean no other but such as did
not Communicate with us before the Indulgence, for such as then did, may do so
still, and not need your Charity.

Then, those that are to be Releived, must be either Independents, or
Anabaptists, or Quakers, or those, that go under the Name o^ Presbyterians.

Now, I think, you your self would not head any of the three Vid. p. 14.
former of these Sects; or if you, or any of your brethren would stoop so low,
how would they in pride trample upon you? and in derision, tell you, they have
pastors of their own way, and need none of your care or pains.

It follows that the persons needing your relief, must be the people known by
the name of Presbyterians, that did not conform before the Toleration; be it
so. Were their Numbers so great to need the releif of so many thousand
Nonconforming Ministers, as some brag of? I would not have you Count them,
least you be ashamed of your Argument.

In this City, I am credibly informed, there were not above 30 or 40 at most of
this quality, that ordinarily refused the public and met privately before the
Indulgence: and we have, they tell me, ten Non-Conformists, come into their
releif. But what needed a Toleration in this Case? Ten Preachers to forty
Hearers, by an easy Division might have kept within the compass of the Act. Now
indeed, they have drawn a greater number together, though not of such as durst
not come to our Churches, but of such as did: but for whose Releif, the peoples
or their own, some do give a shrewd guess.

3. The last Reason assigned for Non-Conformists preaching, is not so
confidently delivered, yet sufficiently intimated: it is founded in the
Relation betwixt the Parish and the Ejected Minister. Yet, methinks, you should
consider the enmity to order and Government and Peace, that this reason carries
in it: and the necessity of Schysm, in one or both parties, about their old and
new Pastor, before you assert it any more. God is not the God of confusion, and
that which tends to confusion he will never own.

I have, before spoken sufficiently to the unreasonableness of the principle,
and shall now only note the Fraud of the persons, that use it to their private
ends: which I know you cannot endure, for in truth, it is made an Engine to keep
up a faction in the Church, and little else is done with it.

If they must preach because their Relation to their flock requires it, why do
they not resort to the places from which they were Ejected? Or how can this
poor pretense justify their preaching so generally in other places? Sure all
that now preach, were not P^st^rs in the places where they now preach,
heretofo^e. Indeed their Country Parishes must now starve for them, they are
generally called ^^gher. Here are Ten Non-Conformists in this City: but how
many of them were Pastors here Aug. 24. 62? About two or three: and what Title
they had, they best know themselves. But what pretense have the other seven?
and what makes such as were ejected in other Counties, and out of Country
Parishes to trouble this City? I hope none are so wise as to say, that these
are to fill up the Dead places, to perpetuate the Faction.

I confess supposing their former places be not well served, and the Ejected
did confine themselves to those places, ^t seems to be the most plausible
color that I have yet seen, but it is neither so, nor so, and I hope you will
abhor the Patronage of such Impostures, when you have exercised your sec^nd
thoughts.

2. Too much of the necessity of preaching: but that this may be maintained,
you say, they may gather new Churches: and this must run upon a pretense of
purity, and serving God better, than we do in ours, or, as you express it in
the place we lately speak of; is the exercising of a Worship and Discipline
more agreeable to Gods word than yours (We are you say, p. 30. ready to give
you the proof when we have leave) ^o Reason.

But it seems you have not proved it: can you fairly leave us and gather
Churches, o^t of ours, before you have proved it? else, have you done your
endeavor, in order to our Conviction, and Reformation? if not, your
Separation. Let the ground be what it will, for the Manner, it is Rash and
unwarrantable, and indeed Schysmatical, in the judgment of the best Casuists,
as well Presbyterians as others, as has appeared before.

Yea, it has appeared also, that this Anabaptistical, and Brownistical
principle of Separation, the same, with finding faults and corruptions in our
Churches, and the pretenses of Reformation for purer Churches, and serving God
in more purity, as they used to Cant: and that it has no bounds, but naturally
divides Sect out of Sect till it brings us to utter Confusion.

And you have a hard task upon your hands to persuade the people to Communicate
with us as their Duty, and yet to allow gathering Churches from us for purer
worship and discipline, upon this principle, that we are bound to serve God in
the best way we can, and consequently, we are bound either not to serve him in
a worse way, or else, we are to serve God in both Communions, and to be members
of two particular Churches at once, of different Worship, Government, and
Discipline.

Rather, throw it away as an unpea^eable and ungovernable principle: and do
like your self, to undergirt and support the sorely threatened, and even
sincking Parochial Constitution of our Churches: say what you will to the
Contrary, if you take not in this mischievous Engine, you plainly Countenance
all the Factions in the Kingdom to endeavor the Ruin and subversion of them.

While we keep within the ancient bounds and constitutions, we know where we
are: but if one we begin to Tumble, where we shall Stop, God only knows. I
need not mind you of the fearful end of Gnostiscime, Donatism, Brownism, and of
our late Seperations, which took their beginning in Independency: they all had
pretenses to break the Peace, under Colors of purity, but in the shuffle, they
lost both, and sunck down at last, into the Sinck of Confusion and Impurity.

Mr. Baxter, will not suffer us to forget something to this Epist. to his rest
Print. 1669.
purpose from our late experience: which methinks, should keep us awake do not
your hearts bleed (says he) to look upon the State of England, and to think
how few Towns and Cities, there be, where is any forwardness in Religion) that
are not cut into shreds and crumbled as to Dust, by Seperations and Divisions?
to think what a Wound we have thereby given to the Christian name?

These consequences, Mr. Calvin reckons to be just judgments of God necessarily
following the dissolution of the sacred Bond of Unity which the God of peace
and the Father of mercy, avert from this divided and untoward generation.

God, who do teach the hearts of thy faithful people, by sending to them the
light of thy holy spirit, grant us by the same spirit, to have a right judgment
in all things: and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comfort, through the Merits
of Christ Jesus our Savior.

Grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this World may be so
ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all Godly
quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

