A faithful REMEMBRANCE AND ADVICE TO The General Council of Officers OF The
Armies of England, Scotland and Ireland, FROM Diverse in Cornwall and Devon, IN
Behalf of themselves and sundry hundreds, cordial friends to the blessed CAUSE
of RIGHTEOUSNESS WHICH GOD has stated and pleaded with a stretched out Arm, in
these (and in the sight of all the) Nations.

May 4th LONDON: Printed for L. Chapman at the Crown in Popes-Head-Ally, 1659.
May 4.

A faithful Remembrance and Advice TO The General Council of Offices, etc.
SIRS,
THough the most High has set the Bounds of our Habitations in a corner of
this Nation, somewhat remote from you, yet have not only the reports and
influence of the late Affairs depending before you already reached us, but
withal, we have hopes that the faithfulness of this brief word may as
effectually extend it self even to you. However, we think our selves eminently
concerned and called upon to give you some taste of our Spirits, while we
behold these works of the Lord, and what Desolations he has made in the Earth.

We, having for a long time mourned in the sense of our own Iniquities, and of
the sore backsliding of this day, from that glorious Cause of the Lord,
wherein, in former days (some of) you have been used and owned by him, as
famous Instruments, have yet been held up by grace, in expectation that his
Work should be revived again, and our hearts should be made glad therein.

In tracing the Lords footsteps in order hereunto, though we have been
instructed with a strong hand to cease from man; yet, was it some refreshment
to us, to see some passages in your Representation of the sixth of April -- 59.
(viz.) your professed indearment to the GOOD OLD CAUSE, your awakenings, and
deep sense of the great reproaches, eminent dangers, and even death at hand
upon it; your bewailing your own great failings, turnings aside, and
backslidings, and your resolutions for better things for the future: in which
matters we should reckon our selves happy, if we might minister any farther
effectual Conviction and Assistance to you: in order whereunto, we think our
selves bound to put you farther in Remembrance,

I. That while you were in a sincere virgin-Spirit, pursuing the true and
single Interest of this Cause, you had constant experience of the mavelous
Presence and Blessing of the Lord on your Affairs, in Camp and Council, by Sea
and Land; as also the cheerful concurrence of many thousand upright-hearted
ones, whose Prayers, Persons, Estates, and all that was dear to them, were
gladly engaged to strengthen your hands to the uttermost, in those amusing
Dispensations wherein you were led, and did not stumble; and for a recompense,
you were also enlarged and engaged cheerfully in spirit, not only to follow the
Lords conduct through any difficulties, but to give your selves up by Promises,
Declarations, and Appeals, in Judgment and Conscience, by which to this day you
stand religiously and indispensibly obliged, to follow His glorious Work,
entrusted in your hands, unto its just issues, in the face of all opposition
whatsoever.

II. That while you were in the just and direct process of that Good Work and
Cause of GOD, the Lords leadings, and your observing experiences farther and
farther, taught you, that (so righteous and prevailing were the true principles
thereof, commending themselves in their own evidence, as that) the reducing it
to practice, was found to have a real inconsistency with the ancient
constitutions and forms of this Nations government, which for the most part
were accommodated to Lust and Antichristian Tyranny over the Persons, Estates
and Consciences of the People; and therefore in its progress (wherein it had
your then cheerful concurrence) you saw it proved ruinous to them, and exploded
they were, how Ancient, Honorable and Dear soever they seemed to be, to men of
low and selfish Principles.

III. That ever since the great Revolt from these Principles, all the
inventions and endeavors sought out, and used, to espouse the National Pomp and
Greatness to the Notion of this Cause; Whatever Interests have been courted, or
Instruments formed to that end; they have all fallen before it with their own
weight: and instead of attaining the aimed-at-settlement in the Relicts of this
Glory, there has not only a continual blasting befallen all your enterprises;
but by degrees has been a very fair opportunity administered unto the
Quintessence of all the Wisdom, Policy and Malignity of every one of those
formerly-conquered Interests, to stand up again in full and equal Liberry and
Authority in the Supremest Judicature of the Nation, to contend for Mastery,
until even now, your selves found there was not safety and shelter left, no,
not for your own selves, although in the midst of your possessed strength.

IV. That now again in the mighty GOD has put into your hands one opportunity
more to do some notable things for him; he has again discovered the
Foundations to the Neck, has laid spoiled at your feet another promising
piece of goodly Glory. You have moreover before you the advantage of a large
taste of the spirits of Men and Parties, in these Nations: who have abode firm
to their former Principles, under all manner of disadvantages: and on the other
hand, who, under either a fawning, or courted pretension of compliance, have
been contriving and preparing instruments of Cruelty that would have ruined it
and you, for the old Hatred.

Upon these and the like Considerations that we might tender, we present our
Advice.

I. If in truth your hearts are thorough for this work of GOD, though your
reviving it be in a troublesome time, to you and to the poor Nation, yet having
your eye to the Lord, whose the Cause is, be ye of good courage, and be assured
that there are multitudes, who have been mourning in secret a long time, whom
you will find in a preparation of spirit, to join heart and all with you in
your righteous pursuance of that Blessed Cause; yea rather, you may be sure the
Lord of Hosts will be with you, while you are with him.

II. That you speedily claim and receive to your selves, as your true
propriety, the light and assistance of such in Council with you, as in the
faithfulness of their Testimony have been laid aside, or compelled to forsake
their places during the time that this stain has layn upon your Glory; whom
you may receive with the advantage of their having been refined by the sharp
trials they have since sustained; for whom there will be room and opportunity
at large, by your performing a parallel Act of Faithfulness, namely, your
speedy dismission from among you of such as have been an hinderance and snare
to your faithful proceedings hitherto; of whom also you cannot but have much
experience.

III. That you will give great diligence to what you leave behind, or lay anew
in the Foundation to be laid of future Settlement: let not any carnal
reasonings lead you to make have, to fall in with any painted interests, short
of It, though they may seem made ready to your hand; but rather having well
reviewed and digested not the Name only, but the true Nature and Principles of
the Cause you mention, and being instructed to trust the Lord, invite, own and
assist such for the establishing the Religious and Civil Rights of this poor
Nation, as have approved themselves men disingaged from any interest that
necessarily binds them up, and renders them incapable of carrying on the work
spoken of, to its just issues. Men of such an anointing, as may indeed
conscientiously prosecute the just ends of all those Declarations, Engagements
and Appeals of yours, and of all the blood, treasure and hopes of ours. And in
so doing, you may expect the Lord of hosts will help you, covering you with
that strength, recovering for you that glory, and recompencing you with that
reward, that shall make and bespeak you a Blessing in the Earth.

FINIS.

