A FAMOUS VICTORY OBTAINED Against the Cavaliers in the County of GLOUCESTER:
BY Sir WILLIAM WALLER, ON Monday last at a town called PADSWORTH; how there
was six score of the Cavaliers killed on the place, most of them being
Gentlemen of quality, and chief Commanders in the KINGS Army; and one of them
is supposed to be a younger Brother to the Duke of LENOX.

WITH A true Description of the manner of the Fight, and what Forces were on
both sides, with many other remarkable Passages concerning the same, which
would be too long to mention in the Title.

LONDON, Feb. 25. Printed for R. Wood. 1643. 1642

A TRUE RELATION of a great overthrow given to the Cavaliers in Gloucestershire
on Monday last by Sir WILLIAM WALLER, at a town called Padsworth, how there
were six score of the Cavaliers killed on the place, most of them being
Gentlemen of quality, and chief Commanders in the Kings Army.
With a true description of the manner of the fight, and what forces were on
both sides, with many other remarkable Passages concerning the same.
IT is not unknown to this Kingdom, that it has pleased God in a wonderful
manner to prosper the endeavors of a worthy Member of the House of Commons
(and a Commander under his Excellency the Earl of Essex) Sir William Waller,
who when Colonel Goring had possessed himself of one of the strongest Forts in
this Kingdom, the town of Portsmouth, with all the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition therein, the said Sir William Waller was the chiefest instrument
under God to regain that Fort, and to force the said Colonel Goreing to yield
up the town for the King and Parliament after he had betrayed the same, and had
full possession thereof, and that without any loss on the Parliaments side,
which town has ever since been preserved in peace and quiet, and is well
fortified, and in a good posture of defense for the King and Parliament.

After that it pleased God to make the said Sir WILLIAM WALLER the chief Agent
in taking of Farnham Castle, which was also possessed by the Cavaliers, where
he took about six score of them, and sent them up to London, and fortified it
for the King and Parliament: and in this place since I have begun to speak of
those great victories which he has obtained, I should injure his person by
concealing a great part of his merits, if I should give a period to my
discourse before I relate something of the business at Chichester in Sussex,
and his late success in the County of Gloucester: And in the first place,
because it was formerly acted and first mentioned, give me leave to speak a
word or two of that great business of the taking of Chichester; for when the
town was betrayed to the force and violence of the Cavaliers; and by the
treachery of the high Sheriff of that County, they had not only the strength
of the town, both of Arms, Ammunition and money, but had gotten a strong
garrison into the same, and did either turn out of the town all the
well-affected persons in the same, or kept them in such awe and subjection,
that they durst not stir either on the one side, or other, the said Sir WILLIAM
WALLER being employed by the Parliament upon that design, with diverse other
worthy and deserving Gentlemen, and a considerable number of horse and foot
after a short time of siege laid against the said town, he quickly forced his
entrance, took many of the Gentlemen and Cavaliers which were in the town
prisoners, and sent them likewise up to LONDON, and thereby settled the peace of
that City, which has continued to this day. But because I have spoken of great
store of Prisoners which have been taken at too places before mentioned least
there should be any misunderstanding in this particular it is not impertinent
to my present discourse to let the courteous Reader know that these prisoners
are not all still in custody (though some of the chief of them are) for
presently after they were brought up to London, the common soldiers were
discharged, neither were they dragged along to London through the dirt, coupled
together like dogs, as the prisoners which the Cavaliers took at Cicester in
Gloucester-shire were, but they were brought to town in a fair way without any
hurt to the meanest of them, and within a day or two they were released, and
money given to every one of them to carry him into his own Country, and during
the time of their imprisonment they were not denied any thing that was fit and
necessary for their present subsistence, every common Tro^per that upon any
cause has been committed to custody by the Parliament (though he were of the
Kings Army) is allowed five pence per diem: it were to be wished that the like
care were taken for those that were of the Parliaments side which have been
taken perisoners and carried to Oxford, where (as it is very credibly informed,
being Captains and other officers) they are allowed but five farthings a day,
and a prohibition that no other relief should be brought to them, or any
friend visit them (which is not parctised at London) and sometimes they are one
day or two without that petty allowance too.

But to return to my intended purpose, which is to declare to the people (both
for the glory of God and the greater honor of this noble gentleman) the good
and happy success of that valiant soldier, and worthy instrument of the
common wealth and whole Kingdom, Sir William Waller, who has great experience
and knowledge in military affairs, and accompainted with good success, upon
information of the Cavaliers being entered Gloucestershire, and taking the town
of Cicester, he was designed to go with some considerable forces into that
County to relieve them against the oppression of that unwelcome Army which was
gotten in upon them: And because of the present necessity that County was in
and the great expectation they had of his coming thither he hasted that
expectation and march that way with a same less strength then otherwise he
would have had with him, for 4. pieces of Ordinance which he should have
carried down into that County as it is informed, and many of the forces which
were designed for that service are as yet no further then Gilford or Farnham,
yet it is reported and as a truth that the said Sir William Waller, being
marched with some small force into Gloucestershire to a little town called
Padsworth, having not one full Regiment, was about Monday last assulted by the
Kings forces, there being at least sixteen hundred of them, which being
discovered by Sir William Wallers scouts, he presently prepared for their
coming, and finding himself very much too weak for to encounter with the enemy
upon an ordinary manner of fighting, he caused all his men to stand in
battalia, and discharge upon the enemy at once, upon the word given, which
being done, at the first onset of the enemy there was about 80. of them slain,
which slaughter on a sudden put them in such a fright, that they presently
retreated back, and before they could be brought up again Sir Willirm Wallers
men had charged the second time, and gave them the same entertainment as they
had before, killing 40. more of them, and forced them to another retreat, after
which they sent for a parley, but the night approaching there could be no more
done that day, and in the night the enemy fled to his own Quarters (as they
say near un- Gloucester) and it is no doubt but in a short time that County
will be settled in peace, notwithstanding the great distractions which are now
amongst them by means of the Cavaliers.

It is also informed that most of those forces which at this time came against
the said Sir William, were gentlemen, and prime Commanders, and that they fled
away as aforesaid, leaving their dead Corpse behind them, one whereof is
reported to be a younger brother to the Duke of Lenox, his second brother the
L. Aubery being killed at the battle in Keynton field.

FINIS.

