before 24 Sep. 1689OBEDIENCE Due to the Present KNIG. Notwithstanding our
OATHS To the FORMER.
Written by a Divine of the Church of England.
1. THE Oath of Allegiance is the Expression of our Natural Duty to the King,
(as the Coronation Oath is of the Regal; which in Nature is antecedent to it)
it is especially signified in these Words, He must be King before we can be
bound to him as such.
I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend against all Attempts, which shall be
made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity.

2. If the King do manifestly separate his Person from, and engage it against
his Crown and Dignity; so that we cannot Defend them both: I mean, if his
Personal Actions, contrary to Law, do directly and openly tend to the prejudice
and spoiling of his Crown and Dignity, by his voluntary subjecting them to a
Foreign Power, contrary to the plain and primary Intention and Letter of the
Oath; subverting the Legal Constitution, and enervating the very Laws by which
his Crown is supported, his Prerogative is measured, and the Dignity of the
King, as such, has its very Being, as well as the safety of his People is
maintained; certainly, in such a Case, none can be bound by this, or any other
Oath, to defend the King's Person, in attempts so contrary to the very Reason
and End of all Government, with the neglect of the other part of our Duty,
which is to defend his Crown and Dignity.

3. The Oath of Supremacy seems to direct us more clearly in this difficulty;
the Words are, I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness;
but how? It follows, and to my Power shall Assist and Defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities, Granted or belonging to the King,
or annexed and united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is, thus we are
to bear Faith and Allegiance to the King.

4. For if we should be bound to Assist and Defend his Person, when it is, and
as it is engaged against his Crown and Dignity, we seem bound, toto posse, and
totis viribus (so far Defense is expounded) to Assist and Contribute to the
Ruin both of our King and Country, and perhaps to the cutting of our own
Throats.

5. If any should imagine, That the Oath will not suffer us to consider the
Person and Crown of the King, thus divided; but that it binds us to assist and
defend them together: it is true, while they are kept together. But if the King
himself divide them, and it is become impossible for us to Assist his Person but
we must betray his Crown; nor Defend his Crown without forbearing to Assist his
Person; to say, now we are bound to Assist and Defend both, makes a plain
Repugnancy in the Oath, and in our Duty (to do and not to do the same thing)
and consequently the Obligation cease.

6. That we are bound by our Allegiance to Assist the Person of the King, to
the prejudice of his Crown and People, seems not only to be against the light
of Nature, the primary End of it being the safety of his Kingdom, and the
safety of the King, but the secondary end of it; but most agreeable to the
sense of our Ancient and Learned Lawyers, and also, Bract, Fleta Ei fraenura
ponere.
of the plain acknowledgment and profession of Ancient Kings and Parliaments.

King Henry I. five Hundred Years agone, told the Pope, whilst live, the
Authorities and Vsages of the Kingdom shall never be diminished: But if I would
so Debase myself (which God forbid) Magnates mei and totus Angliae populus
nullo modo paterentur: The Lords and People of England would by no means suffer
it. And Edward I. wrote himself to the same purpose. Besides, with his consent,
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in their Letter to the Pope, have these
Words, We do not permit, or in the least will permit (sicut nec possumus nec
debemus) though our Sovereign Lord the King do, or in the least wise attempt to
do any of the premises (by owning the Popes Authority, touching his Right to
Scotland) so strange a thing, so unlawful, prejudicial, and otherwise unheard
of, though the King himself would. Once more, on Record in the Fourth of Henry
III. the Commons Declare; Si Dominus Rex and Regni majores hoc vellent (
Adomer's Revocation upon the Popes Order) Communitas tamen ipsius ingressum in
Angliam, nullatenus sustineret.

Now what is the meaning of all this? but that the King's Personal Will,
contrary to Law, however expressed (for it must be signified by his Word or
Actions) if the performance of it would prejudice his Crown and Dignity, may be
resisted. Much less are we bound by our Allegiance to Assist or Defend him in
so doing, in Reason, Law, or the sense of our Ancient Kings or Parliaments.

Objection. But we Swear to Defend, not only the King but his Heirs and Lawful
Successors.

Answer 1. True, but Haeres non est viventis, and the Successor, in Law and
Common Sense, is the Person that does actually succeed, or is in possession.
Now if the Actual Successor be the Lawful Successor, we are bound by our Oaths
to Defend him; but if he be not the Lawful Successor, none else is so, because
none else is the Successor, and consequently, so far the Object and Reason of
our Oaths ceasing, our Obligation by them cease, and we are bound to none
besides the Person in Possession.

2. It Is farther remarkable, That though the word Lawful be once in the Oath of
Supremacy, it is only there, where we Swear Faith and Allegiance in General:
But, as if it were intended, that the Subject should not trouble himself about
the Title of the King in Being, where that Allegiance, is explained with
respect to practice, the word Lawful is left out in that Oath. It follows there
in these Words, -- Shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, -- Granted or
belonging to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, without the Word
Lawful. And agreeable hereunto, we find the word wholly left out in the Oath of
Allegiance, both in the same place, where we Swear Allegiance in General, as
well as in the other place of our more particular Duty; and it looks as if this
was done de Industria, for the same Reason, namely, that such as take the
Oaths, might not think themselves bound thereby to be Sollicitous about the
Title of the Crown.

3. The Holy Scriptures seem not to involve the Consciences of private
Christians about Princes Titles; but expressly require their Subjection to the
Powers that are, as a great and necessary Instance of that Humility and
peacable Behavior which their Religion teaches them.

4. In the same Holy Books, we are farther most plainly admonished that (by
what means soever obtained) it is God that puteth down one, and sets up
another; and upon that ground too, Romans 13.
we are strictly charged to Submit to the Powers that are, because they are
Ordained of God. And though the Apostle use the word (...) I think, none can
Imagine he intended by it, to determine the Lawfulness of Angustus's Title, who
was admitted by the Senate; but rather, to enforce that Obedience that he
presses the Christians to yield, by this Consideration, Imporatore; Romans
satendum est, non optimo Jure Imperium adep^os. Sanderson.
That all Authority is from God; and in its true Nature, and by God's Ordinance,
intended for our Good.

5. The known Statute of 11 H. 7.1. is of the same import, and grounded, we
find, upon the like Reason and H. Scripture, it gives us way to this plain
inference, that the same duty which we owe to a Lawful King, is to be performed
to the King in Being; that is, to the King in Possession; and that no other
King or future Parliament can in Reason, Law, or good Conscience, upon any
pretense of Usurpation in the Possessor of the Crown, or any Disloyalty in the
Subject, charge us with guilt, for Serving or defending the King in Possession.
The Subjects therefore, might Lawfully sight for him, and consequently take the
Military Oath; in Reason (by the Law of Nature) in Law, by the Law of the Land;
in all good Conscience, that is, by the Law of God, in the H. Scriptures.

6. Hereupon, my Lord Coke's words are notable: This Act, says he (meaning 25.
Ed. 3. about Treason) is to be understood of a King in possession of the Crown
and Kingdom: for if there be a King Regnant in Possession, although he be Rex de
facto and non de jure, yet is he Seignior le Roy, within the purview of this
Statute; and the other, that has Right and is out of possession, is not within
this Act.

Nay, says he, if Treason be committed against a King de facto, and non de
jure, and after the King de jure come to the Crown, he shall Punish the Treason
done to the King de facto; and a Pardon granted by a King de jure, that is not
also de facto, is void, Inst. 3. l. p. 7.

Now if by the Law of the Land, which I think is our only guide in such cases,
Treason may be committed against a King that is so only by Possession, without
Right; and cannot be committed against him that has Right, and not Possession:
seeing he is not within the purview of the Statute, sure, we cannot reasonably
be thought to be entangled in such a strait, as to be bound by our Allegiance
to commit Treason, which we cannot presume the King in Possession will Pardon,
and the Law tells us, the King that has Right only, cannot. Who therefore
would question our Liberty to be true and Faithful to the King in Possession,
so far at least, as not to resist him, or to be Traitors to him? or to give him
assurance thereof by our Oath. The renowned Casuist Bishop Sanderson would not
declare the very Engagement to be unlawful, Case of Engag p. 111.
taken in that lower Sense, to the pretended Commonwealth without any King or
House of Lords.

7. Since we have mentioned that excellent Casuist, whose Loyalty, Judgment,
Fidelity, and Authority, is unquestionable, it is fit for us to observe what he
has frequently and without the least hesitancy delivered as his premeditated
thoughts about the present case.

Having supposed a King in Possession only, by Power, if the Query be what is
to be done by the Subject that has Sworn Allegiance to the rightful King: he
answers, it is not Lawful to obey the King in such Possession; but it often
happens that not doing so, [defuisse Officio] we are wanting to our duty. Yea,
that we owe Subjection to a King in Possession, upon the grounds of Justice,
Equity, Charity, and Gratitude, while we enjoy our Liberties and are Protected
by him.

Exigit hoc a nobis (Optima aequi boni lex) vetus illa commutationum formula,
(...). and profecto, perversissimae mentis, sub illius dominationis patrocinio,
velle vivere cui parere nolis: and cajus protectione gaudeas, ejus imperium
detractare.

8. His third Argument for the Necessity of Obedience to the present power,
however obtained, is taken from the Charity we owe to the public, whether
Church or State, of which we are Members, and for the good of which we are
Born; in quantum igitur illius Societatis, cujus ipse Membrum and pars est,
Salus and tranquillitas exigit, eatenus Civis unusquisque imperiis ejus qui de
facto praeest, obtemperare tenetur. Words worthy the most serious reflection of
the present Church of England. Read at large his 5th. Praelect.

But as to the Argument from Gratitude, when we seriously reflect upon our late
forlorn and ruinous Condition both in Church and state; when we call to mind
that all our Foundations were put out of Course, and our Pillars even broken by
the Late King's own ill guided hands; and that the Heroic Prince has been at
so great Expense, and exposed himself to so many hazards, in his own Country,
at Sea, and here in England, in Compassion both to our Miseries and
Infirmities; when our Land was weak, and all the Inhabitants thereof in an
utter disaiblity to rescue or save themselves; and none under Heaven, within
the reach of humane apprehension, besides that one Prince, could possibly
effect it; that Glorious Instrument under God, put his hand to support and
strengthen, and bear up our Pillars: To Redeem and secure our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties; and when our late King, either for fear of his Person, or rather
of the Issue of Affairs in our Re-establishment, had deserted or abdicated his
Kingdom, and left us in confusion to shift for our selves; whose return now
cannot be thought of without Horour: And the present King and Queen, being
therefore first Petitioned, to take the Government, have Graciously accepted
it, upon terms answering all men's desires or Interests. I say, when all this is
well pondered, the Ground and Argument, for our quiet and cheerful submission,
taken from Gratitude, is indeed too big to be contained in a sheet or two of
Paper, or the mind of Man: And Prodigious, beyond the credit of Posterity.

Lastly, One would think there was no place left for any farther Scruple. The
late Change was urged by extreme Necessity, and carried on with a wonderful
Providence, and perfected with Universal Consent; it was eminently the Lord's
doing, and our own too; the Government was unhinged by the late King himself
The present King etc. was put into possession by our selves in our
Representatives; who were as freely chosen by us as ever any Parliament was:
The Convention had nothing wanting but the previous formality of the Royal
writs, which could not be then had; that Punctilio of order, cannot reasonably
be supposed to go into the being of the Representative Body; the want of it,
cannot well be thought to prejudice our Election or Consent to what they have
done, whom we chose and entrusted with our Politic Reason and Interest, and in
whose Acts, we ought to acquiesce as our own doings, in every thing or matter
of Expediency for the Public good, not evidently contrary to our duty to God.

In short, The Possession of the Throne, by the Act of the People of England,
is now unquestionable; we have no liberty left us, either to dispute the King's
Title, or deny him our Duty. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc.

FINIS.

