A further and more true Account of the Apprehending and Taking, of Gerard
Dremelius the Drawer, For the Murder of Oliver Norris Esquire, At the
White-Gross Tavern in East Smith field, his Examination, and Confession,
together with the Examination of Micheal Van Burgh, and Catherin Truet before
the Coroners Inquest, and their Commitment to Newgate on Saturday last: As also
a further, and more particular Account of the said barbarous Murder.
GERARD DREMELIUS, the Dutch Man's Drawer, who was chiefly concerned in the
Murder of Oliver Norris Essque at the White-Cross Tavern in East Smith-field
was Discovered and Taken after this manner, viz. the Constables and other
Officers of the Parish where the Murder was Committed; having Intelligence,
that he carried a Hamper out very early the next Morning, and that he went
toward St. Catherins with it, they by making Enquire, along the Water side,
fortunately found out the Water Man that carried him up the the River about 5
of the Clock, that Morning who informed them, that he carried his Hamper to Mr.
Tailors at the Crown in Charles street by St. James's Square; where being come
by the Waterman's direction, they found that one of the Lord Shoots Footmen
had fetched the said Hamper away, by the said Drawer's order, upon which
sending to the Lord Shoots (who is Ambassador from the Duke of Zell) for the
said Foot Man; he told them that the Drawer being his Country Man, and well
known in his Lords Family, he had taken a Lodging for him at Mr. Comins at the
Cock and Bottle in the same street, where he left him: But Mr. Comins, would
not consent to entertain him, till he had farther enquired of him at the Lord
Shoots House in St. James's Square, where the Servants gave him a favorable
Character: Whereupon going thither; they found him up two pare of Stairs upon
the Bed about 8 in the Evening, where he was Apprehended and taken (and not at
the Crown by St. James's Square, as was falsely given out) when being charged
with the said Murder, he at first utterly denied it, alleging he did not
forstand them but being taken thence that Night, and the next Day being
Saturday, he was carried before the Worshipful Justice Bateman, in Well Colss,
where the Hamper being opened, they (...) all bloody, at which time being
Examined he C^nfessed that he Murt^ered him, and being asked why? be alleged
that the Gentleman drew his Sword against him, where upon in his defense (as he
says) he Knocked him Down; and having got that advantage, it suddaidly came in
his mind to Murder him for his Money, which he (...) performed by dragging him
to a Di^chs side behind the old Buildings near his Masters House, where he cat
his Throat with a sharp Knife of his own, and having Robbed and Stripped him, he
threw his naked Body into the Ditch, or Common Shore, which was deep of Water
and Mudd, laying a conside^^ble quanty ^f Dirt and Rubbish on him, and having
covered the Blood as well as he could, went to his Masters House, and asked his
pretended Mistress for a Hamper, who seeing his Hands bloody, asked him how
they came so, he answered, he believed he had killed the Gentleman; so she
fetched him the Hamper, a^^ sent him go*idg. This being his real Confession,
and no other, Notwithstanding the flying Reports and Pamphlets, to the
contrary, However the Maid being Examined, declared that, when she asked her at
first about the Hamper, she said it was lent to a Sugar-Baker, but before the
Justice and Corner, Conf^ss^d the Drawer had it, and being found in several
other contrary Tale^, the Justice ordered them to be had before the Goroners
Inquest, where the same matters was again repeated, without any or very little
Variation, whereupon Mr. George Rives Coroner, Committed Gerard Dreme^us the
Drawer, together with Van Burgh and his pretended Wife to Newgate, where the
two former are very much loaded with Irons, in order to be Tried for the said
Murder the next approaching Sessions, but the Maid is to be Discharged upon
Bail.

On Thursday last being the 13th of June 1700, Mr. Noris a Co^^et of Horie,
belonging to the Kings-Guards, having occasion to go to Epping upon some
weighty Business, his Father enjoying a very great Estate in those parts, took
House in order for his Journey that Morning but unfortunately (as I may so
term it) he met with some Gentlemen of his acquaintange, who being something
longer than ordinary in taking their Leaves of him; he was so much disordered
in Drink as rendered him incapable of going his Journey, having Drunk variety
of Liquors in St. Catherins, that where leaving his Friends, he secretly with
drew himself, and sent his Horse; by a Porter to the Bull-Head in
White-Chappel, and at the same time took Coach, and came about 10 a Clock that
Night to the White-Cross Tavern in East Smith-Field, the Master of which, being
one Van Burgh a Dutchman, where he continued till after 11 a Clock, being seen
there by several of the Neighbors, but was ^e more heard of till next Morning
about Seven, at which time was found by a strong Water Man, in a Maudlins Rents
very near the said Dutch House, stripped stark naked and Murdered in a cruel
and inhuman manner, having his Throat cut from Ear to Ear, in such a savage and
abominable manner as scarcely ever was known or heard of, for not only his
Windpipe and all his Throat was cut cross, but the vejoints of his Neck Bones
almost cut asunder, with a cruel bruise on the left side of his Head; and not
only so but all his Fingers on his right Hand cut overthwart, supposed to be
done by his laying hold of the Knife, which proved the tragical instrument of
his Death, he likewise was barbarously hacked, and mangled on the left Hand and
Arm, being Robbed of all his Clothes, and a considerable quanity of Gold and
Silver, which his Friends has since afirm'd he had about him over Night, some
says 100 Guineas besides a rich Watch, and other things of great vallue; having
nothing on him but, a pair of Boots, and scarlet Stockings, which it is supposed,
his Murderers could not get off with such speed as they desired.

The news of this barbarous Cruelty being noised about, abundance of People
came crowding from all parts of London to see this Murdered Object, upon which
it appearing by several that he was late the Night before at the Dutch Man's
House which was near that place; he and his Wife were taken into Custody on
suspicion and carried before the Worshipful Justice Constable in
Goodman-Fields, where they were strickly Examined, as was also his Maid, who
all Confessed that the deceased Gentleman was drinking in his House from 10 of
the Clock that Night till after 11 and that Van Burgh offered his Man to
conduct him to his Lodging, but he refusing it they alleged that a stranger
coming by accidentuly, the Gentleman agreed with him for 6 pence to go with him
to his Lodging, and that they did not seem him any more till Dead the next
Morning among the crowd of People; but the Justice asking where the Drawer was,
his Wife replied, they had sent him to fetch some Wine from a certain place
which she named, whereupon a Messinger being sent thither to know the truth,
soon brought word that he had not been there, which made their Case the more
Suspicious, after which the Maid declared that she saw the same Gentleman,
about 10 of the Clock Drinking below Stairs with the Drawer at which time her
Master and Mistrirs caused her to go to Bed contrary to her usual custom, for
other Nights she used to sit up latest in the House but that Night she was
forced to Bed in all the have, and further declared that when in her Chamber
she heard a strange bustling Noise below insomuch that she was coming down to
see what was the matter, but was met by her Mistress, who told her all was
well, and so she went into her Chamber again and so to Bed, but knew nothing
further, only saw her Mistress fetch down the Hamper, in great have toward the
Morning, when asking her afterward what was becom'd of it, her answer was, she
had lent it to a Sugar-Baker, tho some hours after she told her who had it,
desiring her not to speak of it, alleding her Life was in her Hand; so that
although the Drawer does yet seem to take Fact wholly upon himself, yet there is
great cause to suspect both her, and her pretended Husbands Innocence.

Upon further search of his Body after he was carried in a Coffin to the
Constables House, several wounds were found in diverse parts of his Body, being
used after such a Loathsome and Inhuman manner, that the most Savage,
Barbarous, and worst of Infidels would be ashamed of. It Was observed among other
discourse which the Dutch Man expressed, during his being in the Constables
Custody it is said he told them that it was their way in Holland when any Person
was Murdered by a Confederacy they always sent the Murderer out of the way,
the very instant after he had committed it, while the other took care to hide
the Murdered Body, and by that means they usually escaped unpunished; and if
so this was one of his own Country Tricks, but it is thought he will meet with
contrary success here.

London, Printed by J. W. near Fleet Street. 1700.


