The Scot Arraigned, AND At the Bar of Justice, Reason, and Religion,
Convinced, Convicted, and Condemned of a most horrid and odious Conspiracy and
Rebellion against the Native Liberty and Birthright of the Church and Free
State of ENGLAND.

By R. F.

depiction of a ship in full sail by a harbor wall

LONDON, Printed by JAMES MOXON, 1651.

The Scot Arraigned, AND At the Bar of Justice, Reason, and Religion,
Convinced, Convicted, and Condemned of a most horrid and odious Conspiracy and
Rebellion against the Native Liberties and Birthright of the Church and Free
State of England.
LAw is but the best Reason, and Justice the life and actuating soul of that
dead and precious letter; in whose observance and free Administration, the
welfare, felicity, and peace of all Kingdoms, States, and Republiques are
involved and wrapped up: for were man left only to the disposition of his own
depraved Will, he were of all Creatures most miserable. That therefore the
influx of this evil may be prevented, the immediate hand of God, and the
diligent care of humane Policy, through the general parts of the whole world
have enjoined and prescribed wholesome Laws, as well for the subduing of this
natural propension of flesh and blood, as also for the preservation of the
public weal and prosperity.

This is the sole bliss of a people, and this the real Liberty of the Subject,
when a man may enjoy his own Properties and Right without wrong or molestation,
under the protection of a just and Legal Government.

Since therefore it has pleased Almighty God (amongst many of his exceeding
mercies to this poor Nation) to make us a Civil people; and to enlarge that
bounty, to give us religious, just, and honest Laws; nay more, to redeem us
from the slavery of Tyranny into a free State, and to crown all these with the
inestimable blessing of the plenteous dispensation of his holy Word and Gospel:
how zealously, coragiously, and in duty should we endeavor to discover and
prevent all Treasons and Conspiracies which may undermine and deprive us of
these invaluable Jewels? for they are the very foundation and sinews of our
peace, enjoyments, and common society: Amongst many other fears which we may
justly be sensible of, as tending to the eversion and demolishing of these
public Rights and participations, we shall here discover an apparent enemy, a
malignant envious pack of indigent contemptuous wretches, not only inveying and
backbiting against the glorious arival of our happiness, but by an open
hostility, uniustly, violently, and inhumanely endeavoring and ploting the
invasion of our birthrights, and the ruin of the Church; and therefore without
any further preamble I shall here make audience, and at a Conscientious and
legal hearing indite, and make proof against that wretched Criminal, the
Kingdom of Scotland: A faction situate in the rubbish of Christendom, now
actually in arms against the State and Liberties of the free borne people of
England; and therefore I desire God in mercy to show his Justice upon them,
whose bloody purposes and determination speak them no less then the troublers
of Israel, and the disquieters of the peace of Sion. Not to run them up
through all the forepast periurious and damnable practices of their beggarly
mutinous progenitors (for that were to begin an endless series of villainy and
treachery) I shall only prosecute them in the productions of this present age:
and there I question not but to find matter enough to propagate their Just
odium to all posterity.

War is a thing to be undertaken seriously advisedly, and upon sound grounds:
in regard it traffiques in the precious life of man, whose blood must be
required by a strict and righteous God; and concerns no less then the high
moment and interest of a whole Commonwealth.

All other trivial and sinister ends and undertakings, be they never so well
burnished with plausible pretenses, be they never so well backed with
Magnanimity and earthly power, yet are they dishonest, dishonorable, and
disconsonant to the Law of God and Nature. Whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, even so do you unto them. If the Lord has said thou shall not
Covet; Much more has he enjoined thee from force of Arms to wrong thy
neighbor, yet these Unchristian Machiavells: whose misery is their matter,
laying a side the injunctions of Religion, the secret Convictions of reason,
and the open persuasions of Common Civillity, out of a greedy mizing desire
after the enjoyment of our goods and for tunes, have hurried themselves into a
posture of war, to enforce an interest of superintendency over us a free
people, and all forsooth through the Color of their young Novice, and the old
Slobberd greazy account of the quondam quiddity, which must dwindle away, and
return to its dust. O Magister Artis, Ingeniique largitor venture! How wittily
base these juggling Jockies would feign render themselves! A gang of snaky
headed Pedlars, which to keep their hands in action, and from a servile ignoble
Covetousness to satisfy the Cries of their empty souls out of the means and
properties of other men, would needs twist themselves into a seeming
Concernment in the managing and governing of us, by whom (notwithstanding their
French League) they do in Charity breath. But Mr Iockie, by your nimbleness his
leave, what have you to do out of your own bounds to enforce and constrain a
superior people then your self to the slavery of your yoke and Kirk model?
because the sins of our Nation unhappily once provoked God to punish us (as he
threatened the Israelites) by a foolish people, and to give us over a while to
the miserable succession of Scotch Tyranny, now that he has redeemed us by his
mighty Arm and mercy into the blessed estate of our present Condition, upon
that shallow account will you, Res angusta domi, instigate your mercenary
spirits to renew our oppressions, and reinstall your beggary with the pretended
Crown and Scepter of England? hold Coachman; Pharaoh may look bigg, and ask in
pride, who is the Lord that I should serve him? yet notwithstanding when the
fullness of time for the deliverance of Jacob is come, had the Chariots of
Egypt bin as numerous as the mountains of Scotland, and all in flamed with the
maddest zeal of your fiery ^resbyters, yet you know what did and would have
become of them, and in theirs, the sequel of your own destiny. It Is true you
have declared highly against our Liberty and Government, and like bold
Beauchamps, have seconded your words with your swords; and therefore in so
Palpable a case as this, I shall need no other proof then your own
professions, to affirm you Conspirators and traitors against the State and
Commonwealth of England,

For whosoever shall attempt by sinister means or open violence to overthrow
the foundations of our Liberty, and by conpulsion vi and armis to subject us a
free born people to the bondage of an arbitrary will, I dare and must proclaim
them Traitors, and dangerously malignant enemies to the peace and Public
weal of this Nation.

For it is not enough for you to say that we have entered into Covenant, and so
intend to swear you out of your rights and Privileges. Or because you have
drawn the Young Man in, and invested him with a Royalty de Juydot, an ayery
title of your King, that therefore, having so wise a head, you may attempt any
villainy, or prosecute your unjust ends upon us; no, that cannot justify your
eccentrick actions, or strengthen the presumption of your damnable designs.

For you must know, that Will is no legal Title though bound with a voluntary
oath. And that (if ever he had any) your specious Pretender has lost his claim
in the forfeiture of his father.

To create therefore an interest of your selves where there was none before,
and under the false notion of that counterfit Grant to presume to necessitate
us to a Compliance and embracing of your compulsive Arbitration, is neither
Legal nor justifiable, hence then after a mature weighing and reflection upon
the generallity of your enterprise, give me leave to adiudge you guilty of the
highest and most capital Treason that may be conceaved against the State and
free people of England. For they that will endeavor to bring in Innovation of
Religion forged by the giddy mould of a Presbyterian brain, and so null the
privilege of the Church: they that will attempt in a free State to injoyne an
obedience and submission upon a distinct nation to the forced model of a
tyrannical Government, what crime can exceed it in nature and degree? Search
the Scripture and you shall find that God never Authorizes one man to be the
thral of another. Not yet enjoins one Nation to be a president for the Civil
Government of another: but all mankind was left freely to the election of
their own proper moderation. Why then should your pride and desires hoise you
up to that strange height of arrogance, to dare things beyond warrant or
example? Was it the kindness which you have received from us at several times
in these late years in free Contributions toward your wants and supportation,
that has invited this injury? or was i that we permitted you to fish in our
troubled waters without opposition or molestation, that deserves this return?
Or was it that tender care we ever had to perform the Condition of our
Contracts and promises to you, has so incensed you? O the retaliation of
Scottish Gratitude! it is true, you are our brethren, and we have a sweet
fraternity of it, but that follows not that you must thence be our masters: Ne
gyud faith, though indeed the ambition of your minds may look as high as the
Sovereignty and Subiugation of England, yet I must tell you we infinitely
disdain to degenerate so far from the valor of our ancestors, or to offend so
hainously against our own interests, as to enslave our freer spirits to the
tottered Scepter of Scotland, for we are a people of our selves, without
dependence upon any other Kingdom, free Commoners by birth, without the least
acknowledgment of subjection due to any tyrannical oppressor.

And you a people in your selves, unconcerned in our Privileges and
inheritance. If therefore upon your own score you have broken over the fences
and boundaries of our birthrights, and attempt to possess your selves of that
freedom which belongs not unto you, you must pardon us if we endeavor to
prevent your passage, and our own misery: and in the mean time look upon you as
Murderers and Traitors, And therefore by the just Judgment of equity, reason,
and religion, you must be sentenced accordingly. Your book cannot save you,
neither will our Law or convenience afford you the benefit of your clergy. It Is
too late to dissemble, and too soon for us to believe you, for he that Credits
a Scot, may as well trust a Devil, for no bonds can hold him further then his
immediate profit, and let the compact be never so firmly coniured, he will
break through, aut viam inveniet, aut faciet, turn over the records o^ time
but from the conquest, and you shall fin^ amongst all the bickerings of England
wit^ France, for our just rights there, notwithstanding he were tied up by all
the powerful Charms of Amity and Friendship; the English were no sooner almost
at Calice, but the Scots would be at Berwick, ready to invade and plunder the
Northern Countries, if therefore the God of Justice, to recompense his
perfidious dealing, has brought his Judgment home unto him, it is but just for
him to suffer in the same way as he has often compelled others, for what
grounds had he more then his poor relation to the wandering Gentleman? And that
owned too in hopes of a further end, to gloze over the occasion of this
quarrel? They have him, and have enthroned him, let them keep him to
themselves. Otherwise I presume they may both sink in the wetting; for heaven
seldom permits erroneous and desperate Courses to to have good success or
peaceble ends.

Thus briefly (my beloved Countrymen and fellow Commoners of England) you see
the scope and drift of the Scotch war, viz: your slavery, and their
sovereignty; you have known the perfidious dealing of these dissembling
Sycophants, and our forefathers, and many of us have had a lamentable
experience of their Cruelties and Tyranny; if therefore you can so much forsake
your own happiness and freedom, to turn bondmen again to these merciless
Egiptians, it is pity we ever knew or saw a Canaan. Conside, first that they
are a mercenary nation, like Salamanders living in the fire of other men's
Contentions, no occasion so small but that can raise them an advantage, no
invitation so little but deserves their embraces.

Secondly that they are our inferiors, and we a free people, and to be subdued
by such a contemptible rabble were an eternal blemish to the wonted splendour of
our names,

And lastly that they have neither: Law-reason, nor Equity to justify their
doings, but but merely fictitious Skreenes of their own making without any
reallity or color of truth to pretend a Just feud.

Where (...) more to animate our sluggish spirits to the opposition of these
caterpillars then we have? Here is first God to protect us. Secondly an honest
cause to back us. And thirdly a wise counsel to, advice us. And lastly gallant
soldiers to command us; we only, we only, are wanting to our selvee. Me thinks
if these preswasions cannot, yet our fears might move (...) for (...) consider
if ever they conquer, if they grant us our lives, the condition of our being
will be worse then death.

For no man shall be master of his own, but our estates and persons must stand
liable to their wretched dispose, and when a beggar is set on horseback he will
ride to the Devil: then farewell Liberty, Property, and all that may be called
dear to us.

Let us therefore prevent our dangers betimes, and rush into our harness like
the sons of those men which never veiled to a scotch banner: And curse ye
Meros, Curse ye bitterly those that come not forth to help the People of the
Lord against the Mighty.

FINIS.

