A GREAT PLOT DISCOVERED Against the whole KINGDOM OF ENGLAND.

Wherein is declared, The manner how an Army from Denmark, should have landed
in the Island of Loving-land. for the invading and subverting this Nation, and
violating the Laws thereof.

Also, a Discovery of the Earl of Montrosse his Design in Denmark and his
raising of an Army in the said Kingdom.

Published by Authority, and presented to all true lovers of England's
Prosperity.

London, Printed for G. Cotton, Feb. 8. 1647.

A TRVE RELATION OF The great Plot discovered in Suffolk, against the Kingdom
of England.
Worthy Sir,
I Having such a fit opportunity, to accompany my desires, my pen could no
longer cease from paper, but thought meet, to declare it self to all
true-lovers of Englands prosperity. For this ensuing subject is of so great
concernment, for the common preservation of the Kingdom of England, that I shall
most willingly expose my life and fame to all hazard and contempt, for the
welfare of my Country.

I have observed all the windings and turnings of the Malignant party, in their
obstructing of this places security, ever since the beginning of these sad
divided times. Sovereign favors tend principally to the enlargement of their
own interests; what this place may prove in a foreign possession, which is not
only an inlet to a future Conquest, but shall at present contribute most (of
any particular place in the Kingdom) to the subversion of the whole Nation: it
will be vast sums, and multitude of lives, that will regain it, if once lost;

And (indeed) there was never more danger, by reason of the many Plots and
Conspiracies daily contriving by the Malignant party, for the bringing in of a
Foreign enemy.

For, within these sew days, (through the divine providence of God) there has
been discovered a great Conspiracy against the whole Kingdom in general
(diverse eminent persons being concerned in it;) which I will briefly intimate
unto you as follows;

Some persons of note who had formerly been in actual service against the
Parliament in this Kingdom, had confederated with the enemy beyond the Seas,
to have had an army transported from France and Denmark, to the Island of
Loving-land, and so to have invaded the Kingdom of England, for the subversion
of this Nation, and violating the Laws thereof, who (notwithstanding many
difficulties and oppositions) are so firmly maintained by this present
Parliament.

But I hope, all their Machavilian Plots, and Hell bred Devices will be timely
prevented, through the great vigilance, of the well-affected party in this
Island; For there is no ways left unassayed for the preservation thereof but
keeps strong guards at all the inlets, or weak places, whereby an enemy may
have the advantage to land any Forces: and although their number be but small,
yet they are the better able to manage it, by reason, there is not above three
places, that an enemy can land at, though it be a vast and spacious place,
consisting of sixteen Parishes, (abounding with all things requirable) and
situated for a general accommodation of trade, having the Sea bordering upon
a fourth part of it; the other parts being begirt with the great Rivers of Yare
and Waurney, by which the Country Commodities are brought unto it, and from
thence transported unto all transmarine parts.

The whole Peninsula is (as it were raised) into one entire Hill, defended
toward the Sea, with Cliffs and Sands; and on all parts by Land, surrounded
with a spacious level of low grounds; amidst which level, runs the before
named Rivers, discharging themselves (with a third) into the Sea, through the
said Island, by which they are all commanded:

So that it is in accessible by Land, four passages excepted, and one by Sea,
called Newton Gap; which place not improperly, for it is a gallant place of
strength and pleasure, having formerly been termed Little or Low-England.

And it is very much desired, that this place, (being of so great consequence
to England) may be put in such a posture, that it may render it self
defensible upon any attempt whatsoever.

We hear, that the Earl of Montrosse is very active in Denmark, for the
raising of Forces, and diverse other Commanders with him, Prince Rupert does not
lie idle (in France. Most of our skillfull. Pylots are gone to Dunkirk, but
upon what design we know not.

Here are diverse papists within the Island it having been a place of refuge
ever since the beginning of the wars.

Thus, having acquainted you with the chiefest of our affairs in these parts,
I humbly take my leave, and remain

Yours to serve you, N. F.
Loving land Island, Feb. 7. 1647.

Much more may be declared, to illustrate and demonstrate the danger and
necessity to prevent all these imminent dangers, four hundred foot soldiers
maintained, will be a sufficient remedy against ensuing dangers.

Letters were presented to the House of Commons coming from beyond Sea, which
tell of strange stories, how true we know not, but the relation comes from a
good hand.

One is a letter from Poland, speaking plainly that the great Assembly or
Parliament of that Kingdom have put their King under restraint for raising of
forces without their consent.

That they told him freely in open Parliament, he had forfeited his Crown, and
that all his subjects are thereby discharged of their Allegiance, and are not
to be furrher subject to his commands, That they have commanded the Kings Seal
not to be any longer used and raised a Guard of twelve hundred to attend the
King, and keep the Kingdom in Peace.

One cause of the difference between the King of Poland and his subjects, is
said to be, his endeavor to continue a war contrary to the advice of the
States and Council of that Kingdom, and against the mind of the Lord Marshall.

FINIS.

