PEACE and SAFETY FOR THE Whole Kingdom OR, AN EXPEDIENT For a safe and
well-grounded PEACE between the King and his People.

As also for the speedy settlement of all INTERESTS.

Studied and published for the honor of the Kings Majesty, his Royal Posterity,
the present and future happiness of the whole Kingdom.

By RICHARD FARRAR, Esquire

This Expedient was read by the Author himself at the Bar of the House of
PEERS, the July.7th. Sixth day of July, 1648.

LONDON, Printed. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament. JUNE 23.
1648.
The humble Petition of Richard Farrar, Esquire
SHOWS,
YOur Petitioner is very confident, that (by the infinite Mercy and Goodness of
GOD) he has conceived a direct and short way for the obtaining of a safe and
well-grounded Peace in this Kingdom; and This Peace not only founded, but built
up, upon the Two great Rocks of REASON and RELIGION.

Your Petitioner does (therefore) most humbly pray, that he may have free
liberty from both Houses of Parliament to repair to his Majesty to the Isle of
Wight, and there to deliver him the particulars in writing, and by discourse
(if his Majesty shall command) to give his Majesty full satisfaction to all
Objections: and your Petitioner is most willing that the Governor shall not
only have a Copy of what he presents (instantly upon the delivery of it to the
King) but also (if this honorable House shall please) the Governor, or others,
whom they shall think fit, shall be present, with pen, ink, and paper, to write
down the whole of all that shall be spoken pro and con: It being far from your
Petitioners desire (God he knows it) either to present or say ought to his
Majesty in private, wishing, and in his soul most earnestly longing, after
nothing more then the saving the effusion of Christian Blood, and the sudden
settling of a safe and well-grounded PEACE.

And Your Petitioner shall etc.
TO THE Right Honorable THE Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of PEERS.
My Lord,
SInce it has pleased this Honorable House, after the reading of my Petition,
to lay it aside, I well see under how great a Cloud of Prejudice I do appear
before all the world, presuming to offer at so high an Expedient as Peace;
being indeed the very Expedient of all Expedients.

My Lord, I do beg and beseech your Lordship:

For his sake, who so willingly suffered upon the Cross, for us all, Jesus
Christ:

For his sake that (now) so patiently suffers under so heavy a Cross, yea under
so many, so great, so grievous Crosses, King Charles.

For the sake of his most Royal, Princely, hopeful and numerous Issue; some of
whom, albeit they have (happily) crossed the seas; yet (perhaps) they have not left
all their crosses behind them.

For your own sake (my Lord) and the rest of the Honorable House of Lords (your
fellow Peers) who, if I mistake not, want not your share of daily crosses also.

And lastly, for this unhappy Kingdoms sake (the Nurse and Mother of us all,
whose Genius lies weltring in his goared Blood) this wretched, miserable, and
most deplorable Kingdom, abounding every where with Crosses; Crosses, from East
to West, from North to South; even from the Center to the Circumference. For
these Considerations (my Lord) I do humbly beseech you, to be a means, that I
may have free liberty (without any interruption) my self (if my voice will
serve me) at the Bar, to read my short Expedient for Peace; one quarter of an
hour will do it; and then when your Lordships have heard me, spare me not;
sentence me to public shame and punishment, if I merit it; and death, if I
deserve it: And so he kisses your Lorships hands, who is,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble servant, and ever ready to serve the
Kingdom, whilst he is called, Richard Farrar.

The sixth of July. My Lords,
I Believe (at lest I hope) that there are but very few Natives of this
Kingdom, who (for these many years) have not been much troubled, if not deeply
afflicted at the sad and languishing condition of it, at the unhappy and bloody
differences between the King and Parliament, amongst those many afflicted
souls, I do profess my self to be one; and although in estate I am the poorest,
yet am I rich as any he (whatsoever) in my hearty wishes, desires, and prayers
to Almighty God, for a happy Union and Peace, or (to use the very words of this
Honorable House) for a safe and well grounded Peace: In time God so wrought
with me, that for some months past, I made Peace, the subject of my Nocturnal
study: But for a long time without any satisfaction to my self at all: at last
it pleased Almighty God (from whom alone comes every good and perfect gift)
who heard my earnest and groaning prayers, my continual sighs and desires, to
open unto me the only door (at least in my poor judgment) through which both
King and People must pass, if (at least) they will find the plain, safe, easy,
honest and ready way to Peace: And here I cannot but profess, that the rises of
this my expedient (or the ground from whence these Conceptions took their
birth) were: First, From the Consideration of the unhappy and sad separation of
His Majesty's sacred Person, from his Birthright, Rule and Government, from His
Royal Consort (the Queen) from His numerous and Princely Issue, from His loving
Subjects, and, at last, hurryed away (by his own just fears, as it is believed
into a Remote Island, and there remaining under some kind of an unkingly
restraint. Secondly, From the many and frequent Declarations which His Majesty
had made to his two Houses of Parliament, and to his three Kingdoms, wherein he
was pleased to use such high and solemn Protestations, Asseverations, and
Imprecations, that there was nothing in his power which he would not do, that
there might be a right understanding between him and his people: by which it
appeared plain to my understanding ( rebus sic stantibus) that the King is the
only Center from which a settled Peace must flow: and it seemed further unto me,
that there was no difficulty at all for the King (if he were as willing as he
vowed) to build a Temple for Peace to dwell in. After many Debates with my
self, (and not a few sheets of paper written in vain,) it pleased Almighty God
to make me to digest, or form, these following Propositions (as it were in the
behalf of the King to his People; or at least what I conceived the King ought
to do in Reason and Religion (the first of which he is so great a Master of,
and the second so great a Servant to) for the settling of a safe and
well-grounded Peace: And for my own part I ever laid it down for a Maxim (from
the very beginning of my study) That if the King could and would secure that
part of the Kingdom, or all those persons of the Kingdom, that have seemed to
oppose him in words or deeds (ever since the beginning of this Parliament) and
if they might be secure from all future violences, in their lives, estates and
fortunes, both themselves and their posterities for ever, (for transacting such
things as his Majesty does apprehend they ought not to have done against
Himself, his Crown and Dignity, the Laws of the Land, and their
fellow subjects;) That then such a security (if the People could understand it,
and that it could be made plain unto them) would prove an open door for a safe
Treaty, at least, if not for a safe and well-grounded Peace to enter in at: And
I presume I am not much mistaken in this; so now I proceed to the Propositions
which I have framed and which I doubt not but that his Majesty will freely
offer at the Altar of the Peace of this Kingdom.

THE Piety of the Prince, NOT THE Policy of the People, Must make a safe and
well-grounded PEACE.
The King to grant; First, AN Act of Oblivion, as strong as can be devised, for
the Preservation of the Lives, Estates, and Fortunes, of themselves and their
Posterities, that have any way offended the King, or their Fellow Subjects,
from Anno 1640. until the passing of this Act. Secondly, The King to confirm
that Act by a solemn Oath, drawn in the most strict manner, that may be, and
this to be done in public, for the better satisfaction of the people; and a
short Covenant, without any ambiguities (to be understood ad literam) to be
contained in a few lines, for the King to take, and the People also,
reciprocally; and this will make both Prince and People happy: And this Oath
and Covenant to be confirmed in Public by the Sacrament, and declared to all
the People in Print: And thus doing, he will be a glorious King, beloved both
of God and man. The Queen to take the like Oath (the Sacrament must be given by
her own Priests;) and this done in the presence of persons of the greatest
honor, and published in print by her self, and (then) God forbid but she
should have the exercise of her Religion by her self and family fully: The
Prince and Duke of York, to do the like in all things the King their Father
did. 3 That an Act of Parliament be made in the most strong manner that can be,
Viz. That it shall be High Treason (by the King unpardonable) for any Member of
either House in any succeeding Parliament for ever hereafter, so much as to
motion, or cause to be motioned, or by writing or otherwise, to act or speak
directly or indirectly, any thing, that may tend to the calling in question of
the Act of Oblivion, or dispute the fitness or unfitness, the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of it: much more for offering at the repealing of the Act of
Oblivion, or of this present Act, but the person so offending (which will be no
hard thing to be proved) to be executed in 24. hours after as a Traitor in the
highest degree, against both King and Kingdom: The Execution to be at
Westminster. 4 An Act for a general Pardon, and, who shall require it, for a
particular one, from the King, for anything contained in the Act of Oblivion. 5
An Act that no Knight of the Shire or Burgess, shall ever hereafter be chosen,
but that in a few days after the Choice, he shall in public at his own Parish
Church, in the presence of Three persons, besides the Minister, take the Oath
for the keeping of the Covenant and the Act of Oblivion, and for the faithful
observing of the Third Act, viz. That it shall be High Treason, etc. and
confirm it by the Sacrament: and to bring the Certificate under the hands of
Three honest men present, and the Minister, and to deliver it to the Speaker of
the House of Commons, before he speak to any public business of the
Commonwealth. And every Lord of the House of Peers to do the like at their
Parish Church, and bring the Certificate to the Speaker of the House of Lords.
6 An Act that no King or Queen hereafter but shall at their Coronation (unless
they be under age) take the same Oath the King now does, and the same Covenant,
and confirm it by the Sacrament, for the true keeping of the Act of Oblivion,
and the never consenting to the repealing of the Third Act. 7 An Act that all
the Lords and Commons of England, and all those that are out of the Kingdom
(when they shall come in;) in a word, every person in the Kingdom, none
excepted of either Sex, from 17 to 100 years, of what calling soever they be; I
say, that every person in a convenient time (as short as may be) to take the
same Oath and Covenant, and confirm it by the Sacrament; every one to take it
without equivocation or mental reservation (ad literam) and to their uttermost
of power to keep it, and likewise to take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy (here care must be had of Papists;) and to this Act some addition,
that whatsoever Native shall pass out of the Land, or come in, shall take the
Oath and Covenant; the Sacrament cannot then with convenience. 8 An Act that no
Preacher or Minister, Preach or Print, (or any other person whatsoever) any
thing that may in the least infringe the Act of Oblivion and the Covenant, or
the lawfulness of it, or of the Third Act, Viz. That it shall be High Treason,
etc. a severe punishment. 9 An Act prohibiting of all Pamphlets, Books or
Papers, printed or written, which have done or do any way asperse his Majesty,
the Queen, or Royal Issue, the Parliament or the Kingdom of Scotland, or
Ireland, ever since the beginning of 1640 to the day of the passing of the Act;
and this Act to obliterate and deface out in all Books of Records, whatsoever
or whersoever any thing that is publicly entered, tending this way: A severe
punishment for the party so offending, selling ordivulging of them, with an Act
for the time to come, against all that shall offend in that kind; a severe
punishment. 10 A severe Act against all Duels and Quarrels concerning the late
differences either in word or deed, included in the Act of Oblivion, and the
party severely punished though no harm done; for, who draws his Sword or any
weapon in this kind, would, if he could, that all the Kingdom should do the
like, which were a horrid thing: a high punishment. 11 An Act against any that
shall send a challenge, or deliver a challenge by word or writing, and for any
that shall call Cavalier, or Roundhead, or any such nickname, which may
infringe the Act of Oblivion; and no man to be esteemed a coward; but on the
contrary, a truly valiant man, that shall refuse the challenge, or puts up any
affront in that kind, for the preservation of the Peace and love of the
Kingdom, and complaining of it to the Judge, or Justice, he shall be esteemed
the better, and the Party offending highly punished. 12 An Act that no suit
shall be admitted into any Court of Justice or before any Judge, included in
the Act of Oblivion, the party offending punished. 13 An Act that whosoever
shall refuse to take the Oath and Covenant, and to confirm it by the Sacrament
(herein Papists must be considered because of their Sacrament) shall be
imprisoned without Bail or mainprise, and there kept till they do it, having
leave to sell all they have, then to be banished the Kingdom. I leave the
particular punishment to graver judgments. 14 An Act for a severe Punishment
for any that shall wilfully infringe the Oath and Covenant, which he has
confirmed by the Sacrament, if that he persist in the breach of it, and repent
it not publicly. 15 An Act that no man shall upbraid any person or his
posterity on either side, King or Parliament, although he have been discovered,
or shall be discovered and found guilty of any misdemeanors pardoned in the
Act of Oblivion; a high punishment for him that breaks this Act. 16 An Act that
all persons now under age, men or women, and not now fit to receive the
Sacrament, shall when they come to age, at the first taking of it, likewise
take the Oath and Covenant: and this Act to order a public Register in every
Parish of the Kingdom Alphabetically, that so every man's name may be seen, who
have and have not taken the Oath and Covenant, and confirmed it by the
Sacrament. 17 An Act for calling in and nulling of all His Majesty's
Declarations against the two Houses of Parliam. or any other person that has
offended or seemed to offend the King, as also a calling in or nulling all such
as the two Houses have set forth against the King or his Friends, as shall be
agreed on in the Treaty. 18 An Act for tender consciences, that they may enjoy
their consciences free, herein great care must be had, what liberty is given,
for public or private meetings, as also for Printing of opinions: the latitude
of these must be well thought of; but surely there will never be a happy
settlement in this Kingdom unless great care be had of tender consciences; so
numerous they are, and so just their pretense; for doubtless it may easily be
proved by Reason and Religion, that no man ought to force the conscience of
another, but he that lives quietly, and obediently under the Laws of the
Kingdom without offense, should not (as formerly) be pressed to come to any
outward worship. But this Rule never fails; a tender and a good conscience is
no disturber of the peace, and Government he lives under, but rather suffers
with patience, then be active at all by opposition. 19 That His Majesty engage
himself, that the Queen, Prince and Duke of York, shall perform their parts of
these Acts that belong to them, which doubtless he can and will do, and for
his own Party also. 20 An Act that no man shall be of any Jury, or bear any
office in the Kingdom, or be held a good witness in any cause (if any person
except against him) but he shall be put to the trial, whether or no he has
taken the Oath and Covenant, and if he has not, then to do it before he be
received for a good witness. 21 An Act that present care be taken to satisfy
the Army, all their just arrears at full, and forthwith to be disbanded. 22 An
Act that all former Arrears of the Earl of Essex his Commanders and Soldiers,
or Officers, be likewise taken care for, that they be satisfied their just dues.
23 That the arrears due from the Parliament to the Scots be also order taken
for, and to pay and satisfy them. 24 An Act that all Garrisons or Armies, now
already in the Kingdom, or coming into the Kingdom, belonging to the King or
pretending for him, or any way invading the Parliament, be also disbanded.


To these preceding Acts, I deny not, but some additions possibly may be, for
the further and better maintaining of the peace of this Kingdom; too much
cannot be said or done in a matter of so high a concernment as this is; for
what is to be done but once, ought to have no circumstances omitted, that it
may be well done.

So far (now) as I can apprehend, there can be no fairer or more hopeful way,
or means to a Treaty of Peace with the King; (I am sure none more reasonable
and Religions) then these formerly expressed, which if he shall be pleased to
grant. will give a high satisfaction to the people, and render the King glorious
for ever.

It is an old proverb, (Pardon the commonnesse of it) fast bind fast find; and
if His Majesty shall be pleased to offer this, or what other, or more, of his
own Princely disposition, he shall think fit, as I am confident he will do
what he can, who can desire more, or who can doubt, but it will prove a true
love-knot? A knot of perfect love and amity from the King to His People; of
love and highest duty from the people to the King and his Posterity, and of
mutall love and amity between man and man throughout the whole Kingdom.

If any man (now) can show a better security in Reason or Religion, (for on
these two great Rocks, I build this Porch to the Temple of Peace:) I say, if
any man can show a better or stronger security on His Majesty's part, for the
Peace and safety of His people, let him speak it, let him produce it, I envy it
not, I shall rejoice at it.

But if there be no way (or means) more safe, no way so safe, nay no other way
of safety but this, (unless God from heaven should shower down his holy Spirit
of love and unity upon the heart of every particular person in the Kingdom,
and confirm it also, which surely no man hopes or expects, (though all things
are possible with God) I say, (I hope) it will not be refused by the people of
this Kingdom, or by those that represent the whole nation, if the King shall
graciously offer it, but it will be thought a godlike Act of a mortal King,
since in this particular (as I conceive) he can essentitially do no more for
the safety of His People of this Kingdom; nor do I believe, that ever King did
so much humble himself to his People, Since the first King that ever reigned.

Peaceful Reader,
(for into such hands I wish this my Expedient may come) I am not ignorant how
hard and uncivilly I press upon his Majesty's clemency, in my supposed
preceding Propositions. God forbid I should not think, but much less will and
ought to satisfy the people; sure I am, it is more then is fit for any to
request, even the most guilty and greatest offender in the three Kingdoms: but
I have (boldly, I must confess, and humbly I beg His Majesty's pardon for it,
whom I know is all mercy and sweetness) adventured to dive into the very
bottom of security. His Majesty must be the chuser and the Royal dispensator:
If he can do it with less, who ought not to be satisfied? The confirmation of
it by his own, the Queen's, the Prince's and the Duke of York's taking the
Sacrament may be thought too much; I most humbly submit. But for the universal
taking of it, both the Oath, Covenant, and confirming of it by the Sacrament,
is so necessary (in my weak judgment) that I dare say (for many Reasons) no
perfect Peace can be had without it: but it being done, it will in a little
time work revenge out of the hearts of the people on both sides, when all men
shall see at what a dear rate they shall purchase it. Thus bitterness will
extinguish (when all hope of Revenge is taken away) and love to each other, it
is hoped, will daily increase.

FINIS.

