ANTICHRISTS MAN of WAR, Apprehended, and encountered withal, by a Soldier of
the Army of the Lamb.

OTHERWISE, An Answer to a Book set forth by one that subscribes his name
Edmund Skipp, Preacher of the Gospel (as he says) to a people at Bodenham in
Herefordshire; but is found one that is acting Antichrists part disguised: but
nakedly seen, and herein discovered in this Answer to his Book, called the
Worlds Wonder, or the Quakers Blazing-Starre.

And in this Answer he is discovered, and proved to be one that is chief in the
service of the old Dragon: who pretends in his Book to discover the mystery of
the Quakers, as he calls them, and to lay open a dangerous design: who is found
out, that whilst he has been pretending to be chief in discovering a Plot, or
Antichrists misterious actings, is found himself to be the chief plotter, by a
Satanical spirit disguised, and in the transformings of Antichrist, deep in the
mystery which he pretended to disdiscover; but is here apprehended and taken,
and also encountered withal: as the wise-hearted, in the reading with a pure
understanding may see: and so this may prove to be a means of a greater downfall
of Antichrists Kingdom; and for the furthering of the truth, and setting up of
purity in its right place; and by this, Truth and Error may be clearly known
asunder: that deceit may thereby be forsaken, and Truth embraced, and received,
as it is in Life and Power, in the Lord Jesus, who has said, Ye shall know the
Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. John 8.32.

Written in Worcestershire by a servant of the Lord, the second Month called
April, 1655.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1655.

To my Friends and Wel-wishers, that desire the welfare of Sion, and prosperity
of Jerusalem; and to all who suffers reproaches and are reviled for
righteousness sake, in Hereford-shire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, and
elsewhere, under the nickname of Quakers.
THe God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Bless Preserve and keep you, in
your faithfulness and obedience to Himself, and in your diligent watchfulness,
and circumspect walking blamelessly before him, and lovingly one to another:
and the Lord God of life and power settle you, and establish you by his eternal
spirit, in the life and Power of Truth, that you may walk before him in love,
and grow up into the pure divine excelency, that you may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, to know what is the height and depth, and length and breadth
of the love of God: that you may be comprehended into the infinitness of His
incomprehensibleness; and be as a peculiar people, to bring praise to the Lord;
and if you be reproached, and reviled, and persecuted for righteousness sake,
happy are you: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward. Dear
hearts, you that are so accused and slandered, by the Serpent and his seed,
walk in wisdom, and blamelesly, and you will feel the pure Joy spring up into
your souls, to fill your understandings. Oh! be faithful to the Lord and
valiant for the truth! that as Antichrist bestirs himself, seeking to prop and
uphold his Kingdom, and to cast out revilings, and false accusations as a
mighty flood: so you may be watchful over him in every place, and resist him in
the Faith, and be able to stand in the gaps, and so be keptsafe, and be ready
to make war against the Dragon, that in the Lords strength you may be Crowned
with victory, and be made to triumph in His strength; and all wait in the
measure of the grace of God, to receive wisdom from above, and to be filled
with the riches of the grace of God, and so every one to walk as you have
received the Lord Jesus, rooted and grounded in him, that the Eternal may rule
in you all, that you may be made valiant Soldiers to follow the Lamb, and fear
not the rage nor cruelty, of the old Dragon; but stand in the pure Being: and
so as you abide in the measure of the grace of God received, you will grow
strong and valiant in the Lord, and be able to pass over the deceived, and to
withstand the Deceiver; For greater is he that is in you, than he that is in
the world, 1 John 2, 24. So I am with you in the divine Being of love, and you
may read my name in the Book of life.

One who suffers with you for the Testimony of the Truth of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and reproached as you are, by the name of Quakers. R. F.

Antichrists Man of War apprehended, etc.
OR, A Reply to Edmund Skipp's Book of slander, and false Judgment, by him
called the Worlds wonder, or the Quakers BLAZING-STAR.
MEeting with this Book, upon the 28. of the Month called March, in my travel
in Worcestershire; I was constrained to stay a few days to return an Answer
thereunto, for the simple ones sake, to clear the aspersions, and remove the
stumbling blocks, thrown in the way to cause the weak to stumble and fall; And
at the first view of the Book, it set seemingly a great face against the truth;
but through the mercy of God, I was made not to matter it, but join battle
against it. Therefore Edmund Skipp as thou have subscribed thy come, thou have
abundantly laid open thy folly, and showed thy enmity and despite to the Truth;
but thou art encountered, and thy deceits are discovered, and laid naked and
bare to any single eye, as hereafter will appear. I only meeting this Book of
thine in my travel, and both seeing, and knowing that thou have written it from
a spirit of pride, and despite to the spirit of Truth, and against the Servants
of our Lord Jesus, by thy spirit of delusion colored over with shows, and
pretenses of godliness, and a feigned humility, intruding thy self into those
things which thou have not seen, vainly putt up with a fleshly mind, with a
cover of (fallacies and) feigned humility, and to thy first Doctrine, that thou
and such pretenders to be nearest the Lamb, an speaking of: but appears like
the old Dragon in wrath against the Truth, and Servants of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who thy self might formerly have lived Pharisee like, till thou were
discovered, but now have manifested thy wolfish heart; and thou art slandering
and accusing such as follows the Lamb, not in pretenses, but in reality and
purity, whom thou revilest under the name of Quakers: And thou art constrained
to complain, because (as thou say) thou have lost thy society, and even as
it were, now goes a begging to those people, thou calls Baptists, as in the
latter end of thy book, does appear; and now that Satan, has got a chief seat
in thy heart, and entered into thee, through that spirit of delusion thou speaks
of, thou ventest thy solly in acting his part, in reviling the Servants of the
Lord, and defaming the truth.

And whereas thou says that when Satan finds a people, living so strictly
and exactly, in that light and power they have received (as those thou slanders
under the name of Quakers do) for this we praise God that he cannot prevail
against us by his temptations; being kept by that power which in thy first page
thou speaks of, but after reviles: which power of God brings good out of evil
to us, and teaches (those that thou reproaches and reviles under the nickname
of Quakers) the Lords sincere ones who are kept by his power, through faith
unto salvation, and preserved against all the storms and tempests, vilifyings,
slanderings, and revilings, that beat^ upon them, powered out from the Serpent
and his seed, under colored pretenses, and shoots out the stings in their
sails, yet does not harm them, dwelling in the power of the Lord God, and of
the Lamb, that in such storms and tempests they turn not aside, to the right
hand nor to the left, being kept and preserved by his special power, and armed
with the Armor of God, ( Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12. etc,) against the tempestuous
storms of the wicked and against the fiery darts of the Devil, and against such
darts of the wicked, (such as thine are, and as thou art) that it so touches
them and makes them that thou reviles under the name of Quakers, the Children
of the most high, admire his continued faithfullness, the manifestations of his
love to them, so that they praise him for his continued goodness, and his
manifold mercies to them, and they can say as such did, the Lord is on our
side, and none shall make us afraid: though thou Edmund Skip, and the wicked,
bend your toungs like your bows for lies, and shoot your arrows of
reproaches, lies, slanders and revilings, they do not touch, nor harm us,
praised be the Lord, who upholds us by his power (which thou Blasphemes and
calls the power of the Devil) but be thou assured and all such as thou art
that God will visit you, and give you your reward according to your works, (
Romans 2.5, 6.) who are those that have transformed your selves as the Ministers
of righteousness, but are not the Ministers of righteousness, but of deceit,
lies, falsehood, and untruth, and so the Ministers of Antichrist, working in
that mystery of iniquity with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, (and
calls the power of God the power of the Devil, and the Spirit of truth
delusion) but God will take vengeance of thee, and all such for so doing, who
has said He will ease himself of his enemies, and be avenged of his
adversaries, Isa. 1.24. Take notice of that.

And where thou art buifying thy self, and puzling thy mind about the Devil,
(in whose snares thou art) saying he was created an Angel of light, and not of
darkness; thou have left it without any proof, but thy bare conceit, and that
is of no effect, as in thy 3. page: But the Scripture calls him a Prince of
darkness, Ephesians. 2. and the Scripture says, The Angels that kept not their first
estate but fell, are reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day, Jude. 6. and if the Devil was of those fallen
Angels, and they so reserved in such chains until such a time how comes it to
pass that the Devil is an Angel of light as thou calls him, and likewise says
in thy second page, That enemy of mankindi is going up and down, and
compassing the earth, (as in a another place) to and fro, etc. going about like
a Roaring Lion, seeking to devour, etc. If he was created an Angel of light,
and one of them fallen Angels that are chained under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day, and is a Prince of darkness, how comes he to appear
now like an Angel of light; and how gets he the power, to get from under the
chain, to go up and down, and to act sorth such as thou falsely says he does,
and like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour, and to compass the earth in going to
and fro, etc. as thou says. Is his chains so long, or his power of darkness
able to make Angels of light, etc. seeing thou says he was so created and so
acts as thou says; who tells of several passages without any proof but thy
fallacies and brain-conceit, so in the rest of thy sayings and false slanders
cast upon these thou calls Quakers thou have left them without any proof, but
thy fallacies and brain-conceits from the Spirit of delusion, working upon thy
dark heart and fleshly imaginations. So thy lies, slanders, and false sayings
is all turned back upon thee again, and into the lying generation amongst the
old Serpent and his seed (where they were invented, and) from whence they come,
to remain. Open your old bottles, and receive in your envy, false accusations,
lies, and slanders, (cast upon the truth and the righteous seed, and upon the
inocent, such as by you are reviled under the nick name of Quakers) and take
your slanders and false accusations into your mystery of iniquit^e again:
truth clears it self of you and casts off your venom and filth. Receive it into
your breast, and evil hearts from whence it came, that judgment may pass upon
it, and learn to be wise: this gets not slander-carriers nor slanderers a
praise, but of the Serpents seed, and slanderers again, that with them in the
nature and deceivableness of unrighteousness does remain, and woo to all such,
Isa. 3.11. Rev. 9.2. Thessa. 2 9, 10, 11, 12.

And in thy fourth page: Where thou says in one of thy general heads, which
thou calls, Doct. 1.

That when Satan finds a people living so strictly, in the light life and
power they have received, that he cannot prevail upon them by temptations of a
gross sort, such as are those provocations unto open profaneness, covetousness,
pride, etc. I answer that through the goodness of God, by the light life and
power of God in which we dwell as we have received, we are not only kept by the
power of God out of the aforementioned evils, but all evil, of what fort soever
as it is discovered by the light, being short out with the power: so that Satan
cannot insinuate nor get in upon our fouls, that dwell in the light life and
power received of God, whom thou accuses under the name of Quakers, and so
dwelling in the light life and power received, by which we are kept out of
evil, we also see the opposers of the truth, and such like false accusers as
thou art, to be out of the power and light, serving the Devil.

And thou art in the condition next following thou speaks of, in the latter
part of thy thing called a doctrine, where thou says Satan concludes upon
another way, by making covers for your pride with a cloak of dishonesty called
decency, and so for covetuousness called by such good husbandry or provident
care; and a cover for your envy and passion under a pretense of zeal: and
foolish customs covered, with cloaks of craftiness, called by such, breeding
and manners, and a fained pretense of humility for secret dissimulation
flattery, and deceit, etc. And so Satan in those and all other of his deceits
by ^^i^^ing himself, for your dispositions and capacities, if it be to
transsfome himself, into the likness of God, (which are thy words) and as it
were to act the part of God seemingly amongst you, under fair pretenses, fine
words, seemingly self-denying actions, so that at least Satan (or the Devil as
thou says) may insinuate himself into your understanding and affections and
(...) leave any thing unattempted, that may (if it be but in probability as
thou says) serve to seduce (instead of theirs) your poor souls: this makes
him according to thy saying, so disguise himself, as an Angel of light amongst
you, and by you high notionary Priests and false Antichristian Ministers, in
your false doctrine and Antechristian Ministry, working through that
mysterious veil (as thou says) amongst you; and under which be would not be
seen to be himself, yet though he so work and ^ct and have wrought, and a
long time acted amongst you, now praised be the Lord with the true light you
are seen and your veil will not hide you: those that dwell in the light and
life received, who are preserved our of Satan's snares, whom thou calls Quakers,
such sees both him and you and declares against ^^s and your mysterious actings
through the veil thou speaks of, in your mystery of iniquity, at which thou
art troubled. And though Satan be so disguised amongst you, in your notions and
new inventions, yet with the light both he and you are seen, to a appear in
your colors, and the true light declares your works and his, of what sort they
are which amongst you has a long time lien hid, and the wor^^ of darkness
which Antichrist has wrought through that mystery of iniquity, by suiting
himself according to your dispositi^^s and capacityes, (as thou sa^es) into
likenesses, like truth, but is ^ot truth: a show but not the substance) so that
he sits, and has sitten long upon the hearts and minds of such: because as
thou says (he could amongst you no otherwise prevail) and now with the light
your mystery, and mischief invented against the truth, (and those you call
Quakers) is seen, and with the light comprehended; and all your filthiness
poured forth is back into your filthy, unclean and mischievous generation
returned; take it to your selves again, who are in that (treachery, delusion
and) Apostasy thou speaks of, and the poor beguiled wretches stands for your
selves, who are under that power of Satan thou speaks of; and transforming your
selves, out of one (invention) form, image or likeness into another. As thou
art Edmund Skipp, who art as it were going a begging to the people called
Baptists; because thou says (that through the mysterious workings of
Antichtist) the society thou had communion with, is now wholly broke off; And
from thy Antichrist an delusions, and those disguised Angelical, and mysterious
operations of Satan thou speaks of, if they be broke off, they may now boldly
declare against such delusions and deceits: being taken unto light, life and
power of truth; and if they do not, yet I do, and w^tne^s against thy
delusions, and Antichrist an spirit, and Do^^^^^, as hereafter will more
clearly appear: who act in the false Ant^ch^^st an mysterious actings, there
spoke o^ in thy Astronomica^ J^dgm^nt, as thou calls it, upon 2 C^^. 11.13, 14,
15. and which is ^ow ^o much practiced by yo^ d^^g^ised, and Satanical
Ministers: some in one invention, and some ^n another, (l^ke Dyers and Taylo^^)
often in new colors, and learning new fashions, to p^ease lust^ul and c^^^ons
minds w thal, but a^l your covers and clothes of dishonesty, now will not hide
you; but leave you bare to a single eye: Praised be the Lord for the riches of
his love, who brings your deeds of darkness, and h^dden things to light.

To thy first demonstration, as thou calls it in page 6.

First, It m^st needs be ^sp^^t of delusion, and Antichrist, that does (^nstead
of theirs) misinform thy heart, and so makes it judge amiss of things as thou
have done, and hereafter will more clearly appear to any single eye: and thou
have by that spirit of delusion, and of Antichrist, made manitest thy
Astronomical, and false Judgment, but such are div ners; therefore says the
Lord, I will n^^k^th m mad, as may be read I^a. 44. for it is He that
frustrateth the tokens of liars; and thou art a liar, therefore thy token's
frustrated: and it is the Lord also that makes diviners mad, that tu^neth
wisemen backward, and makes their knowledge foolish, as th^ne is, and such
like, Isa. 44.25. who by thy false and Astronom^cal judgment, as thou calls it;
have judged clear amiss, and called evil good, and good evil: and so thou owns,
and approves what thou ought not, and condemns by thy false and Astronomicall
judgment, what ought to be owned, and approved; the light stands a witness
against thee, which l^ght is thy condemnation that hates it, and acts so
against it, and contrary to it.

And secondly, That base deceit of Antichrist thou speaks of, which is brought
forth, is not sound in the hearts of those people thou calls Quakers, they deny
it; but it is found, and brought forth by Antichrist in thy heart, and the
hearts of such as thou art; thy Astronomical Judgment is false, and has
deceived thee, and thou thy self art found in that deceit, ^irmingeham ^. G.
who artiso clearly mistaken in judgment as R. G. and such like in their
deceiveableness are, that calls good evil, and ev l good; and such as calls the
Power of God that reformeth the heart, and redeems the soul to God, and works
our pride, covetousness, theft, whoredoms, drunkenness, lying, swearing,
cursing, cheating, defraud, w^tcherast, hatred, variance, wrath, strife, and
works out of sedition and the works of the flesh, (as 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and
Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.) unto sanctification and purity (as in 1 Cor. 6.11.) and
into the fruits of the spirit; whereby the flesh is crucified, with the
affections and lusts thereof: so that there is a living and walking in the
spirit, and spiritual communion with the Father, by such in the spiritual life
of sanctification and purity, Gal. 5.23, 24, 25. And grace and peace is thereby
multiplied through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, according as
His divine power gives unto us all things that pertain to life and godliness,
through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue. 2 Pet.
1.2, 3. This power and work of grace, wrought by the Spirit of God, in the
hearts and souls of those you scornfully call Quakers, is witnessing and
witnessed; the Spirit of God also wirnesseth the same with our spirits, ( Romans
8.14, 15, 16. Gal. 4.6.) and wirnesseth against your lying spirits, and against
all such as call this work delusion, etc. Here Edmund Sk^pp thy Astronomical
judgment is abominable false, which in thy first demonstration thou would
charge the Quakers withal; who says, they are so clearly mistaken that they
call evil good, and good evil: In this thou art charged to be a liar, and false
accuser: and thy saying is a clear mistake, and altogether false; therefore as
thou art, so is it, and both evil, and so of the Devil: not knowing what thou
says, nor whereof thou affirms: (saying they, and it is thy self, and such as
thou art,) And where thou judges the Quakers (by thee so called) with such
false judgment, and so falsely accuses them, thou may be ashamed and blush:
speaking so vainly and foolishly, out of the envy and pride of thy heart, which
thou would cover with feigned pretenses, but they will not shelter thee. It is
thou that art so clearly mistaken in judgment, (and not they as thou falsely
says) that regards not what thou say: In saying, those that thou calls
Quakers, do judge the ways, practices, and actions of all people, to be
abominable, Antichristian and unjust, except their own; and above all people do
they cry out against, and disown such, who by the world are reproved, and
disowned, as the Church and Disciples of Christ.

I answer, the Church and Disciples of Christ, we do not disown, nor cry out
against; therefore in that, thou have again vented thy lie; but thee and all
false hearted hypocrites, and such as pretend to be of the Church and disciples
of Christ and are not, such we disown, cry out against, and deny. And all that
walk in the way to the Father which is but one, Ioh. 14.9. such we do not deny
cry out against, nor disown, but all that walk in that way we own even all that
are in Christ and walk in him in the lowest degree, and we do not call that way
(nor such actions) abominable but the way of holiness which the Prophet Isaiah
speaks of, in Isa. 53.8.9.10, and the unclean shall not pass over it, but all
contrary ways (and act ons) to purity and holiness we disown cry out against
and deny, and all such as say they are Jews and are not, but of the Synagogue
of Satan, such we cry out against, deny and disown, but the true and right way
we own, and especially all such as are in that way and all those that are
reproached and disowned by the world, who are of the Church and disciples of
Christ, therefore thy lie Edmund Skip, is abominable and false, and as it is so
art thou, an abom nable liar and false hearted hypocrit and one that speak lies
in hypocrisy, that has so regardlesly said.

Secondly, All actions and practices which are in righteousness is by us owned,
and not denied, knowing this, that he that does righteousness is of God, and
that is owned, but he that does not righteousness is not of God, and that is by
us disowned, cried out against and denied, he that does righteousness is of
God, and he that does not righteousness is not of God, 1 Ioh. 3.7. and 10.

Thirdly. In this the children even of God are manifest, and the Children of
the Devil, take notice of this all ye unrighteous ones, and thou also who art
the liar and of thy Father the Devil and all such, Ioh. 8.44. therefore see
what is prepared for such, Rev. 21.8. and lying, slandering, and false
accusing, is from the evil, so of the Devil, and that is Antichrist an, but
Edmund Skip, in thy blazing Star, thou have vented thy lies, slanders, and
false accusations, to blaze abroad, so proving thy self to be such a one,
therefore thy actions are Antichristian actions, and thou art an Antichrist and
of thy Father as aforesaid, (and such there are many) 1 John 2.18. Then thou,
and all such are to be cried against, disowned, and utterly denied, and though
thou may be offended because I tell thee the truth; but the Spirit of truth
does judge the deceit of thy base heart: our own is accepted, and the unjust
rejected, and the way of truth, true Church and Disciples of Christ we own, and
all false ways, self-pretended Churches, and unrighteous actions we deny,
against them cry, and altogether disown.

1. To that which thou calls, thy first charge, page 7.

If thou was charged for hypocrisy, though thou seek to justify thy self, thy
self-justification will not stand good, but is null and void, therefore of no
effect; for I have already proved thee to be a liar, slanderer, and false
accuser of the truth, and of the innocent, one also that regards not what thou
falsely against the truth says and have said: so a liar in hypocrisy, as
before is proved; therefore upon thee who art in the hypocrisy and deceit, the
charge shall stand, and as Conscience-Book is opened, the light which changes
not; (though thou alter and change) yet the light will then answer, upon thee
Gods judgments to be just: and the woes that are due unto hypocrites, to be due
unto thee, as well as to them spoken of in Ma. 23, who art in the nature turned
from the light of which hypocisie does arise, as well as false accusations,
slanders, and lies.

Secondly, Something now to that which thou calls thy second charge, when thou
says, Thou art charged for acting against thy Conscience, etc.

I Answer, though thy Conscience may be seared, as such that make shipwreck of
faith and a good Conscience, and now a fleshly confidence be got up in thee,
and thereby a lying false accusing spirit does possess thee, as the issue of
thy heart has made it manifest, and the light in thy Conscience; thou art an
enemy unto, and acts contrary to that which should exercise thy Conscience
toward God: that is evidently demonstrated to any single eye; and in secret,
the light in thy Conscience which thou art an enemy to, it will here for the
truth witness the same: and also against thy deceit; Though thou seek to resist
the Crier, it will cry, and in thy Conscience against thee testify, and be as
a dart at thy heart, when Conscience-Book does open; and the light which
changes not will stand firm, and be thy condemnat on from God, that hates it,
and walks contrary to it; It says thou should not lie, but thou does lie, and
art here proved a liar; then thou acts contrary to that within thy Conscience,
therefore contrary to thy Conscience: And the light in thy Conscience says,
thou should not falsely accuse any, nor judge with unrighteous judgment, etc. but
thou does accuse falsely, and has accused falsely those thou calls Quakers
falsely; and also judged, and does judge with false judgment, etc. which will not
abide the trial nor stand before the judgment seat of Christ; but both thou and
it are for judgment, and in thy condemnation remembered thou will also be of
what against the truth thou have acted and done: and acting against the truth
and light, the light in thy Conscience, thou actest contrary to thy Conscience,
and though thou say thou do not, thou art proved a liar before; and thou that
will lie against the truth, thou wills not let to lie against thy Conscience,
who art proved to be such an open liar, and thy sayings in other things, is
proved to be false as in that also: the light against thy will, which is thy
condemnation, is my witness and answer, and that shall stand.

Thirdly, To that which thou calls thy third charge, etc. Where thou say
thou art charged to be an enemy to the Lords People: as in thy 8. page and 4.
particular thou says thou art, etc.

I Answer, that thou art, and so the charge is true, and not false, and so it
shall stand, and is not by me denied; Thy trumpet is sounded, thy seed of
dissension east abroad, and thy lies blazes in thy Blazing-Star: and thy false
accusations, and also thy unrighteous judgment (against the truth and) against
the righteous seed, is abundantly made manifest to the public view: and thy
enmity to the light is seen, so to the truth: calling the power of it delusion,
and the like; Thou art he that blasphems God, (in His People and so) in His
Temple, and art a hater of the Truth, in hostility against it, and in the
rebellion amongst such in that nature turned from the light, as are haters of
the ways and people of God; who for their disobedience to the light and truth,
were and are given over to reprobate minds, etc. and thou art g^ven over to the
delusion of Satan, and to believe lies, (and tell them abroad) who art so far
acted by a Satanical spirit in the mystery of iniquity, that thou have largely,
and rashly out of a reprobate sense, vented them abroad against the truth of
our Lord Jesus. Read thy heart, and Judge thy self for an open enemy, thou art
also read thy self amongst such, Romans 1.18, 19. Romans 1.28, 29, 30. etc. 2 These.
1.6, 7.8, 9. 2 These. 2.9. etc.

Fourthly, As for thy fourth charge, where thou says, thou art charged not to
have passed the new birth: And fifthly for backsliding, thou says, etc. As for
backsliding thou confesses it partly thy self in thy 9. page: and for not
passing the new birth, that thou have not, but art found in the old: and the
strong man armed in thee that shall stand; for liers, slanderers, reproachers,
false accusers, (nor blasphemers) are not born of God, but thou art an open
liar, slanderer, and false accuser (of the innocent, hundreds may witness
against thee, that thou falsely accuses under the name of Quakers;) therefore
let the new birth alone, who art (blaspheming) speaking evil of the power that
begets to the newness of life, etc. The new birth thou have cleared thy self
of, not to be the new man, but the old: then let thou that alone to whom it
does belong; for such as are born of God sins not, 1 John 3.9. and he that
commits sin is of the Devil, and not born of God; but thou commits sin, and
that in a high measure, so thou art of the Devil, and all such, therefore not
born of God; and herein are the Children of God made manifest, and the children
of the Devil: so art thou made manifest to be no Child of God, but a servant of
sin, a false accuser, misapplyer of the Scripture, a false Judge, and an open
liar; therefore on the Devil as such are, Romans 1.28. etc. 1 John 3.8. Job.
8.34.44. Romans 6.16. Rev. 21.8.

Firthly, And for talking of the new creature, and the second Adam, and
knowledge therein; thou art speaking without understanding, also questioning
thy own knowledge in the same thou speaks of, (saying, if it be so, etc.) so
thou speaks without true knowledge, or understanding in the same; but the
knowledge by enjoyment in the second Adam, is out of thy comprehension and
brain imagination; though thou have had some little convictions; yet thou art
turned into false accusations, envy, disdain, treachery and deceit, as thy
brother Cain, and brother Judas did, whose end was according to his work, take
thou notice of it; and according to the saying thou speaks of, the charge upon
thee is no blank: but stands still, and sealed with thy old actions; and the
backsliding thou speaks of in thy 9. page, who art in the delusions and false
(Astronomical) Judgment, given over to believe lies, and labors to fill
ignorant people with thy false Prophecies, and lying divinations, in thy Worlds
Wonder: who art manifested by it to be full of treachery and deceit, slanders
and false accusations, and as I have proved thee; therefore instead of mercy,
Judgment for thee shall stand true and just, upon thy Astronomical and unjust
--

By these five particulars thou labored, to have brought about thy mysterious
workings of that spirit of Antichrist, whereby thou art so disguised, and hid
with covers of delusion and deceit, and to have brought the innocent into thy
snares: from these thou sought to make a ground, to charge the people of God to
be deluders and in delusion, the mystery of iniquity under the Region of
Antichrist, etc. and thou have laid as it were baits, and colored them
smoothly over, to take the minds of the ignorant withal, and so bewitch them
with thy lying divination, and false Astronomical Judgment; the Serpent has
shot forth his sting in his tail by thee, to strike the simple; and thou have
labored by thy working mysteriously, so disguised and transformed as a
Minister of truth and righteousness, in some seeming shows and pretenses, to
cast stumbling blocks in the way, to cause the weak to fall, and be wounded:
and to catch the ignorant into thy trap with a bait, and a snare; first laying
down a fair seeming show of truth in appearance, covered with some certain
Scriptures wrested by thee: joining and annexing thy fallacies thereunto: so
conjuring by the mystery of witchcraft in the iniquity, and lying wonders,
raising up false accusations and slanders; but for the truths sake, I shall
through Gods assistance, labor a little to clear the truth, by taking away thy
fallacies; removing the deceit, and setting truth in its place, that the
honest-hearted may thereby come to see, whilst thou art pretending to lay open
a mysterious work, or design of Antichrist, and casting thy mouth-floud after
the woman that brings sorth the man-child, accusing the innocent, whom thou
calls Quakers, altogether upon unjust grounds: so thy covers being taken off,
the innocent will be cleared whom thou accusest under the nickname of Quakers;
and whilst thou art pretending to discover a Satanical plot, or unfold his
mysterious actings, thou will be sound the chief plotter in his design, and one
that art disguised, acting deep under a mysterious vail by a Satanical spirit,
in the mystery of iniquity; and so truth being cleared in some measure, as
hereafter will appear, the people called Quakers, will be found out of
delusion, and the mysterious workings, thou seeks to charge them withal; but
they being found in the Covenant of grace, and under the power of the Lord,
thou w^lt be left in the snare which thou have laid, and the p^t which thou
have d^gged: and sounder the delusions and mysterious workings of Antichrist,
as to the single eye will clearly appear: thereby will the innocent by thee
called Quakers be cleared, though thou and the wicked through plotting
mischief, be ensnared and seared, that all simple hearts may take warning and
be preserved, who have the living God in any measure truly seared and served,
by doing his will, in departing from the workings of Antichrist, by his own
power in himself: and also though his Antichristian Ministers, being as thou
art transformed as a Minister of righteousness, beguiling the ignorant through
the mysterious actings by a Satanical spirit of Antichrist, in that mystery of
iniquity, with thy lying wonders, etc. 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

Now I shall speak to clear the truth from some of thy accusations and
slanders, that deceit may be cast out, and truth stand clear, as hereafter will
appear.

First, To that in thy tenth page, where thou seeks to render the people of God
odious, which thou calls Quakers, and one chief thing thou accusest them
withal, and lays as a ground to work on, and that is thou says, their railing
and speaking ^uch languages to all sorts of people, and Rulers, and
Magistrates, etc. which does as thou says, discover a spirit of delusion,
error, etc. Now if I prove that that they do not, as thou says, then thou will
be found to be what thou would charge them withal: and so they cleared, and
thou left to be known thereby, to be guided by a spirit of error, and in the
delusions, and mysterious workings of Antichrist thou speaks of: But I shall
prove that those thou calls Quakers, are not as thou says; therefore thou art
the deceiver, and in the delusions, etc. an the people thou calls Quakers,
redeemed from such things, and stands clear.

To thy second Rule, whereby thou says, thou will find out where Satan does
color over, and blind this fallacy with some Scripture words, and instances.

And that is first, as thou says, their railing, and says, they count it not
railing, but a sharp rebuking and reproving men with authority, etc. quoting
Thus 1.13. and 3.15. and those are the places thou says, Satan covers himself
under: and that of Nathan to David, when he said thou art the man: and that of
Christ to Peter when he called him Satan.

I answer, Satan cannot cast out Satan, and a Kingdom divided cannot stand;
thou deceiver and subtle serpent, does or will Satan discover, and reprove his
own deceivableness? No, he will not strike at his own Kingdom to root it out.
The fallacy thou speaks of, that is thy own, turned back upon thee again: and
the Scriptures which thou have cited, we witness and own the authority spoken
of; but they are no covers for deceit as thou says; therefore in that thou art
the false accuser, and liar against the truth, and truths friends, thou art a
stranger to the life of truth and them: and that which thou calls railing is to
tell thee and men, of the evil of their ways; for in the second place thou
says, they charge men with hypocrisy, aod so take the example of Christ to
call men hypocrites; here thou shows thou art offended at truth, for declaring
against the deceit, and so art judged out of thy own mouth, and by thy own
works, who art in the hypocrisy, and therefore an hypocrite; for we cannot
follow any better examples then Christ Jesus, and his true Prophets and
Apostles; for we are required so to follow them as for our examples, and we do
not err^n so doing: but are accepted for obeying Christ and h^s Commands, and
following him for our example, and the e^ample of such; Ephesians. 5.1. 1 Co. 11.1.
and thou art offended at that, and that the seed of God should sharply reprove
and rebuke the serpents seed, and the man of sin; and dare thou say there was
sin, or deceit manifested by Paul; forb^dding Titus reprove and rebuke with
authority? or was that any railing and reviling in him, and such, to obey the
commands of the spirit of truth? as Nathan did, and such as are sent, as he was
from God, (sent) to tell David he was the man, and Christ Jesus himself, to
Peter, Get thee behind me Satan. And as it was no sin nor deceit in them to say
so, being guided thereunto by the Lords sp^r^t: then it is not deceit, error
nor delusion for such now (so to say) being thereunto as they was, guided by
the Lords holy Spirit (to say so) to whom they are so sent, and to say as they
are by the Lord required; but thou and the Serpents seed, are offended at the
righteous judgment, and language of the Spirit of Truth: therefore thy sayings
against such are false: and so thou judge amiss to call it railing and
reviling, speaking against sin and dece^t; and to speak plainly to Teachers,
People, Rulers and Magistrates: according as their Cond^t^ons are, etc.

As I shall prove by several Scripture e^amples, and then let all the children
of light judge, and not the world which thou calls to judge of thy sayings, who
are in deceit as thou art, and cannot judge aright, but therein thy folly and
enmity is discovered; and for coloring delusion, error, and deceits, with
pretenses, and seemingly from the Scriptures, by-fallacies, etc. none more
guilty of that sin than thou art, and the Hireling, and Tything-Priests, and
such false Antichristian Ministers, that are in union with Antichrist, as thou
art: being so acted, and guided by a Satanical spirit, in all his mysterious
actings, being turned back, and according to thy sayings in thy 11. page. and
the judgments, woes, etc. against Kendal in the North shall stand;

But that which proceeds from the Spirit of truth, and the true Power of the
living God in His Sons and Daughters: which thou calls railing is not as thou
says, but are words of truth; therefore thy second Rule, for the discovery of
the mystery thou tells of, is false, a lying fallacy: so error and deceit;
therefore thou art a false Judge, and so guided by an erroneous spirit of
delusion, to judge amiss of the Saints practice, by thy delusion, error, and
deceit.

Example 1.

To speak truth in plainness by the spirit of truth to Priests, People, Rulers,
or Magistrates is no railing; but according to the Scriptures, and practice of
the Peop of God, as is here by these Examples proved, to be a witness for the
truth, and against ( E. S. lies, error, and) all decei.
For first, When the Lord sent the Prophet his servant Isaiah, to speak to the
bl^nd watchmen and greedy Sheapherds of Israel, who had transgressed the first
Covenant, etc. he called them beasts, and said, All ye Beasts of the field come
to devour: His Watchmen, are blind, they are ignorant, they are all
dumb-dogs, yea, they are greedy dogs which have never enough, they all look to
their own way, every one for his gain from his own quarter: as the Priests of
England, and Anrichristian Ministers do now; and it is no railing nor reviling
to tell them so, because they do so: nor to call them hirelings, and
blind-guides, because they are so, and looks for their gains, tyths, or hire in
lieu of them, or augmentations, bribes, gifts and rewards, every one looks to
his own way, and all for their gain from their quarter, out of men's estates one
way or another, against many of their wills: take notice of it, and let the
wise-hearted consider, and see if it be not right and just, to tell them what
they are, and to tell them of their sins is no railing; for the Lord says, Cry
aloud, spare not, tell them of their sins, and the people of their
transgressions. Isaiah the servant of the Lord did so, and we the servants of
the Lord, in obedience to the spirit of truth, do so now as he did, and that is
no railing or reviling; but words of sound truth: Take notice of this, and also
read, Isa. 58.1. and Isa. 56.9, 10, 11,

Secondly, And though Isaiah the servant of the Lord did say so, as before
mentioned, by, and with the Spirit of the Lord: he did not therein rail, nor
rev^le, but speak the words of sound truth aagainst their deceits, and for so
doing was justified by the Lord, thoughhe might be (condemned, or) judged with
false spirits, and lying tongues; and such was to be condemned for what falsely
against the truth, and against the Servants of the Lord they said: therefore
take notice of that, and read Isa. 54.17.

Thirdly then, where now any servants of the Lord, are guided by His Spirit to
call Englands Priests, and Antichristian Ministers like thee, (Edmund Skip,)
and such as Preach for hire, and bear rule by their means, and seek for their
gain from their Quarters, and places, and Parishes where they are, though in
colored deceits; I say, the servants of the Lord, being; led by His Spir^t to
call such hypocrites, Antichrists and deceivers, blind-guides and greedy
dumb-dogs, such as never have enough; but every one looks to his own way, and
some for tyths, some for hire and wages, 100 or 200 l. per annum in lieu of
them: some for large augmentations, out of other men's Estates, and some for
bribes, gifts and rewards; professing themselves to be Ministers of Christ, and
the Gospel, and not such servants of the Lord as are led by His Spirit, as
aforesaid; and now to cry out against such deceivers, and Ant^christian
Ministers as Englands black Priests, and high a^^y Notionists, and such as
before mentioned; though they be disguised and color over their deceits, yet
with the light are they seen, and their deceits discovered. And I say, such as
by the Spirit of the Lord tells them (or any others) plainly of their sins and
transgressions, and so what they are: such do not rail nor revile, though
(sinners, transgressors and) deceivers say they do; therefore their judgment is
false and not true, and thy cover (Edmund Skip) will not hide, but leave thee
bare that thy nakedness may appear, and those that thou calls Quakers are
clear, See a fourth Rule to clear this more fully, because thou make it such
a chief Rule as thou calls it, for the discoverng of the Quakers mystery of
delusion in Failing, etc.
and free from such accusations and aspersions, as thou would cast upon them,
and salsly charge them withal: take notice of this; for herein I do not judge
amiss.

Fourthly, When Isaiah the servant of the Lord, was sent to speak to a
professing people, and to the Mag strates, Governors, or Rulers: to tell them
and a people, who observed much from the Letter of the Scripture, which had
been true commands of God, to some in a present dispensation, or under that
Legal administration; but those that took upon themselves to observe commands,
according to the Letter of the Scripture, and were not guided by a true Spirit
to do them: Isaiah the servant of the Lord was sent, to tell such people and
Magistrates or Rulers, who did things by imitation, that God loathed their
sacrifices, and that he did not accept of their service, nor solemn Assemblies,
etc. and though they made many prayers, yet he would not hear them; Take notice
of that, all ye that observe and do things by imitation in your own wills from
the Letter, and are not guided thereunto by the Spirit which was before the
Letter was; And moreover, Isaiah was sent by the Spirit of the Lord, to tell a
City that had been beautiful, and full of Judgment, that now they was full of
murderers, and he told that City that had been full of judgment and
righteousness, and were full of murderers; he said, A warning to Judges, Rulers
and Professors, in all places, to fear the Lord God and stand in aw of him, and
not sin.
their Princes were (Rebels or) rebellious, and companions with theives; and
how? for (says he) every one loves gifts, and follows rewards, they judge
not the fatherless: neither did the cause of the widow come unto them; and he
also told them what the Lord would do by such, and by his enemies and
adversaries; Take notice of that Oh ye Judges and Rulers, and also Professors,
and fear the Lord God. Likewise read, Isa, 1.10, to the 25, etc

And though Isaiah the servant of the Lord, by and with His Spirit so spoke and
said to a professing people and Princes, Now call not truth railing, nor
reviling, leastyou be condemned of the Lord when you are judged.
Citizens, Rulers and Magistrates, he did not in all that sin, neither rail
nor revile; but spoke the words of sound truth: And now the servants of the
Lord so led and acted by His Spirit, with it may so say, as they are directed
and commanded by the Lord, and not in all that sin; neither rail nor revile,
but speak the words of sound truth and not judge amiss, though such as are
spoken to, may reject the Counsel of the Spirit of Truth, etc. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18,
19, 20, 21. Neveri heless, the wicked being warned, and do not return from
their wickeanass, his blood will be upon his own bead, and the Lords servant is
through his obedience cleared; and if such as reject the Spirits counsel, and
judge the servants of the Lord with a false spirit and call truth railing; yet
it is not, and the servant of the Lord by, and with His Spirit may condemn the
lying tongue: for thus says the Lord, Every tongue that shall use up in
judgment against thee, thou shall condemn; this is the heritage of the servants
of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me says the Lord; and this I
witness in and by the Spirit of the Lord for the truth, and against thee Edmund
Skip: and all lying tongues, which are condemned by the living truth, and the
servants of the Lord, for your enmity against it, and them, Isa. 54.15, 16, 17.

A fifth F^ample from p^^ct se of (...) men of God, pro^^ing plain speaking^o
(...) no ^ailing, and, and so rick^h void Edmund Skip's ^^e of difre^^^^, etc.
Fifthly, another Example, take notice of to be a witness against the deceit
and: dying toughes, that calls truth railing, etc, which does also prove, that
speaking truth against deceit, and in plainness to Rulers, Magistrates,
Princes, Judges, Priests and People, is no railing nor reviling as thou Skip
says, and so thy Rule of discovery as thou calls it, is thereby made null and
void; and thou art he that loath so judge amiss, with thy false spirit of
t^echery and deke^t in thy Astronomical Judgment and ^lazing* ^ta^; wherein
thou mast set forth thy lying Wonders; Let all the wise-hearted take, notice,
That when the Prophet Micah^ the servant of the Lord, was sent by the Lord to
the Judges, and Priests to tell them of their Transgressions, and plainly said,
that the Judges judged for rewards, and the Priests they preached for here; and
yet they leaned upon the Lord, but the Lord was against such things, and sent
his servant to tell them of it plainly, Micah 3.11. and he also told the
Rich-men, they was full of violence, and the Inhabitants thereof spoke lies,
and their tongues was (hypocritical and) deceitful in their mouths; and Micah
in so saying, did not rail nor revile; but spoke the words of sound truth, by,
and with the Spirit of the Lord, Mica. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Mica, 6.8, 9.10, 11, 12.
See also what the Prophet Jeremiah says, Ier. 5.29, 39, 31. and see what the
Prophet Ezekiel says, Ezekiel 34.9, 10. and see what the Prophet Hosea says, in
the 4.9. and Hosea 6.9. and in all that they there spoke, they did neither rail
nor revile; but spoke the words of sound truth: take notice, That (then) to
speak truth against deceit was no reviling: and likewise (now) theservants of
the Lord, being sent to Cities or Towns, and such like places, to speak the
Word of the Lord to Citizens and people: and also to tell the Priests, they
Preach for hire that do so, and to tell the Judges, they judge for rewards that
do so: and tell the Rich-men that they are full of violence: and tell the
Inhabitants in Cities, Corporations, Market Towns and Villages in England, or
elsewhere, that their tongues is deceitful in their mouths: and they are so,
etc. Such setvants of the Lord, that are by His Spirit so sent to such Cities
and Towns, to tell Magistrates, Priests and people what they are, and reprove
them of their transgressions; Truth cleared, and the deceit reproved by the
Spirit of truth.
and for their sins and iniquities, and forewarn them of the judgments to come,
e^cept they repent and amend, and turn to the Lord, by forsaking the evil of
their ways, and the evil of their doings; such are not raylers and revilers,
neither of Magistrates, Priests nor people; but Servants and Messengers of the
Lord: and such are those that are so sent by the Lord, of those whom the world
scornfully calls Quakers; therefore such are no railers not revilers, but the
Lords Servants and Messengers, whom the Lord so sends by His Spirit, though the
world abuse them, and scornfully call them Quakers; but says Christ to his,
Marvel not if the world hate you, it hated me before it hated you, etc. The
People whom the world calls Quakers, art proved to be the People of God, of
Him sent, though by the world despised, etc.
And such are not railers, but speaks the words of sound truth: though it be by
some, rejected, it was so before; and therefore Edmund Skip, thy sayings are
false, and thou judge altogether amils, through the mysterious workings of
Aneichrist in his transformings (thou speaks of) in thee, which so makes thee
to vent forth his lies and untruths through thee. Now all People consider of
this, and take heed of despising the Messengers and people of God, whom the
world scornfully^call Quakers: and also take heed of rejecting the Counsel of
God, as thou will answer it before the Tribunal seat of Gods Justice, and
Judgment. And now that truth is so cleared to you in that things, and as
asoresaid, call it not railing, nor reviling which is sound truth, from the
Spirit of truth, and cleared also by plain Examples in Scripture, witnessed
aforetime by the holy men of God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ's, and
sealed to (or confirmed) by us, who now live and walk in the Spirit, though
reviled by the nickname of Quakers; but being of the Div^ne-nature made
partakers, we are not desirous of vainglory, who do deny railing, and
reviling, and provoking, or envying one another, as such did, 2 Pel. 1.3, 4.
etc. Gal. 5.24, 25, 26.

The Prophet Zephaniah was sent to cry, Another Example of a polluted and
filthy Ci^y, that received not the correct on of the Lord, as the Cities
Liechfield, Coventry, and that Town of Kendal and ^ppleby, and says wicked
persecuting places did not receive the Instruction, etc.
woe to the polluted and oppressing City: and those that said, woe to Kendal and
Leichfield, etc. being guided thereunto by the Spirit of the Lord, did right in
so doing, for they are wicked polluted places, as well as that polluted City
that the Prophet Zephaniah cried woe unto, in his Prophecy; and such like, who
obeyed not the voice of the Lord, as that City, etc. did not take warning and
fear. -- And read your Example who have not obeyed the Lords voice in His
Servants, no more then that polluted City the Prophet Zephaniah speaks of,
which obeyed not the voice, nor received the correction, (and instruction) And
says the Prophet, Her Princes within her are roaring Lions, her Judges are
ravening Wolves: their Prophets are light and treacherous persons, their Priests
have polluted the Sanctuary, etc. Zeph. 3.1, 2, 3.

And though that City obeyed not the voice, nor received the (correction and)
instruction, no more than Kendal and Leichfield, and such like places: Let them
take warning and fear, and in Judgments remembered they will be by the Lord, and
know that he sent his Servants amongst them; and there were they persecuted and
imprisoned, as well as at Coventry; and a place in Worcestershire called
Kederminster, and their blood be upon their own heads for they are left without
excuse; let them take notice of that, Richard Baxter M^nister at Kederm^nster,
ch^s-Priestan Worcestershire, ha^h brought forth that monster pers^ution, and
ha^h imprisoned on^ for the breach of no known Law; but under pretense of
speaking hard speech^es
and read Ezekiel. 33.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and 3.18, 19, 20, 21. And also let all
people know, that those places are wicked places, and guided by a persecuting
spirit; and at Kederminster and other places, as those and such like, they have
persecuted the Servants of the Lord for the breach of no known Law, neither of
God nor man; but only for declaring against their Antichristian ministry, and
speaking the Word of the Lord, and reproving sin and deceit, which they call
railing and reviling, as one of the servants of the Lord is now in prison at
Worcester, upon that account only; and for the breach of no known Law; sent
from Kederminster thither, by those under Richard Baxter, Minister which is the
chiefest Priest in Worcestershire, and that Town was accounted great in
profession; but now like Priest, like people, ( Hosea 4.9. and Hosea 6.9.) even
full of envy, and malice against the servante of the Lord, which carries them
forth into cruel persecution; but let the wise-hearted know, that the chiefest
of the Priests when Christ came personally, were the greatest enemies of his:
and did the most both stir up Rulers and people to persecute him; and the
greatest Professors were cruel and bitter against him. And now that Christ is
come, and coming in the Spirits of his Saints, Children and Servants, to
reprove the world of sin, and unrighteousness, and to discover the
deceivableness of Antichrist, and the Ant^christian min^stery, the chiefest
Priests, and many great Professors, as well as Richard Baxter Chief-Priest at
Kederminster: and such now labor to uphold the Kingdom of Antichrist under a
dark black cover, which cannot hide the baseness of their hearts, but lets it
break forth into cruelty and persecution: but it is too manifest, that they are
of the bloody City, in the pollutions and filthiness, and has disobeyed the
voice, and heardened their hearts against the truth; who have haled out of
their Synagogues, beat, abused, and imprisoned, such as the Lord sent unto
them, etc. But it is but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, and that they
may manifest themselves, to be of that Generation of persecutors, and
blood-thirsty ones, How dangerous a thing it is to reproach and revile the
people of God.
that ever persecuted the righteous seed; and woe from God is upon all such
Teachers and People, and they may read their Example, Matthew. 23.31, 32, 33,
34.35.

But to come to the matter in hand, That City which the Prophet Zephaniah
speaks of, and Rulers, Teachers, Priests and people, And again the servants of
the Lord that speaks truth against deceit, do not revile; but such as speak
evil of them, and salsly accuse them are the revilers, as such was: that
reproached the people of God, and maga^^fied themselves against them, as the
Priests and their party do now by, and against those the Lords people whom they
scornfully call Quakers.
which obeyed not the voice, as in Zeph. 3. Chap. and see what the Lord by his
Prophet says, in Zeph. 2. How he cries woe to such a people as are there spoken
of, verse 5. etc. Likewise he tells a wicked people there, what the Lord will
do unto them, and see the cause why, Zeph. 2.8, 9. This (says he) shall they
have for their pride, because they have reproached, and magn^fied themselves
against the people of the Lord of h^sis; therefore says the Lord (by His
Prophet) I will be terrible unto them, etc. Zeph. 2.10, 11. etc. Then take heed
what you do, and consider of this all ye unrighteous ones, who reproaches, and
reviles the people of God under the Nickname of Quakers.

The Prophet Zephaniah did not raid nor revile, when he spoke to that City,
when he cried woe unto in, and called the Princes within it Roaring Lions, and
the Judges Evening Wolves, and the Prophets light and ^eche^ous persons; and
said the Priests had po^uted the Sanctuary, etc. Zeph. 3. because it was so,
and they had done so; yet to the eye of reason, a natural man that knows not
the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.24. he would have been ready to say
it had been harsh language, and railing, as now in th^s generation: they call
the Spirits language railing and reviling, when it tells people of their sins
and transgressions: but though the natural man say so, it is not so; for he
that so says, and accuses falsely, is the railer and reviler, but Edm^^^ Skip.
and the Priests and Antichristian Ministers, and such as are profane, proud
and wicked, they speak evil of the Spirits language, and accuses falsely and
cannot prove their false accusations, therefore they are the railers and
revilers, and not the people which they reproachfully call Quakers.; and the
natural man is not to judge the spir^tual man, but the spiritual man may judge
the natural man, it is his Prerogative; for he that is spiritual judges all
things: yet he himself is judged of no man; and this privilege have all the
Saints, and Brethren of Christ, Praised be the Lord for the riches of his love,
1 Cor. 2.14, 15,16. Heb. 2.11. 1 Cor. 6.2.

But thou art offended, The seed of God may judge the seed of the Serpent; but
the seed of the Serpent is not to judge the seed of God.
that the righteousseed should judge the seed of the Serpent: and thou art
offended, to have a hypocrite called a hypocrite; but Christ gave them that
name, and called them so, them such as are guided by his Spirit may: but we and
the righteous seed are so taught and guided; therefore we may: and so follow
him for our example, Man. 23.27, 28, 29. and we know we are of the righteous
seed; For God has sent the. Spirit of His Son-into our hearts, whereby we cry
Abba Father, etc. Gal. 4.6, 7, and Romans 8.14.

And we are to call a liar a liar; for the Scripture calls them so, and the
Spirit of truth spoke it forth: 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. and we being guided by the
Spirit ( Romans 8.14. and 1 Ioh. 3.2.4.) as such was, that called liars by the
name of liars; therefore by the same Spirit may, and do we call them so; for
that is the name which the holy Spirit gave them, to call liars by the name of
liars; For be that says he loves God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar. 1 Ioh. 2.4. Kev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15.

And thou, and all such as are offended to have liars called liars, seeing the
Spirit calls them so, and gave them that name; thou and all such, art
offended at the Spirits teachings; therefore judge your folly, and the pride of
your hearts.

And thou, and all such who are offended, Serpents were called Serpents by the
Spirit of truth.
to have a Serpent called a Serpent, though they appear like men in the truth,
but full of hypocrisy and deceit; thou, and all such are offended at the
language of Christ in the Gospel-ministration; for he called such Serpents and
Vipers. As by the Spirit of truth such were so called (then) with the same
Spirit, they may be called so that are so now; and that is not un-Gospel like,
but agreeing thereunto, Mat. 23.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

And if thou, and the Serpents seed be offended, Children of the Devil are
called by their Fathers same, the Holy Ghost calls them so.
to be called by your name, your burden you must bear; for the Spirit of truth
called your generation so: and we being guided by the Spirit of truth, dare not
change your name, except you take up the cross, and obey the light, that the
Serpents head may be by the Power bruised, and your nature changed, (take
notice) and if thou art offended, to have a child of the Devil called by the
name of his Father, we must call him so; for that is the name given them by the
Holy Ghost, John 8.44. Acts 13.9, 10.

V pers and dogs and fores, are to be called by their name, being of such a
nature, for the Spirit of truth gave them such names, though in the appearances
of a King and his subjects.
And though thou, and such in thy nature would not have the Serpents seed called
by their names; yet seeing the Spirit of truth gave them names like unto their
natures; therefore being guided by the holy Spirit, and knowing their natures,
we give to them their proper names, as the Gospel Spirit aforetime did, until
we see their change of nature, that so they may change their names; and if thou
would not have a Viper called a Viper: yet John the Baptist called the
multitude by that name, (to wit Vipers) who came to have been Baptized of him,
before they brought forth fruits meet of amendment of life; Take notice of
that, and read, Luke 3.7, 8. which was not railing but words of sound truth;
and if thou be offended to have dogs called by their names, (though in the form
of men) yet the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, by the Spirit of truth so
called them before; and to take off that offense from any simple mind, who
desires to be informed about those names: let them have recourse to those
Scriptures, Isa. 56.10, 11. Phil. 3, 1, 2. Rev. 22.15.

And if thou would not have a Fox called by his name, though in the form of a
man: Christ so called one, to wit, Herod a King, and that was truth and no
railing.

True and just judgment, is set upon that false Astronomicall and unrighteous
judgment of Edmund Skip, against the Truth in that Bock called the
Blazing-Star: and the Rule of discovery he speaks of is of no effect: and the
truth is clear, and stands above his lying and deceit.
So here thy second Rule of discovering that mystery as thou calls it, is of no
effect. Thy judgment is false, and thy sayings are weighed, and thy Spirit
tried; and where thou says, Let all perpl eundestand, that such as Christ did
call hypocrites were so indeed.

I Answer, so art thou, and the Serpent and his seed, as both thou and they are
to us known, as is here largely proved by e^perience.

And to that where thou says, Such as these creatures calls hypocrites are the
most precious, and eminent, and faithful friends that the Lord has amongst the
sons of men:

I Answer, They are precious, eminent, and faithful that are of the Royal seed,
and such we know, and honor in our souls; but liars, slanderers, persecutors
and false accusers are not of that seed, and such are enemies to the Children
of God; but thou art of the Serpents seed, and such like that are in the lies,
slanders, inventing evil, and devising m^sch^ef ^n your hearts against the
righteous seed, and accusing of them falsely; therefore are you of the Serpents
seed, and enemies to God and to his seed, who are faithful, eminent and
precious, we do not so call as thou have falsely said, and many may, and does
witness against thee; therefore with the true light art thou seen to be one
that regards not, what thou out of pride, and the presumption of thy evil heart
do say, and falsely accuse withal; And now let the wise in heart, in the
wisdom of God, by and with the spirit of sound Judgment, now Judge of thy false
and Astronomical Judgment, false accusations and delusions, as in thy 11. page,
is manifested, and the Rule of thy discovery of that mystery thou tells of, is
null and void, and truth stands clear, as to the single eyed does appear: and
true Judgment stands upon thy false Astronomical Judgment, in thy Blazing-Star,
and Book of lying Wonders.

Now follows a reply to thy third Rule, as thou calls it, of disclosing that
secret which thou says is thy own experience, A Reply to thy third Rule in thy
Book of lying Wonders.
in order to that particular as thou says whilst thou lay under temptations;
and that was as thou says, about writing a Letter unto some, that thou says
thou writ unto, out of much bitterness of Spirit: To which I answer, though
thou might have some convictions, and workings in the mind, and not wait to
have thy will bound under the cross, and that kept under judgment, from whence
bitterness and passion hastiness and wrath does arise; but run without a true
guide, to write out of hastiness and forwardness, before thou had any true
command; and so through thy disobedience to the pure, and following the fancies
of thy brain, and the imaginations of thy evil heart, giving way to thy
comprehending wit: and so by straying from the pure, and entering into
temptation through the carnal, in not standing to the eternal; the delusions
through the mysterious workings of the man of sin might carry thee into the
many inventions, and up into the chamber of deceit, and so delusion get in upon
thee, notstanding to the eternal; but entering into the temptation through the
carnal; yet that is no ground for thee (or a Judas) that betrays the pure, to
fetch in a multitude; to condemn the just, and betray the innocent; but thy
punishment and judgment thou for it must bear, as Judas did who betrayed the
just; and all who turns from the light to join with the darkness, to betray the
innocent, Judas is there: and as his works was, Mat. 27.1, 2, 3, 4.
so his end; but after he turned from the light, to join with the power of
darkness, and betrayed the just, he did evil, his work was evil: Genesis 4.7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
so his end was woeful and miserable, for he hanged himself. Take warning and
remember also, that when Cain had killed his brother, then he cried out and
said, his punishment was greater then be could bear; but if he had done well he
had been accepted, as the Lord said, but he did evil, and was rejected as well
as Judas when he had betrayed; and thy light in thy conscience will remember
thee of what against the truth thou have acted and done; and as Conscience-Book
is opened: Answer it will upon thee, the judgments of God to be just.

A Reply to that where thou says, We will make known the very truth of this
delusion, by comparing those kind of teachings of the heart, with those that
the Spirit of truth was, and is wont to bring forth in the souls of his people
in this particular, etc.

I Answer, Thou art a stranger to the teachings of the Spirit of the Lord, and
speaks evil of the work that he is, and has been pleased to bring forth in the
souls of His People; and now thou art found a false accuser of such as witness
the Spirits teachings, and the bringings forth of the truth of God in their
souls: and thou art one that cannot put a difference between the precious and
the vile; but call truth railing and reviling, as before is proved, and calls
good evil, and evil good: and so has no salt to savor withal. And where thou
says, these people are mistaken in their judgment, that they accuse falsely, and
that must needs be a delusion, etc. I Answer, It is thou that art so mistaken
in thy false Astronomical Judgment, as I have proved; therefore thou art in the
delusion and mysterious workings of Antichrist thou speaks of; and thou must
needs be mistaken in thy false Astronomical Judgment, and so in delusion, and
guided by a Satanical Spirit, that does so accuse and condemn a people for what
thou ought not: and calls the workings of the Spirit of God by his power in his
Servants, the delusion of Satan, etc. as in thy 40. and 41. page, and so thy
sayings being false are turned back upon thee again, with thee to remain, and
in the reproachful, false accusing and lying generation from whence they came.
And where thou says that when they are made to write abundantly unto men,
charging them without knowledge of truth, They are not able to make good their
wrongful accusations. etc.

I Answer, as for that fallacy which lies in those words, without knolwedge of
the truth: that we deny, and therein thou art a liar, and charged to be so, and
also a false accuser, speaking without knowledge of the truth as it does appear
in thy false (Prognostication or) Astronomical Judgment, as thou calls it: and
for wrongful accusations, that we also deny, they are thy own, who art not
able to make good by sound truth what thou accuses withal, as is before
proved; and thou art left with the charges standing fast upon thee, and true
judgment set upon the head of thy false Astronomical judgment; and so thou art
thereby out of the teachings of God, which thou speaks of that art the lyan,
slanderer and false accuser of the brethren; For the Spirit of God and his
teachings we witness, according to his Promises, Ier. 31.31, to the 3^. Isa.
54.13, 14. whereby our souls are established in righteousness, according to his
teachings by his Spirit in the new Covenant, Heb. 8, and the Spirit of God
teaches his servants in another way, contrary to thy will, and many slanderous
aspersions and false accusations.

And where thou says, quoting Malacy 3. vlt. they shall discern between the
righteouss and he wicked, between them that serve God, and them that serve him
not.

I Answer, We witness the Promise of the Lord fulfilled, and now we discern,
and know the righteous from the wicked: and so see thee, and all false accusers
to be servants of sin, so of the Serpents seed; therefore no servants of God,
nor in his righteousness, but out of his wisdom and teachings, who are so
slanderous, and despitefully wicked; take notice of that.

But again thou say, if any shall say; That Promise and the Promise of being
guided by the Spirit into all truth, are Promises made to some particular men,
as the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles; they shall find in reading that
place, it was speken to all the people of the Lord, upon that great acceptance
the Lord had of them, upon their meeting together, etc.

1. I Answer, The Promises of Gods love and mercy, are to Abraham, and his
seed: but not to the Serpent and his seed; and false accusers are of the
Serpents seed, and has no right to those Promises; but thou, and such like in
the deceivableness, and false accusers like thee, are of the Serpents seed, and
so has no right unto these Promises; therefore art thou and the Serpents seed
ignorant of the gifts and teachings of the Spirit of God.

Secondly, That Promise of being by the Spirit guided into all truth, The
Promises of Gods blessings, and happiness are to his own seed, and they all
chosen people beloved of God, and by Christ gathered out of the world, to whom
He gives h s word and Spi^^t, and the world ^^teth them.
was not then given: neither were it given upon that account (as thou say)
of the acceptance that God had of the meeting of the Jews in the first
Covenant often together; for Christ was not then come in the flesh: so that
Promise was not made; for it were by him given to his Disciples, before his
departure from them; for when he had told them of his leaving them, and going
to the Father, He said unto them, (a particular people, to wit, his Disciples)
Let not your hearts be troubled, ye (my Disciples) believe in God, believe also
in me, John 14.1. and I go to prepare a place for you, ver. 2. and says he
after that to them, I will pray to the Father, and he shall send you (my
Disciples and Friends) the Comforter; and he shall abide with you for ever.
John 14.16.17. Then that Promise was not given upon the acceptance of the
meeting of those Jews spoken of in Malachy 3. seeing Christ was not then come
visibly, and after he was come, and had suffered many things before his
departure from his Disciples, he told them, he would pray to the Father for
that Promise, Ioh. 14.16, 26. which was that Spirit that should guide into all
truth, Ioh. 16.13. and when Christ prayed for them, he prayed not for the
world. Ioh. 17.9. and he gave them his word, (not the Letter) but the Spirit
which is the Word, Ioh. 17.17. which Word was their sanctification, ver. 17. so
one with the Spirit and Word of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11. Christ himself is the
Word, for so is his name: he is called the Word of God, Rev. 19.13. and he is
the Sanctifier, and sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. Hebrew^s* 2.10, 11. and that
Promise was not made, as thou say st, Edmund Skip, and therein thou have also,
manifested a lying pirit in that, and also showed that thou art not acquainted
with the teachings of the Spirit of God nor the work of Sanctification thou
speaks of, and let all the children of light take notice of this.

Thirdly, to come to the place of Scripture again, because thou says those
promises was not made to the particular people, I say none knows the right to
the promises, but the rightcous seed, and they are one people singled out from
the world, who are heirs of God, and joyntheirs with Christ, etc.
John 17.9, 10, 11. John 15.18, 19. and the promises of blessing and happiness
are to them, therefore the promises of blessing and happiness are to the
Righteous feed, separated from the world, chosen out of it by Christ, John
15.18, 19. to whom he gives his word and therefore does the world hate them,
John 17.14. this word abides in such as has overcome the world, and greater
is he that is in them, then he that is in the world, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. and
such are sons, 1 John 3. and being sons they are heirs of God and joint heirs
with Christ, Rom, 8.16.27. and such have a right to the promises, being heirs
according to the promise and of the seed, which the promises are to, Galas.
3.29. therefore thy fallacy I deny Edmund, Skip; and witness the spirits
teachings, which thou art a stranger unto, as it does appear, the accusations
is taken off from Truths friends which thou calls Quakers, and now truth is on
their side, and shines pure and clear.

Fourthly, That promise made to the waiting people at that time spoken of,
Malachy 3. was a particular people and a true figure; for there was a time when
the adversaties of the Lords people called the Proud, happy, and they that
wrought wickedness were set up by such enemies and adversaries, Malachy 3.15.
then they that feared the Lord met often together, and spoke one to another,
and the Lord hearkened and heard them, Gods unchandgable Love, and Remembrances
of his former mercies and loving kindness, is sweet and comsortable to his
people.
etc. verse 16. but the promise was not upon their acceptance of meeting
together, (in the first place,) but out of the free love and mercy of the Lord,
made known unto his own peculier ones, which moved them to meet together, for
says he, I am the Lord I change not, therefore the sons of Jacob are not
consumed, Mala. 3.6. there was a manifestation of Gods love unto them; and his
loving was the moving cause of their meeting together, and not their meeting
together the moving cause of Gods love to them; and so the promise I say to
them, was not (in the first place) upon their acceptat on of meeting together,
but the free love and mercy of the Lord which moved them to it, and for his
loves sake were they accepted, their meeting together was not the cause of Gods
unchangable love to them; but the free love and unchangable of Gods goodness,
and the so mer promises of God, and remembrances of his loving kindness to them
was the cause: and their meeting together a fruit of their tobedience to God
for his mercy and loving kindness manifested to them; and now the promises are
to the seed that are (in the Covenant and) returned to the pure being and in
the obedience to the God of Jacob, and Israel in the Spirit, 2. Cor. 3.17.18.

Fistly, And that we witness who are of the promised Seed, The Saints and
Servants of the the Lord are witnesses to his teachings and workings by his
Spirit. And The holy Unction is the Saints-Teacher, and the Spirit of Promise
their grade into all Truth.
and we witness the teachings and Covenant of God with his own Seed, and
according to the promise of the Lord to the Seed, as in Isa. 48. v. 27. and
where he has said that his Spirit and Words, put in the mouth of such there
spoken of, shall not depart out of the mouth of the seed, nor out of the mouth
of the Seeds Seed, from henceforth for ever says the Lord; Isa. 59.20, 21. and
that spiritual promise of Christ in the Gospel, we witness which guides and
leads into all Truth, the Spirit being come which was promised and prayed
for, John 14.16, 17, 26. John 16.13. and we also witness to the holy Unction,
which teaches us all things, and we need not that any man teach us, but as the
Anointing teaches us, which is Truth and no lie, as it is written 1 John 2.20,
27. And, Edmund, Skip, this power which gave forth the promises, and new
fulfilles them to the Seed, we witness (to, and in) therefore Edmund Skip thou
that calls the teachings of the Spirit of God, and the workings, by his Power,
in and through his children and servants, the mysterious workings of
Antichrist, thou speaks evil of the Power of God, (and blasphemes) in so
saying, but thy folly is seen, and that for all thy Comparisons and Scriptures,
under pretenses adding thereunto thy fallacies and lying divinations, as is
manifested to any single eye in thy 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. etc.
pages.

And thou art ignorant of the workings and teachings of God, (and one that
blasphemes his Power,) but thy Judgment thou must bear, who art that false
accuser of the brethren and misapplier of the Scriptures, and calls Truth
delusion, and Delusion truth, and so calls evil good and good evil; such is
thy false judgment, crrour and deceit; manifested in thy Astronomical
judgment or Blazing-star:

1. Whereas thou (Edmund Skip) falsely accuses them thou calls Quakers, and
says they are filled up with Railing, Harsh, Some accusations cast off from
the Truth and Truth friends (by the World called Quakers) and turned back upon
the Accuser, and false accusers to remain.
and Clamerous language, etc. in this 13. page, but thy saying therein is
false, (and that is largely proved against thee: and so the truth from that
accusation cleared before) and that is turned back upon thee, the false accuser
and with the false accusers to remain;

3. And whereas thou tells of taking Scripture to cover over deceipts withal;
that we deny; and this saying is therein false, so turned back upon thee
again, and with thee, and the false accusers to remain, the Scriptures we
witness to be a true Declaration of the Truth, Luke 1.1. 1 John 1.3. and we
make use of them in their place to witness for the Truth and against
(deceivers and) deceit, but for taking them to cover over deceipts withal;
therein, thou lies, and have by that also manifested thy lying spirit; and none
more guilty of that sin, both taking the Scripture to made with all for money,
and also to cover deceipts and fallacies with all, then such as thou art and
the priests of the World, and not we whom thou accuses: for presently after
thou calls them a mislead people, and tells what is meident to a mislead people,
quoting, 1 Timothy 6, 4. and 4. v. 2 Timothy 3.4. But that misleading we deny, and
turn thy saying back upon thee, and all that are proud, traitors, heady, high
minded, and lovers of pleasures: which things we deny and against them
testify, and those Scriptures which thou have cited tells of such a sort of
people. Which two places of Scripture clears us, and proves such as the Priests
and their followers, to bring forth the fruits they speak of us, their fruits
makes them manifest, to be those people thou speaks of, and not us, whom you
call Quakers: so according tothatsaying the Priests and their followers are the
misled people thou speaks of, and there is like Priest like people, Hos. 4.9.
which 2 places of Scripture, (1 Timothy 6.4, 5. and 2 Timothy 3.4.) turns backwards
off, from us to you ye Proud-doaters about Questions and Strife of words, such
also as supposes gain to be godliness, and those likewise that sollowes
pleasures; which we deny, and turn them back as thou art, and the Priests, and
Antichtistian ministers, such as are proud and supposes gainto be godliness;
which they do not that thou accuses under the name of Quakers; and thou thy
self, if thou was not blind, might see that thou clears them also of that
thyself, in thy 30, and 31 pages, where thou says, they are made to deny their
callings, etc. but as for giving over laboring and following of wordly
business thou says, thou could bedy with that, and shows thy Reason (as thou
says) that when thou considered that most men are overcome and surfeited with
the cares and things of this life, thou thought (as thou says) that the people
of God should be upon the extreme, on the other hand, (those then are not they
that suppose gain is Godliness etc.) here thou takes them also, according to
that saying (of thine) to be the people of God, and yet thou calls them, a
misted People, (what confusion is here) how confused thou art, saying, and
unsaying, building up, and throwing down, Babylonish! and thou cleares them
from the cares of the World, and for surfeiting with that, and yet in the
places of Scripture before cited, as in 1 Timothy 6.5, 6. that is speaking of one
that is Proud, etc. which thing they deny and abhor, and also declare and
testify against it, as Isaiah did, that said, Woe to the Crown of Pride, Isa.
28. and by that Scripture which thou art blind in, and cannor see what in
darkness thou have done, thou have Ranked them amongst a people that doates
about Questions and strife of words, and such as follow pleasures, etc. which
things they deny, and against them testify, and they are no such; thou thy
self in another place have confuted thy self therein, and cleared themof that,
in thy 20 Page for thou says there, they desire to become fools, and to be made
weak, and as thou says thou knows not what; is does appear thou says thou
knows not what, that art so confuted, and so consuting thy self in thy own
sayings; theresore let all the wise hearted take notice of that; and judge by
what spirit thou art guided, even by a Spirit of delusion, error, and deceit.

And to that in thy 19 Page where thou says, they Reckon it, their perfection
and bappiness to be deprived of all, here thou speak thou know not what,
a divination of thy own brain, and an imagination of thy heart.

And whereas thou says, the Spirit of God does neither so Act nor teach, etc. I
answer the Actings and teachings of the Sparit of God, we own, but deny thy
sayings, who are ignorant both of his actings and teachings, as before is
proved, and as thou thy self in uttering thy Confusion, have made it plainly
manifest;

And where thou art telling of one thing, that did very much stumble thee a
great while, and it was this thou says, that they said, the best things that
ever they Received from God, mentionag knowledge, and faith and high
enjoyments, must burnt up and destroyed.

I Reply: they that walk in the light stumble not, The best things that ever we
Received from God, as Faith, Heavenly-wisdom, and Spiritual enjoyments is
owned, etc.
but they that disobey the light and walk contrary to it, they stumble even at
noonday; but thou walks not in the light, and therefore thou stumbles and would
aspire to know the Saints Conditions with thy vain mind, but cannot; for out of
their life, faith, and enjoyments thou art shut; and for destruction and to
suffer: but thy fallacy we deny, which Isles in these words, of suffering loss
of all that we Received of God, and where thou says of faith, knowledge, and
high-enjoyments, and would charge a Lie upon us, saying that we should say, we
should suffer loss of them, thy fallacy we deny, but Faith, True-knowledge,
and what we have received of God, that we enjoy, according as his Divine Power
has given unto us all things that pertain to life and Godliness, through the
knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. etc.

And where thou says, that they desire to become fools, and to he made weak,
and thou knows not what, Page 20.

Reply: Thou have shot forth thy sting in thy tail, or hinder part of thy
words, in that fall acy or saying; where thou says thou knows not what, as thou
have said, how confused thou art, as I said before, to say, thou knows not
what, therefore thy judgment and sayings must needs be false and not true, that
as thou thy self has said, thou says, thou knows not what, and an in thy
confusion and falsehood treachery and deceit, thou have nothing to do to judge
of the ways of God, nor of the people of God.

And where thou says; The Holy Ghost judges it meet that all care and
diligenoe should be used; has in Reading, exhorting one another, etc,

Reply: What the Holy Ghost teaches that we do own, and also at we are guided
thereby to evercising of those Graces, A Sting in the tail, a satit cy denied,
wherewith the Lord has endued our souls, we also own, and to he kept diligent
in the Spint, to understand the mind and will of God in the making sorth of his
Love, that we may be to the praise of the glory of his Grace: and Reading, and
Prayer that we do own, but thy Sting in thy tail, fallacy, or lying-divination
that we deny.

Reading and Prayer, and all Godly exortation according to the teachings of the
Spirit of God, is now witnessed amonst the people of God by the world called
Quakers.
Which is this: where thou says Those beguiled wretches pretend, they must not
Read or Speak a good word to one-another, (Reply) thy saying in this is all
false, and thou laid a smooth-ground before it; and colored it over, and lays
this in the middle to stumble the simple; thou subtle Serpent, this fallacy we
deny, and the pretenses shall stand for thy self, and the begulied, and
wretches thou speaks of; but Reading we own, and speaking good words, exhorting
one another, and prayer by the Spirit of Truth, and speaking the Truth in Love;
that we may grow up in Him: in all things which is the head even Christ, from
whom the whole body joined together, and compacted by that which every Joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body unto the edifying of its self in Loves, Ephesians.
4.15, 16.

And where thou says, They say they have no freedom to speak, admonish, or
discowise about (heavenly things, or) any thing whereby they may glorify God,
or do good one to another.

Reply: Math. 5.16.
This saying is altogether false and not true, and thy fallacy we deny: but
speaking about the things of God, and that which may glorify him, that we do
own, knowing that by obeying the teachings of the Spirit of Truth; and also
edifying one another in Love, building up into the most holy Faith is well
pleasing to the Lord, and comfortable one to another, and so by letting our
Light shine forth to others, and bringing forth fruit with an increase in the
graces of the Spirit hereby, we glorify our Heavenly Father, John 15.5, 8.

Reply: Thy fallacy, or sting in thy tail we deny: which lies in those words
(as they fancy it) but the waiting and stirring of that which is pure, and the
immediate teachings of the Spirit we witness and own, and herein thou have
manifested thy self to all the Children of light, to be ignorant of the
stirrings, workings, teachings, and actings of the Spirit of Truth, and so art
in the fancy thou tells of; and as thou calls it thy self; and in this thou
have cleared thy self to be no Minister of the Spirit, nor New Covenant; that
art ignorant of the immediate teachings of the Spi^^^, but the immediate
teachings of the Spirit we witness, as the Minister of Christ's in the
Spiritual ministration did, who were made able Ministers not of the Letters;
but of the Spirit, as they did witness, 2. Cor. 3.6. And no Prophecy of the
Scripture came in old time by the will of man but holy of men of God spoke, as
they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21, and that were not mediate by
man, but immediate, by God, and as they waited, the holy Ghost immediately
spoke, and said, Separate me Sarnabas and Saul, Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
for the work whereunto I have appointed them, Act. 13.2. and as Philip was
traveling, immediately the Spirit taught him, and said, Go and join thy self to
the Charet, etc. Act. 8 29, 30.

But thou that art ignorant of the immediate teachings, thou art ignorant of
the Spirit of God, and so thy Ministry is mediate of man and not of God;
therefore no Minister of the Spirit and the Gospel, and in that thou have
clearly also, discovered thy self to be an Antichristian-minister, and so in
the delusions thou speaks of: they turn back upon thee and are there to
Remain, Paul an Apostle and Minister of the Gospel was not made by (mediate
means; that is, not by) man but (He was made immediate, and that was) by God
Gal. 1.1. And I certify you brethren that the Gospel which I preach unto you, I
received it not (mediate) of man but (immediate) of God: take notice of that
Gal. 1. neither was I taught it of man but of God. verse. 11.12. and by
Revelation (and that was not mediate but immediate) verse. 15, 16. then foutteen
years after Paul went up to Jerusalem, by Revelation Gal. 2.12.12. and the
Myistery was made known unto him by the (immediate) teachings of the Spirit;
even by Revelation, Ephesians. 3.2, 3, 34. But thou that art ignorant of the
immediate teachings of the Spirit of God, does not know the Father nor the Son,
for there is no True Knowledge of them but (...) ^^clation, Math. 11.27. and
that is by the Immediate Teachin^ (...) man knows the Father, but the Son, and
he to whomsoever (...) will reveal him, ( Luke 10.22) take notice of that, and
all that denies the immediate teachings of the Spirit of God, Remember you (as
well as Edmund Skip) have cleared your selves to be no Disciples of Christ, nor
Ministers of the Spirit, but it is good that Fools utter their folly, as thou
have done thine, take notice; and read 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.

And where thou art Reckoning up many things by thy busy mind in thy 22; 23,
and 24 pages, and judging of their conditions with thy thoughts; and (sums,
or) gathers some Scriptures together also, to busy thy mind about, Edmund
Skips Confutation.
who art a Stranger to the life of them as does appear. And thou says, the
Words of Paul are very much abused by the false interpretation of their enemy;

I Answer: Thou have whipped thy self with that Rod, for thou art their enemy;
then the words of Paul are very much abused (unto them) by by the false
Interpretations of thee (their enemy) therefore be thou ashamed, and blush thou
enemy of the Righteous, and abuser of Paul's words by thy false interpretations,
whereby thou seeks to cover thy lies, slanders, and false accusations; but
Antichrist even besools thee, and lets thy nakedness appear; thy covers, will
not hide thee, but leaves thee bare, take notice of this.

And that which thou calls a Grand Assertion of theirs, and thou would have the
world to give their judgment of it, and that is, concerning hell, which the
wicked go in at, etc.

A Reply to that which thou calls a grand Assertion concerning Hell, etc.
I answer, How should the world or wicked give any true judgment concerning it,
seeing the wicked and all that forgets God shall be turned into hell, Psalm.
9.17. and the natural man knows not the things that stands in the counsel of
God, because they are spiritually discerned, and so he is not able to judge
them, 1 Cor. 2.14 and yet thou will have the world to try thy expressions and
renents thou speaks of; they who are in the dark part with thee, are not able
to judge aright, but thou and thy expressions and ^enets, are all seen and
comprehended with the light and with the light condemned, and hell has
enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, and the proud and
wicked ( Mal. 4.1.) and their glory and their pomp, and their multitude shall
descend into it, Isa. 5.14. and then woe to all the Lords enemies and
adversaries, Mat. 25.41. to the end: and z These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Rev. 21.8. And
that fallacy of thine I deny, which thou art to prove if thou can, or else
ensnared thou art, and taken with a horrible lie, and the lake for the liar is
prepared, and then hell and torment is the re^^ed of such (take them a long
with thee) that are in the m^^ (...) ^orkings of Antichrist, and willing to be
kept in his deceiv^^ (...), for the devil that deceives them that are spoken
of R^v. 2^.10. the beast and false prophet, and all such are to be cast into
the lake of fire and brimstome, and shall be tormented day and night for ever
and ever, Rev. 20.10, 11. and all who are not found written in the Lambs book
of life are cast in thither, etc. verse. 14, 15. then take notice of this all ye
wicked and ungodly ones.

And where thou says, in Brevity thou have given the mysterious deceit it self.

I answer, thou have accused with many lies and slanders, and those are from
the old serpent, covered over with smooth pretenses, but thou art clearly seen
and found to be in that mysterious working of Antichrist thou speaks of, and so
guided by his spirit, whose coming is after that manner spoken of, even with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, etc. and so in short thou
have cleared thy self from the teachings and workings of God by his spirit in
the hearts of his children and servants; and in that which thou have been
pretending to discover to others thou art found chief in Antichrists design,
and deep in his mysterious actings thy self, and let all the wife heatted take
notice thereof.

And where thou art slanderously reproaching and accusing the servants of
Christ that follows Christ in the sufferings, calling them their Quaking fits,
roarings, transings, swoundings, passions, and Agonies and exercitations of
body, and ex^team tortures, etc. that it makes them roar out for very
bitterness; and thou cl^erly judges, thou says, if the Lord did not limit the
devil in their behalf, as he did for Job, saying, thou shall not touch his
life, it would be impossible for their concaves to hold their internals in
those violent motions, for they are made, under those Agonies, to tremble and
Quake, as though their flesh must part from their bones and ligatures, like
unto men in the strongest fits of an Ague, as though they had seen Belshazzars
vision, Dan. 10. that made his knees smite one against another, in those strong
passions, they are thou says, exercised with so much heat, of what sort thou
says, thou knows not, etc.

Reply. Thou have reckoned up many names, and been busying thy mind about
setting forth a peoples condition, whereby thou would render them odious to the
world, but the people of God was ever so in the worlds account; and Isaiah and
those people that trembled at the word of the Lord, Trembling, Quaking and
shaking, the Scriptures witnesses, which is also witnessed by the holy men of
God.
as in Isa. 66.2, 5. they were signs and wonders then, Isa. 8.18. and so are
the people of God now, to thee and such like, and thou have been so much
bysying thy self about them, to set them forth by thy gethered words and
expressions, the inventions and divinations of thy brain and in the latter end,
confesses thou knows not of what sort it is; therefore thou art ignorant of
what thou have been busying thy mind about, and falsely accusing them withal,
thy gathered and vain expressions and vain repetitions I deny, but the power of
God which causes Quaking, trembling, and shaking, (which thou calls cruel
torturings, etc.) I own and witness, or else I should deny the authority of the
Scriptures, and the conditions of the holy men of God, who witnessed Quaking,
trembling, and shaking, as Moses, David, Daniel, and the men that were with
him, roared, trembled, and Quaked, and Habakkuk whose belly shook and lips
quivered, and Paul, and the Corinthians that trembled; and the Philippians that
was to work out their salvation with fear and trembling: this the Scriptures
witnesses unto, and the same power and workings of the Spirit of God I witness
unto: but if thou (who watches with an evil eye) had seen Moses when he said
he did exceedingly fear and Quake; Act. 7.31, 3^. Ezekiel. 12.18. Psalm. 38.8.
Psalm. 119.120. Job 21.5, 6, 37, 1. Isa. 66.2, and 5.
and David when be roared by reason of the disquietness of his heart; and when
his flesh did tremble; and Daniel when he trembled and fell down to the ground,
that his breath and strength went from him, and seen the men that were with
him, when such a Quaking fell upon them that they went to hide themselves for
fear; and Habakkuk when his belly shook, and his lips quivered; and Ioh when
his flesh did shake and tremble, Dan. 10.7, 8, 11. Ior. 23.9. Ier. 30.5, 6.
Hab. 3.16. Act. 9.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 7.5. Phil. 2.11, 12, 13.
that his heart thereby was removed out of its place, and Jeremiah when he
reeled to and fro, and all his bones did shake; and Paul when he fell down, and
trembled; and when the Corinibians trembled, and the Philippians wrought out
their salvation with fear and trembling, who witnessed the power, which I have
written to more fully and cleared by Scripture, in a Book called the Brazen
Serdent, to take away that stumbling block from the minds of the simple, and
such as are troubled about it, let them have recourse to the book called the
Brazen Serpent lifted up, and because I have written so largly to this, in that;

I shall now pass on, but if thou who watches with an evil eye, and seeks to
raise grounds, to raise slanders and aspersions to cast upon the people of God,
to render them odious to the world; if thou had seen these servants of the
Lord, before mentioned, in those conditions, thou would have been ready to have
called them their Quaking fits, Roarings, cruel torturings, etc. and thou that
labors to raise such aspersions upon the people of God, Psalm. 21.1. Ier. 5.22:
Isa. 2.11, 12, 17, 19, 20, 21.
who witness his power, as such did; thou might as well have accused them,
and have spoken against them, that witnessed the sanie conditions before; as
speak evil of the people, ways, and works of God now (who speaks evil of them,
and the power of God) but it is too manifest to all the children of light, that
thou art a false accuser of the people of God, and one that speaks evil of his
power, and thereby have also cleared thy self to be one that art ignorant of
the ways, workings, and teachings, of the Spirit of God, and a stranger to the
condition, of the holy men of God that spoke forth the Scriptures and ignorant
of the conditions of these now, who witness to the life of the Scriptures; and
knows not the manner of the work of the Spirit of God, as in thy 22 Page, thou
confesses thou, knows not of what sort it is that makes them cry out, etc.
And in that let all the wise hearted take notice, that thou have also said thou
knows not what, and art Ignorant of their conditions that thou have been
slandering, and upon them casting accusations and false aspersisions. And here
I charge thee to be a slanderer of the innocent, and a busy body in other men's
matters, and knows nor of what sort their work is, as thou have said, therefore
silence deceit, and stop thy mouth, be ashamed, and blush.

And in thy 25. Page, where thou says, By this thou clearly sees, thou art
delivered out of the temptations of Satan, and they are befooled with
Antichrist, wherein thou art also telling thy generation thy lies, etc.

Reply. The children of light that dwells in the pure power of God (which thou
speaks evil of, and art delivered from) they dwelling in the pure discovery of
Divine light and life; they see thee the boaster excluded out of Gods Kingdom,
which stands not in word, but in power, righteousness, peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost, and such in the power are kept out of Satan's snares, and for being
befooled by him, and so charge thee to be a liar, and denies thy fallacy, and
with the pure divine light they that in the life of it dwells, such sees thee
in the snare thy self, though exalted Lucifer-like, yet befooled with the
delusion of Antichrist in h^s mysterious actings thou speaks of, and though
thou be exalted in the delusions by Satan's transformings in the working so
disguised through that mysterious vail, yet thrown down thou must be, who art
in the delusions, and so overcome with deceit by the subtle stratagems of Satan
thou speaks of; therefore let all that fears God, take heed of thee and thy
delusions, and the mysterious workings of Antichrist, by whose spirit thou as
well as his Ministers, art Acted, who art laboring through his deceitful power
(thou speaks of) and working to bring other poor creatures into thy own Region
of darkness, and valley of death; who art under the dominion of the prince of
darkness; the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that rules in thee,
and all the children of disobedience, such as thou art, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11,
12.

In thy Pages 25, 26. thou says, They compare their sufferings and Ago^ies
with those of Christ, and they must suffer the wrath of God and the like as he
did, and yet reckon themselves the servants of the Lord. The Spirit of the Lord
will prove this to be a horrible lie and delusion, because that Christ suffered
for his servants, and bo^e the wrath and curse of God for them; and made
satisfaction to his Fathers law and justice in his own blood, and his father
was pleased to accept it; etc.

Reply, thy comparison and fallacy we deny; where thou says, they compare
their sufferings and agonies, with those of Christ, and say they must suffer
the wrath of God as he did.

The comparison is thy own, and the fallacy lies in those words in thy third
line ( as He did) we do not say we must suffer r^^po^ that cross at Mount
Ca^vary, Christ's death of great effect, who has satisfied the justice of God
for the breach of the first covenant, and now estab^^shed the second.
to satisfy the fathers w^ath and justice for the transgressions under the
first covenant ( as he did) therein thou lies and accuses falsely, for he has
satisfied his fathers law and justice by suffering upon the cross at
Mount-Ca^ary for the transgressions that were under the first covenant, who
through the eternal spirit offered up himself without spot to God (and now in
the new Covenant he does purge our consciences from dead works to serve the
living God) and for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Covenant, that by
means of death for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Covenant; they which are called might receave the Promise of eternal
inheritance, Hebr. 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and we are called, not only to
believe, but also to suffer; as they under the New Covenant that believed were
and did who said, For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe, but also to suffer for his sake; having the same Conflict which ye
saw in me; and now hear it to be true; Philip. 1, 29, 30.

This spoke the Minister of the Gospel, The Saints under the New Covenant, do
witness the sufferings of Christ in t^em, etc.
who had suffered and born about in his body the dying of the Lord Jesus, Read
and understand; 2 Cor. 4.10. and the same Minister of the Gospel did annex a
suffering to believing and that in the behalf of Christ, Philip. 1.29. and thy
comparison and fallacy being taken away, we witness such sufferings, which thou
appears to be a Stranger in, and accuses a people that witness the Power of
God which works out salvation by fear and trembling, which the Gospel
Minister that spoke to the Philippians of: and to suffer as well as believe, in
his 2 Chapter. 12.13. and also annexed obedience to faith, and suffering to
both; and we know that Christ is the Author of our salvation, that obey and
serve him, and His servants we are as well as sufferers, for his Names sake,
who also is the Author of eternal Salvation, to all that obey him, Hebr. 5.8,
9. this fallacy being taken away, Truth we witness and a suffering Condition,
and that according to the teachings of the Spirit of Truth; for Christ's sake
(though not as he did upon the Cross, at mount Calvary to Redeem them that
were under the Law from under it) who fulfilled that Law and Covenant, that
were but* Types and figures of him; who took away the first and established the
second, Such as come not by the door and through inward sufferings with Christ
are strangers to the New Covenant; and the thief is seen to be without, etc
Hebr. 10. and as they who witnessed Christ under the New Covenant, did
witness a bearing about in their bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus: so do we,
and the life manifest in our mortal bodies as such d^d, 2 Cor. 4. And as they
who were Ministers of the New Covenant, and knew the terrors of Lord, so do
we, therefore we persuade men to be Reconciled to God, as they did who were his
Ambassadors and Fellow Laborers with him, 2 Cor. 5.11. and 2. Cor. 6.2 Cor.
2.15, 16, 17. And we know also that as the sufferings of Christ abound in us,
so our Consolation also abounds by Christ as theirs did, 2 Corinthians. 1.5. and
thou that art a Stranger to the inward suffering, and so accuses them who
witness them; thou manifests to all the children of Light, whose servant thou
art, a Thief that has climb^ up another way, and so never come in by the door;
and have I charge thee in the presence of the Lord, to be no^^ of his
Ministers* that art so ignorant of the Spirits works and teachings, and by thy
fallacies, and living divinations, casts slanders and Aspersions upon the
Children and Servants of the Lord, by thy subtilty and Serpent-tine wit; who
art that horrid liar, and the Spirit of God proves thee to be so, that through
a dirty fallacy thou would cast upon the Innocent, bu^ it is turned back upon
thee to Remain; plagues is the Serpents portion, but thou art of the Se^pents
seed, a lier, and false-accuser, and plauges is thy portion; silence deceaver,
and stop thy mouth! with the true light art thou seen and comprehended, and
with the Light condemned.

And though Christ did make satisfaction to his Fathers Law, Christ has made
satisfaction for the Law: and there is now condemnation to such as are infreed
from.
and Justice, to fulfill that law which had been broken, and through the
fulfilling of it, were his Justice satisfied; yet that does not free from
inwards sufferings; that law stood outwardly, and was fulfilled, and the
Justice of God satisfied concerning the breach of it; but now his Law is
written within, in the heart: according to the tenor of the New Covenant, that
was given according to the Fathers Promis, Ier. 13.13, etc. Hebr. 8. So now the
Righteousness of the holy Law of the Spirit of Life, it is to be fulfilled in us,
as it was to be fulfilled in them, that did not walk after the flesh, but after
the spirit, and though there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ, who
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, who witness the Law fulfilled
in them; and so are led by the Spirit, and made more then Conquerers through
him that loved them: who are sons and heirs of God, Romans 38. Chap. and 1 John.
1, 22, 9. and Gal. 3.29. Gal. 4.6.7. 1 John 2.20.27. Yet such as are not sons
but bastards, The unrighteous who walk in the flesh, and fulfi^l the lusts
hereof are out of Christ, and under a state of condemnation: lu^ they are now
warned and left without excuse, happy a^e they, if they return to the Lord by
forsaking the evil of their ways, but if they do not ^wo, etc.
who walk not after the spirit but after the flesh, such as are unrighteous,
(and unrighteousness is transgression of the Spiritual Law, Read 1 John 3.4.
and verse 10.) such are under a state of condemnation; take notice of that all
the proud and lofty ones; all the covetous, oppressors, liars, swearers,
false-accusers, haters, back-biters, scoffers, scorners, coseners, cheaters,
envious, and malicious ones, Romans 1.27, 29, 30, etc. and take notice of it all,
you unrighteous ones of what sort soever, and you that plead for a continuance
insin; and yet walk after the flesh, Remember you are under a state of
Condemnation, and are transgressors of the Righteous Law, ye unrighteous ones:
therefore return from your unrighteousness, or else you shall in no wise
inherit the Kingdom of God, and this I testify unto you from the Spirit of the
Lord, say not but that you are warned, I am clear from your blood, now that I
have warned you from the Lord, and if you will not take warning to turn from
your unrighteousness, your blood be upon your own head, and in your
condemnation from God, the light of God in your consciences that reproves you
for sin; will also be a swift witness against you; and upon you Answer it will
the Judgments of God to be just; therefore take warning, now whilst you have
time, least you die in your sins, and perish, and be shut out from God, and
cast into everlasting burnings, and eternal torment; also Read, and Consider
of those Scriptures, Rev. 20.10, 15 2 Th^s. 1.8, 9.
1 Cor. 5.9.10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Rev. 14.9.10.11. Mal. 4.1. Rev. 21.8, 27.
Read. Ezekiel. 33.11, 12, 13, etc. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19, etc. you may see before the
Reward of the unrighteous: and now you are warned. And where thou says It is a
most devillishire, and delusion to conceave that any who are one with God
in^^^^ist shall undergo the wrath of God in that manner they speak of, by this
they make the death of Christ of none effect, citing* Hebrews the 9.

They that are one with God in Ch^^sta^e freed from si^; ^^d ^o from wrath;
(Reply:) The death of Christ we witness to be of great effect, and as before
is proved, and also according to the 9 of the Hebr, which witnesses what
before is said, but thy conceaving and fallacy we deny (which lies in these
words, That any who are one with God in Christ shall undergo the wrath of God
in such manner, etc.) we deny the conceit, and thy fallacy both; and we charge
thee to be a lier, and false accuser; for we do not say that such as are one
with God in Christ, shall suffer the wrath of God in such a manner, there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ as before is said, and that we
witness, and who walk in the light, Christ is light; and such as walk in him,
receaves the Light of life, John 1.9. John 8.12. and he leads to God the Father
of Lights; and in him there is the love perfected; 1 John 4.16, 17. and he that
walks in the light, as he is in the light, has fellowship with the Father, and
Son, and there is a cleansing from all unrighteousness, and a dwelling in the
divine Love, and so the Unity is witnessed, as Christ has said, John 14.30.
and he that abides in him sins not, 1 John 3.6. neither can he sin, verse
the 9. and there is a freedom, from sin and unrighteousness, the cause of
wrath; and so a freedom from sin: A freedom also from wrath, to such as are one
with God in Christ: so this conceit and fallacy being denied, and truth set in
its Right place, the people thou calls Quakers are not in the delusion, because
not within the compass of thy saying, whereby they would prove them so, then
thy ground being ripped up, thy fallacy taken away, Truth is cleared, and thou
art ensnared, or in the delusion thy self, that art in the lies and
false-accusaions, take notice of this.

The Serpent and his seed are shut out from God under the wrath and vengeance.
2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8.
But ye the Serpent and his seed, are in the unrighteousness, and not in God,
for there is no fellowship, agreement, nor concord betwixt them, 2 Cor.
6.14.15. but enmity is placed betwixt the two Seeds; and such as are of the
Serpents seed, as thou art, must know the wrath and vengeance of God, for the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodlines and unrighteousnes
of men; who hold the Truth in righteousns, Romans 1.18. take notice of that, all
ye unrighteous ones, as is said before, for it is a Righteousness things for
God to Recompense to tribulation to the unrighteous, and such as trouble his, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7.

And where thou says, When you have weighed it, see whether it can stand with
the Lords Justice; to call any of his servants to bear so in their bodies and
spirits as they do, his Just and exact Judgment, until he have wrought out of
them his own Satisfaction and Recompense in that nature.

The World are not to Judge the Laints, but the Saints shall Judge the the
World;
Reply: The natural man knows not the things and teachings, nor workings of
the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. and
such thou calls to judge and try, etc. For thou calls upon the World to judge,
and the World try thy expositions and tenants; and the World are not to judge
the Saints nor the Spirits workings, teachings and actings; yet the Saints must
judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. 1 Cor. 2.15. therefore thou and the Judges in the
carnal, are with the Spirit of Truth judged through the eternal, with that
which sets up Judgment and Justice in the new Creation, and we are the
wormanship of God in Christ Jesus, created again, and changed by the operation
of his spirit into the pure Image (again) 2 Cor. 3.17.18. and so we are out of
the unrighteousness in the Righteous, where the true Justice is set up through
the Judgment, therefore you cannot Judge us who are in the life of Truth; with
your earthly carnal minds; which is shut out, not being subject to the Law of
God, and so judged with the power that brings forth judgment into Victory.

The body of sin is first within and those that know Redemption from it and
victory over it, know^^ the Power of God working within.
Secondly, To come to thy sayings they are weighed, and thou art seen to stand
in thy will and unrighteous, false, Astronomicall judgment; and the Secrets of
God that stands in his Counsel, are hid from such (Astronomers) and liars as
^hou art, who art all along caught with the lie comed out of thy mouth, and
that which stands with the Divine Power of god, stands with his Justice, to let
his servants bear about in their bodies his true Judgment, which brings forth
Righteousness, and by the execution of his Justice, sin is the reby condemned
in the flesh, so within their bodies: for the body of sin is within, and the
just Judgment is executed upon it within; and so through the judgment upon
the unjust, comes the freedom of the Just; by the working of the power of
Truth, in the Spirits ministration.

But thy fallacy we deny, and thy sting in thy tail, yet it stands with the
Justice of God, to condemn sin in the flesh; Romans 8. For what the Law could not
do in that it was week through the flesh; God sent his Son to condemn sin in
the flesh, verse 3. and the freedom from the Law of sin and death, is by the
Law of the Spirit in Christ, ver 2. and that is within in the body, which
Spirit that works within and executes Judgment upon him, setting free from
the same, does also quicken the mortal body, verse 11. and Paul he bore about
in his Body (so did the rest) the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of
Christ might dwell in their mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.10.11. and these workings
and actings was within in the body; and he said from henceforth let no man
trouble me, for I bear about in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, It stands
with the Justice of God to condemn sin in the flesh; and to let his servants
bear about in their bodies, both the dying and sufferings of the Lord Jesus.
Take notice of that Gal. 6.17. and they had the sentence of death within
themselves, and that was in their bodies; and the sufferings of Christ did
abound in them, 2 Cor. 1. and that was in their bodies; and when Paul writ unto
the Colossians; he Rejoiced in his sufferings for them, and was to fill up that
which was behind of the Afflictions of Christ in his flesh, etc. Coloss. 1.24,
25. and he knew the mighty Power of God which wrought in him mightily verse 29.
the Power of God within; and the afflictions of Christ in their flesh; and the
works of Christ in their body, and the knowledge of the terrors of the Lord,
and the bearing about in their bodies the dying of the Lord, and the sentence
of death within them; and the condemning of sin in their flesh; and the
sufferings of Christ did abound within them; these things was witnessed by them
in their bodies etc. which Conditions thou art ^gnorant of, and so never came
in by the door, which door and sufferings and the like, the people of God now
witness, whom thou Skip does slander and Revile: but as for thy saying, If we
bear in our bodies and Spirits, Gods just and exact Judgment, until he have
wrought out of us his own satisfastion, and recompense, etc. thou speaks thou
knows not what, and as I said before, so say I still: thy fallacy we deny, and
thy sting in thy tail; but we witness to the truth, and sufferings with
Christ's, as the servants of the Lord did: and by the workings of his Spirit we
witness sin condemned in the flesh, Judgment brought forth into victory, and
sanctification by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Cor. 1.30. but that
point of sophistry is thy own, and turns back upon thee again.

And where thou have gathered several Scriptures together, and art speaking
about sanctification; and says in the last place, will you consider how Paul
does reckon the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. as in thy 28. page.

Reply, The sanctification we own, and witness unto, as I said before; but we
deny thy point of sophistry thou tells of, A Point of sophistry denied.
and that thou have any thing to do, either to Judge of the people of God, or
workings of the Spirit, that art ignorant of his teachings, and art iound to be
the false accuser of the Brethren; The divine power of God which works out
the corruptions, does also sanctify the soul, and brings forth the fruits of
the Spirit, as is here mentioned, witnessed by us whom the world calls
Quakers.
yet we witness the Power of God, which causes to shake, tremble, and quake,
as the holy men of God did, which the Scriptures also witnesses. And as we
witness their conditions, so we witness the fruits of the Spirit effected by
the operation of the divine power: which branches forth into love without
dissimulation, etc. which love is kind and envyeth not, vanteth not it self, is
not puffed up nor revileth nor rejoices not in iniquity: but is a support both
of faith, hope, and patience, and causes to go comfortably through both
afflictions and tribulations, 1 Cor. 13. and the same power of life brancheth
forth it self, by the spiritual operation into joy: which is not fleshly, but
spiritual, such a Joy as no man can take away, and this remains within also:
according to the saying of Christ, John 15.11. and this divine power brings
forth another fruit of the Spirit in us: which is called Peace, and such a
Peace as the world cannot give, but such a Peace as Christ gives unto his,
spoken of in the 14. of John 27. verse, and it brancheth forth into
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, patience,
godliness, brotherly-kindness, etc. as in Gal. 5.22, 23. an^wering with 1 Cor.
13. chap. which speaks of the Spirits fruits, and likewise agreeing with that
Romans 12. and 2 Pet, 1, 2, 3. etc.

This we witness unto, by the Spirits workings and teachings, according to the
measure, and manifestation of of the Spirit of truth, and according as his
divine power has given unto us all things that pertain to life and godliness,
through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue, 2 Pet. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Where thou says, first, whatsoever journey Satan shall suggest unto them, they
must undertake, if it be a hundred, or two hundred miles. Page 29.

Reply, That is false and not true, and here thou art charged to be an open
liar, and false accuser, satan's suggestions we deny, and turn thy saying back
upon thee again, and we also deny his service, he is thy Teacher and Master,
who has so taught thee to lie, and falsely accuse, and thou undertakes to do
his service; but thou must receive thy reward, according to thy work, and all
such: as you may read, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 20.10. etc. Rev. 22.11.12.

Whereas thou have heard, that some have gone from some parts of the North unto
London, 200. miles an end, and must go with all expedition upon his command,
etc.

Reply, Thou art offended that any should go to do the will of the Lord, and
that makes thee spew out thy venom because truth is raised up to declare
against the deceit of the world and Antichristian Ministers like thee, and thou
cries out of their go^ng up to London f^^^^ the North, because thou perceives
thy Kingdom to be struck at, and now begins to speak; but when did thou cry
out against any, or many that went up to London, to Petition for the advancing
of the Kingdom of pride, covetousness, self-seeking, Priests and Antichristian
Ministers; but now thou rages that hi^ Kingdom is discovered, and struck at;
And as for their going from the North up to London, it is not denied; but the
lie which thou joins unto it, and thy sting in thy tail, where thou says, they
go with all expedition upon Satan's command, that is denied and against
testified; If it had been so, thou would not have so cried out against them,
as thou have; but praised be the Lord who has put into the hearts of his
servants, to execute and to do his will, though thou and the Devil thereat be
offended: and because thou art so trained up in his Antichristian School of
deceit, thou with all expedition obeys his command, to declare his lies and
vent them abroad.

And where thou says, the poor creatures are made to fast sometimes three days
and three nights, and sometimes more, etc.

Reply, Is that such a wonder as thou says, that they are made to fast so from
food, etc. here thou have manifested thy self to be what thou art, a stranger
to the life of truth, and to the conditions of the people of God, and Ministers
of the Gospel: who were in labors and tumults often; and also in watchings,
and fastings: 2 Cor. 6.

But thou says, Satan he does so far deprive them of natural affections, and by
that it may be known to be his work, etc. Page 30.

Reply, Ephesians. 2.3. Col. 3.1, 2. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4.
The corrupt nature, and all evil affections we do deny; but the pure divine
nature, and such good affections we do own: and are made to set our affections
on things which are above; and for Satan to teach people to fast three or four
days, or commanding them more to do so: it is so destructive to his own Kingdom
of lust gluttony, riot, and such excess, that he will never set any to work,
against himself, to root out a Kingdom of lust; therefore in that thou have
also spoken without understanding. And such as are without the pure natural
affections, are they that are in the corrupt nature, children of wrath, liars,
false accusers, fierce, heady, high-minded, truce breakers, and lovers of
pleasures, and of that nature art thou, and such like; therefore that saying
turns backward upon you in that generation again, and there to remain, (2 Timothy
3.1, 2, 3, 4.5. etc.) who are those that are so evil affected toward the
truth, and truths friends: so that thou and such like does revile them,
slander, and falsely accuse, out of the evil of your hearts, and evil
affections toward (it and) them, and so that you are known to be thereunto
acted, and guided by the working of Antichrist, John 8.44.
and manifests your selves to be of your fa^^^ the Devil.

1. Where thou says, Col. 2.6, 7.
They are made to deny their Callings.

Reply, That is false, for such as are called out of corruptions, into purity,
and out of a state of nature into grace, abiding therein, they do not deny
their Callings; but every one as he abides in the measure of the grace of God,
into which he is called, he abides in that Calling wherein he is called of the
Lord: We do abide in our Calling.
and so it agrees with the former practice of the Saints, and Children of God
in the time of old, where the Apostle says to such as were called, says he,
as ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: as obedient
children, not fashioning your selves according to your former lusts in your
ignorance; but as he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy, for I am
holy. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16.

2. Where as thou says, they are made to give over their callings, Pet. 1.3, 4,
5. Coloss. 1, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
professions, and honest employments, many or most of them.

Rep^^ (...) at is also false, for as we are called in one hope of our Calling
(...) we abide: (many or most of us) professing the same, and ho^^^^ ^mploying
our selves therein; being diligent and faithful to th^^ ^^rd, who has so
called us; We are faithful in our calling, Profession and honest employment.
for the discovery and laying open the mystery of iniquity as it is to us made
manifest; and also we are faithful (many or most of us) in our honest
employment, declaring against the false-Antichristian ministry and reproving
the man of sin: at such thou art offended, for our faithfulness in our Calling,
and honest employment in the same; but we know in whom we believe, and whose
Name we Profess in the faith; and obeying in our Calling into the Unity; we
receave the virtue; and so we are made fruitful in him, who has so called and
Chosen us; that we should be to the praise of the glory of his Grace, John
15.3, 4, 5, 14, 15, 16, etc. verses; 27, 2. John 17.14, 16, and 16, Ephesians. 12, 0.

And where thou accuses and says they neglect and disregard their families;
The family is not neglected, and disregarded but Respected and Regarded.
(Reply) that Accusation is false; families they regard and respect; and this
fallacy lies in those words, ( Disregard and Neglect) take it again, it is
denied and turned back upon thee to remain; But the family we do not so
disregard as thou says; therefore thou art a lier, and false accuser; take thy
accusation again, and stop thy mouth with it; and where thou says, They say it
is the language of Antichrist that bids a man take care for his own household
and family. (Reply) we deny that fallacy also; it is the language of
Antichrist in thee that so standerously says, and falsely accuses. Now Truth
slands clear and is freed from those slanders and false accusations. Blessed
and praised be the Lord God of Principalities and Powers, who makes us to see
what is the Riches of his Grace and fellowship of the mystery which from the
beginning of the World has been hid, in God who created all things by Jesus
Christ: Ephesians. 3.0.9. to the intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in Heavenly places; might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God,
Ephesians. 3.10. According to the eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus
our Lord, ver. 11, being now no more Strangers and Forreiners, but
fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.18, 19,
20. for which cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom the whole family in Heaven and in Earth is named, Ephesians. 3.14, 15.

And whereas thou says that some of them go naked, and they have a color from
that of Saul, and also says, they neevr knew the mind of the Lord so
discovered by any of his servants, either under the new or old Covenant, etc.
page 35.

( Reply*) A Reply to that about going naked which thou has accused some
withal and says they bring in a cover for that from Saul.
Here thou have showed, that thou art a busy body about other men's matters,
and also ignorant of the mind of the Lord, discovered to Isaiah the Prophet,
one of his Servants und^^^^e old Covenant, to whom the word of the Lord came,
saying (...) thy sackcloth from off thy loins, and thy shoe from off thy (...)
and he did so, and walked naked and barefoot 3 years in obe^^^ce to to the
mind and will of the Lord, Isaiah 20. chapter. See and take notice, here was
an example. And the Lord so far Discovered his mind, that he commanded the
same thing to be acted and done, which were Performed according to the Word of
the Lord; Therefore in that thou have manifested thy Spirit of Error, as well
as in the rest of thy sayings, slanders, and false accusations.

Secondly, And thou says, As for that of Saul's stripping off his clothes, and
lying down naked amongst the Prophets, there is nothing in that Place does
prove it to be the will of the Lord, etc.

(Reply,) Saul at that time was guided by a Spirit of Prophecy, and that was
according to the will of the Lord, for no Prophecy of the Scripture came in old
time, by the will of man; but by the will of God, 2 Pet. 1.21. but Saul was
then a Prophet guided by a Spirit of prophecy, according to the will of the
Lord, and at that very time when he stripped off his clothes and day naked
before Samuel, all day and all night: 1 Samuel 19.23.
then Saul having at that time the Spirit of God, and prophesied till he came
before Samuel, where he stripped off his clothes; and then prophesied also;
which were according to the will of the Lord, at that same time when he lay
naked among the Prophets, and as Balams Ass did speak to reprove him for his
madness and folly, so thou having manifested thy madness and folly, art Reproved
and Judged for thine, who art in error delusion and filthy deceit, but are
lest naked and bare as Saul was; and now all thy Covers will not hide thee, thy
skirts is discovered, take shame to thy self and beware how thou utters thy
folly as thou have done.

And whereas thou says, if they cannot see the servants of Christ that walk
according to the manifest Rules of the Gospel, to be the servants of Christ;
but reckon them to be the servants of sin, hypocrites, etc. as (thou says) they
do commonly; why then (thou says) they prove themselves to be blind and led
forth by a lying, and deceavable spirit of delusion by Antichrist, etc. page 37.

( Reply:) Now if we can see and know the servants of Christ, that walk
according to (his Spirit) (...) manifest Rule in the Gospel; and so do not
reckon them to be (blind) servants of sin; nor hypocrites, etc. and do not (as
thou says) commonly call them so, then we do not prove our selves to be blind,
nor led forth by a lying and deceaveabl spirit, neither of delusion nor
Antichrist, etc. as in thy 37. page.

The Serpent caught or taken in his own snare devie^.
But we whom thou calls Quakers, do see, and know the servants of Christ, that
walk according to Gospel rules, and do not reckon them to be servants of sin,
nor men in the darkness and hypocrisy, etc. neither do we commonly call them
so,; then we do not prove our s^^^es to be blind, but in the light; Joh. 8.12.
nor led forth by a lying and deceivable spirit, but by the manifestation of the
Spirit, a rule in the Gospel to profit withal; 1 Cor. 12.7. and also led by
that spirit which is the Saints guide into all truth, John 16.13. a Rule in the
Gospel, and so we are led by the Spirit of God which is the Saints guide Roman.
8.14. Galat. 4.6, 7. therefore we whom thou calls Quakers, are not in delusion,
nor guided by the Spirit of Ant^christ, we are hereby cleared, and thou
ensnared: and so thou art he that have proved thy self to be blind, and led
forth by a lying Spirit; therefore in that delusion of Antichrist thou speaks
of; and art acted and guided by his Spirit, and amongst such as thou ranks
together like unto the men of the world, that do not know the servants and
Disciples of Christ from his professed enemies (according to his saying) but
speaks evil of the men you know not, and of the things and workings of the
Spirit of God, and so there needs no further proof then your own open and
Professed mistake; who your selves are Ranked with the carnal and sinful men
of the World, so that there is, like Priest, like People, Hos. 4. v, 9. who are
all under the Power of Antichrist, and so without God in the World, and the
poor deluded Creatures, thou speaks of according to thy 37. page

The Covenant, the Promises we witness, but the Alienation and slanders,
aspersions, and false accusations, and lies, as well in the 37: page, as in
other parts of thy Book that we deny, turning them back upon thee and thy
generation again; though thou be made to cast away Tithes, thou art strong in
thy false accusations and lies, and so art in the deceivablenesse with the rest
that took them, though thou be in another color disguised; take notice of
that, therefore do I turn thee amongst the Serpents generation: for Liars, and
slandererers, deceavers, and false accusers (therefore thou) are of that
generation and of the Serpents seed, whose head is in the unbru^sed.

And whereas thou says, if these poor deluded wretches of whom we are
speaking, shall judge themselves to be the servants of Christ; and reckon them
to be the servants of Christ also, then they are brethren; and if brethren, and
yet hate their brethren; they must needs be under delusion and the words of the
Apostle John will render them to be Liers and deceaved People, etc. page 37, 38.

( Reply:) Now upon this Reckoning and Account, as thou leaves it toour judging
rnd reckoning of our selves; so I say, if we know that we are the Servants of
Christ, The wise taken in his own craftiness and the Innocent art clear
th^reby.
and reckon our selves Brethren and so love one another, and do not hate our
Brethren, then thy necessity is taken away; and we shall not be under delusion,
nor a deceaved People, neither will the Apostle John render us to be so, but on
the contrary witness with us: to be the children of the Lord, and Friends, and
Brethren in Christ; and so we are and shall thereby be cleared for what thou
falsely would charge upon us, and does slander us withal.

But we whom thou calls Quakers and reviles under that name, we know that we
are the servants of God, and bought with a Price, and being called in the Lord,
we are his free men; and so we Reckon our selves also to be Brethren: and not
the servants of men; but of God, abiding with him in that calling, wherein we
are called, 1 Cor. 7.22, 23, 24. and so let every one abide in the same
calling, wherein he is called of the Lord, ver. 20. and serve him in what he
requires, Presenting also their body as a living sacrifice, holy acceptable
unto God, which is their reasonable service, Roman. 12. and being born again
not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, seeing we have purified our souls
in obedience to the Truth, through the Spirit, we love one another with a pure
heart servently, according to the Gospel, discipline Rule, fellowship, and
doctrine, as such did who were of that Birth and Seed, 1 Pet. 1, 22, 23. and so
we witness as such did, that he who sanctifies, and they who are sanctified
are of him; and he is not ashamed to call them his Brethren, Hebr. 2.11, 12.
and we being so born sanctified and taught, we Reckon such as are of that Seed
and Birth in the Sanctification, to be also our Brethren, and we do not hate,
but dearly tender and love them, and we also reckon that the suffering
condition is not to be compared to the Glory revealed within, by coming
through the suffering, Romans 8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and we know that our brethren
before, who were led by the Spirit, did also witness the same, and we know
moreover as the sufferings of Christ do abound in us: so our consolation also
abounds by Christ, Praised be the Lord for the Riches of his Love, 2 Cor.
1.5. 1 John 3.

Then it being that we are of the New Birth in the calling and brotherhood,
and have acknowledged and witnessed that we are Servants of God, and Brethren
in, and by Christ; and that we do not hate, but love our brethren; it must
needs be that we are not under any delusion, according also to thy saying, E.
S. Being proved and tried, and back-returned, thy fallacy taken away, and truth
set up in its place, and therefore thou being sound the subtle Serpent with thy
sting in thy tail, and envy, and hatred thou and al false accusers of the
innocent are the deluders, and in the delusions and wretchedness thou speaks
of; and now that we are cleared from thy slanders, and thou found the envier
and hater, and such in the nature; the Apostle John's words witnesses for us;
and against such as you are that are in the envy and evil, committing sin and
so serving the Devil: take notice of that; and also read 1 John 3.15, and 1
John 3.8, 10.

It follows from Edmund Skips words that (we a People whom he calls Quakers)
being servants of Christ and brethren; (not hating but) loving our brethren;
that we are under no delusion, nor guided by aspirit of Antichrist, etc. But we
whom he calls Quakers are servants of Christ and brethren, and also (do not
hate but) love our Brethren; therefore according to that, we a People whom
Edmond Skip calls Quakers; are not deluders nor under delusion, etc. take
notice of that; Friends and Christ, who are of the Royal Seed and new Birth,
are set forth and manifested to be the Children and servants of God, by their
Love to him, and one to another that are if the same spiritual Birth; and in
Union with him in the pure divine Light, Life and Love: Or Some Rules of Love,
whereby the Children of God are known to to love God, and also to Live one
another.
and also of John's words to witness for the Truth.

John's words witness for the Righteous seed, such as are born again are of
that seed, and sons of God, so brethren in Christ; who lives in the divine
light, Life and Love, and we may cry out with admiration that are of that Seed,
and in the divine Love; and say with John; and John with the righteous Seed,
who sald,

First. Behold, what manner of Love is this that the Father has bestowed on
us, that we should be called the Sons of God, therefore the World knows us
not, because it knew him not, 1 John 3, 1, 2.

Secondly. (And says he) ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins
(and we know the same) and in him is no sin at all, whosoever abides in him
sins not, 1 John 3.5, 6.

Then Thirdly. little Children let no man deceive you, he that does
Righteousness is Righteous even as he is Righteous, and whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin; for his seed Remains in him (so says the holy
Ghost) and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3, 7, and 9.

Fourthly. Therefore, Marvel not my Brethren if the World hate you (it is but
what the Lord Jesus foretold of to his, John 15.18, 19, 20, 21.) and we know
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John
3.13, 14.

Fifthly, Now my little Children let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue; but
indeed and in Truth; and thereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall
asure our Hearts before Him, ^ John 3. ver. 18, 19.

Sixthly. This is His Commandment that we should believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment, and he that
keeps his commandment dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby we know that
he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3.23, 24.

7. In this was manifested the love of God to us (whom the world now
reproacheth for his names sake, etc.) because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him; and herein is love not that
we (first) loved God; but that he (first) loved us and sent his Son (to teach
us and guide us, Joh. 8.12.) and to be the propitiation for our sins who being
children, have them forgiven, 1 John 2.1^. And now, beloved, if God so loved
us, it is our duty, and we ought also to love one another, for God is love, and
if (with his love) we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfected in us, 1 John ^.9, 10, 11, 12.

8. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, because he has given us of his
spirit, verse. 13.

9. And we have known and believed the love that God has to us. God is Love,
and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God-in him, herein is our
love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because
as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4.16, 17.

10. We love him, because he first loved us (and manifested his love to us to
beget our hearts and souls to love and obey him) and this commandment have we
from him; that he who loves God, loves his brother also, verse. 19, 20.

11. By this we know we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his
commandments, for this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous (to such as are born of God) for whatsoever
is born of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our says, 1 John 5.2, 3, 4.

12. Who is he that overcomes the world but he that is born of God, 1 John
5.5, 6. Joh. 3.5, 6, 7, 8
of water and the Spirit, not after the flesh nor after the will of man, but
after the spirit, and according to the will of God, Joh. 1. but as many as
received him to them he gave powers, to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name; which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of men, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. and such as are born
of God, are in the life of faith, known the witnesses, and he that Believes ^n
the Son of God and is of that birth, has the witness within, and the record is
there known and witnessed in the life eternal; and we do through the mercies of
God, know the teachings and workings of Gods holy Spirit within us, witnessing
the faith and the birth; and we do not believe and love one another, only; but
we know that the Son of God is come also; and has given us an understanding to
know him that is true (and as they was, and said; so do we) and we are in him
that is true; even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is true God and life eternal
(and no delusion nor deceit but) according to the teachings and workings of the
spirit of truth, and witnessed to by the Scriptures and the servants of truth,
1 Ioh. 5.10, 11, 12. and 20.
and friends and brethren who are out of the envy and hatred, in the divine
love, and so out of the old life in the new passed by the Lord.

Page 28. And where thou says, They are under the great bondage and slavery
which is laid upon them by Satan, who captivates them at his will.

Reply, Then it is by the Satanical Ministers, and tything and hierling
Priests, that bondage and bring into prisons for speaking the truth, and
declaring against their false Antichristian Ministry, The servants of Christ's
bondage by the Ministers of Antichrist.
as many by their means has so been brought into bondage, and outward
imprisonment, and could not have liberty to declare and spread abroad the
truth; because Satan in and by his false deceitful Ministers caused some to be
laid hold on, and put into prison; and thereby acting the devils part, brought
some into bondage; which by the devil in his Antichristian Ministers were laid
upon, even such servants of God, as were Antichrists opposers, and so that
Scripture were fulfilled, where it is said the devil shall cast some of you
into prison, and ye shall have tribulation for a t^me, and so the devils
Ministers has in that acted their part to bring into bondage the servants of
the Lord, take notice or that, ye Satanical persecuring Antichristian
Ministers, who bondage and imprison the servants of the Lord: and you that are
by them so imprisoned, be faithful unto death, and you will receive the crown
of life, Head Rev. 2.10.

And whereas thou says, They are made to suffer more cruel (and heavy) burdens
then she Israelites under Pharaon in Egypt, Page 28.

Reply, Then it is, by the Satanical Priests and Antichristian Ministers, as
before, and not only by our bonds and imprisonments, but also by causing them
to pay the tenths of their yearly increase of hey and corn, The tithing and
hireling-Priests, false Antichristian Ministers are cruel oppressors of the
people of God as Pharaoh was.
and tithe lamb and wool, money for Mar^^ and foals, money for kine and
calves, money for eggs, and smoke passing the chimmeys, and their geese and
piggs, tithe hemp and flax, tithe apples and cherries, Easter reckonings, and
Midsummer dues, as they call them; and causes such to pay those things to whom
they do no service, except to revile them and ^ail against them; and such as
cannot for conscience sake toward God, pay these demands to uphold an
Antichristian Ministry, captivates, or imprisons them at his will, and thus
they suffer more cruel burdens by them, then Israel did by Pharaoh, for I do
not read that ever Pharaoh did after that manner; therefore you Antichristian
Ministers be ashamed of your Ministry.

Page 40. And thou thy self says in Page 40. That, They forsake father and
mother, wife and children for Christ's sake, and they endure much affliction,
persecution, opposition and disgrace from the men of the world, etc.

Reply, By that thou have proved them to be none of the world, but such as love
Christ above all; Mat. 10. 37, etc Luke 9.23, etc.
and art thou offended, and all this while slandering and reviling them for
their love they bear to Christ, by doing his will, and following him according
to Gospel, discipline, The people and servants of Christ suffers affliction,
persecution and reproach from the men of the world, for the love they have to
Christ by following him and doing his will and reproving of sin.
rule, and doctrine, and so suffers for his names sake, as such aforetimes did,
that believed, loved, obeyed and followed him? and it is the portion from the
world, that His must e^pect to be afflicted, persecuted, and suffer reproach,
which thou calls disgrace from the men of the world, and so here thou have
cleared them to be the chosen people of God, that are chosen out of the world
to suffer for Christ's sake as they do: and by this thou have also cleared thy
self to be none of the friends and disciples of Christ, but one of the world,
for they are reproached and slandered by thee, and so by the world; and
therefore thou love them not, because they are not of the world, and makes
good the Scripture and saying of Christ, who said to his, If the world hate
you; ye know it hated me (and so thou hates his, and therefore hates him) and
says he to his, if ye were of the world, the world would love its own (but
thou loves not us, because we are not of the world, but are chosen out of the
world, to declare against the evil of it, and therefore thou art offended, but
we must do the will of the Lord, and rejoice in that he has chosen us out of
the world, and counted us worthy to do his will in declaring against the
deceits of the world; and also in that he has counted us worthy to suffer for
his names sake, Joh. 15.18, 19, 20, 21. and more especially that our names are
written in the Lambs, book of life, knowing also that the unrighteous, and all
whose names are not written in the Lambs book of life shall not enter into the
holy City, nor inherit the Kingdom of God, but be cast into the lake that
burns, etc. as Jesus has said, who sent his Angel to testify the same. Take
notice of this all ye persecuters, gainsayers and oppressors of the truth, and
all the unrighteous profane ones, and all under what deceipts soever, 1 Cor.
5.9, 10. Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. and Rev. 21.8, 27. Rev. 20.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Rev. 22.10, 11, 15, 16.

And where thou shows thou art offended that truth should be spread abroad,
thou makes covers to cover over deceit, but it is clearly seen, and thou art
falsely accusing and saying, That they pretend that the Lord sends them,
hither and thither, that they know not wither to go, or to what person, till
they come to the place or person, etc.

Reply. That is false, the pretense is thy own, and that fallacy or sting in
thy tail I deny (where thou says, They pretend the Lord sends them hither and
thither they know not whither, The wicked bends their tongues like their bows
for lies, and so shoots their arrows of reproach against the innocent.
etc.) thy pretense and fallacy is denied; but the Lords sending I own, and
know and after what manner he sends, even as he pleases, according to the
workings in his own council after the good pleasure of his will. And this I do
own notwithstanding thy cover, from the Lords sending of Moses to Pharaoh, and
Nathan to David, and Ananias to Saul, etc. Thou art busying thy mind about
them and their sending, and art a stranger to the life they lived in; they was
not liars, slanderers, false accusers nor hypocrites like thee, but declared
against such, as thou and thy generation of evil doers, are by the spirit of
the Lord in his servants and children declared against now, at which thou art
sore offended, and bends thy tongue like thy bow, for lies; and shoots thy
arrows of reproaches, false accusations and slanders, out against the truth,
and would not be told of it again, but be thou sure God will meet thee, and
with his righteous judgments smite thee, and such like, and then woe to the
wicked, and such as thou art it shall go ill with you, Isa. 1.24. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8,
9. Isa. 3.11.

2. Thy pretense being denied, and fallacy cast out; the former sendin^s of the
Lords servants I own, A sting in the tail denied, but the Lords sending of his
servants, as he pleases, owned.
and also the sending of the Lords servants now, by the same spirit and power,
which thou art a stranger unto, that speaks against immediate teachings by the
Spirit of God, which teachings immediate I own, and also know the Lords sending
when I am sent, to person or place, as Ananias did when he was sent unto Paul
in the street, called straight, to that person and place, Act. 9.10, 11. and as
I do so do all witness to the truth who stands in the council of God; and to
the truth I witness; but thy saying that lay in thy fallacy, and sting in thy
tail, that I deny, and back with the rest of thy lies I return open thy old
botle, and take them in again into the serpents seat from whence they came,
that with thee and in thy generation they may remain.

And where thou says, Let us return and examine the manner of the Lords
sending his servants and prophets upon particular messages.

I answer, Thou have nothing to do to busy thy mind about them, The way and
manner of the Lords sending forth his servants is owned according to the
working of his power in his own council, and after the good pleasure of his
divine will, and also some times to particular places and persons according to
the word of the Lord.
yet art an enemy to them, and a stranger to the immediate teachings, and so to
the power by which they were and are sent; but the immediate teachings I own as
before is said, and also the power and spirit by which the Lord sent, and now
sends his servants; and the manner of the Lords sending of them as he
pleases according to the working of his power in his own council, and after
the good pleasure of his will, he then sent forth his servants, and so does he
now, and that I also own: and those that the Lord sent and stood in his
council, they knew whither to go and sometimes the Lord told them to whom to
go, and what to say, and sometimes they were to go to places, etc. and it
should be told them when they came there what to say, and sometimes waited
after they came there several days, before it was given what to say or speak,
etc. And as the Lord did then to his servants according to his own council, and
the good pleasure of his will; so does he to his servants now according to his
own council and the good pleasure of his divine will (but Edmund Skip, thou
that art a liar, slanderer, and false accuser of the brethren) thou art of the
old serpent ( Rev. 12.15, etc.) and not in the council of God, but accusing
such as are, and speaking evil of the ways and workings of the spirit and
power of God, then out of his council and so not sent of him, but by the false
accuser, and the man of sin; therefore I take that from thee which thou have
stolen, and return it into its right place again, and I tell thee plainly the
Lord is against such thieves as thou art, and as may be read; Jer. 23.30, 31,
32.

But to the truth I witness and own, and that when the Lord called Moses, and
made known himself to him, he sent him according to the good pleasure of his
will; and so does he now, such as stands in his counsel, Exodus 3. And when
Ezekiel was sent to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river
of Ch^ber, he knew whither to go, but not what to say, neither when he went to
them, nor at first or present when he came there, amongst them and where they
was; but he sat where they sat and remaied there amongst them seven days,
before it was given him what to say; so he, to wit, Ezekiel the servant, of the
Lord, when he was at that time sent by the spirit of the Lord he knew whither
to go, but not what to say, until it were revealed unto him, Ez^kiels seven
days silence at Tel-abib.
or given unto him what to say from the Lord, to the people unto which he were
sent. And as it was with that servant of the Lord so it may be with some others
of the servants of the Lord, they know sometimes whither to go, and not at
present what to say, and as it was no delusion in Ez^kiel, to go and wait: so
it is no delusion in them that so go in obedience to the spirit of the Lord,
though they wait when they come there (as long or little time as the Lord
pleases) as Ezekiel the servant and true Prophet of the Lord waited amongst
the people of the Captivity at Tel-abib, where he was sent seven days after he
came there, then he came there amongst them by the river Cheber, before the
word of the Lord came unto him what to say; therefore silence all flesh: also
read Ezekiel. 3.14, 15, 16.

When Ananias was sent to Paul, he was told in a vision to whom to go, and what
to say, Act. 9.10, 11, etc.

Peter sent by the spirit, etc.
When Peter had seen the vision, though it was not told him before he went what
to say, yet he knew whither to go, and went without gainsaying, Act. 10.17,
18, 19, 20, etc. So others of the servants of the Lord may know by vision or
revelation whither to God, and not at present what to say, and to go without
gainsaying the power, they do well for to obey.

Philp sent on the way toward Gaza.
1. When Philip was in the villages of the Samaritans, he was commanded to arise
and go toward the South, unto the way that went down from Jerusalem unto Gaza;
and he did obey the commands he knew at that time only whither to go, to such
away that led to Gaza; but he neither knew what to do there, nor what to say,
yet he did obey, and went unto that way that went from Jerusalem unto Gaza
which is desert, Act. 8.25, 26, 27.

Philip joined to the Chariot.
2. And again, Philip when he came there, as he was going on the way, he saw a
Chariot, and the spirit said unto Philip, go and join thy self to yonder
Chariot, and he went, knowing then the second time whither to go; but not at
that present what to say, until he came at him that sat in the Chariot, to whom
by the Spirit he was sent, Act. 8.29, 30. And when Philip came at the man to
whom he was sent, instead of delivering a message first unto him, when he came
there, he propounded a question, Act. 8.30. But the Eunuch neither ran away,
nor sent Philip to prison for propounding unto him a question, as many
Antichristian Ministers in these days do. Take notice thereof.

An observation to be taken notice of, by the Lords servants about being sent,
etc.
And here it is to be observed, that the Lord did not always make known to his
Servants, whom he sends to particular persons and places, what to say before
they go: their obedience is required, first to go, and then to wait for what he
is pleased by them to say or do; therefore he will have his servants to stand
in his Counsel, that they may be ordered by him according to the good pleasure
of his will: Some of the Lords servants, and at sometimes, knows-before they
go, both whither to go, what to say, and what to do: others, sometimes they
know to whom to go, and not at present what to say: it was so amongst the Lords
servants, Prophets and Apostles before time, and it is so with the Lords
servants now; they are to be ordered by his Power in his own Counsel, according
to the good pleasure of his will.

Several things acted by the servants of the Lord before time, which if any of
the servants of the Lord should be commanded so to do now, this generation
would wonder, and call it delusion, and madness.
And again, see a few of the Prophets acts, according to command. First, see
Jeremiah's act about the earthen bottle, how the word of the Lord came to him
and told him what to do, which would be strange in these days, if any of the
Lords servants should do so; and likewise concerning the girdle, when he was
commanded once to go, and put it in a hole of the rock, Jer. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. and
he obeyed that command, ver. 15. but he knew not at that time why he did it,
but showed his obedience to the Lord; then after many days he was commanded to
go fetch that girdle again, and it was so marred that it was profitable for
nothing, see Jer. 13.6, 7. and the second time Jeremiah knew nor why he did so
act, but he showed his obedience without any gainsaying. Then the third time
the Lord made known to him the mystery of the thing, verse 8.9.10.

Likewise that of Ezekiel, about the tile when he pourtrayed upon it, and laid
si^ge with a pourtrayed tile, etc. Ezekiel. 4. and likewise concerning the Barbers
rasor, cutting off his hair, and weighing it in the balance, etc Ezekiel. 5. and
about digging through the wall, to carry the goods out, when reason would have
said the door had been more convenient; and many things which the Lords
servants did there, which if any of the Lords servants now should be commanded
to act such things, to figure out the condition of a people, and what the Lord
would do, and in his time perfect and accomplish: they would in this generation
be ready to call it madness, delusion and folly; but such as knows not the
immediate teachings of the Spirit of God, knows neither his sending to
particular persons nor places, nor the Spirits workings and actions, no more
then thou Edm. Skip do who so slaundereth, and accuses the people of God,
and art a stranger to the immediate teachings of the Spirit of God, as thou
have showed, and before is proved, therefore silence deceit, and stoy thp
mouth, thy (Prognostication or) Astronomical Judgment is false, and stuffed full
of lies, (falsehoods) and untruths, to fill ignorant people with fancies, envy,
and lies, that thou may make them like thy self in deceit, and filthiness, such
as are wiling to believe it, and be led by thee, but to the wise hearted thou
have tittered thy shame and folly: With the light that changes not, art thou
and thy pernicious ways, and fubtil twistings, seen and comprehended, and with
the light judged and condemned.

And where thou says, There was one in the North kept a fast a great while, and
thou conjectured it to be either Nayler or For: who was commanded of the Lord
to fast, and as thou says, if thy memory fail thee not it was seven days; and
having so done, he was commanded to fast so many more, next ensuing that: and
so several of them as thou says, have been commanded to fast; and this, thou
says, is the little great wonder, this man having fasted as be was commanded,
by his enemy under the pretense of a friend, etc.

Reply, Thy sting in thy tail, fallacy, and little great wonder is denied,
where the Serpent shoots forth his sting in those words, saying, he was
commanded by his enemy so to fast, under the pretense of a friend, thy pretense
is false, and the enemy and his commands, we do deny, and thee the Conjecturer,
Prognosticator and Astronomer, with thy lying wonders in thy false and
Astronomical Judgment, and thy prodigious Comet, with its scintillations and
sp^rklings thou tells of, and also thy little great wonder and lies, and false
accusations, and slanders, who art he that Satah has trans^ormed like to an
Angel of light: who art venting thy lies, and malice, because thy false Apostle
ship is now discovered, and thy Antichristian transforming, being fitting for
his highest attain men's, and making, and made able to deceitful works, as thou
have learned by Antichrists methodical way in his School and art, learning that
Philosophical Maxim thou rests of, and by thy Philosophy and vain deceit,
deceives poor ignorant creatures, acting ^n that mystery of iniquity and
sophistry; plagues upon it, and woe, and ^^^geance from God, is the reward of
thy Satan call work: who art ^o^^gly promoted by him, as to be his Nuntio. Thou
declarer and publisher of horrid lies, slanders, and false accusations, woe and
vengeance expect for thy reward; and the lake is prepared for sorcerers,
inchanters, witches, liars, and such like, Rev. 21.8. thy filthiness we deny,
thy sting in thy tail ( Rev. 1.9.) and also thy decei^ ablenefs, slanders,
false accusations and horrid lie; and liars, are for the burring lake, and such
like: take notice of that.

Secondly, But, obeying the commands of the Spirit we own; for such are Christ's
friends as keeps his commands, and watching, fasting, and prayer, we own
according to the reachings, and commands of the Spirit of truth, and with
Gospel discipline, and Doctrine; but all that which is contrary to the truth of
the Gospel that we deny; and the Devil does not, nor will not so strike at his
own Kingdom of lust, as to set any six or seven days to fast; for thereby
lust it becomes weak, and it as a means of rooting lust out, that great evil,
on fruit of the Devil; and as Christ has said some sort, and so it may be said
of this sort, it goes not out, but by fasting and prayer; and herein thy
Judgment is false, and not true: and thou contemns the power of truth, and the
works of the Spirit of God; and one while says, if it was be thou calls
Nayler, or another, that he had a command of God so to d^ (...) thou say he
said he had: then he did well that kept the command and obeyed: and art thou
offended at that? thou art offended at truth if thou be, but thou art;
therefore ignorant of the teachings and workings of the Spirit of truth, and so
ignorant of Christ's commands; and yet takes upon thee to Judge the truth with
thy false mind, and out of thy false heart: and has also manifested the same
in accusing him falsely; that thou have but a conjecture of, be it Nayler or
Fox; and so with the truth art thou judged, and thy lying tongue condemned by
the Spirit of truth, according to the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
Isa. 54.17.

Thirdly, For fasting which thou contemns, and derides such, as do it in
obedience to a true command, and so in obedience to the Lord; for thou says in
page 44. thou art persuaded they dare not tell a lie, etc. and if they dare not
tell a lie, etc. as thou says, then God teaches them to deny lying, and speak
the truth, and so to obey the teachings and commands of the Spirit of truth:
and it is God that teaches truth, and no lies, for no lie is of the truth;
therefore in thy sayings thou have ensnared thy self, and by thy words art thou
judged to be unstable like a wave of the Sea, foaming out thy own shame, and
manifests thy confusion, that says for thy own ends, as in page 44. thou art
persuaded they dare not lie, yet further thou say, they are deluded by
Satan. How confused thou art, the Devil has no truth to speak: then not to
teach ^^^^ther to speak truth, and not lie, for there is no truth in him (...)
when he speaks a lie he speaks it of himself, for there is no truth in him
John 8.44. then not for any to receive from him; therefore they speaking truth,
and no lie whom thou accusest, they are neither taught of him, nor deluded by
him. Take shame to thy self and blush, that so lies of them, and accusest also
for fasting, and when they had confirmed the souls of the Disciples, and had
prayed with fasting, they commended them to God on whom they believed, Acts
14.21, 22, 23. and they gave them to fasting and prayer, 1 Cor. 7.5. and were
in fastings often, and they approved themselves as the Ministers of God in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, and fastings, 2 Cor. 6.4,
5. here in judging fastings that were done in obedience to a command of the
Lord, (to be a command of Satan) thou therein have judged the spirits action,
and judged the practice of the Saints and Servants of the Lord, and art
ignorant of the conditions of the aforesaid approbation of the Ministers of the
Gospel, and so have manifested thy Antichristian spirit of treachery, delusion,
and deceit, according to thy gradations, as thou have been taught methodically
in thy master Antichrists School: who art one of his Antichristian false
Apostles, and Scholars trained up in error, delusion, and deceit, by him whose
coming is with signs, and lying wonders, with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, in them that perish. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11.

And where thou says, for that deceit of theirs in giving over all care and
Callings, and then honest employments in the world, they are made to
misapprehend the teachings of Christ, in Matthew. 10.37.38.

Reply, We do not misapprehend the teaching of Christ in Mat. 10.37, 38 but
witness thereunto, and in that thou art proved a liar; And for that fallacy
which is laid down in that word (All) Care and Callings, and honest
employments: that is also false, and is so proved before; therefore thou art
charged with another lie: thy mouth is full of such stuff which thou have
learned in the Antichristian School, where thou have learned thy art of lying,
and deceit, he ashamed and blush.

And thou Sophister say, being given over to lies, where thou wrests, and
twists about with thy fallacies and deceivable spirit, that we think Christ
does engage his people to leave all care and diligence.

Reply, Thy fallacy thou have laid down, (in thy saying all care and diligence)
which we deny, and here thou art found with another lie in thy mouth: silence
deceit, thou cannot by a lying-spirit enter into our thoughts; that say, They
think Christ does engage his people to leave all care and diligence.

Here again, I charge thee with another Lie, for it is not our thoughts; the
Lying Spirit has told thee so, by which thou art deceived and so taught to
lie: thy Tongue is deceitful, and so is thy heart, and now the Spirit of Truth
tells thee the same; and also witnesses against thee, and thy deceit.

And that distrustful care we deny, and know that Christ does engage his
people to leave it; but there is a true care, which Christ engages the hearts
of his people unto, and that we own. And the love of Christ teaches us
diligence and faithfulness also; which engages our Hearts and Souls unto him;
and to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with our God, to serve him with
Reverence and Godly fear, and also to serve our generation in Love, by being
faithful unto the Lord our Redeemed passing the time of our sojourning here in
fear and true care, therefore thou open Liar, lay thy hand upon thy m^d^^ and
^^ish; be ashamed for ever, that thou should be to befooled by the Devil as
thou art, to be his slander-Carryer and sow his seed, of distention, lies,
slanders and evil (...), and so Labors to harrow it, into the fear of enmity,
and grounds of Prejudice.

And that saying, where thou says, Thou have read (...) what an insolent,
proud, Authentic manner the Devil spoke to Christ, etc.

Reply, That shall stand for thy self, who are the Devils-slander-carrier, and
Satan's Proclaimer and Publisher of lies, slanders, and deceiptfull wicked evil
and filthy aspersions, in such a (...) insolent, Authentic manner against the
Truth of Christ, and his Brethren and friends, (so against him in them) and
Reviles the servants of the living God is thy Forefathers did, Revile our
b^est^d Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but were joyce in this: that we are
counted worthy to (so) suffer; for his Names sake, Math. 5.10.11.12. and with
all knowing this that the servant is not greater then his Lord, as he himself
has said, therefore we bear it in Remembrance, dwelling in his word, John 4.1
(...). John 15.20.

And where thou says, we own visions and Revelations, etc

Reply, That we do not deny, if we should, we should deny the Spirit of Truth,
and the Condition of the holy men of God, Act. 9.10, 11, 12. and Act. 10.17.
and we also know this, that there is no true knowledge of God, but by
Revelation, as Christ himself has said, Who spoke Truth and could not (...);
and he is also to be believed and obeyed, who is the way to the Father; and the
Scriptures bears testimony from his own mouth to the ^^^e undeniable and
grounded Truth, as may be read, Matthew. 11.27. Luke 10.22.

And where thou says, so making themselves eithe Prophets, or Apostles, etc,

The Lord makes both true Prophets and true Apostles.
Reply, Self, we deny and all the Power of darkness, so in that thou have told
another Lie, and of our selves we are not able to think any thing as our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God: who, makes both Prophets and and
Apostles; and so, able Ministers of of the New Testament, or Covenant; not of
the Letter but the Spirit for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life;
this the Scriptures witnesses, and we witness with them, 1 Samuel 3.19, 20, 21.
2 Pet. 1.21. Ephesians. 4.4.11, 12, 13. Romans 12.6, 7, Acts. 13. 1 Pet. 4.10. 2 Cor.
3.5, 6. Gal. 1.11, 12.

And where thou says, Let this be also well observed, these dreamers say not
withstanding they pretend, it is God by some special Revelation, or
Inspiration: be what it will, the Lord must be the Author of it, page 34.

Reply, Thy fallacy we deny, and therein thou have uttered another Lie, be
ashamed and blush; and for the Dreamers they shall stand for thy self, and such
in thy nature, and deceablenesse of unrighteous, who defile the flesh, and
despises the Spiritual dominion and Government, which we witness unto, by
which Spiritual Poner the flesh with the affections and lusts are crucified,
Gal. 5.24. and with the Spirit and Power of our God are we sanctified, washed,
cleansed, and justified, 1 Corimb. 6.11. therefore we are no Dreamers. For we
witness the Spiritual dominion and Government; by which we are preserved in
our sanctification by Christ Jesus, as such was in theirs that spoak against
the dreamers, Jude 1.2. and Revelation and Inspiration; and the Lords sending,
according to the good pleasure of his will, and the working of his divine power
we own, but thy pretense and fallacy, or sting in thy call, where thou says, Be
it what it will be, God must be charged with it; that we utterly deny, and so
testify against this abominable lie, and ^^^n it back upon thee, and the
dreamers there remain, Observe it well.

And where thou says, Did you ever know a People acted through a more glorious
show, or pretense of Righteousness, then they are, etc.

Reply, Thy shows and pretenses is by us denied, but to obey Christ in all his
discoveries and divine Appearances, working unto Righteousness, and changing
from glory to Glory, into the pure Image, by the power of the Lords Eternal
Spirit,, 2. Cor. 3.17, 18. as such afore-time did that we, we with the
Scriptures do, also witness and own, and as Christ has said to his Father, in
the eternal love to his, in the glorious appearance and discovery unto such as
were changed and changing into the Glory, where he says, all mine are thine,
and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them, John 17.10. and the sufferings
is not worthy to compared to the Glory revealed within, Romans 8.18. and God who
commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts,
(through his glorious discovery and divine appearances of Glory and
Righteousness, to give us the knowledge of his Glory says the Ministers of
Christ, and even in the face of Jesus Christ, this treasure have we in eathren
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us; 2 Cor.
4.5, 6, 7 and the Saints fellowship with Christ, in the Glory is to be admired
as the Apostle says to the Thessalonians which glory appears in the inwards,
2 Thessal. 1.10. this the Scriptures witness, and in the fulfilling and
changing into glory of Righteousness, we also witness: according to the
measure and manifestation of his divine appearance and fellowship with him, in
the pure enjoyment of Light, Life, and Love, received from him, who is the Lord
our Righteousness, and so made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness 2 Cor. 1.30.
and with him and the Spiritual operation, we witness according to his divine
Appearance; both in Glory and Righteousness, as the Scriptures also witnesses,
which we do own and with them also witness; and of Christ according to his
pure discoveries of his love, according to His glorious Appearance which we do
own, but thy fallacies and gilded pretenses we do deny; and thee and thy
pernicious ways, disown;

And where thou say, Their throwing off and denying the World, and all care and
pains thereof for Christ's sake, and forsaking Father and Mother, Wife and
Children for Christ's sake, what a fair color is this?

Reply, Thy color we do deny, but to the Truth of Christ we witness and own,
and thy Satanicall spirit will not let thee throw off, nor deny the World, etc.
for there Antichrist keeps his hold, who hurries the hearts of such out after
the world to seek the glory, love and praise thereof, and to deny it, is so
directly opposite to Antichrist and against his Kingdom, that he will not lead
creatures out of it; and herein thou art discovered in thy colors to be of
Antichrist and the world; but we are taught first to seek the Kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, and all other things shall he added, as he has said,
Matthew. 6. Chapter: and art thou so much offended that any should so love Christ
above all, as to follow him in the cross: whereby they become crucified to the
world, and the world unto them (and he that loves father or, mother, son or
daughter more then me, says Christ) is not worthy of me. Take notice of that,
Math. 10.37.38. Galat. 6.13, 16. but thou art offended that any should love
Christ above al, and their Neighbors as themselves, and so manifests that thou
art an enemy to those that walk according to the Gospel Rule, through the
Cross, who are of the Israel of God, who witness grace and mercy; which is the
Privilege of the Israel of God that walk according to that Rule in the Gospel,
Gal. 6. v. 16: which thou art offended at, and them that walk according to the
Rule in the Gospel, who love Christ above all, and their neighbor as
themselves, and fulfill the Royal Law, by doing the will of God, and walking
in the Light, Life, and Power of Truth. Therefore let all the children of
Light, that dwell in the divine Love, light, life and power of the eternal
Truth, judge of thy deceit. Antichrist will not destroy his own kingdom, and
now he is offended that the Kingdom of Christ in the souls of his Saints is
(set and) setting up; which foretells the destruction and downfall of thine,
and the downfall of the Priests of the World, and their Antichristian ministry,
at which thou art sore moved, and like a troubled Sea froming out thy own
shame: but thou art discovered and thy deceiptfull works laid open and made
manifest, therefore stop thy mouth, who art of the World and the old S^^pents
seed, (and also Prognosticating Astronomer like) but this Astronom call
judgment is falss and not true, as is proved and laid open to the Public view;

Again thou says They endure much affliction, opposition, and persecution from
the World, etc.

Reply, Then let all that fears God take notice of that, for the World loves
its own, but the Quakers Reproachfully called, and persecuted by the World, are
not of the World, but being in Christ and so Christians, they do suffer by the
World and men of nature contrary to Christ; for Christians did not, nor do not,
afflict one another, nor persecute, but were so done by, informer Ages: Hebr.
11. and here thou have cleared thy self, to be no Christian, but of the World,
and so Antichristian; and those called Quakers, to be Christians and not of the
World, who are (as thou says) so persecuted, and reproached by the men of the
World, and thou art one that does so shamefully reproach, Christ Encourages
his to bear the Persecution of the World.
and speak evil of them and the ways; and workings of God in them, etc. Yet
they being Christians and suffers by thee, and the men of the World, the
Christians aforetime did so suffer, and were persecuted by the World, as they
are now, and their Conditions is not contrary, but agreeing to the Conditions
of Christians, friends, and servants of Christ before them; being compared
with, Hebr. 11.36, 37, 38. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 9, 7.8. 2 Timothy 3.10.11, 12. and also
compared with that saying of Christ to his, where he encourages them to bear
the Reproaches and Persecutions from the men of the World; where he says, A
warning from the Lord to such as Reproach and persecute under the nick name of
Quakers or such as are of the divine nature made partakers.
if the World hate you; it hated me before it hated you; if you were of the
World, the World would love his own, but because I have chosen you out of the
World, therefore the World hates you, etc. John 15.16, 17, 18, 19. Here Christ
has a chosen People that suffers affliction from the men of the World, for his
Names sake. But the People whom the World reproachfully calls Quakers; they
suffer reproaches afflictions and persecutions from the men of the World, for
Christ's sake, therefore they are the People that Christ has Chosen out of the
World. Take notice, both thou and all you that so slander and reproach, and
also such as persecute Christ's Chosen-people, whom you scornful call Quakers,
and beware what you do, against the Innocent; be you sure that the Lord Jesus
Christ will call you to answer before him for it; and consider also of that 25
Chapter of Ma^h. ^^, verse. 41, 42, 43. and so on to (...), an^ ^^e what you can
^earn out of it, and cease your cruelty ^^ult persec^^^^ and reproach not the
people of Christ so as you do sco^^^^tly by you called Quakers, no^ any that
^^e of the divine n^^^re ^^^de p^rtakers, 2 Pet. 1.3* 4, etc.

Again thou saye^* There^re (...) a p^^ple to be sound, that cry out more
against Antichristi^^ all apprea^^^es of sin and ^^^ghteousness then they do,
etc. Page 40.

Reply. Also here again thou do^st more fully clear th^^ ^o be the people of
God, for they are to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
b^t rather reprove them, (...) 5, 11. and that they do according to thy say^ng:
The people of God may repove sin, and cry out against unrighteousness
and ^^ey a^^^^g in righteousness, being taught by the g^^^e of God to deny
ungodliness and worldly lus^^, and to live righteously, soberly, and godly in
th^s present evil w^^ld, T^l. 2.11, 12. they may ^^st^y cry out against sin in
all appearances, and also against ^l^might ^^s^ess whatsoever, for the people
of God did so b^^ore them that were so taught by the grace of God before them,
and they that did so cry out against sin in all appearances and unrighteousness
of what sort soever were the p^^ple of God, and were not del^^ed, and they that
in the spirit and power of truth, do cry out against sin in all appearances and
against unrighteousness of what sort soever such are the people of God now, and
are not del^^^ed; but the people whom the world does scornfully call Quakers,
they do so, to w^^, as the people of God ^for^^^me did, ^^^^g out against sin
in all appearances, and all unrighteousness w^^^soever, being themselves taught
by the grace of God ^^o deny ungodli^ess and worldly lust, and to (...)
righteously, soberly, and godly in this p^ese^^ evil world, as the people of
God ^^^^ime were* therefore the people of G^d (...) the (...) Quakers* are ^ot
delu^ed, not delu^ers, b^^ children and servants of God, and may c^y alo^d, and
^ell the people of their sin^ and transgressions, as the Lords Prophet d^d who
was not deluded nor no deluder, Isa. 58. and as the true Apostle said, so do it
Know you not that the unrighteous and such like shall not (...) the kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6.9. ^^o and woe to the ^^o^n o^ of p^^^e, Isa. 28. and to the
wicked ^t shall go ^ll with them, Isa. ^.11. Take notice of that, and cease to
do evil, and s^^ve not the devil.

These people, thou says, if they be observed well, are such (...) people that
would seem to be very ^^^m^eless in their whole carriage (taking away thy cause
or fallacy) that they will (...) speak words that be evil, The people of God
are of a blameless carriage and conversation.
Page 41.

Reply. Thy cause or fallacy being taken away, these people tho^ would accuse
upon a false ground they are so blameless a people in their whole carriage that
they will not speak an evil word, then they are not guided by an evil
principle, but a good, and it is to be observed that when they speak, their
words are altogether good; take notice of that: for thy fallacy I deny, and set
truth in its place, and so the whole carriage of those people thou calls
Quakers, are according to the carriage of the people of God in fornier ages,
recorded in Scripture, who was to let no evil word^ nor corrupt Communication
proceed out of their mouths, but that which was good, Ephesians. 4.29, 30, 31, 32.
and why art thou offended at them for practicing that which the Minister of the
Gospel did exhort unto in his doctrine; here thou have manifested them to be
Christians, and thou thy self Antichristian, and has learned thy Antichrist^an
doctrine in the School of Antichrist, being taught by his subtilty in that
methodicall way, and his gradations thou speaks of, who by thy fallacies would
conjure, and so raise up, as thou have done gradually, first slanders, then
aspersions and lies; and after that many false accusations: thy master old
Antichrist and thee his Scholar, and all thy fallacies, lies, slanders, and
false accusations we deny, though thou have learned a deceitful work,
methodically in Antichrists School, being taught by his subtilty in his
gradations.

And again, thy cause and fallacy being denied, thou says, They will not use
labor, pains, or care, that shall be evil, page 41.

Reply. Thy cause and fallacy being there denied as in the other, then not
neglecting, but doing that which is honest, Just, and good, we are not in a
vain show of will worship, nor neglecting our bodies; where thou wrests that
Scripture, which speaks of the body in another manner and order, Col. 2.23.
neither do we seem to go beyond the servants and Ministers of Christ, but
witness with them. Take notice what thou have written, and behold thy folly.

But we do not neglect doing that which is honest, good, and just, but do that
which is right and just in the sight of God, and also speak to the edifying of
the Body in love, and so speak that which is good, that speaking the truth in
love, we may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ
from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, unto the effectual working of the measure in every part,
makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.15,
16.

And so now it is made manifest that the bulk of thy hitherto actings, declares
thee to be beguiled by Satan in this nature, being deceitful, transformed like
himself, and art carried on to lie, slander, and salsly accuse, as thy master
Antichrist does; who is cast down, for he is the salse accuser of the brethren,
and in his School thou have ^eamed the same, and where thou says, thou have
not any thing more of concernment to amplify, etc. he ashamed of what thou
have done* and if thou be pricked at thy heart, remembered of what against the
truth Satan has taught thee to do, then thou art, and be sure thou shall be as
thy works is so will thy reward be, who treasurest up wrath against the day of
wrath and revelation of the righteous judgments of God, who will render to
thee and to every one in thy deceivableness according to your deeds, Romans 2.5,
6, and 8.

And not knowing any thing more (of that deceit thou art in, that thou should
Amplify) thou says thou will hasten to a period only thou says this master
piece is yet behind, A Reply to that called Satan's Philosophical maxim of
E.S. in page 41. 42.
which thou calls Satan's learned Philosophical maxim by which thou art ready
to blaspheme, for thou says this master piece of work is yet behind, thou
means thou says of making those creatures mechanical able to do deceitful
works with their hands, as the Apostles did by laying their hands on the sick,
etc. page 42.

How dare thou say, the Apostles did deceitful works by laying on of their
hands; or dare thou call that which was the great power of God, Satan's
Philosophical maxim, and if the Lord so manifest or have manifested his power
through and by his servants laying on of their hands as he has done, but how
dare thou call that power Satan's Philosophical maxim, and that he should
make any able to lay hands on the sick, and recover them, as the Apostles did,
and as Christ said should be done, Mar. 16.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. If thou dare
call this power mechanical, or the great power of the devil: and if thou dare
say that the Apostles laid their hands on the sick to recover them, and if thou
dare say that such as by that power do lay their hands on the sick, and work a
healing! and loving effect as that power by the laying of the Apostles hands
did, and now I say if thou do call this Satan's Philosophical maxim, and that
it is his mechanical power, or in short the great power of the devil, to do so,
and that has by the Apostles done so, if thou call this power that wrought,
and works its effect by healing through laying on of hands, the great power
of the devil, I say thou art then the greatest blasphemer that Satan has, or
one with them that blasphemes the holy Ghost spoken of Mat. 12, 31, 32. in in
that high measure.

And I demand, charge, and ^emmand thee in the presence of the Lord, or any
that dare say so, to show by plain Scripture, where ever it says that any by
the great power of the devil, or through Satan's learned Philosophical maxim,
did ever receive from him such a power as to lay their hands on the sick and
recover them, etc. or else for ever be ashamed and confounded, Satan would have
given money for that by Simon Magus, but he and his money was to perish, that
thought to buy the Holy Ghost, or receive the great power of God thereby, Act.
8.18, 19, 20.

The Holy Ghost was given by the power of God, through the Apostles laying on
of hands, Act. 8.17. and Satan could not get it neither with money nor without
it, when he labored for it, and healing was a gift of God, given by his power
to his Apostles; and it could not be bought, neither did Satan ever receive
that power, it was always kept from him; and given to the Apostles of Christ
only, Mar. 16.18, 19, 20. and though some of Satan's friends would have cast
out the unclean spirit they could not; Satan never received that power nor
never can; therefore seeing thou have so laid open thy deceit in thy false
Astronomical judgment, and as thou calls it the worlds wonder, but I say lying
wonder, invented in the mystery (witchcrafts in the iniquity; but thou art
known to be of the dark power and to be amongst the Antichrists false Prophets,
and Satanical Ministers in the transformings; yet the power of healing by
laying on of the hands, he cannot purchase for thee, nor give unto his; for
take this granted, and seeing thou art so carried on to lie, blaspheme and
speak evil against Christ and his power, therefore let all the world, and all
who has any care of their souls, take heed of thee, or hearkening to thy lying
divinations. I warn them from the Lord as they will answer it before his
judgment seat, in the terrible day of his wrath, wherein the strong man shall
cry bitterly, Zeph. 1.14. etc.

And also let the world, and all that has any care of their souls take heed
both of thee and all such as thou art; and let them take heed and give over
following or hearkening to any such Antichristian Ministers, whose end will be
as their works are, and as thine is, for they are evil, so will thy end be, now
that they are warned from the Lord by his spirit in his servant, it is good for
them that they turn from thee and all such deceivers, in the deceivableness of
unrighteousness as thou art: so in regard there has been so much of thy deceit
made manifest and thy falsehood discovered all along in thy book, I know the
wise hearted will see it and judge it, and I having also warned the world, and
all that desires to fear God and serve him, of thee and such like to beware.
Take warning, and turn from thee and such as thou art, least they and you fall
together into the pit, let them fear and amend, and so I shall draw toward an
end.

For that in thy 46. page, where thou have been telling the Baptized people;
thou had a Communion with a society of people, which is now, as thou says,
wholly broke off from thee. I say they being guided by the light of Christ to
see into that Mystery of iniquity thou art in, and so know thy subtilty and
sophistry: It was a part of their duty to leave thee, and break off from thee,
and thy deceivableness; and now if they abide in the light, and be faithful to
the reachings thereof, it will be another part of their duty to declare against
thee and thy deceit, and no more to have any fellowship with thee, nor thy
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them and thee, Ephesians. 5.11

And though thou be f^attering the baptized people; and tell them thy
conceivings of their way, and thy hindrances; and now even as it were goes a
begging unto them; let them see if thy own ends be not the cause of the
flattery, and if thy necessity would not cause thee to fly thither for they own
ends, and to have a hypocrites seal amongst them, and a cover to shelter thee
under, let them take heed what they do, and how they keep company with thee as
they will answer it before the Lord, all such amongst them as desire to fear
him, now that they are warned, and thy deceit so discovered: and if they take
counsel of God they will drive thee back, and keep from thee, and out of the
delusions, and ecclipses mystery of iniquity, Astrology, and star-gazing, and
not believe thee in thy lying words in that Astronomical judgment, thou calls
the worlds wonder, or the book called the Blazing star.

And now a few words to thy last page, or that called the word to a Book, which
thou calls, The worlds wonders.

Where thou are telling in thy book, it may expect a hue and cry to be sent
after it very shortly.

Reply, Thou the thief art guilty and fear surpriseth the hypocrites heart, for
thou says to thy book, It may not expect from thee any defense, by raising and
Army of reasonings, argumentations and disputings, neither by thy pen not word.
Reply, Thou have filled it so full of lies and falsehoods, that the devil in
thee cannot enable thee to defend them for truths, and so thou have left them
to be broke through and scattered, and thy lies and falsehoods being turned back
upon thee again thy burden thou must bear, for now truth strikes at thy
deceits, and has proved them to be as a mighty flood come out of the mouth of
the serpent, whereby Antichrist has been casting forth all manner of
opprobrious lies, and disgraceful speeches and blasphemy against the Lamb and
the woman that has brought forth the man-child, yet the child is caught up,
and both the woman and child is preserved; and the Dragon he is now encountered
and beaten back to lie in his hole, who has sent forth his book like a Goliath,
even in the defiance of the truth; but not able to defend it self, nor thou to
help it and him; who have spoken to it great swelling words out of the pride of
thy heart, saying, go forth in thy own strength like a mighty man of war, even
Goliath like; and now goes David, or a soldier belonging to Israel in the
spirit and of the Army of the Lamb; one of the servants of the Lord has met
thy Goliath or man of war, and taken his sword and cut off his head, not by the
arm of flesh, nor in his own power and strength, but in the power and strength
of the Lord. And I say now praised be the Lord, who has guided hand and heart,
and has set truth above over the deceit and preserved his servants from the
enemies fiery dart, and does so much assist his people as to take their part,
and set them free from their enemies that they may prize his great and glorious
name. And now I say to this my book, Go thou forth, not in my name, power, or
strength, as a man, but in the name, power, and strength of the Lord, to do his
service, and so from me in the same, Go thou forth in the power of the Lord;
and be victorious, and the blessing of the Lord be with his own works and
labors; and go thou up and down to pursue thy enemy and be vigilant for the
defense of the truth, and be also a reprover and rebuker of and w^rrier in the
name and power of the Lord, against truths enemies and adversaries and be a
valiant conqueror for subduing that Army of lies, and for the treading down
false accusations and aspersions, cast out against the innocent and the
assistance of the Lord, answer and go along, and make the hearts of his to
rejoice, and carry them glad tidings to Israel; let them know that thou art
come to bring them word that Antichrists man of war is encountered withal, by
one that is little in his own eyes; and the blessing of the Almighty be with
his own work, and carry on his own cause against all his adversaries and his
childrens fo^s; that truth may triumph, and the Lord make thee prosperous, even
to Amen. Farewell, and be of good cheer; and all my dear friends be faithful
and valiant for the truth every where, And the Lord God of Power be with you,
now and for ever more.

Written only for the clearing of the truth, and for the simple ones sake; by
a servant of the Lord, at Underwood Hill in Wotcestershire; there finished and
made ready to be sent forth this fifth day of the second month, commonly
called April, and according to the worlds Account, 1655.

Instead of a Postscript.

AN Answer to a Mittimus, by which Thomas Goodaire a servant of the Lord, was
sent from Kederminster, where Richard Baxter is chief Priest, to Worcester
prison, after he had been kept there a certain space, and committed for no
breach of any known Law; but to manifest the enmity, and that monster
persecution, brought sorth by Richard Baxter's ministry at Kederminster: who is
chief Priest there, and accounted the chiefest Priest in Worcestershire, and in
persecution, his ministry is chief in that shiere, and begun there first, in
that County or Shiere, to wit, at the Town called Kederminster.

The Mittimus begins thus, as follows, and the answer unto it.

To the Keeper of the Goal for the County of Worcester, 1655.

Forasmuch as Thomas Goodaire the 25. of this instant March being the Lords day
came into the Parish Church of Kederminster.

I answer, no Church it is, but a Synagogue of Satan which brings sorth that
monster persecution, and casts into prison for speaking the truth; but it is
written, Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; behold, the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
Crown of life, as it is written Rev. 2.8, 9, 10. The true Church of Christ
never persecuted any; but your Parish Church (as you call it) has brought
sorth that monster, therefore a harlot, and not the spouse, be you ashamed
thereof. The true Church is in God, 1 These. 1. and 1. and does not perish: but
yours is out of God and so perishing. Christ is the head of his body the
Church: Ephesians. 2.22.23. but not of a Steeple-house; you have told a lie to call
that a Church, and are found persecuters also, and so not of Christ's Church: it
were not of a persecuting nature; but such as followed him the Head, were of
that body which were persecuted; John 15.18, 19, 20, 21. 2 Cor. 6. but you have
cleared your selves o be none of that Body, nor Church, that persecute his, and
shut up in prison, as you have done.

Mittimus. At such a time as many hundred of the good people of this
Commonwealth were there assembled to worship God,

Reply, The worship of God you know not that are persecutors and liars, there
you have shut your selves out of the worship of God; for God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, worship him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.22.23, 24.
but you are in the lies and not in the truth, and here taken with a lie in your
mouth; for he came in before your will worship began, or were assemb'ed, and
did not speak till your Priest had given over and ended, and then asked him a
Question, and he sled and called an Officer, etc. and so manifested himself to
be an Antichristian Minister, and a deceiver: and he the said Thomas Goodaire
came not into your parish Church, as you call it, at such a time as you were
assembled together, as you say, but was there before you were assembled or your
Priest came, and he walked to and fro in the room before the Priest came, and
then sat him down until he had done; therefore that saying is a false
accusation: be ashamed you liars and blush.

Mittimus. And there misbehaved himself.

Answer, Speaking the truth is no misbehaviour, and he spoke the truth: but
misbehaviour he does deny, and therefore that accusation is false, and you are
taken venting, and has vented another lie, and read who liars are of, John
8.44. and you that are such liars of the innocent, and bends your tongues like
your bows for lies, to cause them thereby to suffer imprisonment: be aashamed
for ever, and read your reward that are such liars Rev. 21.8. Mat. 25.41. etc.
But to be short, I shall set down the Mittimus as it is verbatim: and let the
wise-hearted see if there be any breach of a known Law; but only filled with
lies, and thereby does not act the part of Justice, Righteousness, nor
Christianity; and let Richard Baxter and his partakers be ashamed of what they
have done; and woe be unto such an Antichristian Minister, and Antichristian
persecuting Ministry.

The Copy of the Mittimus.
To the Keeper of the Goal, for the Country of Worcester.
FOrasmuch as Thomas Goodaire the 25. of this instant March, being the Lords
day, came into the Parish Church of Kederminster, at such a time as many
hundred of the good people of this Commonwealth were assembled to worship God,
Reproachful ^^^^ches is a false accusation charged upon the said Thomas
Goodaire, either against the Priest, or Magistrate, and no such thing as
affront was offered by him, neither by uncivil words, nor gestures; those are
false slanders, and the word disturbance of peace is but a cover and shuffle,
but there is no Law transgressed.
and there misbehaved himself, not only by reproachful speeches against the
Minister; but also by a^ronting the chief Magistrate of this corporation, by
contemptuous speeches and gestures, whilst he was in discharge of the duty of
his place, to the great disturbance of the public peace, and the grief and
pertubation of the people there assembled. These are therefore in the name of
his Highness, the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereof, to will and command you forthwith to receive the said Thomas
Goodaire into your custody, and him safely keep until next General Sessions for
the peace, to be holden for this County; and hereof you are not to fail, as you
will answer the contrary.

Given under our Hands Seals, this 27. of March 1655. Nicholas Pearson. Thomas
Belamy.

Something in reply to Edmond Skipps Book, which he calls the Worlds Wonder,
or the Quakers Blazing-Starre, who says he is a Teacher of the Gospel at
Bodenham in Herefordshire.
At his Book, the World may wonder; but the Children of light does not: for his
folly in it they manifest, and him to be the Wandring-Starre, who is wandered
from truth; and thou may read in Jude, in the end, Edmond Skipp, that in thy
Conscience shall me remember, who is called of the World Humphry Smith.
There shall come in the last days, scoffers walking after their own lusts, 2
Pet. 3: 3. Babylon is fallen and become the babitation of Devils; Rev.
14.8.18.2.
BEing moved to write something in answer to the scandalls that has been cast
upon the truth by Edmond Skipp, in a Book called the Worlds Wonder, or the
Quakers Blazing-Starre; wherein he has not only cast many aspersions upon us,
in these parts of the Nation, to wit, Herefordshire, but also on those, yea all
of those, whom he never saw not heard, whom the great and mighty power of God
has raised by the pure life of Christin them, to witness and live in which we
(hear a handful of Babes) are but in a little measure yet brought to witness:
therefore not for our own vindication, but for the simple ones sake, who ever
was carried away in all ages with Scribes, Pharisees, false Prophets, false
Apostles, through the slight and craftiness of men, whereby they lay in wait
to deceive, 2 Cor. 4.2.

Therefore take notice, that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
learned, not many mighty; for the wisdom of this world passes away, and the
Lord is now taking the wise in their own craftiness, and choosing the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, and the things that are not to bring
to nothing things that are, that so no flesh may glory in his sight, but that
the Lord alone might be exalted, in this the great day of his power, Isa. 2.11.
wherein he is risen out of his holy habitation, Jer. 2.13. to shake terribly
the earth, Isa. 2.19.21. and bring down the haughti^e^ of man, and la^ low the
haughty looks of man, Isa. 11. who are going forth like men of War in their
own strength, against the Lord, and against the anointed, witness the last page
of Edmond Skipps Book, Psalm. 2.2.

Now that the truth of Jesus Christ may the more appear, I shall in this
following discourse in b^se^, lay open some of the former, and yet-lived-in
dece^ts of this open enemy, and also some of his lies, which he has written
against the truth of Christ, whom the world knows not: therefore they write,
speak, hate, stone, whip, imprison, and ^a^^y say all manner of evil against
us, wherein the Scriptures are fulfilled by them, Matthew. 5.11, 12. whose
Judgment slumbereth not, and whose damnation lingereth not. Now before I
proceed further, I give thee a little notice, what sort of people he thus has
opened his mouth wide against, and it shall be made manifest, and that from his
own writings, which declare us to be the people of God chosen out of the world,
John 1^.19. and he to be the persecutor, I shall give thee a few short hints;
but if thou will observe his writings, thou will find that he himself has
declared, that our whole life and practice is proved by plain Scripture, and
that our lives and practices are the same with them, that did write and speak
forth the Scriptures; but in short, see his own words in page 40. Did you ever
know people acted through a more gl^^^o^s ^^o^^or appearance of righteousness,
then they are (to wit^ns) their ^^nying and throwing off the world, and all
^care and ^^ains^^or Christ's sake, their forsaking Father and Mother, and ^ife
and Children, Luke 14.26.
Matthew. 10.37. though with so much affliction, opposition, persecution, and
disgrace from men is not this like the Cross of Christ, and the sufferings of
Christ, and his Apostles, (yea even the same) their ^avelling so many ^^i^es
from place to place, Jer. 18.18.
and speaking so boldly unto great men, ^^^^^g out against their abominations,
their writing so many letters, and dealing so plainly with men.

And there are hardly a people to be found, that cry out more against
Antichrist, and all appearance of sin and unrighteousness, then they do, and in
page 41. the whole bulk of their actings hitherto as fa^^e as I know, or have
heard, do declare them to be carried forth as Ministers of righteousness, page
44. for I am persuaded, they dare not tell a lie.

Now see plainly, before thou proceed, the darkness, ignorance and envy of this
man, that can persecute in writings, and smite with the tongue, such a people
as he himself in this very darkness, cannot choose but con^e^s such things by
and in, who that is not altogether blinds, will not see the b^^^ness, darkness,
and ignorance of this man's confused-Writings.

See one more page 50. Now these people as far as I am, and ever was able to
discern them, are endued with a large measure, in those things the Apostle
mentioned in Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. I mean many of them that I know, that I did take,
in my former intimacy and acquaintance with them, to have received much of the
power of truth through Christ, and to hare much communion with God, and large
experiences of his love; but as for others of them, they were never judged by
me or the rest, to be any more then a willing people; and for such, this
Scripture does not touch them: even by this (although there might be much more
mentioned) thou may see in measure in the light of Christ, what he is that
does tail against such a people, whose words, lives, ways and actions, are
agreeable to the Scripture, as he confesses in his own Book.

The world loves his own, and the world delights in its own, the world speaks
to the world, and the world hears that which is spoken from the earthly heart,
reaches the deaf ear, and no farther, that which is comprehended by the dark
mind that is spoken forth by the deceitful Tongue, that feeds the deceit that
lodges in the hearers, so one darkness upholds another, and the same deceit
upholds its own in both speaker and hearer; so in both Writer and Reader, yea
all that write and speak that which proceeds not from the life, but from the
death, being in the state of death, is but death speaking to death, whereby
Serpents are begotten, or the seed of the Serpent is increased.

Now they that are of God, hears Gods word, and they that hear not his word
are not of God; for the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are spiritually discerned by the spiritual man that judges all
things, though no man can judge him who is a Child of the day, and dwells in
the light, and has no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, out
of which the Children of the day are delivered, and can witness the darkness
past, and the true light now shining in them; but all those who say they have
fellowship with light, and walk in darkness, are liars, and all liars are shut
out of the Kingdom, and are estranged from God, who is altogether pure, ho^,
and righteous, just, perfect light and those that dwell in him are in he is,
and they only have the minds of Christ the which all the world and earthly
hearts are ignorant of.

Therefore I shall not put the worldly carnal heart to judge of what may be
written by me, although I am but yet leaving off the world, and entering into a
little of that which is eternal, which no eye of flesh can ever attain unto and
live: neither can any but those that live in the same life that speaks aright,
or understand; what is spoken from the life, by those that speak aright, from
the pure life: therefore let not thy deceitful heart deceive thee in judging
herein, for the old heart is deceitful, as I shall further make manifest, both
unto the world, and unto the Children of the light, not only from what I hear
but from his own written words and my knowledge; and being witnessed by the
light and truth, as it is manifested in me whereby something may so plainly
appear, that even the world it self may see the deceit that always has been,
and yet is in this man, who now desires all the world to take notice page 23.
of his exposition of his lies, that he himself has cast on us, who are not of
the world, therefore the world knows us not; for we witness against it, that
the deeds thereof are evil.

After Edmund Skipp had thrown off his Tithes, and convinced of much more,
which he was waiting to throw off too, he then told me not long before he left
us, that he had not faith to carry him through, neither could he believe; but
he was confident, that the Devil would steal all that he had from him again,
the which is now too true.

Woe, woe, woe, from the eternal God to all the Inhabitants of the earth, who
dwells in the earthly darkness, being seated in the earth, drove out from the
presence of the living God, and are vagabonds and fugitives in the earth, whose
Center is in the earthly dark mind, woe to all those that put light for
darkness, and darkness for light: woe to all those that go down to Egypt for
help in Egypt: the pure seed is captivated and kept in bondage, in Sodom and
Egypt the Lord is daily crucified and put to open shame: woe to all the Oaks of
Bashan, and all the beasts of the field, woe to them that build their nests
among the Stars, for Capernaum that is listed up to Heaven, and in its
wisdom, in its own strength, shall be brought down to hell; for the Lord God of
life and power is risen out of his holy habitation, to confound the language of
Babel, and dry up the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and famish all the gods of
the Heathen, that know not God, whose presence is terrible to all the Children
of disobedience: therefore woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, who
arises to scatter his enemies, and to wound the head of every one that goes
on still in his wickedness. Oh, the day of the Lord is at hand, wherein every
man shall receive according to the deeds done in his body, then he that has
seemed to wait, and now begins to smite his Fellow Servants, saying, his Master
delays his coming, and so eat and drink with the drunken that are drunk
indeed with the wine of the fornication of the Whore of Babylon, those are
Drunkards indeed, that are drunk with wine and o^ercome, but not with strong
drink, such stagger at the promises, and stumble at the corner stone; but when
that stone shall fall upon them, it will grind them to powder: therefore be
warned of the Lord, thou that despi^est, and wonder (for all the works of the
Lord are wonderful) least thou perish; for the Lord is working a work in these
days, that thou can not believe, nor any that live in their own wisdom;
exalted above the pure wisdom of Christ, who teaches all his to deny all, yea
even all, both wisdom, righteousness, wit, and all carnal comprehensions; for
they are followers of him, who lived not in his own will; for, says he, I came
not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me, and says, Not my
will, but thy will be done; and he that is not yet made a fool, and so denies
his own will and wisdom, is yet exalted above the cross; and the son of
perdition is exalted above all that is called God, sitting in the Temple of
God, even in the holy place, where truth should always be exalted. Christ
should reign as King, and subdue all his enemies under his feet, and lead
captivity captive, that a gift may be received, which gift is eternal life, and
this life is in the son, by which gift, all that are in the son-like obedience,
do witness, being made heirs with him in the eternal Covenant, which is
established upon better promises then the first: therefore he takes away the
first, that he might establish the second, which is witnessed in the son-like
obedience, by the which we are made the righteousness of God through him, the
which is a mystery to the dark world, whole mouths are now open to speak evil
of that they know not, calling the great and mighty works of God, the delusions
of Satan, and the conditions now witnessed in the Sons and Daughters, that the
Prophets and Apostles both passed through, to speak of those things they now
call the works of Antichrist.

But he is an Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son: now see who is an
Antichrist, no man knows the Father, but the Son and he to whom the Son
reveals him, he that denies this Revelation, denies both Father and Son (that
is Antichrist:) Now to know the Father, is eternal life, and he that says he
knows, and has fellowship with the Father, and walks in darkness is a
liar, and the Devil is the Father of lies, and he that lives not in the truth,
which is Jesus Christ, he must needs lie, because he is out of the truth, and
t^erfore found an enemy to the pure truth, as it is in Jesus, who is the truth
and life it self, by whom the world is, and shall be judged, when the Lord
shall come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on all that know him not: this
day is even at hand, yea even now the Lord is coming a swift witness against
all unrighteous ones, who hold the truth of God in unrighteousness, living in
their ungodly practices, sporting themselves now in the daytime spending their
time upon their lusts living in their own wills, speaking forth the Saints
words, but are enemies to the Saints conditions. On consider, consider, the
Lord is just in all his ways, and he is come to judge the earth with
righteousness, he will plead with all flesh, before him all faces shall gather
blackness, and in him who is pure light, are all the secrets of all hearts laid
open; for nothing hides from him who is a God of consuming fire, and of purer
eyes then to behold iniquity. Oh be ashamed and confounded, all ye Inhabitants
of the earth, and of the Sea; for the Devil is come down unto you, and rages
because his time is but short.

To thy first, in page 6. where thou say it must needs be the spirit of
Antichrist and delusion, that does misinform the heart. I answer, the heart it
self is deceitful, and out of the abundance of thy heart, thy mouth speaks,
page 8. or else thou would not speak, as though a deceitful heart might be
misinformed by a delusion; for deceit and delusion is but one, which lodges in
the hearts of all the Children of disobedience who are all in the death, the
curse and the fall, unless they come to witness restoration, the stony heart
taken away, and a new heart given which is by the putting off the old man with
his Iusts and corruptions, and the new man put on, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

But in the light, in thy own Conscience, see when thou could witness thy
redemption, and thy heart free from delusions, as thou speak, or from the
power or darkness, when thou by thy own relation to me, went from one Parsonage
to another, and that not without thy Gown (as thou call it) upon thy back,
that thou have looked upon as it was indeed Antichristian, and then after at
Bodinham, thou did sue the poor people for tithes, to my knowledge, witness
one poor man thou did sue for 1 s. and would have constrained the poor man to
have paid charges; for that 1 s. if I and some other had not spoke to thee
after thou had often refused the 1 s. without charge: thou the light let thee
see tithes to be contrary to Christ, yet then lived contrary to the light in
thy own Conscience, as thou wast made to confess in my hearing and hundreds
more that thou had acted in it contrary to thy conscience, two years and
before that time thou did confess unto me, and to others, how thou was going
to take counsel of men, how to sue for thy tithes, and the Lord met with thee,
yet the De^il had like to have taken thee off of the work of the Lord, again,
diverse times, as thou confessed, then thou layest groaning under the burden of
thy tithes, yet thou resolvest to keep them another year, yet I had thoughts to
the contrary, and was made to tell thee at Jo. Ba. his house in Hereford, on
the sixth day, that thou would ere long, roar against thy tithes like a
Lion, and on the next first day after it was so, and thou wast made to
acknowledge the Lord in it, and sent thy man with those few words to me,
Brother Smith, the Lord has done a strange work in me this morning, and I
shall alter strangely this day, therefore pray earnestly for me, and make what
haste thou can to come unto me: now this is that which thou now calls
delusion; for this was the greatest power, that ever thou could witness; but
thou was made to see by the light, the emptiness of thy own words, both in
speaking and prayer before as thou call it, witness that in Margarets Graves
yard, where thou spokest words, the which were a burden to thy life and after
acknowledged that it was nothing but flesh, though thou did strive much in
thy own strength, and at Len. thou toldest the whole assembly, that thou had
long spoke after the manner of men; but now they must expect no more such from
thee, and that thy praying was as dead as ditch-water; but now thou should
wait to pray in the spirit, and speak by the spirit, and the like, at Cliston,
and then thou was convinced; that thou must leave all, even Glebe-land too, and
so live on thy own Land, and build on thy own Land, as thou call it, and
thou then was convinced of more deceit in thy heart, therefore thou wast not at
all freed from deceit, but always lived in the Antichristian state where thou
art yet, witness thy own hand in page 5. where thou confessest thou have got a
sinful heart, which is a heart got in sin, and full of sin; and we know, that
none but the pure in heart shall see God; but sin is of the Devil, and is the
work of darkness, and none that walks in darkness, have fellowship with God,
1 John 1.6. here thou discoverest plainly, that the old heart is not yet taken
away: therefore thou wast not at all, nor yet is, free from delusions,
therefore for shame, leave off thy judging the hearts of others, as thou have.
Read Skipp page 6.11.19.16.

As for the five charges which you mention page 9. and saying, that if we had
had more accusations against thee, its like thou should have had them, and in
saying, the first charge was hypocrisy in page 7. I answer, that that which
was written by me, in answer to thy deceitful lines, first sent to us, that
which I shall for the sake of the simple, set down plainly in the same order,
as it was written by me, having a just Copy of it by me, and then let the
tender spirited read thy lies in thy own book.

A true Copy of the Answer sent by me and the rest, to thy Letter and
Accusation.
1. YOu said you would tell us truly, etc.

Answ. There cannot be a true discovery of truth, brought forth in those that
are yet in the fallen estate as thou art.

2. That there is a mystery of iniquity in us that we see not.

Answ. The Mystery of Iniquity is not discovered, but by the pure light and
life of God, as it is freely given forth from God, the which light all the
Children of light lives in, but thou live in the dark ways of the world,
and lives not in this pure light to judge by.

3. That the time is come, that thou should disburthen thy self of the
discovery of truth.

Answ. Thou have laid aside too much truth: that which convinced of thy evil,
is now a burden unto thee, but we disown all that disown the truth.

4. That the Devil is an Angel of light, and his nature is to act in the light.
make Does the Scripture say that devils nature, is to act in the light?

Answ. Thou art imagining what the Devil is without thee but thou knows but
little of his actings in thee, although thou art his Servant and live in his
light (as thou call it) but the light of life thou art a stranger unto.

5. The light as it is acted in the soul, gives no discovery of the deceit,
but rather covers it all.

Answ. By virtue of the pure light that proceeds from the Father, we see thee
live in that which thou calls light, which does not discover unto thee, the
abominable practices thou art in, (to wit) pride (thou do usually call thy
own Child Mr. Benjamin Skippe) (a proud practi^e seldom heard of) the love of
the world, deceiving the people, upholding the worship of the Beast, painted
over with the Saints words, an enemy to the Saints life, as does now more fully
appear.

6. Thou writest so largely of the Devil, as it thou were acquainted with all
his secrets, both what he is doing and what he will do.

Answ. The things of God thou art a stranger to, for they are hid from thine
eyes, and all such wife ones of the Devil, the world and the flesh, who are in
the first nature, as thou art.

7. Thou writes of what the Devil will bring us to.

Answ. 1. It is neither thee, nor the Devil in thee, that knows what we are,
much less what we shall be.

2. If thou and the accuser of the brethren in thee, have ought against us at
present, that we walk not up to the present discovery of the pure light, as it
is in measure brought forth in us, then I charge thee to speak.

3. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam that is at present in thy own eye,
before thou go to cast the supposed mote that thou thinks may fall into our
eyes hereafter.

In the close of this Answer, I write a tender letter in love to his soul: now
let any that live in the light, compare these several answers, with that in
his page 7, 8, 9.

In answer to that which thou call railing and reviling language in page 10.
the Devil has always brought up his Children with so much manners, that they
must not tell a lier he lies, nor a Thief he is a Robber; or if any tell the
proud of their pride or the covetous of their covetousness, then this is called
railing read the Scriptures cited by him, this is fully cited Tit. 1.13.3.15.
etc. see how thou condemns the practice of Christ, both in his Person and
Members in page 11.

To that which thou calls thy experience in page 11. I tell thee thou have had
much experience of deceit being always in it; but thou had never any
experience of the powerful workings of God in us, only thou was made by the
light to see thy filthiness in some measure, and then presently thou went forth
from the counsel of the Lord, and acted and spoke in thy own will, the which
was deceit indeed, running before the light, the which I mourned over and often
complained to my friends, who can witness the same, page 12. The Scripture
cited by thee Mal: 3. they shall discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, the promise being
in measure fulfilled in us, we discern thee still to live in thy own will, and
wisdom: therefore when thou halted between two opinions long, at last one of
our friends was made sharply to reprove thee, the which thou could not own,
and therefore left us that had undergone burdens upon our own spirits for
thee, in condescending unto thee in tender love, desiring that thou might be
made at last to witness the work of the Lord in thee, unto which thou art still
a stranger, and now an enemy unto.

In thy page 13. thou mentions a Scripture as to us, 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. they there
are discovered by their covetousness; for they suppose, that gain is godliness:
and can thou in the least, accuse us of covetousness? if thou can spare not
to speak the truth, but else let shame cover thy face for so many lies, and
comparing us with those in this Text. Ask the light in thy own Conscience,
whether thou have not looked after gain, witness thy Tithes, thy looking after
another Parsonage to that thou have, witness thy Physical Office, thy
questioning what to do, for more maintenance, although thou have told me, that
thy Lands was 10 l. per Annum: 2 Timothy 3.4. that is thy own portion, witness thy
many Instruments of Music in thy house: page 16. thou writest of faith, but
thou know not that faith that purifieth the soul; he that has this hope,
purifieth himself as he is pure: he that believes is entered into his rest,
has ceased from his own works, as God did from his the which faith thou art a
stranger unto; for thou have writ ^^y own lies, and the deceit of thy own
heart, and thy carnal ^^oughts, the which thou call the world, with whom
thou art to judge: witness, page 9. line 11. and 7.18. and thou think in
page 16.51.56.57.

Page 17. Thou say, that we esteem, The more our hearts are brought off the
dealings of God, and prayer, and spiritual exercises, the more pure and
perfect: the which thou know to be a lie, witness thy own words, after the
meeting at Clifton, where thou say, thou saw such a spirit of prayer as thou
never had seen before, to which those that were there, can yet testify, and we
witness growth in grace and knowledge, 2 Pet. 3.18. and walk from grace to
grace, leaving the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1.
forgetting those things which are behind, we press forwards; for man in his
own wisdom cannot find out the Lord, who is a spirit, John 4.24. and regards
not the wise in heart, Job 37.23.24. therefore if any man will be wise, let him
become a fool, that so he may be found in the wisdom that is from above, Jam.
3.17.

Next thou says, that we desire the perishing of the former ways of God: this
is another of thy lies; for all the ways of the Lord are righteous, Psalm.
145.17. so in page 18. Satan acts thee to call that Scripture dangerous, Phil.
3.7.8. if thou call Paul's experiences dangerous, its no wonder that thou
call ours so too; but we know, that all Scriptures are written for our
learning, the which we are searching.

Next thou will show the thoughts (and but the thoughts) of thy own heart,
which is thy old sinful heart, witness thy own hand, page 5. line 11.12.
therefore from thy wicked heart, thou being ignorant of the spirit, do in
page 24. even jeer at speaking by the spirit in opposition to all the holy men
of God, 1 Pet. 1.21. therefore thou art an enemy to prayer in the spirit,
Ephesians. 6.18. the which we witness: therefore in the light of Jesus Christ, thou
art calling thy own company, (to wit the world) to try thy exposition of thy
own lies, that thou have cast upon us in page 23. and the last in thy second
rule, page 23. there thou denyest the sufferings of Christ, being ignorant of
it in thy own soul; but we know, that if we suffer with him, we shall be
glorified with him, so we are made willing to fill up the measure of the
sufferings of Christ, and those that have thus suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1.2. Thy second where thou mentions quaking, (thy
lies there we deny, but quaking and trembling) we witness to be the Saints
conditions fulfilled in us, who witness the same power of God as they did, Jer.
5.22. Isa. 66.2. Psalm. 2.12.

In the third, thou speak thy own lies at random.

In the fourth, thou have declared thy self to be an enemy to the sufferings of
Christ, calling it a delusion. Oh let shame stop thy mouth for ever, thou enemy
of the Cross of Christ, and thy own soul; for although Isaiah prophesied of
what Christ in his own person has fulfilled yet the Members of Christ are to
take up his Cross and follow him: and it is written and witnessed, 2 Cor. 1.5.
for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds
by Christ, 1 Pet. 4.13. 2 Cor. 4.10.

That which thou and the rest of the world does call our bondage and slavery,
page 18. that was the Saints, and is our joy and liberty, by which the
righteous seed is brought forth in obedience to the living God; but it is no
wonder, that the world hate us; for they know us not, if we were of the world,
the world would love his own, John 15.18.19. Mat. 5.11, 12. In answer to that
in page 29. Jesus Christ is unto us the bread of life, John 6.33.35.48. and he
is unto us the water of life, John 4.14. and 7.37. In page 30. thy lies are
made manifest unto all men, that knows us; for which of us does deny to labor
with his hands, and which of us is it, that lives in idleness? nay it is Satan
the Father of lies that acts thee to say, that we should say, It is the
language of Antichrist that bids men take care for their Families; for we do
take care for our Families, with all diligence in the sight of God, but our
Conversation is without covetousness, Heb. 13.5.

What is mentioned in the third Rule, page 31.32, 33, 34. to that I an^wer: the
same spirit that ruled in the Children of disobedience, then even in the days
of the Apostles, the same spirit rules in thee and others: now they stumble at
both Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; and now the same Generation are
stumbling at Christ in his Members, so all they that stumble, stumble at the
light, and at the corner stone: as for the Prophesiers that thou mentions in
page 36. I tell thee and them, that all Prophesiers that are enemies to
possession, we do deny to be any Members of Christ's Church, which is in God, 2
These. 1.

Page 37. is another lie, yea more then one plainly in saying, that we rank our
selves with the sinful men of the world, who are indeed all under the power of
Antichrist, from the which thou was never yet redeemed by Christ in thee; for
thou art astr anger to his life.

See what thou raisest from supposition, or thy if in page 37. see what thou
can witness from those Scriptures fulfilled in thee, thou art a Theif and a
Robber, stealing the Apostles words, stealling the word from thy Neighbor:
thou confesses that we walk like as the Apostles did in many things, as in
conversation, words, and writings, in page 40. and 41. thou say that the
whole bulk of our actions hitherto, as far as thou have either known or heard,
do declare us to be carried forth as Ministers of righteousness: oh let all
take notice of this, the Devil speaks some truth; but in the latter end of page
40. thou art thinking that Satan's Kingdom is divided, oh filthy conclusion, oh
mere Babel, can thou open thy mouth, and let thy pen run against such a
harmless people, of whom thou thy self art made to confess such excellent
things.

I shall now leave a little in following of thee in thy confused and deceitful
lines, and shall turn to that Scripture, 2 Cor. 11.13.14, 15. for such were
false Apostles, deceitful workers, etc.

In page 41. elsewhere thou raises thy own conceivings, (as of other things)
of the Scripture, and then amplify or illustrate upon thy own Imaginations: so
giving private interpretations of the Scriptures, for thy own private ends,
whereas no Scripture is of any private interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20.

I shall lay down by plain Scripture, who those false Apostles are.
1. They are such as preach another Jesus, 2 Cor. 11.4. now Jesus is a Savior,
Thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins,
Mat. 1.21. he makes an end of sin, Dan. 9.24. being dead with Christ, Romans
6.8. the body of sin is destroyed, v. 6. he that is dead with Christis freed
from sin, verse 7. compared with 1 Pet. 4.1. by the which we are made free from
sin, Romans 6.18.22. and become the Servants of God; so that the blood of this
Jesus, who is the son of the living God, cleanses us from all sin, 1 John
1.7.2.12. because your sins are forgiven for his names sake, which name is
Jesus a Savior from sin, and we know that he is manifested to take away our
sins, and he that abides in him sins not, 1 John 3.5.6. Rev. 1.5. Now
whosoever believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5.1. Now
Jesus is a Savior, Christ is God in flesh, or the anointing of the true
Teacher, 1 John ^.17. Now he that can witness a Savior, is brought forth in
flesh, he is born of God, and can witness Christ in him the hope of glory which
is Immanuel, God with us, and those dwell in God, and God in them, 1 John 4.16.
2 Cor. 6.16. now sin is the unfruitful work of darkness, God is light, 1 John
1.5. Now he that says he can witness Jesus, and is born of God, and yrt lives
in darkness, to wit sin, he is a lier: now Jesus is one with the Father, and
dwells in the Father: now he that dwells in the Father, has this hope or
faith, that purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. and 5.1. and he
that abides in him, sins not, this is Jesus the son of the living God, that
saves his people from their sins, whom Paul witnessed, revealed in him, Gal.
1.16. by the which he preached grace and peace to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
1.3.30. and 22.16. now there is no other name given under Heaven, by which men
shall be saved: therefore all those that cannot witness this Jesus, this Son of
God, they are false Apostles that speak of a Jesus, that they know not: like
those that went to cast out De^ils in the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached,
Acts 19.13.14.15, 16. those were not vagabond-Jewes, only, but chief of the
Priests that did so: now all that cannot witness this Christ, this Jesus
revealed and brought forth in them, as the true Apostles did, that spoke from
the life of Christ in them, even all others are false Apostles, among whom thou
art seen in the light of Jesus Christ to be, and in the world, like a raging
Sea, whose waves casts up mire and dirt continually, unto whom there is no
peace, Isa. 57.20, 21. a wandering Star never settled, Jude 13. but tossed up
and down with every wind of Doctrine: from such turn away.

2. How you may know them.

P. 36.9. Abiding in the light that comes from Christ; in that light, you will
see light, and so comprehend all the Children of darkness; for he that follows
Christ, who is the light of the world, shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life to judge all the false Apostles, and all the Children of
the night, who live in the dark mind in pride, covetousness, lying, making a
Trade of the Scriptures, which were spoken forth from the light, by those that
witnessed it, but thou that takes up their expressions, and live not in the
same life, thou art the false Apostle that preaches another Gospel: now
besides the foregoing Scriptures, thou have declared thy self to be a false
Apostle, by thy own writings.

First, in writing thy thinkings and conceivings, page 50. yet my former
thoughts page 53. I am but in part convinced page 16. methinks, page 51. as I
conceive, such were the false Apostles, 1 Timothy 1.7. understanding not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, but speak and write the imaginations of their own
hearts, as thou have done in page 18. the thoughts of my own heart, in the
which are many devices, Prove. 19.21.

Secondly, In being one of the world, and calling thy Fellow Creatures of the
world, to judge what thou say, and here thou have manifested thy self, to be
a false Prophet, entered into the world, which the Saints of God never did;
page 23. and let all the world assure themselves, that in page 45. here thou
do wrire thy self (as thou art) calls thy own to witness the world, one with
the world: therefore we being gathered out of the world, are hated and written
against by thee, John 15.19. I shall forbear to write what I know of thy
former, and yet continued practices: this being sufficient to prove plainly,
that thou art a false Apostle, whose many lies written against us, I need not
to mention in particular, only some few in short, that the simple may not be
deceived by thee, nor the truth suffer altogether under thy scandalls.

Page 48. Thou biddest the feeble Creatures of the world, to judge of spiritual
things, though the world by wisdom knows not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. page 46. thou
say, that we do lying wonders; but have thou in all those lies and writings
of thine, proved that any of those which thou call wonders, are lying
wonders; for it is not thy saying it is a lying wonder, that makes it to be so;
for there were such as thee, that said, that Christ cast out De^ils through
Beelzebub, but they were liers, and so art thou.

Thou say our works are deceitful, page 49. but thou have no ground for it;
but the deceit of thy own heart, page 18. the which thou call the world to
bear thee witness, page 23. page 50. thou fayest, we di^own the power and
spirit of truth (which is a lie) but thou have a form of godliness, denying the
power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Page 53. Thou say thou art in part convinced, that peradventure the Lord
would have his people walk in some way, whereby they might be brought into a
perfect unity in heart. Oh art thou not here ashamed to let even the world,
whom thou call unto so often, read thy ignorance? what art thou, but in part
convinced, what way leads to unity? Oh for shame for shame give over thy
profession, talk no longer of the Gospel thou have made thy self manifest to
all men, Oh have thou been talking of the Gospel so long, and art yet ignorant
of the way that leads to unity. Oh let shame stop thy mouth, and cover thy face
for ever; but if thou would shift from this, and say thou meanest an outward
way or form. I tell thee, there is no way to have fellowship with the Father, 1
John 1.3. but in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge (not a thinking) of
the Son of God, who is the true living, and only way unto the Father, John
14.6. where is perfect unity, even one heart and one way, Ier. 32.39. which is
away of holiness: the Wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein, Isa.
35.8.

Also in page 53. thou say, that thou art very sensible, that thou have lost
thy comforts, and therefore thou do hope not to give over, until thou have
found some way or means of having thy former enjoyments refreshed.

Why have thou lost that thou never had, thou said but now, that thou was
but in part convinced of the way; and had thou the comforter long ago, and
lost him now? oh Babylons Merchant, the way and the comforter is but one, the
which is Jesus Christ, John 14.6.17.26. and John 17.23.

I know, that if Jesus Christ had been brought forth in thee, without which
there is no true comfort who is the substance of all tithes, types, forms and
shadows, that thou could not unto this day, have remained a Parish Priest, and
so uphold an Antichristian Priesthood, halting between many opinions, neither
according to Aaron, Levi, nor Christ; but living in thy own will, and so living
above Christ, who lived not in his own will; for says he, not my will, but
thine be done, John 6.38. And now who will regard thy writings, when thou
acknowledges, that the comforter which is the spirit of truth, is departed
from thee: now it appears, thou art a lier indeed, now thou have no truth born
up in thy understanding, thy former enjoyments (as thou calls it) which were
indeed, nothing but comprehensions got up in the wisdom of the Serpent.

Oh art thou not ashamed, that the world which thou did soon make up in thy
writings, should now read thy confusion, art thou not ashamed in such a
condition as this, when thou confessest thy former enjoyments, and comforts are
departed from thee, even now, to write against those that thou acknowledgest,
to have large experiences, and much of the power of truth through Christ, page
50. Oh take heed least it had been better for thee, that a Millstone had been
hanged about thy neck, and thou cast into the Sea. Oh can thou not look back
on him, whom thou have thus pierced, to wit, the life of Christ in others: now
thou may read with shame and tears, that which thy own hand has written from
thy own sinful heart, look in page 5. and 8.18. which was then in the
apostatized condition, without the former comforts (as thou calledst it) page
53. now thou art found to be a false Apostle indeed. Oh remember from whence
thou art fallen and do thy first works, yea repent ere it be too late, Rev.
2.5. Oh though thou can strive with man, there is no striving with thy Maker,
who will come a swift witness against all deceitful workers, who live within
the power of what they speak or write; much more, against those that write
filthy abominable lies. Oh if thou love either Christ or thy own soul: return,
return, unto the light of Christ in thy own conscience, which will let thee see
the deceit of thy own sinful heart, out of the abundant deceit thereof, thy pen
has run so largely in confusion: now I charge thee in the presence of the
living God, (in as much love to thy soul as ever) that thou return to the light
of Christ in thy own conscience and mind, that which checks thee in secret.

I tell thee man in love, there is something yet in thee, which will witness me
to be true. See one more page, 64. where for thy own defense, not for the
defense of the truth, thou sai^^, thou wast necessitated to fly unto the
practices and truths of other men to wit, Baptists, where it is plain, thou had
not the spirit of Christ to fly unto and speak from, as the true Apostles had
witness one, Acts 6.10. therefore thou art both seen in the light, proved by
Scripture, and thy own Writings, to be a false Apostle, and a false Minister, 3
Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. much more might be said and proved, both from thy writing
and actings; but I desire the good of thy soul, by this which is sufficient at
present, to prove thee at present to be one of the wondering Startes, Jude 13.

A word to all Professors in the world.
BEing it was ordered of my Lord God, and Father of lights, that something must
go forth in print, as from me, who am the least of all Saints, I was even as
freely engaged in my spirit, out of tender love to your souls, to present a few
lines from that measure of spirit, which is brought forth in me.

Oh my friends, my friends, the hour is not only coming, but now is witnessed
in me, that the dead shall: hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live, John 5.25. and the voice of the true Dove is heard in our
Land, to wit, this earthly Tabernacle that is made the Temple of the living
God, who is now fulfilling his promises in us, that walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, even in us is the Lord, establishing his new and
everlasting Covenant, even the sure and certain mercies of David, which is by
the life of Jesus Christ in us fulfilled and witnessed, whereby we have
fellowship with the Father, and one in measure brought to live in him, and he
in us, where we have joy and rest, and eternal peace, which passes all
understanding, and all the worlds comprehension, where all the Children of the
light meet, and see face to face; for the Lord has brought again, Sion who is
become the perfection of beauty, out of the which, God now shines, Psalm. 50.2.
and is become our glory, and we his, Isa. 46.13. Oh praises, praises be unto
him, who has redeemed us out of Nations kindreds and tongues, to serve the
living God in newness of life, and not in oldness of Letter, that so now we may
offer up eternally, living and eternal sacrifice and praise for evermore, who
has in measure redeemed us from the world, and out of all darkness that is
therein, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, and made us
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, which is the eternal light
of life; for God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; and all those that
live in him, are Children of the day, who walked in the day, even the pure
light, in the which there is no occasion of stumbling, our feet being guided in
the path of peace, which is the true and living way; in which the wafaring man,
though a fool, shall not err. Isa. 35.8. which is a pure way of holiness,
leading up into the full enjoyment of the Father, who has long waited to be
gracious unto us; and now in the day of his love and power, has gathered us in
his arms of love, and brought us home unto himself, who were before the
outcasts of Israel, wondering with you from Mountain to Hill, but did not
find rest unto our souls; but now the great and mighty power of the Lord has
raised up his own seed in us: now indeed, we are made by the life of the Son
in us, to cry Hallelujah unto him, to him alone be all, honor, glory and
obedience, and eternal praises forever, even for ever and ever; for he that was
lost is found, he that was dead is alive, and behold he lives for ever more.

Now my friends, the whole world lies in wickedness, and all the world by
wisdom knows not God: the natural man perceives not the things of God, which
are hid from the wi^e and prudent, even from the readers of the Scripture, from
Scribes, Pharisees, Priests, yea the Princes of this world; for had they known
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory* who is crucified daily by the
same spirit that now rules in the Children of disobedience, even in the
Scribes, Priests and people, that live in the same Nation where the learned
ones of the world are, (...) all those that walk in darkness, to wit, pride, to
covetousness, (...) love of the world, hatred, variance strife sedition,
heresy, ba^^ biting, heady high-minded lovers of pleasures, more then the over
of God: scoffers, walking after their own ungodly lusts, raging waves of the
Sea, foaming out their own shame, who accounts gain godliness, whose eyes are
full of adultery, feet swift to shed blood, ears open to all deceit, whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness: the poison of Aspes are under their
lips: their throats an open Sepulcher, who imagines mischief, lying altogether
deceitful, and desperately wicked: who can know it, such as these are the
fruits of the flesh, in the which all the world lies; therefore I witness
against the world, that the works thereof are evil.

Now in the world there are Sects, Schisms, Judgments and Opinions, there
they are heaping up teachers to themselves, having itching ears, and according
to the number of their fancies, so are their ways of worship; according to the
number of their imaginations, so are their Gods; for there are many Gods, and
many Lords, but the living God is not known by the world; for it by wisdom
knows not God* no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him: now he that has the Son revealed in him, is born of God, and he
that is born of God overcomes the world, and sins not, he that sins,
has not seen him; but this is a hard saying, who can bear it* the world
cannot: for the world hears its own, they that are of God, hears Gods word,
ye hear them not, therefore ye are not of God.

Now friends, all you that have looked after me, and other men, for teaching,
now I can write unto you what I ^n^w, that it is the Lord alone, that teaches
his people to profit, none teaches like he, who is now my teacher indeed, and
will be yours, if you are made willing and obedient to be tought, directed, and
guided by him: who is gathering his out of all Nations, kindreds, and tongues,
Ezekiel. 31.11. which is by Jesus Christ the one and only Priest, who is the light
of the Gentiles, and the light of the world, by which he has enlightened every
one that comes into the world, John 1.9. which light shines into the
darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, verse 5. Now the world is set
in the heart of man, Eccles. 3.11. of the which world, Christ is the light, and
he that follows him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, John 8.12. this is that grace of God that has appeared unto all men,
teaching them to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. this is the light
of Christ, who is the word of God in the heart; for this word of the living God
is not far off; but it is nigh thee in thy heart, and in thy mouth, that thou
may hear it, and see it, and do^t, Deuteronomy. 30.14. Now therefore friends, look
not forth after them, that say Christ is here or there; for they are all
deceivers: the word is nigh, the light is within thee, even in thy dark heart
although thy darkness cannot comprehend it, because thou love darkness rather
then the light of Jesus Christ, which shines in thy Conscience, and lets thee
see the evil of thy ways, and calls thee to repentance, and to forsake the
wicked and live: this is the Talent that thou art hiding in the earth; for the
which thou must give an account to therefore say I unto thee, mind that
teacher that teaches to deny ungodliness, and this is the light of Jesus
Christ in thy Conscience, the which light proceeds from Christ, and leads
all that loves it, John 8.12. up to Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the
life, the only way, and no other way to the Father.

Now all of you owning this word Teacher, and light in your own Consciences,
you will come to witness Jesus Christ in you the light of life, and know him to
be the way unto the Father, which leads out of the darkness of all the worlds
ways, worships, forms, and fashions, and customs, and words, ways and
actions, and come to be gathered in the light unto Jesus Christ, who is the
light, and from the light, then to come to witness the Scriptures to be true,
yea even fulfilled in you by the same spirit, as it was in them that did write
and speak forth the Scriptures, and so witness with them against the same
things that were witnessed against then, by the Children of the light, who had
fellowship with the Father, by the which they saw that which in measure I
witness, that there is but one way, one truth, one light, one faith, one
baptism, one spirit, one head, one high Priest, who ever lives to make
intercession for us, one Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in
Heaven, one God over all, who is rich unto all that call upon him in spirit and
truth, the which worshippers the Father seeks to worship him, who is a
Spirit, and all his Worships are spiritual; but God hears not sinners, and he
that regards iniquity in his heart* the Lord will not hear him; for there are
none but the pure in heart that shall see God, whose presence is terrible to
all the m^kers of iniquity, that continue in the unfruitful workers of ^^^ness.

Now all of you, see that you keep unto the true guide which i^ Jesus Christ,
and follow him, and see that you do not turn again to the vomit, as the manner
of some is, who begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh: Oh leave all for
Christ, you cannot serve two Masters, you cannot be of the world, and of G^^,
you must witness a separation therefore i^ love to all your somes that have
been professors with me in public in these parts of the Nation: and all others
flatter not your selves in your conditions, promising your selves liberty
whilst you are the Servants of corruption: therefore forsake the wicked and
live.

H. S.

FINIS.

