A DECLARATION of the Knights and Gentry of the County of HERTFORD that adhered
to the late KING.
BY discountenancing our ancient laws under which the Nation has been so long
happy, and pursuing after new forms, and disputes about them; Government which
was made for our Protection, has been the occasion of laying us open to all
misery; and we that before in respect of society had but one common reason,
have broken our unity by that which should have preserved it. And whilst
every man pursues his single apprehensions of good, the real good of the Nation
was lost: from which confusion of parties our valiant and wise General is now
hopefully withdrawing us, and because the passionate discourses of some private
persons seem to obstruct this good work he is about, We have thought fit to
make this Declaration for our selves, that we are not in the number of those
that vaunt our selves in the prospect of our prosperity, nor that if it were in
our power would delight in any revenge upon any man or body of men whom we
think has contributed most to our sufferings; we are rather of those that will
with patience bear the indignation of God because we have offended him, and
will forgive our brethren a little, that of him we may be forgiven much. We
will not be so ungrateful to God that by the management of his excellency has
done so much for our delivera^ce, as presently to be prosecuting others, which
as it would behigh ingratitude to him, so we dare say it would be no less to
the General, whose whole conduct of his business, shows him to be truly of a
public spirit that will protect every party as they subject themselves to the
Laws made for the whole Nation; and the wisdom of the approaching Parliament
will without doubt be such, that we have all reason to hope our settlement from
them, and to determine our obedience to them.

Thomas Fanshaw Knight. of the Bath Simon Fanshaw Knight Francis Boteler Knight
Edward Cooper Knight John Wats Knight Ralph Bash William Cooper Robert Slingsby
Thomas Conisbie Edward Crosby George Bromley John Tailor Thomas Brann George
Bromley,

etc.
London Printed for Daniel Pakeman at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet 1660


