The Merchant's Warehouse laid open: OR, The Plain Dealing LINNEN-DRAPER.

SHOWING How to Buy all sorts of Linen and Indian Goods: Wherein is perfect
and plain Instructions, for all sorts of Persons, that they may not be deceived
in any sort of Linen they want. Useful for Linen Drapers, and their Country
Chapmen, for Semstresses, and in general for all persons whatsoever. Whereunto
is added, The Art of Cutting out Shifts, so that you may save a quarter of an
Ell, in Cutting out one Shift, and ^et Cut it as long and large, as others hall
out of a quarter more. A Work never before Attempted.

DEDICATED To Her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark.

By J. F.

LONDON. ^^^^ted for John Sprint at the Bell, and Geo. Conyers at the Golden
Ring in Little Britain. 1696.

TO HER Royal Highness THE ^rincess Ann of Denmark. Humbly Dedicated.
MAY it please your Highness, that the Loud Acclamations, and Applause of your
unlimited ^^dness, and boundless Charity to all those that ^y themselves to
your Bounty, have never yet (...) known to return empty handed, which has
^^sioned this present boldness in me, humbly to ^^^ent this small Epistle to
your Royal Highness, and (...) made me presume with all humility to crave
^^rage to this small Epistle: Neither had I taken (...) Presumption on me, had
I not been very well ^^ed of two things, the first is, That amongst them any
Books that have been Writ on most ^^cts, there has not yet in any Age been any
^^^rth on this; the next is, That I am well assu^^^ it will prove as general an
assistance and good Worldly Affairs, as any yet written, both to (...) and
Poor, by reason the Rich and Wealthy do (...) buy great quantities of Linen,
and so conse^tly, when they are deceived with bad Linen, (...) be deceived of
great Sums; and the Poor having but little Moneys to lay out, and that little
(...) haps, has been saved out of their Families B^ to procure a little clean
Linen to put on their (...) and if they are deceived of that, can by no (...)
get more to supply themselves withal; but if (...) take the advice of this
little Book, they will n^ (...) of their expectation, in having that which is
(...) let it be of any sort of Linen, or Indian (...) whatsoever they shall
have occasion for: An^ these reasons I shall presume to place it among^^ of
your Acts of Charity, it being hoped to (...) Act of Charity to those Poor
People that seldo^ Linen, and being unskilful in Linen, are (...) fore often
deceived to their great sorrow; The ^^ing the first Book I ever wrote in my
Life, and (...) fore humbly crave your Royal Patronage and ^^^ritable
Construction, on what your Wis^^^ Knowing Judgment shall think amiss, is the
H^^ Request of

Your Royal Highnesses most Humbl^ Obedient Servant.

AN EPISTLE TO THE ^ourteous READER.
(...) Five reasons I have been prevailed with to Write this little Book; the
First Reason is, That those that ^^^ly dealt withal, having found by Experience
that (...) Linen on my Judgment, were never Cheated ^^elved; and therefore
have been very Importunate ^e I left off, to have me put forth some Directions
^^ey may have understanding to buy good, and not be (...). The Second is, The
great difficulty it is for ^^^ple to know good Linen from bad, by reason many
(...) Linen are very good to appearance, and yet wear ^^er, and other sorts
again appear very thin and ill, (...) the best of Cloth. The Third is, To
prevent (...) from buying damaged Cloth, which most People buy, ^ing well to
the Eye, but when it comes into the Wa^^ls into pieces, and are in as much want
the week af^^ ^ashed as if they had not bought any. The Fourth ^^event all
People from buying one thing for another, ^asking for one sort, they are shown
another, which ^^lse sort, and wears very ill, and that is for want ^^ing the
sorts of Cloth, which several sorts I shall (...) you with such Instructions
how to know them, that ^^^nest Capacity shall know all, or most sorts of Cloth,
^hey shall have occasion to use or enquire for. The Fifth and Last Reason,
which has persuaded me i^ you know, that few or none of those Cloths that are
(...) about and sold by the Pedlars, are the true and ri^^^ Cloth for wear, but
are a sort of fine Cloth to the (...) but wears not above half the time of true
Cloths (...) few or no people can discern, till they have worn^^ and by that
time they have forgotten who sold it t^^ it may be, when they have sold it you,
will not ap^ you in some time, but send their Partners, by re^^^ know they have
sold you a bad Cloth for a good; I sha^^ fore make it my endeavor in this
little Book, to (...) you such Instructions, for every sort of Cloth o^ Goods,
that you may not be deceived by the mo^^ Dealer, if you shall please to take
the Advice of t^^ Book; laying out the Price of one Book shall be (...) buying
of six Else of Linen; and in order to yo^ understanding thereof, I shall
proceed Alphabetica^ if it answers my design to your content, I shall i^ time
enlarge on the same subject, and shall esteem^ happy, in being the instrument
of your good,

Yours

THE Plain-Dealing LINNEN-DRAPER.
A.
BEcause I design to go on Alphabetically in this Book, and the Cloth that
deserves the preheminency in this, both for general and common use and
strength, there is no (...) that is at present in use, that exceeds
Alco^^-holland, it being made of the best Flax in the (...), and the Third
being Spun by the most care^d curious hands; and it is Wove by the best of
^^rs; and therefore if you are resolved not to (...) good Holland for Shirts
and Shifts, you must ^is sort of Holland; now to let you know how ^^or choose
the right, you must ask for Alcomore^d that is made by one Stanlack in Holland,
who ^akes the true Cloth, the pieces contain about ^^^ty nine, or thirty four
Else at the most; it has (...) in the Selvidges, not commonly sewed on, ^yed
into holes loose in the Cloth: The present (...) Prizes are from two Shillings
and four Pence, ^ree Shillings, which is generally the highest (...) of the
sort; it is about one yard and half a ^^ter broad. There is also another sort
of Alco^^-holland, of the same man's make, which is above three quarters of a
yard wide, and has (...) sewed on to both Selvidges, the right of both (...)
marked with this mark on the end at the (...) of the breadth. So much for
Alcomore.

B.
I shall begin with Bore-laps, because (...) Shifts or Shirts is counted and
known to b^ (...) strong Cloth, though not so certainly stron^ former, yet if
they are thick and even thre^ wear well, but if thin and uneven, they wear
(...) there is three sorts, one Ell wide, the oth^^ wide, and another three
quarters wide, the made up much like an Alcomore-holland, (...) crested or
double in the middle, and have (...) sewed on: The ill-conveniency that attends
(...) of Cloth is, that it seldom wears white, the third sort of Holland, which
not only wears (...) as Alcomore-holland, but washes whiter (...) does, but
that being Ell-wide is only used for (...) it is called Bridges-holland.

The next being Musling called Bettilies, (...) of general use for Cravats, or
Heads for Wo^^^ use for several things, it being a more ag^ (...) wear than any
other slight Cloths, and is the ^^^est of all Muslings that comes into England
o^dinary sort, for there is none of them ever ye^ extreme fine: There is two
sorts of those B^ the short sort as it is generally called, contain^^ty yards,
the long sort contains about twen^^ yards; they are near ell-wide, and are the
(...) of all Muslings for washing, there is beside^ Bettilies, Colconda, and
Oringal Bettilie^ your Cumum Bettilies, and several others; (...) shall only
treat of these, and of these I shall (...) instructions in their order as they
are set (...) because these are the present useful ones for ^wice, the
Bettelies Colconda are generally ve^e but thin, they are useful only for Women's
^e, by reason they wear very slight and ill; ^^e about yard wide or a little
more, they con^^ut sixteen yards in a piece: and are no ways (...) Men's use, by
reason they are apt to be fray'd, (...) they be starched by those that make it
their ^on only to starch, they are usually fray'd in ^iece as they come over,
therefore you must (...) your inspection great care, lost the piece be ^^ay'd
when you buy them, for if they be, you ^ver bring it to rights in the washing;
but ^arched, if preserved from fraying, they look ^^licate and clear. The
second is the Oringal ^^s, this is of a different nature, they being ^elve
yards long, and are the properest sort ^^cks of Mons Cravats, and for Cravats
for or^^^^ Tradesmen they are extreme good, by rea^^ey are not only strong but
thick; they are (...) yard wide, and are usually the cheapest of (...) those
Bettilies I have named, and are fit for ^ses that Muslings are used for, the
third and (...) Bettilies that I shall speak of in this Book, is ^etilies
Cumum, which is above fourteen yards ^^ece, and yard half quarter wide, it is
usually ^e the first Bettily, and very thin, but yet (...) very well, very
little worse than the first Bet^^^^ I have mentioned, it being very clear and
(...); it is very useful for many things, especially (...) use of Women. The
next Cloth that comes (...) the Letter B, is a Cloth called Barras, they (...)
generally twenty eight Else, it is about Ell (...) it is a very useful Cloth
for packing of Goods ^e Country, and when well whited is good for ordinary
Sheets for Poor People and Servan^ of good breadth, and although very thin,
(...) strong, but especially if it be thick; there is (...) sort of Stuff
called Boulter, it is not half yard made of a sort of Woollen, which is very
thi^ for straining and such like uses; it being of (...) importance, I shall
not treat farther on it, (...) you know that they are usually, and ough^ twenty
four yards long, and is bought for fou^ or six Shillings when dear, by the
Piece, an^ at Retail for 6 d per yard. As for Callicoes, (...) son they are of
general use with us, I shall (...) some of them; the First is Bafts, of which
the two sorts, broad and narrow, they both hold teen yards in length, the one
being above ya^^ other three quarters wide, they are the stron^ any ordinary
Callicoe, and wear very well, (...) much worn in Shirts and Shifts, the
greatest ^^veniency that attends them, they are incli^ wash yellow without very
good washing; (...) another sort is called Birompots, which is (...) the same
nature and length, which is used (...) same use, and for Linings of Britches,
(...) strong. I could name many more, but (...) name all sorts, it would swell
the Book bey^ designed limits, therefore shall content my se^ what only is
useful; there is one sort of Cal^ led Birom Banies, which is much used for Cu^
This Birom Banies is a Callico striped with a^ and white Cotton, wove one by
the other, (...) two or three stripes of brown, and one broad this Callico is
above yard wide, it holds te^ each Piece, it is naturally a rotten sort of we^
for that reason is fit only to hang up for C^ either for Beds or Windows; it
usually was (...) seven, eight, or nine Shillings a Piece, but (...) (...)
Indian Goods grown dearer, it oftentimes is (...) cots and slits, therefore you
must take great ^^en you buy any of it.

C.
^ll begin with Cambricks, it being a Cloth ve^l in our Nation, for these
following uses, ^^dkerchiefs, for Head Linen, for Bishops (...); there is a
great deal of difficulty to know (...) Cambrick from Kentings, by reason there
^^ings are of the same breadth, and are of the ^hiteness as the Cambricks are;
the Kentings (...) never so white at first, will in time wash yel^^st for
Cambricks, they will wash white to the (...) its wear; the Cambricks are sold
either (...) fifteen, or thirty in a Parcel, the Kentings ^^d by Rounds, as
four or five in a Round, as (...) sold by Retail, the Kentings are always sold
(...) than Cambricks of the same fineness. Cro^^^ sort of very course Linne, it
is of the use ^^s is of, it is the general sort of brown Lin^hich is used for
Packing for Exportation, ^^land Goods, it being whited, it wears very ^feriour
to a right Canvas, farther, it being (...), it is useful for abundance of other
uses, as ^chen Cloths. Canvas, there are several (...) but coming all from
France, at this time they ^ohibited from coming into this Nation, and (...)
reason I shall in this Book pass by the directi^^ which otherwise should have
been given in this, (...) have a sort of Cloth made here in England (...)
Canvas, which name ought properly to be gi^^ none but French: but this sort of
English (...) which I am going to treat of, is a sort that ^e here, and dyed in
thread yellow, if you can get the color that fits you, and fine enough^
purpose, it is better for Stays than Frenc^ will not retch, nor let Stays out
of shape. (...) of this Letter is Indian things, and the fir^^^ name is Cossees
Musling, it being a sort of (...) which is of several bredths, as some almost
(...) half wide, others of above yard wide, oth^^ little more than three
quarters wide, the (...) bredths being usually very fine and thick, ^^^ful for
a great many uses, which I shall omit (...) the Buyer putting it to such uses
as they thi^ proper, excepting Cravats, for which it is to (...) and will wear
yellow, and look ill about th^^ but withal it wears very strong; the narrow
(...) Cossees is thin and very course, only pre^^ course Necks of Cravats, or
to lie betwixt (...) Checkered Linen is a thing of great use in ^^^tion, for
Bed-quilts, and for Sea shirts, it be (...) wide, it is sold for thirty
Shillings, or thir^^ Shillings a Piece, there is about thirty six ya^^ Piece,
it being thin, yet wears well, it is usu^^ for 12 d. per yard. Coureyes is a
sort of fi^^ Callico about yard wide, it is a strong Call^^^ double threaded
one way, it is but seven yar^^ half long in the Piece, is something yellow
Izarees, and cannot be known from right (...) only the length of the Izarees is
eight yar^ the Izarees is double threaded both ways, (...) two sorts of Indian
Silk called Culgees, th^^ Satin, the other is Taffety, they are stained (...)
sorts of Colors; they wear as well as any S^ comes from the Indies, they are
much used for kerchiefs, and for Lining of Beds, and for (...) for both Men and
Women: they are two b^^^ three quarters wide, and yard half quarter^ they are
as at this time all Goods is, not on^^ ^^certain Prizes. Chints being of so
general (...) this City, that I cannot ^omit speaking of (...) there being
several sorts, but I shall speak of (...) few; the first is a sort of very fine
Chints, (...) are Painted with very fine Colors all of In^^gures, either of
Birds, Beasts or Imagery, (...) washed never so often, still retain their
co^^^^ they are worn to pieces. There are your (...) Serunge which are
something courser, yet (...) very pretty Flowers, they are about three (...) of
a yard wide, about twelve yards in a (...) The Colors of those continue as
well as ^^er, they are usually sold for Gowns, Petty^^ and to make Quilts for
Beds, which Quilts ^^^ted the finest sort. There is a third sort (...) all the
sorts at present I shall name, this sort (...) former is of great use for
making ordinary (...) which (...) the greatest use they are sold for, ^^^ing
about seven yards long, and were for^^old for three Shillings and six Pence,
but (...) Five, and Five and Six Pence. Another ^^dian Stuff, is Chercanneys,
it is cheickered ^^ety of colors, as Red, Yellow, Blew and (...) it is a sort
of Stuff wears very well in any (...) shall think fit to use it for, as Lining
of ^^indow Curtains or Morning Gowns, or Un^^y Coats, it is about ten yards in
a Piece, ^^e yard wide: It has been sold some time (...) thirteen and fourteen
Shillings a Piece, but (...) about twenty or three and twenty Shillings (...):
some of this kind holds about sixteen yards (...), and are the same both as to
the breadth (...) as the former.

D.
I shall begin with Dowlas, for the genera^ is of for ordinary Shifts and
Shirts for Trades (...) and should have begun with Dowlas from Fra^^ reason it
is usually the strongest sort, but tha^ prohibited and forbidden, a Canvas is,
it is at (...) needless to fill up the Book with unprofitab^^ course, therefore
shall proceed with Dowla^ Hamborough. This sort of Hamborough Dowla^ several
breadths, as three quarters, three q^^^ and one, sixteenth, three quarters and
half (...) made much like the French, and some in pa^^ is so like, that were it
not for the lengths, (...) Drapers could not know it from the right Fren^^ the
difference is thus, the French holds o^ dred and four Else in each piece, and
fifty (...) half piece: the Hamborough holds fifty four (...) whole piece, and
twenty seven else in a hal^^ this last wears well, but with these faults (...)
they never fail of, it wears with prickles or (...) and never wears perfectly
white as the form (...) there is this difference in the folding up of the from
the Hamborough, the French Dowlas h^^ Selvidges turned in, and after that
folded in^^ folds flat, but the Hamborough is rolled up ve^^ and either tacked
with Thread, or tied ab^^ Tape. Dimetty being of several sorts, and (...) use in
our Nation, and being of our Englis^ (...) facture, I shall therefore discourse
on every particular, and shall begin with the strongel^ is called Pillow
Fustian, it is of great us^ Feathers in for Pillows, and is exceeding (...)
Wast-Coats, and for Lining of Breeches, (...) will not use them for either,
because they the ^^hick, it being double wove; it is about twenty (...) long,
and almost half ell wide, the courser (...) are, they ^e the narrower and the
shorter: The (...) sort of Dimetty, is the common sort of plain, (...) is
usually the same length of the former, but (...) are single Wove, and are but
half as thick (...) former, the finest sort is commonly the ^^est and longest;
there is two sorts of those, (...) has a Nap on, and the other sort which is
(...) the finest without a Nap, and is used only for ^^ork Beds on, they are
the former length and ^strong, some of the Pillow Fustains are Brown, (...) are
always dyed sad color for men's Frocks, (...) there are some of the single
dyed, these are (...) to foot flockings with, and to line Breeches; (...) is
another sort of flowered white, which is used (...) for Wast-Coa^s for Men, and
P^tticoats for Wo^^^^ they are made broader than the plain, and if (...) are
not cut in the working, will wear very well, (...) sort is twenty yard long,
and are of several Fi^^^^, if you would discern the Cuts that is in them, (...)
^oust look on the wrong side, which you will ^sewed up again, if there be not,
many Cuts it is ^able, for they cannot cut the Cotton which is on ^^ght side,
without cutting some holes through, ^^nest of those flowered are the strongest.
There ^ewise one sort more of flowered Dimerty that is (...) but thinner and is
dearer. I shall now begin (...) the stripped, which has been, and now is in use
(...) ^ast-Coats, and Petty-Coats, for Men and Wo^^^ There is of several
Stripes, which are gene^^ called by these names, the Common-stripe,
^ackthread-stripe, and the Vienna-stripe; the ^mon-stripe, the finer it is, the
more Bars it (...) the course sort has not above thirteen or four^^ Bars, the
finest has about thirty bars, which sort is very fine, and wears much better,
both (...) lour and wear than the course; the Pack^^ stripe is the sort which
is most in fashion, an^ ways the dearest, and not undeservedly, for^ really the
strongest of all sorts, both of Flower^ Striped, but is the narrowest of either
sort (...) Vienna-stripe is a sort that has some dista^^ twixt the Stripes,
but not so much as the Co^^^ stripe has, but is always made much thinne^^ any
of the former, and I do believe wears (...) worse than any of the former, even
worse the flowered which I formerly mentioned. There (...) sort more which is
called stripped Dimetty, it^ Cotton flowered with several sort of colored (...)
stripes, but is not properly a Dimetty. The (...) that comes under the Letter
D. is Diaper, of (...) there is several sorts, and at present I shall on^^
course of those sorts which are most useful, the is the Diaper which comes from
Holland, of (...) there are two sorts of work, called Rose and (...) the Rose
is a small little round work, the Pa^^ little square figure, but both are of
equal br^^^ and very good colors; they are of several fi^^ which is known
usually by the numbers, whic^^ the Hundred, for example, the lowest numb^^
comes is called sixteen hundred, the highe^^ comes is called forty hundred: The
way of (...) it is, if you agree for the Napkenning, the (...) is three times
the breadth, and three times the (...) it is a sort of Diaper, that not only
wears we^^ wears extreme white. There is another (...) Diaper called
Sleasy-Diaper, which comes from ^^borough, of which there is several sorts,
which (...) describe to you in order: And first shall begi^^ Diaper Table
cloths, which are Wove into (...) and length for Spanish Tables, but of those I
ca^^ ^^mmendation, because they wear very ill, but ^^^ing their breadth being
one yard, three quar^^ing, and the same breadth, are sold the cheapest (...)
Tabling, they being sold from the Drapers for (...) Shillings and four Pence,
or three Shillings (...) Pence each Table-cloth; as for the sorts of (...),
there is a sort that may be bought for se^^llings a Piece, it being twelve
yards in length, ^^ay be hold half a yard short; there is a great (...) of this
sort sold for Clouts, by reason they are ^^uery thin and soft, the next is a
sort of the (...) nature, but they are finer, broader and longer, (...) only
for Napkins, for a Piece makes a dozen ^^pkins, and wear much stronger than the
other ^^^ly discoursed of. The next is a sort of Sleasie^^, which is the finest
sort of all that comes (...) Hamborough, that is as fine as fine Holland^^,
they are in suits, as I should have told you, (...) former are, for two pieces
of Napkens is as (...) a Piece of Tabling, the Piece of Tabling ^^eight yards,
and something more, it holding (...) a quarter over, sometimes half a yard: But
^^est of all is twelve yards in a Piece of Tabling, (...) every Piece of this
Tabling, there is two (...) of this Napkins to complete a suit, it being ve^^
and wears very genteel and well, and very (...) the whole suit is generally
sold at the best (...) three Pound ten, or three Pounds twelve (...) per suit,
which is not above three Shillings ^^ce a yard Tabling, and fourteen Pence the
(...), but is as fine as the Holland-Diaper of two (...), and six Shillings, as
is of the same figure, (...) People can know it from the right Holland-(...)
when washed. There is one sort more of this (...) that is of the same figure,
of the French-Dia^^nd is so like, that few people can hardly know it from the
right, unless it were compared (...) The next is a sort of Diaper made in
Engl^^^ very strong, called Huckaback, There is (...) lengths in each Piece,
both Tabling and (...) there is of the Napkins from nine Pence (...) lings the
yard, the widest of the Tabling (...) ceeding two yards wide, and the narrowe^
(...) and half. There is other sorts of Diape^^ from Holland and Hamborough,
being wro^^ very pretty figures, and is proper only (...) Coats, Wast-Coats or
Breeches for Men, th^^ being white Thread, and the Flower is bro^^^ that which
comes from Holland is broader, (...) stronger than the other, and is much
deare^^ (...) Hamborough is not worth above 18 d. at (...) the Holland is sold
for 2 s. it is extraordina^^ for Beds or Hangings for Rooms: The^ (...)
Tablings of this. There is Diapers come (...) land to England which are of
various fig^^ wears as well as any Diaper whatever, and (...) than Sleasie, but
not so dear as the He (...) Works are much like the Sleasie, but the (...) much
thicker and stronger; there is some (...) fine, and of the same work of the
Hollan^ (...) both fine and course, in two or three (...) washes as white as
Holland-Diaper, if wa^ There is another sort comes from Scotlan^ not easily
known from Irish^ Diaper, but (...) difference, it wears like damaged Cloth
(...) mer, for in a sew washes it wears to pieces (...) always over-whited, and
never wears we (...) you buy it brown or half whited, and if (...) brown, it
never wears white till it is (...) There is other sorts of Diaper comes from
(...) Indies, and is called Callico-Diaper, it is ca^^ (...) reason it is made
of Cotton, as the Callicoes^ (...) (...) into little figures, there is several
bredths ^^ss, the narrow sort is about three quarters, (...) widest sort is
yard and half wide, it is ex^^hite, and wears very well for several uses, (...)
most decent wear that any Man or Wo^^ near for Waste Coats or Petty-Coats.
There (...) Callico-Dimerty, which is for breadth and ^^^octly the same, but is
Wove with a Wale ^^^in Dimetty, and is likewise made of Cot^^ for whiteness and
use is full as good as the (...) and of the two is most worn.

(...) now come to speak of Damask, it commen^^ the Letter D. It is a very fine
sort of fine (...) and is wrought into several sorts of fine (...) and Figures,
of Stories taken out of Scrip^^ is for few uses except for Table-Linnen, (...)
Table-Cloths and Napkins; that for Table-(...) broader than any sort of Linen
for that (...) the Napkins is always made one third of (...), and as I have
given you advice in the (...) so you may observe in this, the Tabling be^^
times as broad, ^is three times the price, ^^ne and white that the King has
nothing Bet^^ his Table; but of these there is two sorts, (...) and
Sleasie-Damask, as for the Holland-Da^^ have in this side described, but for
the (...) it is not so fine nor of such curious works as ^^^er, it being
usually wrought all in Flowers, (...) this farther difference, that it will not
wear (...) after washed, as the Holland-Damask does, (...) is the Tabling or
Napkin so broad as the (...), but it is always bought much cheaper. There (...)
sort more of Damask that comes from the In^^ade of Silk, which commonly is used
for fine (...) and makes very rich Gowns for Ladies, and (...) Petty-Coats, it
is a Rich, strong Silk, and wears very well for an Indian Silk, it is w^ with
variety of colors, which is very fine (...) about half yard and nail wide, and
contains (...) fifteen yards in each piece.

The next is a sort of Derriband, it being a (...) of little use, and therefore
I shall be very (...) in my Discourse of those Derribands; there (...) sorts
known by these two names, large Derr^^^and small, the large are about yard
wide, the is but three quarters wide, the large is eig^ yards long, the small
are about twelve yards: (...) sort of Callico that is very yellow, and wea^
worst of any Callico that at present is in use, (...) most use it is for, is
dying, it will take a very^ dye for any color, and is proper for Lining any
things, which otherwise is fit for nothing. (...) garees is another sort of
Callico which is cours^ something whiter than the former, yet not s^ but is
much stronger than the Derribands, it i^ for Shifts for ordinary People, and
for Lini^ many things, and many Pieces are Dyed and p^ with colored Flowers. I
shall come now to (...) of Stripped Muslings which begins with D. it (...)
called Doreas, it being a Musling that is a ya^ quarter broad, and the broadest
sorts of stri^ any Musling, and usually the courselst and chea^ any sort, it
wears but indifferent well, but i^ white.

E.
The next sort of Commodity is Elat^his it (...) a^ Indian Silk stripped with
variety of colors (...) (...) with very modest colors, it is usually for ^s,
and contains just the quantity for a Woman's (...), and wears very well.

F.
^all begin with Flaxens, of which there is seve^ts, but for brevities sake, I
shall speak only of (...) that are the most usesul at present, and shall be^ith
English Flaxen, because it is made in our ^e Country, of which there is several
bredths, (...) broadest of it being yard and half wide, too (...) for two
bredths in a Sheet, and two narrow ^e breadth in a Sheet, therefore is only
proper ^able-Cloths, it is wonderfully strong, and al^h it is not extreme white
at first, yet in a few ^gs becomes as white as any sort of Holland (...) does
not exceed two shillings six pence the ^his sort comes out of Lancashire, as
does the ^other sorts I am going to treat of. The next ^wide, which is the
breadth for Shifts, for a mo^fize body, but for a lusty Woman it is too nar^nt
is wide enough for any Man, and wears as (...) the former, it is not so fine of
the price as (...) other Linens are, but what it wants in the (...) you have
completed in the strength: if it be ^ing white before you buy it, you may be
assu^ will in a few washings be very white. The ^redth is the only proper
breadth for both Men (...) Women for Shifts, it being full three quarters (...)
and is full as serviceable as the former, and is (...) alike for whiteness,
there is much a greater ^ity sold of this than of the former, by reason ^edth
fits both Men and Women for Shifts, bet^an the former. The fourth and narrowest
breadth (...) I am going to treat of, is but half ell wide, and is proper only
for Children, by reason breadth. I shall not give you any other descri^ this,
only say, that it is in wear every way (...) former sorts of Flaxen that I have
wrote of, (...) say this more, that if you can contrive the b^ be convenient
for Shee^s, it is the strong (...) Linen now in being for that use or
purpose. (...) is other Flaxens of several bredths which co^ of Ireland, and of
several sorts, but I shall (...) the most useful of them, and shall begin (...)
broadest, which I have seen three yards wi^ very fine, and very strong, but
this althou^ useful both for Sheets and Table Cloths, yet (...) commonly made
use of. There is another so^ where the former is made, within, or about ^ty of
Dublin, which is made of the same Fla^ former, and is as strong in wear as our
Flaxe^ the Alcomore-holland, and wears as white o^ than either, there is some
of the same ser^ three quarters wide, and yard wide, all man same nature and
strength. There is other (...) side those made in the North of Ireland, so^
wide, some three quarters, and some half el^ are of great use for Shirts and
Shifts, and w^ white and strong, but not so strong as the (...) made in and
about Dublin, and are very u^ other uses. Fry Burgures are a sort of Slea^ nen
which comes from Germany or Hamborou^ about yard wide, it is an ordinary Cloth,
a^ and wears very ill, but is white for some (...) has been worn very much for
several use (...) Country, and particularly for Aprons, till t^ the experience
of the wear, but since they (...) other Clothes much more commodious for the
vice* this sort holds forty else the whole Pie^ twenty else the half Piece. I
shall now (...) ^lland, which is the strongest and best color (...) Holland of
that fineness, it being a Holland ^sually half a quarter wider than the other
which are commonly called Frize, but are not (...) this sort is usually known
by the breadth and ^hness, for if it be right Frize, it is not so ^eded to the
Eye, nor wrought quite so thick (...) of the others, nor to any ones liking
half so (...) by reason there appears oftentimes thin (...) it, and that it
because it is not Callendred, ^kned as other Cloths that I shall speak of ^er,
but is just as it comes from thee Whitster, (...) any of the least deceit; to
know this Cloth ^lain, it is usually above twenty nine, or be^ that and thirty
four Else long at the most, it ^rally made up long folded, and has always
^ting strings on at both ends. I have at large ^sed on this, by reason those
that have had the (...) will if they can get it, be unwill^ng to wear (...)
this sort of Cloth is but scarce to be had, by (...) it is not near so fine of
the price, by reason (...) breadth and strength, and therefore few Dra^ill buy
it, lest they should not sell it to any ^age, or at least may lie ^y them some
consi^e time before it is sold, (...) ^ther Cloths being (...) the sight, sell
quickly (...) ^^vantage.

G.
^re being a great many sorts of Cloth comes (...) this Character, but as I
have said before, I (...) for brevities sake, treat only of the most use^s in
this Nation, and if what I shall treat of (...) be found acceptable, I shall
enlarge hereafter ^se I shall now omit, and pass by of each Let^^ Gulix being
the finest fort I shall discourse of on this Letter, and of as great and
general (...) all Persons of Quality, and Gentry of any Q^ I shall therefore
begin with that, it being the proper of any for fine Shifts or Sheets, and to
(...) most, explain it to all capacities, it is a Cl^ Yard wide if fairly
measured, but by deceit o^ in Measuring the breadth of Linen Measur^ three
quarters of an Ell for a Yard, and (...) means makes it appear to be Yard and
Nail^ but as I said before, is bust just Yard wide, the of fine Cloth, the
strongest except true Fr^ any fine Cloth, they are if well made, very eve^ very
thick, and of all Cloth the whitest excep^ Holland, but is not so fine of the
price as a Ba^ much stronger; there is of this sort of Holl^ most prices, from
two shillings and six pence, (...) teen shillings the Ell, it contains in the
Piece^ twenty nine Else to thirty one or there abouts, (...) you as near as I
can, an account of the lengt^ prevent your buying a sort of Holland w^ small
thread, which if well made are scarcely (...) known from Gulix but by the breadth
and lengt^ Small Thread being not quite so broad if fairly (...) pared and
measur^^ and but in length betwi^ venteen and nine^^^ Else, and is of no servi^
I shall observe to you in the Letter S. you m^ you desire to see the length of
either sort, (...) Ticket tied on to the side of the Cloth when white-strings
are cut off; the Holland called (...) is not so fine by much of the price as a
Small (...) is, but wears full as long again as does a (...) Thread; there is
another sort of Gulix, which (...) cut into half Pieces, and is done up in blew
Pa^ ^eing folded double, and in my observations, (...) count this to wear the
best of the two sor^s; (...) sort being cut in the middle, is generally half^
^h of this sort of Cloth, they are very finely ^ed, and is not quite so thick
and harsh thread^er it is washed as before, but is soft; and not^nd^ng thick
enough to wear very well, be^ it is even threaded* and the reason it grows
(...) in the wa^h is, because when it is whited, ^t wetting* it is wrenched out
of a Pap as the (...) call it, it thicken the Cloth, which they do ^fine Cloth,
except the right Friz^, for which (...) the Friz^ is thicker after it is washed
by much (...) before; notwithstanding all which, the Galix (...) extraordinary
well if it be not thin and ill (...) which will appear in the middle of the
Cloth, (...) well observe it. The next for its general use ^ts holland, or as
we commonly call it Gentish^d, the name of it is derived from Gaunt in Flan^ of
these there are several sorts and bredths, of (...) shall discourse one after
another in their pla^he first of these being Ell-wide of which there (...)
for^s of whiting; the first and best colou^ is ^ders-white, which is very
white, without much (...) it, it commonly wears very well if not over (...), it
is crelled, and has whiting strings to it ^h sides, and is usually the finest
sort; the next (...) Holland-whiting, this whiting is always much (...) and
blewed, and if much stiffned, and is very (...) has lain long in it, it
certainly wears ill, and ^xst wears ost^er ill than well; it is made up ^ded,
and has the whiting ^rings at one end; (...) the same length of the former of
this sort, (...) is in length about forty Else in (...) Piece, and is ^mes
divided for convenience into half Pieces, (...) is but twenty Else; there is
the third fort of (...) which is whited in England, this sort wears (...)
better than, the last mentioned, but with this ^ce, that it seldom or never
wears white, because our Climate is not ho^ enough to wh^ thick a Cloth, as it
usually is for it being so thi^ is often frets and wears ill, being Wove so ex^
thick, that it frets in the ^easts under Men (...) men's Clothes, this sort ha^h
^o^strings to w^ by but our way of whitening is to stake Lin^ the Ground on the
Grass: They in Holland and ^ders white it on Sand. This being the last sort
(...) broad Gentish that I shall treat of at present; (...) come next to the
Yard wide, and give you (...) and demonstrate (...) you each sort (...) due
place, which is as follows; of the Yar^ there is as of the Ell wide, three
several s^ whiting, the first and best whiting, both for (...) and whiting, is
the Flanders whiting, whi^ esteem to be both whiter and stronger than any^ of
this breadth, though I must confess, as in t^ mer whitings I have said, that
there is in the some Pap or Pulse, which, although it mak^ Cloth to appear very
thick, yet it does not pre^ the Cloth for wear, but adds to the whiteness
color, although when it is washed out, the (...) f^^ls thinner and softer to
the hand, but wear^ the worse; the second and next to it, is the H^ whiting
which is both stiffen^d and blewed (...) more than the former, by which reason
it is pro^ that the blew if lain long in the Cloth, is ve^ ni^io^^ to the
Thread, and makes it wear ill, (...) to your appearance it is very thick and
strong (...) next and last sort of Gants-Holland, is a sort (...) same bre^th,
but whited in England, and alth^ is not brought to that perfection of whitin^
wears far stronger than (...) two-former: t^ difference in the length, the two
former (...) about ^eventy Else, not much different over or (...) have strings
on^ one side, the latter h^ ^gs, and is about forty Else or thereabouts, not
(...) under nor much exceeding that quantity^ this ^less it be well whited*
will not wear white* (...) well whited will wear white enough for com^sifts The
next is Garl^^s, whereof there are (...) sorts, and because they are useful in
our ^dom, I shall treat of them all as near as I can ^ brevity, unless (...)
should outrun my designed (...). I shall therefore begin with the Ell-broad,
(...) which there is two sorts of whiting the first is a (...) whiting, this
sort notwithstanding its blewness, ^s as well as any if even and thick; this
sort ha^^ ^gs at the end, and is folded double, this sort is (...) finer of the
price than a Genti^h, but wears (...) thinner. There is another sort of
E^l-wid^ ^lits, which is of a browner whiting, which sel^ or never wears white,
but if thick and well ^e wears very well, but if thin it wears very ill, (...)
notwithstanding is good for Dying, for ^lews, (...) for Linnens. The next sort
of this Linen is Yard* (...), of which there is several length, as well as
^urs, the first sort is of a blew stiff colo^, it holds ^ty Else in the Piece,
it is generally well made, (...) if so, it wears as well as the former; it has
^ting strings at the end, is used for Shirts and ^s, and Aprons. The next of
this breadth, is of (...) same length, but is not so stiff and so blew as the
^ner, yet wears as well as it does, this has no ^ings to it: there is another
sort very thin, but if it ^nce to be as thick as the former, will not wear ^r
so well as it will, by reason it is made of more ^fie thread than the former
is, and is fit or proper ^ly for Dying or Glasing; this sort often holds 2^ ^s
in a Piece, but sometimes holds but 20 Yards (...) Piece. There is one sort
more holds but 16 Else (...) a Piece, this wears usually very well, and is of a
pretty white color, and has no strings to i^ is another sort that is three
quarters and hal^ which is thick, it wears well, though not so (...) Flaxens of
the same breadth by far, but wears (...) than it does. There are several sorts
of three q^ breadth, some fine, some coarse, but the fine^ the best, but the
coarse is made of bad Fla^ wears ill, and is only prope^ for Dying for (...)
flight uses, there are several sorts of three q^ wide; but those I have spoke
of at present m^ ^ice, for should I speak to every sort in part^ I should
exceed my designed limits. There a^ sides all these, several sorts of brown
Garlits, (...) are bought for whiting, but these that are wh^ England wear
stronger than any of the other^ never wear white, but of a black grain, an^ is
others that are bought for dying, which a^ proper for whiting. I shall now
begin with a (...) called Gingams, it is a sort of Callico, for its u^ service
I shall not omit to name, because it fal^ ^der this Letter, and is of general
use, first for (...) and Shirts, as it is for several uses, it is a (...) yard
and half wide, of which there are two sort^ one is double threaded both ways,
the second (...) double threaded one way, that which is (...) threaded both
ways is forty yards in a Piece, it (...) exceeding white, if washed by it self
from other (...) ^^^^.

H.
I shall begin with a Callico called Hummun^ being a Callico something above
yard and half (...) there is fine and coarse, the fine is generally use (...)
stitching and flowering, the coarse is only prop^ Linen, by reason it is not
on^^ coarse but yello^ ^welve yards and a half in the Piece, but is ^in buying
but for twelve yards, the half be^ed for measure to those that retale them.
^allico that neither wears white nor strong, ^er of the price than any Callico
considering ^h. The next of this Letter being Linen, ^emp Roles, it is always
brought into Eng^n, and is a strong coarse Linen, yard wide, ^hen whited very
good for Sheets for Poor (...) and is often bought by the Poor People for (...)
and although not very thick, it wears admi^ong, there is much of it used brown
for or^ainting* The next is Hammils, a sort of (...) Cloth, there is of this
two sorts, Flaxen and (...) the first and finest of this sort is often used
^ers Shirts, and for Napkins, and often be^ three bredths in a Sheet, is very
good and ^or that use* the Hempen is likewise used for (...) Sheets for Poor
People, and for Towels, ^m weam so well as the finest, it is almost ^arters
wide; there is another sort finer than (...) of these, but does not wear near
so well as ^f these, it is thinner and of the same breadth, ^d Herford.

^ext sort of Linen comprehended under this (...) called* Hockingfielders, of
which there are (...), broad and narrow, the broad is of great ^e instead of
Canvas, for Sheeting, but wears (...) so well as right Canvas does, but when it
(...) the Water grows much thinner than before, ^on it is stif^ed after
whiting; the other sort (...) yard wide, and by reason of its contrary (...) of
little use in this Country, it is a Cloth ^es out of Germany, it is a Cloth so
like Can^en Callend^ed, that few or none can know it, ^e that use to Trade in
it from the right; this shall not last above five or six years, the Ca^ wear
eleven or twelve years in constant (...) may know the right from the wrong b^
wrong is made up crested when they come (...) is two half Pieces made up in
one: it co^ Else in a half Piece, but when Callendred (...) long solded, and
are but twenty Else in a (...) for the right, it has often in a whole piece^
is Calendred fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty (...) odd measure in a piece, and
when Callend^^ cut them into thirty or forty Else in a piee^ of no certain
length as the other is, and wears much whiter than the wrong does* (...) of
this Letter is Huckaback-Diaper, it is so^ part made in Lancashire, it is a
very strom^ and wears very white, but is made all of (...) the finest that is
made does not exceed 18 (...) or the Napkin, and if the Tabling be the the
breadth of the same fineness, it is above the the price, by reason it is more
difficult to (...)

I.
There are not many sorts of Linen falls (...) Letter, but I begin with the
Indian Ge^ and that is Izarees, it is a Callico made e^ yards long, and is Wove
double threded b^ it is yard half quarter wide, it is the strong (...) Callico
that is made, and is the finest tha^ double threded; it is extremely worn by G^
Shifts, when to be gotten as it is the stro^ dearest of Callico, for it is the
whitest of all (...) it has been formerly sold for 16 d. and yard the finest,
but by reason of its ^om^ and great use, it is very scarce, and for the is
grown very dear, and is at this time s^ (...) which is 32 ^. per piece, and but
little to be (...) that rate, which I believe is at this time ve^^t to be had,
if you would give any price for (...) sort of this Letter is Ind^r^^^s* which
(...) Cloth of (...) great use in this Town, only (...) Towels, it is a course
narrow Cloth which (...) Hamborough, it is bate half yard wide, ^ins about
sixty, seventy, or eighty yards in (...) is most used in the Country, and is
sold to (...) Shop Keepers* As to its wear it wears ill, (...) very thick,
which th^^k (...) cau^^ it to (...) by reason it is m^^^ of the wo^^ of (...)
^der the Letter ^, I think it necessary to give ^structions concerning Indian
Dimetties, I ^iscoursed something on the same before, but (...) full: There is
of this three sorts of bredths, ^west is three quarters wide, the ^exd is ^o^d,
the third br^^^ is yard and half wide ^y being made of Cotton, and so well
twist^ve, that they wear as well as any Lin^^^; (...) be properly worn for
Shirts and Shifts, (...) any person made trial of, he would scarcely (...) of
any other by reason of their duration ^ness: besides the addition it would be
to ^alth; for if Callico be a healthy wear, this ^etter than Callico, for it is
warmer, and is (...) the same sort of Cotton, and is stronger (...) ^arees,
notwithstanding its great strength, ^rally wa^^^^^ whiter than any (...): this
^ime^ty is always ten yards in a piece, and (...) Callico Diaper of the same
length, for they ^thing the one from the other, but in the

K.
There are but few so^^ of Cloth come (...) ^^tter K only a sort of Cloth which
we (...) land called Kentings, but are called by al^ other Countries Sleasie
Lawns, and are so (...) Linen Drapers here, of which there are th^^ sorts, and
by reason it is not the proper Le^ fall under, I shall omit the explanation of
(...) this place, and shall refer you to the Let^ the more plain instructions
of this sort of C^ there fore shall pass on to the he^^r L.

L.
I shall begin with Linsey Woolsey, by re^ our own native Manufacture, there
are of thi^ sorts of colors and ^^ed ^^ but I shall only (...) those which are
sold by Linen Drapers, (...) there are two sorts ^law and Green, the Ble^ the
more generally used, and they being b^ a line, therefore in treating of one
will be i^ ons for both; I shall therefore speak of t^ you shall see whether it
be well covered (...) Woollen, so that the Linen can hardly be se^ if you can
partly see the Linen that is not (...) vered, but is thin, and wears not well;
be you observe i^ it be a deep and even d^e, places are whiter than others,
then those p^ not so well covered as the rest, neither will (...) either well
or of a good color; the same (...) observe in the Green.

I shall now speak of what Indian Goods co^ der this Letter, and shall begin
with Long because it is the most useful that falls (...) ^er; it is so called
by reason of its great (...) it being usually thirty eight or forty yards in
(...) and is about yard half quarter wide, of ^ere is two forts, fine and
coarse, the coarse ^oper for Linen of several things, the fine is ^ed for
Shirts, Shifts, and often for stitching (...)-Coats and Wast-Coats, both for
Men and (...) and is both white and thick, though but ^read, the Price at this
time is uncertain, by (...) of an extraordinary rise of Indian Goods in (...)
but the price formerly for the coarse, used about Eight Pence the Yard, or Nine
Pence (...) and the finest sort used to be for Fourteen (...) and at most for
Sixteen Pence, and at this (...) much dearer, and is seared will be dearer
(...) is of this sort comes over Frown, which is ^dying into sad color and
blues, but those that (...) the Indies ready dyed blue, are much the (...) they
never lose the color in washing as the ^dye does: you may know the English-dye
^ndian by the colors, for the Indian-dye is ^er dyed than the English, for the
English (...) and dark ^pots in it, and there is of the ^ften comes damaged,
this you may know ^ains you will see in it, and therefore if any stains in it,
try it with your finger, and ^maged your finger will tear a hole in it with
(...) by that you may be sure it is damaged: (...) try any sort of Callicoes or
Linnens the (...), where you see any stain is in the Cloth. (...) another sort
of Indian thing called Longees, (...) is made of the same stuff your Grass
Tasteties (...) which I shall speak hereafter, but with this (...) this sort is
wore with variety of colors, (...), and some wrought with flowers in the (...)
the check, this is made of an Indian Grass or Herb, from whence comes the name
of (...) Herba; they contain ten yards in each piece (...) proper only for
slight uses, as Linen of Be^ for Window Curta^ns, they wear very (...) thin,
being much stifned, they feel pretty (...) fore they are worn or washed, but
after eith^ are like a Rag.

There is a coarse sort of Cloth called Letti^ it is a coarse narrow sort of
Cloth for Towels (...) is seldom enquired for, there being better (...) that
purpose.

There is one sort more I shall not omit (...) mention of in this letter, by
reason it takes (...) ginning of one name with the letter L. it being Lawns,
and by reason it is usually called Sleasie. I shall only treat of it in part
here, and p^ letter S. because it begins with S. being called (...) Lawns, the
name Sleasia it takes from a To^ Sleasia in Germany: these Lawns are of two b^
the one is just the breadth of a Cambrick, (...) three quarters and half quarter
broad, if it (...) and well made, it is very strong, and we^ well, but if thin
and uneven, it wears very (...) it seldom or never wears very white, and
n^^standing it often wears very yellow; there is (...) sort three quarters
wide, which is made of the thread, and the same make, and of the same (...) in
every respect as the former: is be sure yo^ buy any of them yellow at first,
for if you do^ always not only wear yellow, but very ill, but can get those
that are of a clear white, without ning, and those if well made will wear the
whit^ strongest of any sort. I shall leave you to the (...) S. for farther
Instructions, and therefore shall from treating any farther on this Cloth (...)
place.

M.
(...) Letter that comes Alphabetically under (...) is M, and shall begin with
Indian Goods, (...) there are several under this letter, but I (...) only of
the most useful here, of which Mo^^ this is a Callico extremely in use in (...)
Work, for Petty-Coats and Waste-Coats, ^ing, Quilting or Embroidering, it is of
se^eness, and is yard, quarter and half quarter (...) is as white, fine and
even as any Callico, (...) comparable to other Callico for the wear ^lly as
fine of the price and breadth as any, ^m dious for many other uses, a Linner
(...) and for Curtains for Beds and Windows, ^es have no great occasion for
strength: but ^advise no one to use them for Shifts or Shirts, ^s time many do,
for they wear like dirt in ^on to the double threaded, there is often^^ them
damaged, that you may perceive, if (...) any stains in them, or if they look
yellow, (...) limber, it is a sign they have been washed (...) damage; for the
same are stiff in the Piece, ^thred feels harsher and firmer than the former:
^ico is known by its length as well as by its (...) it holds a contrary length
to any other, for (...) over just nine yards in length only, a little (...) for
the Retaler, which is something above (...) of a yard in each piece.

^xt is Mulm^ls, it is a sort of Muslins used (...) uses in this Nation, but I
cannot in the (...) it any commendation, for there is not one (...) in it, in
my Judgment, that is praise wor^^ the first place it is always very thin, the
next ^generally fray'd, and it not only wears extraordinary ill, but when
washed two or three (...) wears very yellow, although when you bu^ they are
often to the view very white; it i^ commonly sold by Hawkers and Pedlars, be^
finest of the price of any Muslen, but in the (...) perfect Cheat; this Muslen
holds always (...) yards in, a piece, as does many sorts of Musle^ is usally
one yard broad, or as we ^all it, (...) half quarter wide, you can know it no
wa^ the thinness, it deserves neither Time nor P^ be bestowed on it, therefore
I shall desist.

I shall go on to an ^n^ian thing called Mo^ nies, for the service of which it
may go hand i^ with the last mentioned, it is a sort of Callio^ (...) is
stripped sometimes, with yellow Gotten, and (...) times with yellow Silk, it is
sit only for Li^ Beds and for Window Curtains, for which (...) looks very well,
but wears very ill in any use (...) any or the least strength is required;
those t^ of it must look it narrowly over, lest there sho^ holes in it before
they buy it, for there is (...) any comes over, but what has many slits i^ it
is above yard wide, and holds ten yards in (...) it no more deserves to be
treated of than the (...) and therefore I shall go on to the next letter.

N.
There being not many sorts which begi^ this letter, I shall therefore begin
with some^ thing which is called Nilleys, of which there (...) sorts, stripped
and plain, by the Buyers are (...) Bengalls, because they come from the Bay
(...) gall; they are yard half quarter broad, and (...) contain ten yards in
each piece, but the India^ now grown as great Cheats as other Countries (...)
(...) to falcifie every thing, and for this Stuff, (...) it sometimes a yard,
and usually half a yard ^ter than it used to be, for it used to contain ten
^pwards, it is of much use for Gowns and Petty^^, but does shrink in wearing
unreasonably, they ^ery fine stripes, but are of no great use or ser^^ the
plain are generally for Dying, and those (...) Dyed are only useful for Linings
of Men and ^ens Cloths, but many sorts of Linen is much (...) proper than
this, by reason of its little service, (...) greater in convenience attends it,
that it (...) much, and by that means often spoils a Gar^^. There is of this
sort variety of plain mixed ^s which are very proper for Mantua's for Wo^^ and
of late years has been much used by Gen^^. The next sorts are Neck-cloaths for
Men, of (...) there are several lengths and fineness: as to this (...) all the
direction that can be given as to the un^ding of those is, that you must buy
the thick^^ harshest threaded, and not those that are thin (...), and uneven,
they usually hold sixteen in a (...) there is one sort Ell long, another sort
is one (...) and a half, long, another length is two yards (...) there is
another sort that comes from Holland, ^de of Cambrick, those wear much better
and (...) than the former; there is of the same lengths ^edths as those from
the Indies. There is one ^ore which co^es from Hamborough, these are (...) of
Kenting thread, and stripped at the end (...) former, but wear very yellow and
rough, (...) they always look dirty after you have worn (...) you can hardly
know them from Cambrick ^oths, only by this observation, that the Cam^^ are
broader, and not so much blued as they (...) there is besides these a sort of
Linen called ^dge Linen, which if the right, wares very well, but not so well
as the true Alcomore H^ but is so like it, that for breadth, length and (...) it
is so much like it, that many knowing Dra^ not know one from the other, but
only by S^ Ma^k, it wears whiter than the Alcomore.

O.
The next Letter is O, of which Letter (...) but few Linnens that is used in
this Town, (...) for its general use begin with O^nbrucks, (...) of more use
than any one sort of coarse Li^ England, the white is very much used for Shi^
Shifts, the brown for Painting; it is a sort of (...) not too much whitened,
and is thick after whi^ even threaded, wears well for any use that (...) per
for, as for Sheets, to put ^hree bred ths in (...) they look very fi^e of the
Price, and wea^ than a Hocking fielder; as for the brown, i^ good for Dying
blue, either for Aprons, or (...) men's Shirts, it wears for either use very
(...) There is one sort of Indian Goods which be^ with the same Letter, which
is called Orin^^tilies, it is thicker than a M^sling, and not (...) thick as a
Callico, it is abo^t yard half quart^ and twelve yards long, it is much used
for (...) Cravats, and is the best thing for that purpo^ can be gotten, and
wears very well for that (...) has been formerly used for Hoods for Wom^ by
reason that of late it has been very scar^ have made use of other things in
the place of (...)

P.
Few sorts of Linen come under this lette^ fore I shall begin with something
from Indi^ ^ed Putcays, of which there is two sorts, one (...) quarters wide,
the other almost yard wide, ^idest is of the same length of the coarse, but
(...) this difference, is finer than the narrow, it is a (...) coarse Callico
the finest, but if thick, wears (...) well for ordinary Linnens for several
uses, they (...) usually seven yards in a piece, and are made up (...) square
like a Book, and is but of an ordinary (...) to other Callico. The next sort
beginning (...) P, is a sort of fine Callico called Percallis, (...) being of
it two sorts, the one is much like ^poires, and is made up much like it, and is
^lf the length; the next is made up like a Book; (...) sorts are indifferent
fine, and are fit and much (...) for Shifts and Shirts, but the Book-Percallis
is ^ongest, both these forts are one yard half quar^de, and are eight yards
long, and if the Sleeve ^en out of the breadth, a Piece will make three (...),
it is likewise very useful for Stitching and ^ing, and if well washed washes
very white, it ^h of the nature of Sallampoires, but of that I ^peak of in its
letter, which is S. The next In^^ thing is a Silk called Paunchi, it is a sort
of which is about half yard wide, and ten yards (...) it wears very well for
Linings of men's Coats, ^me other certain uses, but it being of no gene^^ I
shall not farther insist on it; there is a sorn (...) of the same nature, both
for breadth and length, ^lled Gelongs, it has a few flowers up and down (...)
but they are some space distance one from the (...), if either of those are
Dyed, they wear gre^^^^ ^ersian Taffaty. I had not mentioned the Ge^^ here, but
that I omitted it in its Alphabet, (...) is of both comes over white, and these
are (...) into colors, but if you buy colors, choose (...) that come ready
Dyed. There is one sort of Indian Silk more, called Persian Silk, or Persia^
fety, which of all Silks that comes from the E^ dies, is of most use, of which
there is abu^ used here; it is the strongest Silk that comes (...) and is
proper for most uses; as for Linen of^ for Gowns and Petty-Coats, and Linings
of^ Coats; there is of it white, but the white (...) ever known to be of good
white, therefore the^ are always Dyed into all forts of Colors; a^ sides,
there is of all sorts of colors comes, the Dyed in the Raw Silk, before they
are wove, (...) will have those that are, and will wear of (...) gloss, buy
those that you are sure are Dyed (...) they come over, for those that are Dyed
afte^ come over, do most certainly wear dull and g^ and in spots; there is of
those Persians (...) lengths, the shortest holds ten yards, the n^ yards, the
next holds o yards, the next ho^ yards, and seldom any longer; it is yard half
(...) wide, but when they are Dyed they hold no^ yard wide, for they shrink
both in breadth and le^ Dying; the sure to know those that come over^ which are
the best, is to observe the ends, (...) you will find some white wove in, and
by the will find they are not Dyed here, or if bot^ be cut, you will fine a
thread of white wove into side, whereby you may know the natural colou^

The next Letter being Q, there are not a^ sent any Goods begin with this
letter, that a^ useful to us in this Nation, and therefore at (...) I shall say
no more of it, but pass on to the Le^

R.
(...) which there are not many sorts neither, but I (...) begin with what
Indian things are only useful to (...) and shall begin with Romals, of which
there are ^dy three sorts, which be termed as follows, ^e is Silk Romals,
there is Romals Garrub, and ^m Romals; I shall begin to give you advice (...)
of the Silk, and so each in order; the Silk is (...) of all Silk, and if thick,
wears well, if thin, (...) very ill; the Garrub is the most deceitful of any,
^ey for the generallity wear like Dirt, if any of (...) chance to wear well, it
is more than we ex^; the Cotton being the third and last sort, and (...) much
the best, for they as certainly wear well, ^ey are made all of Cotton, as the
others wear (...) There is one sort of Indian thing more, called ^es, it being
a stripped Silk for either Gowns or (...) Coats, there being of it several
bredths, but ^^adest is yard and half wide; they do not wear (...) well, but
are pretty colors, yet are but little (...) h^re, therefore I shall at present
pass it by, shall come to Roans and Rasterns, but because (...) is not any
allowed to come, I shall pass it by, ^ome to ^^ushy Cloth, which although it is
a ^e Cloth, is of much use with us, and therefore (...) give you some small
directions on this; it is ^full half yard wide, if it chance so to be, it is of
^bredth, if you buy that which is fine and even ^ded, and not too thick, it
will wear very well any use you have occasion to put it to; of this (...) is
two sorts, Hempen and Flaxen, but your ^en is known by being whither and finer
than the ^pen, and wears by much the better; they are (...) they come from
beyond Seas tied up in Bundles, with a piece of the same Cloth they are betwix^
hundred and three hundred Else in a Bundle, a^ though it is sold by the
Pedlars, and other Sho^ the Yard, yet they buy by the Ell, the pieces ^ ry
short, the longest seldom holds more than te^ there being some hold not above
five Else; I^ not treat any more on this, because I have al^ outrun the
designed limits of my Book.

S.
I come now to S. and shall begin with (...) Goods, and of those Susis shall be
the first, it (...) of most general use of any under this letter; (...) is a
sort of Stuff, made of half Silk, half C^ and is adorned with very delightful
colors, (...) wears, if not damaged, much beyond your (...) and the more Silk
is in it, the better it wears (...) proper for a great many things, as Gowns
and (...) Coats in our Nation, but the greatest and mo^ neral use in this
Kingdom are for Linen of Be^ Window Curtains, for which they are extraor^
pretty, because they are usually light colour^ are cheap; I could mention many
other so^ Sannows a sort of Callico, Sipriss a sort of S^lk^ many others, but
of no great use, but in this (...) shall pass them by. I shall now begin
accord^ my promise to treat of Sleasie Lawns, it being ^^ry useful Linen here
with us, it takes its nam^ a Town called Slesia in Hamborough, and not f^
wearing Sleasie, as a great many do imagin^ if good of the sort it wears very
well; of this (...) is two sorts of bredths, one three quarters and (...) and
the other but three quarters; the broad (...) good for large Handkerchiefs, and
many other but is only most proper for Handkerchiefs ^^d sort seldom fails of
wearing very well, for ^^y are always made of strong and good Flax, but ^om
wear very white, unless they have very good thing, they are a very good breadth
for Shirts, but ^hardly thick enough for that purpose; of this (...) you may
have as fine as a Cambrick, and some^es there comes over some of Cambrick
whiting, ^e wear very white, the other three quarters ^e is only proper for
narrow Handkerchiefs, the ^seft sort wears often ill and yellow, but the finer
(...) stronger, they being evener-threaded than the ^se; there be of this sort
some of the Cambrick ^ting, but very seldom, which if you can get, ^s as white
as any, but this I must tell you, that (...) sorts notwithstanding they are of
Cambrick ^ing, when they grow old will incline to wear ^w; but right Cambrick
wears white to the last. ^ch Cl^th coming under the letter S. I cannot (...)
it, being of so general use, and of so great ^mption; it is a sort of white
Sleasie-Soft^h, it is of no great wear, but is fine of the ^e, and it is of
great use for Dying for Hats, ^ngs and many other slight uses, but not for
^gth, and since Callico has been dear, is much ^for Linnens for Beds and for
Window Curtains, ^e is two sorts of bredths, one full yard, or a ^e above, the
other full three quarters, they are ^fferent fineness, but never wear truly
white, and ^ear soft and sleasie, they hold differing lengths, ^e hold but five
yards, those are the very coarsest ^ll, and as they arise in fineness, they
rise in ^th, the longest not exceeding twelve, or at the (...) fourteen yards,
they are bought by the whole^ by the numbers; for example, suppose the first
^ber be twelve, they will take of 12 of the whole ^ughout, and then you have
the piece that are numbered twelve for nothing, and supposing the^ bers rise to
twenty five, the highest stand i^ ^teen pence a yard* there are several sorts
of (...) for Dying Blues, or any other color, but for there is several
bredths, and of differing price^ those are not bought by the number; you m^ for
Fief Cloth or Mondross Cloth, which is the (...) est and fittest for most
purposes, For these are the er sorts only for Dying. And because Shifts begi^
the Letter S. I shall here give you such Instru^ which if well observed and
followed, you may (...) by know how to Cut out a Shift out of two (...)
Holland, as most People shall do out of t^ and a quarter, and shall be both as
long and as^ for example; If you will Cut out but one S^ long, take two Else of
Holland, and slit it the the middle; let it be Ell wide or Yard wide, a^^ing as
the bigness of your body requires, and (...) it is split through the middle,
instead of taki^ half breadth, and just the same length of the half breadth for
the Body, ^nt of Ell off of or (...) half bredths, and just the same length off
of the half breadth, which take for the body of your^ then take the remainder of
one of the half h^ and double it, then lay it a cross, and cut it f^ Goars,
then take the other remainder of the (...) and double it, and cut it in the
middle, which (...) just a pair of Sleeves, then you want only f^ Gussets,
which will come out of the hollow^ the Neck of your Shift, which Rule you may
(...) in cutting out two, four, or six Shifts, for wh^ cut out two take a body
of one of the half b^ and a body off of the other, and when you c^ take two
Bodies off of one of the half bredth^ two Bodies off of the other, and when you
(...) take three off of one of the half bredths, and (...) of the other, and by
that means you may cut (...) what length in reason you please; whereas if (...)
take your Bodies all of one piece, you can make (...) but two Else long, and by
this means you save ^arter of an Ell in the Cutting out of each Shift. ^ld give
you other Instructions for Cutting out ^ll Cloth, that you might Cut a Shift as
large ^f a Cloth half Ell, as others should do out of a (...) three quarters
wide, but I shall be forced to (...) this, by reason it would make me outrun
the (...) of my Book, and for that I shall treat of it in ^^t Edition.

T.
(...) being the next Letter, there being but few Li^ ^f this, that are of any
great use here, where^cklenburs is one, it being a coarse Linen, ^enerally
very uneven, which comes from Ham^, it is but little different from Ozenbricks
in ^s, and none but those that are of the Trade ^ll the difference, but the
right Ticklingburs, ^ost as strong again as the Ozenbricks, you ^ow the right
Ticklingburs by this, the right is (...) than the other, and is not so fine,
but thicker, (...) thread is not so even as the Ozenbrick, yet this (...) is
extremely useful both in Town and Coun^ there is not many Cloths sold in
England that ^great Consumption as this, and at the dearest (...) above Ten
Pence, or at most Eleven Pence the (...) There are other Cloths of this Letter,
but of (...) no use here, and therefore I shall refer you (...) to my next Book.

U.
There being few or none except French Clot^ drr this Letter, as Vehemounty and
Vitery C^ I shall refer you for their Instructions to m^ Book.

And for the Letters following, they havi^ thing falls under their Alphabet
worth ment^ and therefore shall conclude with my wishes, (...) may work my
desired effects, which I am sure^ not fail to serve you in, if you punctually
obse^ Directions, and if it is serviceable, I shall m^ addition of some
material things, which (...) omitted for Brevities sake.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books.
THE True Art of Angling: Or, The Best and Spee^ die way of Taking all sorts
of Fresh Water Fish with ^orm, Fly, Paste, and other Baits, in their proper ^s;
how to know the Haunts of Fish, and Angle for (...) in all Waters and Weathers,
at the Top, Middle, and (...), Baiting of the Ground, Night Baits, Oils, and
^nts, Baits Natural and Artificial: The several ways ^gling; To make Oil of
Asper, and many rare Secrets (...) before made public; containing the whole
Body of ^g, and Mystery of a Complete Angler. By J. S. (...). A Brother of the
Angle. Printed for Geo. ^ers at the Golden Ring, and John Sprint at the (...)
in Little Britain. Price 6 d.

(...) The way to save Wealth. Showing, 1. How a Man ^ive Well and Plentifully
for Two Pence a Day. 2. Di^s to make Shoe-leather, and other Leather last much
(...) than usual. 3. To Beautify Shoes, and keep them ^et, and preserve them.
4. To make Coals spend much (...) than usual. 5. To save Soap in Washing of
Linen ^s. 6. Directions to Dress Hats. 7. To Cure all sorts ^nds whatever, by
a Poultice only. 8. To make seve^ts of Powder for the Hair. 9. Directions for
the right ^ing, and preserving from all Diseases, all sorts of (...). 10.
Directions to make several sorts of Ink Pow^ and other Ink. 11. To Brew good
Liquors without Malt. (...) T^make Coffee of Horse Beans. 13. To make Sealing^f
all sorts. 14. To know whether Gold or Silver Coin ^d. 15. To Cure Consumptions
a new way. With di^ other Extraordinary Experiments, Rarities, and Cu^
laventions. Printed for G. Conyers, at the Golden Ring in Little Britain,
over against the Sugar. loaf. (...) Price stitcht 4 d.

* The Experienced Fowler; or, The Gentleman, (...) and Country-man's pleasant
and profitable Re^ Containing, 1. The true Art of Taking Water a^ Fo^l, with
diverse kinds of Nets, Lime twigs, Lime^ and how to make the best Bird-Lime. 2.
Direct^ Bat-Fowling, Lowbelling, Tramelling, and driving (...) how to find
their Haunts, and tuks them with S^ Snares, etc. 3. An exact Method for using
the (...) Piece at a true Level, to Shoot at Water, Groun^ or Flying. 4. How to
make Shot, proportion the (...) and know good Powder; with the proper use (...)
Horse, Bush, Hedge, and how to manage them. (...) Singing-Birds, their Diseases
and Cure. 6. (...) distinguish all sorts of Poulterers Ware; whether (...)
Young, Fresh or Stale, full of Eggs or not. Also, (...) Order, and speedily Fat
Tame and Wild Fowl. (...) which is added, Directions for destroying all man
Vermin. By J. S. Gent. Printed for Jo. (...) at the Blue Bell; and G. Conyers,
at the Rin^ Little Britain. Price Six Pence.


