A farther Account of the Victory Obtained by Their Majesty's and the Dutch
Fleet over the French.
Published by Authority.

Whitehall, May 24.
THis Morning by an Express from Portsmouth, came Letters from the Fleet, with
this following Account; That on the 19th Their Majestles and the Dutch Fleet,
being about 6 Leagues from Cape Barfleur, got sight of the French Fleet, who
came down upon us with the Wind at S. W. and about 11 they were engaged, which
contlnued till about 3 in the Afternoon, when the French bore away; It was Calm
greatest part of the day, but a fresh Gale springing up about 6, the Blue
Squadron renewed the Fight, and continued it till Ten at Night; During the
Engagement we heard 3 Ships blow up, which we concluded to be French; since we
did not miss one on our side; All Night 'twas very Calm, and Foggy the next
Morning; about 8 a Clock it began to clear up, the Wind at E. N. E. when we saw
the French Fleet about 2 Leagues to the Leeward of us, being much lessened in
their number since the day before, for they were now but 36 Men of War; we
endeavored all we could to get up with them, and they to retire from us; About
Ten it grew Calm again, and about Three both Fleets came to an Anchor, the
Dutch, who had the Van, being within a League of the Enemy, the Wind then
Westerly. At 11 at Night we weighed, and Anchored about 6 the next Morning. The
21st about 9 in the morning we set Sail again, as did likewise the Enemy,
Admiral Russel took his Course toward Barfleur, having got sight of several
French Ships under the Shore, and Admiral Allemonde, and the Admiral of the
Blue, Sailed to the Westward; the first endeavored to get up with 16 French
Ships, which he discovered, and snpposed were coming from France to join their
Fleet; and Sir John Ashby pursued the rest of the Enemies Fleet, who
endeavored in great Confusion to get into the Raze of Ornay. Admiral Allemonde
lost sight of the said 16 French Ships in the Night, they having* as he
believed, got in among the Rocks, and because it was not advisable to follow
them there, he sailed Eastward again to rejoyn Admiral Russel.

On the 22d in the Forenoon, Vice Admiral Delavai burnt under Cape de Wyke near
the Shore, the Royal Sun, being the Ship of the Count de Tourville, Admiral of
the French Fleet, carrying 104 Guns, as also the Admirable, Commanded by his
second Monsieur Beaujen of 102 Guns; and the Fort of 80 Guns, with two Frigates,
and three of lesser Rank, and Admiral Russel was in close pursuit of 9 more.
The Prisoners of the said Burnt Ships declared, That during the Battle 4 or 5
their biggest Ships were Destroyed.

Rear Admiral Carter, and Colonel Anthony Hastings Commander of the Sandwich,
were killed in the Battle.

From Portsmouth we have an account, That 4 French Ships, of 3 Decks, lay on
the back of the Isle of Wight, very much disabled; and that two Engiish Men of
War, who were refitted, with two Dutch Frigates, and a Fireship, were going out
to take or destroy them.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy. 1692.


