FEARFUL APPARITIONS OR THE STRANGEST VISIONS that ever has been heard of.

IT IS A Spirit that constantly every night haunts one Mr. Youngs yard in
Lumbard-street, near to the Golden Cross, which has played such prancks, and
appeared in such several and horrid shapes, that many Divines and other
Learned men, who have come armed with a full resolution and with an intent to
have spoken unto it or (at least) to have looked upon it, in the very attempt
thereof have fallen into a kind of a distracted ecstasy, and were neither able
to speak or stand, to the great wonder and terror of all that were eye
witnesses thereof.

April 27 LONDON Printed for John Hammond, 1647.

Fearful Apparitions: OR, The strangest VISIONS that ever has been heard of.
OF all the Monsters and strange stories that this quick-sighted Age ever
discovered, here is one (and a true one) by them cannot be parallelled, it is
no Feigned story, no Foraigne News, as from France, from Ireland nor from the
North, you need travel no farther then the upper end of Lumber street in one
M. Youngs yard there has been seen strange apparitions for the space of about
a month last past, every night, about two of the clock constantly there is a
great clatterng of Iron chains and bolts, then presently is heard a great
screeking and yelling and howling like a dog, and other whiles whisling and
playing on Music, then presently there appears a great tall black man (or
rather Devil) at least six yards in height, with long black shaged hair, his
eyes as big as two ordinary pewter dishes slaming like fire, and out of his
mouth there seems to fly fire which flashes into the windows of the house
like lightening, he continues walking in this manner about the Yard and looking
in at the windows for about the space of three hours every night.

There has been very many Gentlemen of good quality, and many famous and
eminent Divines to see this strange Apparition: Amongst the rest there was one
Divine lately spoake to it, the Spirit answered again, but with such a horrid
and dismal noise that the Divine was not able to understand what the
Apparition said unto him; in answer to the question which he asked, the
standers by and those who were present with this Divine were likewise much
amazed, insomuch that they knew not where they were, their hair standing
upright on their heads, which made them (and not without good cause) to wish
themselves further of.

For by their Relation so hideous a Monster has not any eyes beheld; For what
cause this Spirit should so constantly frequent this place, it cannot yet be
conjectured, but it is thought that ere long the cause will be manifest, the
Owner of the Yard where this Spirit walks, is a very eminent man, and an
Elder in the Parish where he lives: This Gentleman (Mr. Young I mean) has a
Son who took to himself the courage to open a Casement which looked into the
Yard where the Spirit walked, with an intent to have spoken to it, he had no
sooner opened the Casement but (although it was a Casement of an upper room
two stories high) it was again instantly shut too by this hideous Monster in a
most terrible and fearful manner, after these strange Apparitions, the Spirit
usually vanishes away, (to the thinking of the beholders) into the ground, then
immediately ensues a noise like to claps of thunder and flashes of fire like
lightning seems to ascend out of the Earth, and after that a stinking mist,
and a noisome sulferous smoke.

Reader,
If you doubt of the verity of this Relation, you may easily be satisfied of
the truth, the neighbors there-abouts can and will tell you more then is here
set forth, for they are every night witnesses thereof, to their great fear,
trouble, and grief.

FINIS.

