THE LAWS DISCOVERY: Or a Brief Detection of sundry notorious Errors and
Abuses Contained in our English Laws, whereby Thousands are Annually stripped of
their Estates, and some of their Lives.

By a Well-wisher to his Country.

LONDON: Printed by R. I. for G. B. 1653.

Courteous Reader.
I Am forced for my Countries good, to become vulgar in providing this
Winding Sheet for the Authors large and learned Treatise, which otherwise I
fear might pass unviewed, both in respect of its Volumn, and our present
Affairs; howsoever, I trust National Utility will pacify the curious, and
counterpoise particular Interests, whereby it may be rendered readier for thy
acceptance.

J. F.

THe Author was a Gentleman born to a fair estate, by degree a Barrester, who
partly through sickness, and partly for Conscience, deserted the Profession of
our Laws as Epidemically evil; he spent diverse of his last years in supervising
the defects thereof: Amongst many Grievances wherein he desired redress,
Personal Imprisonment for Debt was one, and Insufficiency of our Laws for
charging the Debtors estate, another: Therefore several of these subsequent
Proposals, tend chiefly for securing of Creditors out of the Debtors estate,
whereby the Debtors person may go free.

The Laws Discovery.
I. WHereas the Lands of a Copyholder, who is a Tenant at Will, according to
Custom, are not subject to extent in his life time, nor liable to his Debts in
the hands of his Heirs. It were convenient that some Plenary Act were made for
Redress hereof; securing the Lords fine, and preserving the Custom of the
Manor.

II. That Leases taken for other men's lives, whether in Possession of the
general or special Occupant, may be sujected to payment of debts; the Creditor
whose money bought the Lease, or preserved it from sale, has better right
thereto, then either of these Occupants. Such defects as these protect Heirs in
Borough English; also when Lands fall to the youngest son of a Copyholder;
neither of these can be charged upon Ancestors Bonds, because not Heir-general
at Common Law.

III. That an Heir of Tenant in Tail, may be liable to his Fathers Debts.

IV. That some remedy be used for payment of Debts, where Parents purchase
Lands in their Childrens names, with other men's moneys.

V. That where Heirs-alien Lands before Action brought by the Creditor, they
may pay such Debts, and not leave the Creditor to a suit in Chancery in such
plain Cases.

VI. That the Creditor for securing his Debt, have liberty to charge the Heir,
and Executor both together, because it is uncertain which is best able to pay;
if he recover of one, the other may stay his suit.

VII. That younger Brothers, and Grandchildren enjoying Lands upon dissent, be
liable to pay Debts.

VIII. That Coheirs in Gavelkinde, where Brethren inherit equally, may all as
well as the eldest, be liable to pay Debts; also that Lands left in trust for
Children, be liable to payment of Debts.

IX. That Creditors have liberty to extend more then half the Debtors Lands for
payment of Debts, which cannot be done at present.

X. Whereas rich Debtors get their Lands extended by one Creditor or other,
thereby to defraud the rest; therefore, that as Leases, Goods, and Bankrupt
Lands are sold, so where the Landed Debtor will not sell within convenient
time; that the Creditors should have the Debtors Lands to sell and dispose of
returning the overplus to the Debtor, or else that some other convenient remedy
be used herein.

XI. That there were some place in every shire for Registering all Leases,
Bargains, Conveyances, Statutes, Judgments, Recognizances, and the like, which
any way concern the Lands in that Shire; in former times care has been used
for Recording of Bargains, Sales, and Statutes, within six months, but none at
all for Leases, Feeoffments, Deeds of Covenants to stand seized to Uses, with
Leases and Releases after them.

XII. That Writs to take a Debtor dirregible, particularly to one, and
generally to all other Sheriffs or Justices within England.

XIII. That the Privileges and Abuses of Palatines, which extremely hinder
Payment of Debts, be laid by with us, as they are in Portugal.

XIV. That in regard Attachments prevent Arrests and Bloodshed, they may be
used as well in other parts of England, as at London.

XV. That as was used by the Ancients against Sanctuary-men, so instead of
Appearances, notice by Justices of the Peace, or the like, may be given or
left; and in case of Contumacy the second or third time, Process may be made
against the Offender. This would prevent those Grievances by Outlawry, also the
great Expenses in Chancery, the Abuses in Palatinates privilege, the Exchange
and Fairs from Arrests avoided, Trials by Ejectione firmae, and Abuses by under
Sheriffs.

XVI. To prevent the Abuses practiced in Wills and Administrations; that in
every great Town or Hundred standing Commissioners should be chosen by the
Neighborhood (and sworn before some Justices) for seizing and selling of
Estates, unless Executors, or the like, give sufficient security to such
Commissioners for the absolute Payment of all Debts, and that all Debtors be
paid alike; this course might very much help Orphans, also the just Payment of
Debts and Legacies; likewise it were good some strict Laws were made against
imbezzling any part of such Estates.

XVII. That Insolvent Debtors be freed from imprisonment, or else detained some
short time at the Creditors charge, till their cause be determined, and that
their Estates be seized for satisfaction of Creditors.

XVIII. To help the Creditor for Matter of Proof, that the Debtor, or what
others the Creditor or Judges think fit, may be examined upon Oath, as in case
of Bankrupt.

XIX. For the encouragement of Merchants, and some special Manufactures, as at
Antwerp some Immunities from Arrests, at least for small sums, be conferred on
the Professors.

XX. Whereas Poor Men can seldom put in Bail, for want whereof, they suffer
unheard many months imprisonment, till their day of hearing comes, and are
thereby often utterly ruined; therefore for prevention, that the Plaintiff by
his own Oath, or of some credible person allowed by the Judge, declare the
truth of the Cause; wherein, if he failed the prisoner, giving Authority for
his appearance, to be dismissed without Bail, or which is better, that the
Judge be authorized to determine of Law, Fact, and Equity, to avoid the
Formality and Charge of pleading.

XXI. That no person be held to Bail, who has offered to pay without Suit of
Law, neither should his person be liable to Execution.

XXII. Whereas by that barbarous and senceless Law of Pressing to death, Rich
and Landed men are encouraged to Steal, and Accessaries wholly escape;
therefore if such manner of Offenders were attainted by verdict, such
inconveniences might be prevented.

XXIII. Whereas by Clergy many times Murders, and notorious Thieves, are but
warmed a little in the hand, because they can read; and another for a Sheep, or
trifle, is hanged not for his offense, but because he cannot read: Therefore it
were requisite, That this senceless and barbarous Character, which admits of
much knavery and cannot be read by every good and able Scholar, were banished,
as well as French, Latin, and Court-hand, especially in such cases which
concern men's lives.

XXIV. That persons accused for life, be permitted Council, in regard their
fears render them often, both speechless and unadvised; bare accusations are
not such sufficient condemnations, as to deprive any (though innocent) of
Council in such extremity.

XXV. That there may be but one Statute for one Matter and Repeals made total
not in part, so that men may know what is enforce, what not, and live under
such Laws, as it is possible to know which now they cannot.

XXVI. That Reversioners have free power to dispose of their Estates without
the Tenants consent: This would both prevent many Chancery Suits, and secure
Purchasers.

XXVII. That the Statute of Merton may be totally repealed, and thereby those
Ancient Local Customs confirmed in behalf of the Tenants and Inhabitants.

XXVIII. That the uncertain Fines of Copyholders may be reduced to a certainty,
either of an easy yearly Rent, or moderate Fine; also that the like might be
done in servile Tenures and Heriots; this would prevent many Chancery Suits and
Oppression by Lords.

XXIX. That the Suborver, as well as the corrupted witness, should be
stigmatized and disabled for future Matters; also, that whosoever unjustly
takes away another Testimony by making him a Party should loose his Sure, if
proved: This is an old Chancery trick.

XXX. That Trial by Combat may be suppressed as a Reasonless Law, and
unwarrantable by Gods Word.

I Have narrowly Epitomized the Author, partly because others have (especially
Mr. William Leech) treated at large upon some of these grievances; And partly,
that as a compendium of many necessary Mementoes, it might produce an Active
Remembrance in all true hearted Englishmen, and Worthy Patriots of their
Country.



FINIS.

