A PHANATIQUE PRAYER, By Sir H. V. Divinity-Professor of RABY CASTLE.
WE are not here assembled, ( most Glorious Lucifer) to Complement thy Infernal
Majesty; but rather to Argue, and Expostulate, with thee, the Reasons of thy
late with-drawings from us; and to Plead before thee, the cause of thy people,
in this the Day of their Tribulation. To whom should the Sons of Disobedience
repair for Comfort, and Protection, but to the Father, and Patron of all
Apostasy, and Rebellion? Have not all our Thoughts, and Actings, been directed
by thy Immediate Inspirations, and will thou now forsake us? Alas, Thou
know, that for thy sake, we have Subverted a Glorious Church; -- Blasted a
flourishing State; -- Dissolved the best Temperd Constitution of Government in
the world; -- Robbed, and Murdered our Fellow Subjects; -- and finally washed
our Sacrilegious Hands in the Blood of our lawful Sovereign (the Best of Men,
and of Princes, at once) Nay, in Imitation of thy great Example, we have
attempted the Dethroning, even of God himself: We have made it Treason, to keep
his Commandments; -- Blasphemy to Preach his word; Sedition, to obey the
Dictates of Humanity and Reason -- and to conclude; by Violence, Perjury,
Schism, and Heresy, we have promoted the Kingdom of Darkness, in the Land of
the Living. -- After all this; behold, (thou that have Raised us out of
Nothing) thy Servants returning to their first Principles; our Godly Exercises
are Interrupted; and those Weapons, which thy Chosen had provided for the
Throats of Unbelievers, are taken from them. -- The Oath of Abjuration, is laid
aside; thy faithful Servants, displaced; -- Thy Ministers, discouraged, -- and
(which makes the wound still more Grievous) many of our Bosom friends engaged
against us. -- Nor are we conscious to our selves of any Omissions in order to
the Great work of Reprobation, which might Provoke thy Displeasure against us.
But we labor, Night and Day, in our professions, still bearing up against all
opposition whatsoever; wear (in fine) resolved upon Martyrdom, if we fail of
Deliverance; and we have already disposed of all conducements to that end. We
publish Seditious Papers, and Rumors, to divide, and distract the Counsels of
our Adversaries. -- We have entered into Sacramental Combinations against the
Ungodly; and whatsoever, either Fire, or Sword; Policy, or Perjury, can effect,
shall not be wanting. Do thou not see ( Dear Lucifer) how dangerous and
Popular a Design is now on Foot, for a settlement in Church and State? And how
those, that would have served thee, faithfully to their Lives end, are Forced
to leave thee, for want of Pay; and Acquiesce under a Carnal Authority? a ahhh
-- direct us in this our great extremity; -- Prosper those that are Resolved to
fight thy Battles. -- Endue this Famous City of London, with Ignorance, Faith,
Wealth, and Patience: and Breathe upon the whole Nation, the Spirit of Slumber,
and Delusion: that, like a Company of Fools, they may Credit, Relieve, and Fear
us. In a Particular manner; comfort, in this their day, thy distressed
Servants, Tichborn, and Ireton; keep up the Hearts, and strengthen the Hands of
thy chosen ones, in Authority, that they be not disappointed, by the Damnable
Integrity of a Christian Common Counsel. Confond the Anti-Diabolical Devices of
Conscience, Honor, and Reason. -- Guide thou the Hand of him we have appointed
to murder the General; and Provide for thy Scattered Remnant, commonly called
the Rump. Fit us in our several Callings for those Services unto which thou
have reserved us. -- Give us the Tenderness, and Syncerity of the Olivers; --
The Religion of the Harryes. -- The Patience of Lambert. -- The Perseverance of
Bradshaw. -- The Volubility of Whitlock. -- The Compunction of Haslerigg. --
The Conscience of Ireton. -- The Piety of Tichborn. -- The Zeal of Luke
Robinson. -- The Continence of Mildmay. -- The Modesty of Scot. -- The Courage
of Atkins. -- The Wisdom of thy Similitude, Miles Corbet. -- And the
Illuminations of Goodwin, Sterry, and Peter's; More particularly, we beg from
thee the Grace of Obstination: -- ah -- keep us from Backslidings; who knows,
but thy servants, Judas, and Hoyle, might have Repented, and Dishonored thee,
had thou not seasonably taken them unto thy self? -- Far be it from us, to
Impose upon our Lord, and Master. No, no; we are ready to be any thing, or
nothing, in order to the advancement of thy Interest; even as thou Please,
any thing, but the Right, is our Business. The Rump of Smectymnuus, as it may
be ordered with Independent Sauce, is a most Savoury, and Satanical Morsel; and
Disobedience, any way Disguised, or Dressed, is a Dish for thine own Palate. In
order to the better Accommodation of Schismatical, and Disloyal interests,
nothing is left undone, which either Malice, Force, or Wit, can contribute. Thy
Creatures are now at work, upon the grand Account, to cheat the People. These,
are thy Faithful Servants, Lucifer; and they Deserve their wages. -- Like
Batts; they can both Fly, and Creep: -- Shift themselves into all Shapes; --
comply with all Humors; -- Change Parties, and Opinions, oftener than their
Shirts, -- and then Bewail their wanderings. Ah, be a Gracious Devil to these
People. Cast an Egyptian Darkness over the whole Nation, least they discover
the Delusion; and find, that to be Great, and Rich, is that we Fight, and
Snivel for. It Is a Free-Parliament, they Claim; and that we dare not for our
Heads deny them, -- Darken their Understandings, we beseech thee, that they may
not distinguish betwixt liberty, and restriction; a faction, and a
representation; -- their own choice, and our impositions. -- Send forth a
Spirit of Infatuation among these Infidells, to charm them into a Belief, that
none are fitter to reform their Laws, than the Subverters of them: -- that
those, whose lives are forfeited to the Law, are the most likely Persons to
preserve it; -- that such, as offered violence to their own Members, to keep
themselves in power, will turn themselves out now to make way for others. And
to conclude, persuade them, but to constitute those people Arbitrators of their
Lives, and Fortunes, that have spilt English-blood, like water, and sold their
Fellow Subjects (like Beasts in the Market) six pence the Head for Slaves, to
any Purchaser, -- and then we will govern them (by thy assistance) in Saecula
Saeculorum.

FINIS.

