A ROD To drive out the Wild Bores, AND Subtle Foxes, From amongst the VINES
That the Vineyard may be kept clear.

OR, A GIFT, Sent to the PRIESTS; To let them see themselves, that they may
acknowledge their Errors, and upon them own their condemnation to be just and
right, now the truth does so plainly appear.

By R. FARNEWORTH.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's, 165^.

THey who claim Tithes as a divine right, professing themselves to be
Ministers of Christ, and the new Covenant, have long deceived the people,
seeing neither Christ, nor his Gospel Ministers ever practiced any such things
in that Covenant, who were made able Ministers thereof, to preach the Gospel
for Gospel allowance without Tithes, as hereafter will appear, and also without
a set maintenance, of 20. 40. 60. 100. or 200 l. by the year.

2. They who profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ, and transgresses,
not abiding, in his Doctrine, have not God, 2 John 9. and are not to be
received by believers; but such are the Priests of these times; therefore
receive them not into your house, neither bid them God speed, least you in so
doing be made partakers of their evil deeds, 2 John 9.10, il.

3. They who claim Tithes of the people, from that of Melchizedeck meeting
Abraham, when he returned from the slaughter of the Kings after the Conquest,
and blessed him, who then freely without any Command, or known Law, than
voluntarily for his blessing, gave him the tenth of spoils, returning the rest
into their places, at that present, Tithes being a free will offering, and no
command, neither was they then given by a Law, nor any more there to be done,
neither to Melchizedeck nor his successors that were after his order, therefore
according to that of Melchizedecke, tithes was not after his order for
succeeding ages; but there begun, and ended in that thing never done before,
nor after according to that order: but the Priests of these times, who call
themselves Ministers, that take Tithes of the people, before their enemies are
conquered and subdued, and has no blessing for them neither, but before
conquest take tithes of the people, and compel them to pay them by a Law
successively, such are not after Melchizedeck the figure, and then likeness of
Christ not the substance, but Christ is now come the greater, who is the end of
all Figures, and likeness of him, and he now reigns, who is after
Melchizedeck, and over, who endures for ever, the end and substance, and sum of
all things before, and after Abraham, and the Types, in the life and power of
truth, over all God blessed for ever: Therefore the Priests of the world, who
call themselves Gospel ministers, but are not, but by their Logic, fallacies,
and Philosophy, which is vain deceit, Colos. 2.8. has in that long deceived
the people; and if they could have proved that they had been as Melchizedeck
was when he met Abraham, which they could not, but if they had, they were but
to have taken Tithes of the Army, to wit the tenth of the spoils only, and not
before, but after the Conquest, provided, that they had brought them forth from
God a blessing, and if the Soldiery would freely, they might have given them a
tenth out of the spoils, but not out of men's estates, but no command for
tenths out of the Spoils; it might have been a free will offering only, at one
time and no more, Gen, i4. answering that in Heb. 7.

4 They who take not of the Soldiery only, but country also, not the tenth of
spoils, but men's labors are contrary to Melchizedecks order, therefore from
that to be denied; and they who take tenths also before the conquest whilst
people are burdened with Sin, and Sinful, oppressed by their enemies, and
adversary, are there also contrary; so they likewise who neither meet the
Conqueror, nor bring forth for him any blessing, where the Conquest is, such
have no right in that to receive a gift, the tenths of the spoils only,
therefore are these by such conquerors and soldiers to be denied, for such are
not after the order of him, who was, and is, in the time of freewill offerings
before the Law, and witnessed through the Law, in the same place out of Egyt,
where Abraham dwells, and his seed that are in Abraham to see the end upon the
rock, witnessing the ancient of days through the Cloud, re^^^nder, and then
stand over, where the Priests of the world stand out, who are the usurpers
ruling in Tyranny over the people, bond and free, in that compelling people to
pay tithes by a Law, before they have conquered their enemies, and have no
blessing for them that are returned, who divide the spoil, and now begin to
blossom, seeing them (the Peiests) who have lost and are without the blessing,
and themselves yet under the curse, as Ham was, who lives in the disobedience
to Christ, and the New Covenant, being by nature and in it, yet the children of
wrath, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, who are not after the order of
Melchizedeck, neither before the Law, with such yet, as follow the error of
Balaam, who go on in the ways of Came, Jude 1i. Genesis 3. but such are the Priests
of the world, who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel, having no other
proof nor warrant but to say so, as those who said they were the children of
Abraham, and said, God was their Father, but had no other proof but to lay so,
for their natures properties, and actions declared the contrary; so that Christ
the Gospel spirit told them, they were of their father the Devil, and his works
they would do; and if I say so to you the Priests and national Ministers, your
fruits declare the same; to wit, that you are of your father the Devil,
oppressing the people, and this spirit that tells you so, is not Ungospel-like,
but agreeing thereunto, John 8.45. Mat. 20. the 34. There you the tything
Priests are by the faithful Abrahamites to be denied, and your ways by them is
to be again to others testified, Ephesians. 5. i1. You, and your ways, and
worships being with them weighed and tried, and now are found with
Nebuchadnezar, and belshazar, who have not humbled your selves, also to be too
high, and your Kingdom is to be taken from you, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Eupharsin.
Dan. 5.26.27, 28.

5 The Priests, who call themselves Ministers, are proved to be contrary to
Melchizedecks order before the Law, in receiving Tithes, and now also contrary
to the Aacronical and Levitical order, not doing their service for the Tithes,
a peculiar gift to the Aronicall and Leviticall Priesthood, having no other
inheritance, and so set apart and ordained for that service in its time, and
after ended, therefore the Priests are without all order for that, and no ways
can prove their right to them, but from Popes to bishops, and so to Priests
their successors, therefore from the Popes father are they risen up to them,
and they from the Pope, and the Pope from the Devil; up Priests to the sides of
the pit, for now about your Tithes are you weighed and tried, turn under, they
who had a command to receive Tithes, had no other inheritance, Numbers 18.20.
to the 25, etc. and were set apart to serve in the Aaronicall and Leviticall
Priesthood, and had the Tithes a peculiar gift for that service only, during
that Ministration; then these that claim Tithes by a Law, and are not
Aaronicall and Leviticall, who do not the service therein contained in that
Law, under that Priesthood, and are without their order, who do not their
service, are deceivers of the people, and nations, which God is against; but
such are the Priests of the world, who takes tithes, who call themselves
Ministers of the Gospel, but are neither after the Legal order, nor Gospel
Ministration, therefore are they to be denied by all those that witness Christ
Jesus come in the flesh; and to put an end to the Aronicall and Leviticall
Priesthood, and is of another Tribe, to wit, the Tribe of Judah, that had no
command to take Tithes, who now reigns over all, God blessed for ever. And it
is the Sum of Abraham, the Sum of Melchizedeck, of Aaron, and Levi, and of
all things contained in the Law and first Covenant, which is disannulled and
another now established upon better promises; for he took away the first that he
might establish the second, who now lives, the Saints High Priest, and sum of
all things ^s here spoken of, over all God blessed for ever, who is able to
save to the uttermost all those that come to God by him, the sum and
substance of all things there spoken of, Heb. 7.8, 9, i0, cap.

7 They who say they are Ministers of Christ and the Gospel, and take thought
and care beforehand with a people, or before they settle with a people, agreed
with to have Tithes or a set maintainace, so much by the year, such reject
Christ's Counsel, and show their distrust and infydelity, therefore no Ministers
of his, seeing that Christ Jesus, the dear Son of God, and only begotten of
the Father, when he sent his Ministers into the world to preach his Gospel, and
to turn people from darkness to the light; he said to them that he sent forth,
take no thought what ye shall eat, nor what you shall drink, nor wherewith you
shall be clothed, for after these things do the Gentiles and Nations of the
world seek and look after; they went upon that account, to wit freeiy and
wanted not, Mat. 6.25.26. Luke i2. 22 23, Neither had they any set means; but
such as distrust, and are not willing to serve Christ upon that account, are
not content with Gospel allowance, but take thought and care before for earthly
things, are carnally minded which is death, Romans 8. Who have set maintenances
agreed for by the year before hand, contrary to Christ's Counsel and Gospel
order therein, but such are national and ungospellike Ministers, who contemn
Christ's Counsel and authority, and despising that good Gospel order and
dominion; therefore such in that nature, are no Ministers of Christ, nor the
Gospel, but are with the world in their ways, and worships, customs, and vain
Heathenish observations, and though the subtle Foxes have holes, and the birds
of the air have nests, yet the light which changes not, lets us see all
subtle deceitful spirits, and roving minds, which fly from the light, and dare
not appear before it to be tried with it, yet to that light which searches the
heart, and condemns al deceivers in secret, for acting contrary to it; to that
light am I made manifest though shut up from all dark minds, for light shines
in darkness, but da^kness comprehends it not, John. i. 5.

8. Christ Jesus said unto his Ministers, be not ye called of men Masters; Mat.
23.8, i0. He that says he is a Minister of Christ and the Gospel, who takes
upon him to be called of men Master, he therein disobeys (presumptuously)
Christ's command, and shows by that his contempt to Gospel Order, and to Christ's
authority and so despises his dominion and government, and will none of his
counsel, then none of his Ministers, Mat. 23. Ioh. 5, 38, 39, 40, 4i, 42, 43,
45. but such was the Pharisees, and Jewish High Priests, and such are the
Priests of the world, or National Ministers now, who are out of Christ's
counsel and doctrine; therefore no servants of Christ, nor Ministers of the
Gospel, but enemies to Christ, and rebels to his Power, as the Pharisees, and
Chief Priests were, who now despise his spiritual dominion, and his true Gospel
Government, as such in their nature did, and greater will their damnation be,
Mark i2. 38, 39, 40.

9. Such as stood praying in the Synagogues, and had the chiefest places there,
laid heavy burdens upon the people, and grievously to be borne, such were
against Christ's Coming in the flesh, and were then enemies to Christ and the
Gospel, and such Christ cried woe unto them, Mat. 23.

But such are the Priests of the world, or national Ministers now that do as
they did, therefore are they ungospellike, and no Ministers of Christ, but
enemies against Christ's appearance in the Spirit, and as the chief Priests,
and Scribes, and Pharisees their fore fathers were, who follow their example,
and are out of all Gospel order, example, practice, fellowship, and government,
that are in that nature, and the woes is unto such now, and the vengeance from
God they cannot escape, therefore people of such beware, least you perish with
them, for it is like Priests, like people in their nature, and deceivableness of
unrighteousness, and if the blind lead the blind, shall they not both fall into
the ditch, such leaders of the people cause them to err, and they that are led
of them are destroyed, Hosea 4. i0. Mat. i5. i7. I say 9. i6.

i0. The Ministers of Christ were, and are content with Christ's allowance to
wit, meat, and drink, where they were received, being sent into the world, of
such as do in his name receive them, for the workman is worthy of his meat, and
the labourer worthy of his hire, Gospel Ministers that labor in the word and
doctrine were, and are to have Gospel allowance by Christ opening the hearts of
people to receive them, and having food and raiment, they are therewith
content, which is their wages, or hire, Gospel allowance for Gospel labor, not
Tithes, nor hundreds, nor twenties of pounds by the year, but into what house
they entered, or enter into, Town or City, provided, that they first enquire in
it who are worthy, and Gospel Ministers were, and are to eat and drink in such
places what they set before them, whilst in such places they stayed, and do
stay, and was and is their reward in that case, and Gospel allowance, and he,
or they who say they are Gospel Ministers, and are not content with Christ's
allowance, Luke ^0.5.6.7. and Mat. i0. 8.9.10. are none of his Ministers that
break Gospel orders, as to take Tithes of men's labors, or Silver, or Gold, by
the sum of 20. 40. 60, 100. or 200 l. by the year, but such that break
Gospel orders, as the Priests of the world, and national and ungospellike
Ministers do, that are in Masteries, oppression, usurpation, pride, vainglory,
and have their set-maintainances, and the people bound by a Law to pay them
their sums, etc. not being content with Gospel allowance, as food, and raiment,
i Tim. 6.7, 8. Therefore no Ministers nor true Apostles of Christ, but of
Antichrist, who do not abide in Christ's Doctrine.

1i. If the Ministers of Christ, and the Gospel were not made Ministers by the
will of man, then not at Universities six or seven years, as national and
ungospellike Ministers are now, and have been long under the antichristian
reign, who were made ministers for national maintainances by man's will,
contrary to Gospel order therein that were and are so: but the Ministers of
Christ were not, neither are made Ministers of his Gospel by man's will,
therefore not at Universities as national and ungospellike ministers are; for
I certifye to you brethren, that the Gospel which I preach unto you, I received
it not of man, then not at an University, neither was I taught it of man, then
not at Colleges by man's will there, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, as
does appear, Gal. i. ii, i2, 15, i6. Ephesians. 3.2, 3.

i2. Christ Jesus himself said, who had all power given him both in Heaven and
in Earth, that no man knows the Father but the Son, neither knows any man the
Son, but the Father, and he to whomsoever the Son reveals him. Mat. ii. 27.
Luke i0. 22. Then they that deny revelation, deny that Ministry which stands
out of man's will, to wit, the Ministry of Christ in the Spirit, and they also
that deny revelation, deny both the Father and the Son, and the Gospel order in
the Ministry, and mystery thereof: But such as deny that are the University men,
and even the Priests of the world and national Ministers made by the will of
man, therefore such are not the Ministers of Christ nor the Gospel, but by
believers and the chiidren of the light to be denied. 2 John 9.10. ii.

i3. They are beloved of Christ, and Friends indeed, that keeps Christ's
Commands, but such are enemies that keeps not Christ's commands; and he has
in his Doctrine said by command, be ye perfect, as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect; Heb. 6. i. i2. 22, 23. Colos. i. 25 26, 27, 28.
then they which preach and say, men cannot be perfect, they cross the
Scriptures, and contradict Christ's Action, Doctrine, and Command therein
contained, such are Antichrists Ministers, as are against Christ's Ministry,
which is for the perfecting of the Saints, Mat. 5.48. Ephesians. 3. ii, i2. but
such are the Priests of the World, or national, and ungospellike Ministers;
therefore such are no Ministers of Christ, but enemies against Christ, and his
Gospel, who bring a contrary doctrine to Christ, Colos. i. 27, 28. i Cor. 2.6.
and his Gospell-Ministers.

They say, men cannot be perfect, when Christ commands to be perfect, and the
Gospel ministers preached wisdom to such as were perfect, and if by Christ's
ministry some were made perfect, then by the same others may, but some by his
minestry were made perfect, therefore I may, as they were, i Cor. 2.6. Heb.
12.22, 23. i John. 4 i6, i7. Rev. i4. 4.5. And they that bring a contrary
doctrine to Christ and his Gospel ministers, such are to be held accursed, and
such as love not the Lord Jesus Christ, who do not keep his commands, but teach
to transgress and break them, by persuading people to cont^nue in Sin, saying,
they must not nor cannot there be set free from sin, which is the Devils work,
and in his Kingdom, therefore such teachers are to be held accursed, for he
that commits Sin is of the Devil, Galath. i. 8, 9. i Cor. i6.22. Romans 6. i6.
John 8.34. i John 3.8.

i4 They that say Paul the Gospel minister took wages of hypocrites, are liars
of the man of God, and therein err from the truth, and so show a spirit of
error; but one did say so, to wit, William Sheffield high Priest of Ipstock,
therefore a liar, and the Lake is for such, Revel. 2i. 8.

i5. Those that by fallacies would prove a lawfulness to take Tithes or wages,
20. 40. 60. i00, or 200 l. by the year, for telling their lies, and plead that
place of Scripture, 2 Cor. ii. 8. as thou Sheffield did, adding to it thy
fallacies, and lying divinations to color over thy deceivableness, but the
light sees thee, and all such under such pretenses to wrest the Scriptures
therein, but such are the Priests of the world, and thou one with them, that
pleads for hire of the world, and wages of hypocrites, or set maintainances of
Churches so called, that are in the hypocrisy, from that by the year as
aforesaid, therefore do you and such like wrong the man of God, and are
wresters of his words and the Scriptures, for your selfe-ends to your own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3. i6.

i7. Paul the true Gospel minister, preached freely to the Corinthians unto
them the Gospel of God, 2. Cor. 11.6, 7. And that which he calls aobbing other
Churches, was not taking of Tithes, nor having 20, 40, 60, 100, or 200 l. by
the year, as the Priests of the world, and ungospellike ministers have now: for
Paul says to the Corinthians, that he robbed other Churches taking wages to do
them service; and says he to the Corinthians, when I was present with you, and
wanted, I was chargeable to no man, but you national Priests cannot truly say
so, when did you go out to call a people out of the world, and plant them, and
take nothing all at that time of them, no not to supply wants, who your selves
are chargeable to the people and burdensome, and that work yet unwraught by
you, but the Gospel ministers who labored in the word and doctrine, do judge
your practice, that never yet went freely to call out of the world, and plant,
and in that time take nothing of them, and when you wanted, was chargeable to
no man among them, but took of your brethren only, to supply wants, and so eat
of trees to spare young plants, and took but of your brethren to supply wants,
as to buy you a Coat in your labor, one being wo^n, or to buy a pair of
shoes, or an Hat, or some needful and necessary things in want only: You have
not yet so done according to Gospel allowance and order, being out: but my
beloved Paul, and fellow labourer in his planting time, spared the Corinthians,
and preached to them the Gospel of my father freely, as aforesaid, and in his
want and necessity took nothing of the Corinthians: but the brethren which came
from Macedonia supplied his wants, and that was the wages and robbery he speaks
of, and if they were brethren, then not hypocrites, 2 Cor. i1. 9. Heb. 2.11.
Therefore Sheffield here I have proved thee a liar, in saying Paul took wages
of hypocrites, and if he took but to supply wants, then not to lay up in
store, but he did but take of the brethren only, and to supply wants, therefore
not to lay up in store, as you hypocrites do, for he said, having food and
raiment, he was therewith content, 1 Timothy 6. Therefore silence Sophisters,
Philosophers, and vain deceivers.

If the Apostles counted it a robbery to spare the Corinthians, when he wanted
necessaries, Isa. i1. 7, 8, 9, i0, ii, i2. Tit. i. 7. Act 20.33 34, 35.
in taking to supply his wants of those brethren that came from other places,
to wit, from Macedonia, and to cut of all occassions from them that sought
occasyon, then he was blameless and chargeable to no man, but so it was;
therefore he was blameless as the Steward of God, and he was chargeable to no
man, and went not beyond his power, which he had to eat and drink with the
Corinthians, i Cor. 9.4. And one with Gospel allowance by Christ, Mat. 10.8, 9,
i0. Luke i0. 5.6.7. And he did not go beyond his power and seal of his
ministry, i Cor. 9. in sparing the Corinthians, and receiving a supply of the
brethren. Yet he spared the Corinthians, to wit, in his necessity, and coveted
no man's Silver or Gold, then that may condemn you the national Ministers, that
take care beforehand for set maintainances, and bind people by a law to
fulfill your tale not of brick but money, or moneys worth, if they be
grievously oppressed and burdened for it, but if others want and starve, so
you have it, it grieves you not, therefore are you taskmasters, and
oppressors, and no Gospel ministers.

i9. If you might take of none but the seal of your Ministry for supply only,
you might have but little, except you were better workmen then you are, and
planted better plants then yet you have, set proud ones aside, set covetous
ones a side like your selves, set drunkards a side, liars, swearers,
oppressors, couzeners, cheaters, haters, backbiters, vain-talers and workers of
iniquity aside, and few you would have left to seed, and feed on, and if you
take such for your plants that are rooted in inquity, who also live in Sin, and
plead for it then keep to them only to feed, and feed on, and let all that
depart from iniquity, and who are growing out of Sin up into purity, who are
planted and planting in the endless light beyond your dark apprehensions, let
them alone I warn you, and charge you, as you will answer it in the presence of
the Lord, meddle not with them, live on your zeal only, keep out of the
Vinyard, which you have not planted, and feed you the Serpents which you have
begotten, and also feed your selves on the sower grapes, such as you have sown
reap, i Gal. 6,5. 20 Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, and if you say, let him that is
taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all good things, Gal.
6.5; 6. I say so let him do it, then do not you compel or constrain any to do
it, least you wrest the Scripture, or add, and the plagues be added to you for
so doing, Rev. 22.18. and be not deceived, for God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap, he that sows to the flesh, shall
of the flesh reap corruption, but such are the devils seeds men, or Ministers
of the world, not of the word, your crop is even ripe, that which you have been
long sowing, is now growing, you have sown to the flesh, and it does spring
forth, and now appear, and is ready for the Sickle, pride grows tall even
ready for the fire, Malach. i1. i. Oppression, and wickedness grows hard even
ready for the hammer and the flame, Ierem. 23.29. Hypocrisy, dissimulation,
vain-talking, foolish jesting, envy wrath, and persecution, grows up in your
Fields, springs from the North, up into the South, there it is sound in that
untilled ground, where wickedness and ungodliness begins to abound; you idle
laborers, your reward will be just judgment for your portion, all such are
untaught yet in the word; therefore let the good things alone to whom they do
belong, and read where you are, Rom i. 28.29. Romans 3. i2, i3. i9. Isay. 59.9. 2 Thessalonians. i. 8, 9. Rev. 2i. 8.27. Psalm. 9. i7.

2i He or they that take nothing but of such as they have taught in the word,
provided, that they communicate freely without constraint, Gal. 6.6^ Then
Silence proud Priests, and stop your mouths, where pride is, such are yet
untaught to deny it, and woe to the crown of pride, Isay. 3. i6. i7. to the end.
Isay 28. i. Such you are also shut out of, because they are untaught in the
word, that lives and takes pleasure in pride, and Filthiness; therefore take
nothing of them, nor none in their nature that are yet untaught in the word to
deny their evil deeds, and that Scriptures no cover for you, but leaves you
bare, and is a whip to scourge you out of the Saints privileges, who are out
of their practices, where covetousness and oppression, vain-talking, foolish
jesting, drunkenness, and such is ruling and acting in people, they are yet
untaught in the word, i Cor. 6.9. i0. Ephesians. 5. i, 2, 3, 5.6, 7. For they that
are taught in the word, are to lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, and to
receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save their souls,
James, i. 2i. and they that are taught in the word are come to the beginning,
their Sins are forgiven, and they have overcome the wicked one, overcome the
Devil, i John 2. i3. i5. but such as continue in wickedness, and plead for Sin,
and a continuance in it, are yet the Devils Subjects, therefore Sin reigns in
them so the Devil, and such are untaught in the word; John 8.34. Romans 1. 28i
etc. Romans 6. i6. i John 3.8. by the rule as aforesaid, if you have nothing but
of such as are taught in the word, provided, that they communicate freely
without constraint, Gal. 6.6. You will be cut out of your own flock, who appear
to be yet untaught in the word by Scripture, and their own practice, which
differs from the Saints, and the Saints you are not to meddle with whom you
have not taught in the word, but the Lord alone, who is their teacher by his
spirit, Luke i2. i2. Romans 8. i.
and with it through his children, Isa. 54. i3, i5. John 6.55. John i4, 26.
Heb. 8. i^, 1i. Except they see you hungry and give you a piece of bread, or
thirsty, and give you drink, or barefoot, and give you a pair of shoes, or
naked, and give you a Coat, or something to cover your nakedness, though you be
enemies, it is not for your sakes that they are bound to do it, but for the
love they bare to Christ, Romans i2. 20, 2i. Mat. 5.55. etc. Therefore silence
Priests, let the Saints conditions alone, for you are out of their life, where
Pride, Envy, Wrath, Maliciousness, Hypocrisy, Disimulation, and ungodliness,
is ruling, and acting, such are taught by you to deny it, therefore yet
untaught in the word, you are from that Scripture also to let them alone, they
are not to communicate, Mat, 3.2. i Cor 3. i3.
because untaught in the word, but such is the fruits which you have sown to
the flesh, now reap your corruptions, and make ready for the fire Malach. 4.
i. Isa. 66. i5, i6. Psalm. 9. i7. Mat. 25. 5i. to the end.

Conclusion to these.
THe Grace of God teaches us, and all that obey it, to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, Tit. 2. ii, i2. And such we witness with, for they that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts Gal. 5. And
those that live in the spirit and walk in the spirit, who are not sayers, but
doers of the word, such we own, Gal. 5.25.2^.
and you the Priests and Mational Ninisters we deny, who are in the flesh, and
walk in the flesh, and desirous of vainglory; who are sayers, but not doers;
therefore keep out from amongst the Vines, and spoil them not you subtle
Foxes, least you be taken in the snare, and catched in the trap, this is a
warning for you, and a Rod to drive you out from the Saints privileges, being
out of their practices.

This paper I was moved to write, after there was to have been a meeting
between the chief Priests, some of them in Leicestershier, and some of those
the world calls quakers.

R. Farnworth.

If Paul and the Gospel Ministers were examples for others to follow after, and
if in preaching the Gospel for their work they coveted no man's, Silver nor
Gold, that the Gospel might be free, and they chargeable, nor burdensome to no
man, then they who in these days profess themselves ministers of the Gospel,
and do not follow such for their example, but covet men's Silver and Gold, and
goods, constraining and compelling, people to pay them their demands, and under
a pretense to wit, for preaching their brain imaginations from the letter,
which they call gospel, thereby they are both chargeable and burdensome to
people, and are contrary to the Gospel Ministers therein, and out of their
Gospel example, practice and order, and so are no Ministers thereof, but such
are the Priests of the world, or Ministers of man, therefore no ministers of
Christ nor his Gospel, who said, be ye followers of God, as dear children,
and walk as you have us for an example, and now bre^hren says the true Gospel
minister, I commend you to God and the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up and give you an inheritance, among all them that are sanctified;
and also says he, I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel, but
have Preached the gospel of God freely, what is my reward, then verily, that
when I Preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge, etc.
Acts. 20.32.33. Ephesians. 5. i. 2. Cor. 1i. 7. i Cor. 9. i5, i6, i7, i8, i9.

If the Ministers of the Gospel were content with food and raiment, and
exhorted to avoid the love of money, for it was and is the root of all evil
and while some coveted after it they erred, and do err from the faith and so
pierced and do pierce themselves through with many sorrows, but the Man of God
was to fly those things and is, to wit, the love of Money, and not take it for
preaching of the gopel by 20, 40, 60, i00, or 200 l. by the year; then they
who do so, show their lust running out, and love after that to wit, money, and
so flees Righteousness, Faith, Love, Meekness, and pierce themselves through
with the many sorrows, and do that which Gospel Ministers did not, leaving
undone what in the Gospel is required; then they that do so contemn gospel
counsel and order therein, so showing a Spirit of error, and they thereby do
appear to be no Gospel Ministers, that contemn Gospel Counsel, and break
Gospel discipline, and order, but such as do so are the Priests of the World
and National or Ungospellike Ministers that love Money, and make it the ground
of their Gospel: for first, they agree for tithes or 20. 40. 60, i00. or 200.
l. by the year, so following that the Apostles and true Gospel Ministers did
not; who said, having food and raiment, let us therewith be content, but they
that will be richfall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful Lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition, for the love of
Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted after (as the Priests
of these times do) they er^ed from the Faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows; but (...) men of God and Ministers of the Gospel did and do
flee these things, i Tim. 6.8.9. i0. ii. Therefore the Priests of the world are
contrary to the men of God, and no Gospel Ministers, therefore silence
deceivess, and stop your Mouths.

If Christ Jesus himself nor the Ministers of the Gospel never sprinkled any
Infants nor gave no express Command for the same, their sprinkling Infants is
no Ordinance of Christ; but neither Christ Jesus nor any Gospel Ministers did
never sprinkle any Infants nor give no express Command in all the Scripture
for the same, therefore Sprinkling of Infants is no Ordinance of Christ, but a
Mark of the BEAST, Revel. i3. i6, i7. Then they who now profess themselves
Ministers of the Gospel, and do so, to wit, sprinkle Infants and call it an
Ordinance of Christ, when neither Christ nor his Gospel Ministers never
practiced such a thing to such Objects, nor laid down no express Command in the
Scripture for the same, such as do sprinkle Infants are without the Gospel
order, and that is no Work in the Gospel, and they who Minister such things to
such Objects, are no Gospel Laborers nor Ministers thereof, but such are the
tything and hireling Priests, therefore no Gospel Laborers nor Ministers
thereof, but deceivers of the Nations for their own end, with their brain
Imaginations. If that be no Gospel Labor which stands in the will of fallen
man, as to Preach by an Hour-glasse and as they please, when they will, and how
they will, according to the fancies of their brain, or to speak a divination
of their own brain, according to their will, Stealing the words of their
Neighbors, to speak for their own ends as the false Prophets did Ieremies,
23. 3i. 32. Then such are no Gospel Laborers that do so, they that do so are
no Gospel Laborers but vain deceivers, which God is against but such are the
Priests of the world or National and Ungospellike Ministers, under what notion
soever, therefore no Gospel Laborers but vain-deceivers, and the Curse is to
such, and they are to be held accursed Gal. i. 8.9. i Cor 16.22. For the
Ministers of Christ are not made by the will of man, Gal. i. i, ii. i2. 2. Tim.
i. i.
neither do they labor therein according to the will of man, but speak as they
are moved by thy Holy Ghost, as the holy men of God did, and speak not after
man's will, but as the spirit gave them utterance, and now gives them utterance,
as Gospel laborers do and aforetime did, as it is proved by their practice,
and Scripture, who follow the example of the holy man of God, and Ministers of
the Gospel, and laborers therein, Ezekiel. 3. 2 Pet. i. i9. 20. 2i. Acts 4. 3i.
Isai. 48.16. Isai. 6i. Acts 2.4. Luke i2. i2. If that be no Gospel labor to
pray before preaching and after, that stands in man's will, without the Spirit
and Spiritual understanding, then such as do so show a spirit of error, and
are no Gospel Ministers nor laborers therein, but such are the Priests of the
world or national and ungospellike Ministers that are out of all Gospel order
therein, therefore no Gospel laborers nor Ministers thereof as their fruit
makes them manifest, who altogether act contrary to the ministers of Christ in
the gospel ministration, and so are no ministers thereof, for the Apostles and
Gospel Ministers did not make it their custom to pray before and after, when
they spoke to the people, i Cor. i4. i5. Romans 8.26.27. Acts 2.4. Neither did
they pray without the Spirit, and spiritual understanding, as the Priests of
the world that are out of the life of truth do, but Gospel Ministers did preach
by the Spirit, and pray with the Spirit and the Spiritual understanding, as the
Spirit gave them utterance, and sometimes after, but not customarily as Priests
do; Acts 20.36. If that were no Gospel labor to set ignorant people to sing
David's conditions in Rhyme and Meeter, and so to teach them to Sing Lies in
hypocrisy, as the Priests teach people now to Sing without understanding, and
so lie in hypocrisy, and saying they are not puffed in mind, when they are puffed
in mind, saying also they have no scornful eye, when they have scornful and
lustful eyes, and much more in that nature, then they that do so are not
Gospel laborers therein: but it was no Gospel labor to do so, to wit, as
aforesaid, therefore such who labor with deceit are no Gospel laborers, but
such are the Priests of the world, or national and ungospellike Ministers: now
therefore no Ministers of Christ nor the gospel, but seducers and deluders of
the people, for the Ministers of Christ and laborers in the Gospel did not set
any to Sing David's conditions in Rhyme, and meeter customarily, which was to be
read, but such as were redeemed sung new songs, which none could learn but the
redeemed ones, and those that sung Psalms, was not David's conditions in rhyme,
but Spiritual Songs and with the Spirit, and Spiritual understanding also,
Colos. 3. i5, i6. Rev. 5.9. Rev. i4. 3, 4, 5. i Cor. i4. 15. If it were no
Gospel labor to make Funeral Sermons for the dead, as Priests now do, nor to
call people to a Sacrament, for which there is no rule in all the Scripture,
nor no such word as sacrament, and to Church women as they call it, then they
that do so are no Gospel Ministers, nor laborers therein, but it was no Gospel
labor to do so, to wit, as aforesaid, therefore they that do so, as to make
Funeral Sermons for the dead, and also Church women as they call it, and call
people to a Sacrament which there is no Scripture rule for, such are no Gospel
Ministers nor laborers therein, but such are the Priests of the world,
therefore no Gospel Ministers nor laborers therein, but seducers and
Antichrists; stop your mouths, your Ministry is accursed, and your labor is
rejected, silence deceivers. If that was no Gospel allowance nor Gospel wages,
nor ever practiced by any aforetime, Gospel Ministers, as to take Tithes, of
Hey, and Corn, Lamb, and Wool, Eggs, and Geese, and Pigs, money for Mares, and
soals, Skins, and Calves, Gardens, and Pees, and money for smoke passing up
peoples Chimneys, and in several places; Money for servants wages, Easter
reckonings, Midsomer dues, and such like offering, pennies so called, and the
like, then they that do so are oppressors of the Creation, and like the
Taskmasters of Egyt, and no Gospel laborers, but vain deluders, and wicked
deceivers, but it was no Gospel wages, nor Gospel-allowance, nor ever practiced
by any of the Gospel Ministers, for no mention is made of any such thing in the
Apostles writing or practice, Therefore all that do so, to wit, as aforesaid,
under pretense of preaching the Gospel as they call it, who are out of all
Gospel order, government, or practice, then such are seducers, deceivers, and
Antichrists, oppressors, and as the taskmasters of Egypt, but such as do
aforesaid, are the Priests of the world, and ungospellike Ministers, therefore
oppressors of the Creation, and as Pharaohs taskmasters, seducers, also, and
deceivers of the people and nation, and woe to all such, and cursed are they,
and Vengance from God is their reward.

Now people consider, and lay it to heart, for I have in these things cleared
my Conscience before the living powerful God, and you are left without excuse,
and if you will not repent and turn from your Idol Shepherds, and Idolatrous
worships, Vengeance expect, for the hand of the Lord is against all such, and
the wrath of the Lord is kindled, and the sword drawn, furbished and made fit
for the slaughter, he will plead with all such by his sword and by fire, and
great shall be the flame thereof, Isa. 56.15.16. Now you have time, prise it,
for to that in your Consciences I am made manifest, which bares testimony
against Sin, and if you do not return to the Lord with speed, I will be a swift
witness against you, and follow to the grave and pit, and when you go down into
the pit, quick, in your great and lamentable cry, then remember what I said, to
warn you in your life time, and ye would not, Remember Dives end is yours that
do so.

There is no Hypocrites in the true Church.
THose that say there is Hyopcrites in all Churches, does err from the Spirit
of truth etc. Showing a spirit of error, and speaks lies in Hypocrisye, by
their fallacies and deceit, where by they deceive the simple, such as are
carried away with the deceivableness of deceivers, and such as say so, are no
Ministers of Christ, but one Priest did say so, to wit, William Sheffield High
Priest of Ipstock, in Leicester Shire, therefore, a liar, and a Hypocrite, and
no Minister of Christ's, but of Antichrist, and a vain deceiver, and a liar in
Hyocrisye against the truth, and true Church.

Which true Church is the body of Christ, of which body Christ is the Head,
Ephesians. 1.22. And Lord of the truth and true Church, the fullness of him that
fylleth all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. For the Church is the Household of God, not
builded upon Hypocrites and Hypocrisye, but the true Church is built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief
Cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly framed, grows unto an holy
Temple, in the Lord, Ephesians. 2. i9, 20, 2i. Where no Hypocrisye can stand,
Christ being Head of his Church, is Head of Truth, but judges out Pypocrisyes,
and cuts of Hypocrisye, for the true Church is in God, the Church of the first
born written in Heaven, in which the Spirits of just men are made perfect,
Hebrew i2.22.23. And the true Church being in God, there is no Hypocrisye in
him, it is blasphemy to say, so, therefore silence all deceivers, with your
Fallacies and Philosophy, and vain-deceit, Colos. 2.8. by which deceit you make
Hypocrites in your Churches so called, and deceive souls thereby.

But in the only true Church there is no Hypocrites, then not in all, Christ is
truly, John i4. i6. And he is the Head of the true Church, Ephesians. i. 22.23. And
God is the Head of Christ, i. Cor. ii. And the true Church is the house of God,
which Church is the Pillar and ground of the true, i Tim. 3. i5. And Paul and
Silvonus and Timothius writ unto the Church in God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and there is no hypocrisye in him, thy fallacies and Philosophy
Sheffield does and has deceived thee, acknowledge thy error, and erroneous
ways, and all such in thy natute, who acts contrary to the light, and own thy
condemnation to be just thereupon, for with the light which changes not, art
thou and all such, and your ways and worships all comprehended that are out of
the light and out of the truth.

And such with the light are judged and condemned; tremble ye sturdie looks,
the day of the Lord is coming upon you all, and you shall lament and wail, yea
vengeance from God is your reward, and to you all that Act against him in his
appearance, this is the word of the Lord woe, woe, woe, to all such.

FINIS.

