A Beacon Set On Fire: OR The Humble Information of certain Stationers,
Citizens of London, to the Parliament and Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

Concerning the Vigilance of Jesuits, Papists, and Apostates, (taking advantage
of the Divisions among our selves and the States great Employment,) To Corrupt
the pure Doctrine of the Scriptures. Introduce the whole Body of Popish
Doctrine and Worship. Seduce the Subjects of this Commonwealth unto the Popish
Religion, or that which is worse.


By Writing and Publishing many Popish Books, (Printed in England in the
English Tongue within these three last Years, therein maintaining all the gross
Points of Popery, urging a necessity for all to receive them upon pain of
Damnation, proclaiming in one of them, that the Parliament have discharged the
people of this Nation from the common professed Religion thereof; boasting of
many eminent men that are lately converted to their Religion, and expressing
the hopes they have of a great flowing in of people unto them.)

And Blasphemous Books of another Nature: All made evident by The Catalogue and
Contents of many of the aforesaid Books added hereunto.

Published for the Service of the Parliament and Commonwealth.

Hoping that the Parliament by sufficient Laws, and the Lords Ministers and
People by their Preaching and Prayers, will set themselves (upon this Alarm
that the Enemy gives) to maintain the Faith that was once delivered to the
Saints against all the Enemies thereof.

LONDON, Printed for the Subscribers hereof. 1652.

The humble Information of certain Stationers, Citizens of London, to the
Parliament and Commonwealth of England, concerning Popish and Blasphemous Books.
THe ardent affection that we bear unto the to the Parliament and Commonwealth
of England, concerning the late publishing and printing many Popish and
Blasphemous Books in England in the English Tongue, which otherwise perhaps
they would not so soon come to the knowledge of, that they might suppress them.



Yea our hopes ascend higher, to wit, That that great Accusation of the
Parliament in one of the Popish Books [namely, That God has put a period to
the common professed Religion of this Nation, and that by Authority of
PARLIAMENT,] will be by public Demonstrations confuted; the Parliament well
knowing, that the common people of this Nation will be of one Religion or
other; and if by public Authority they be not kept to the Reformed Religion,
they will be easily drawn to the Popish: When an old Religion is out of credit
with a State, the multitude will welcome the Introducers of a new; and if once
the Approvers of Popery should grow most numerous, how then can we have other
then a Popish Parliament, and a Popish Army? Or if the Parliament should be
Protestant, yet how could it rule or be safe, since the strength of the supreme
Magistrate lies in his Subjects? And if once the Romish Religion should
prevail, then farewell the holy Bible in our Mother Tongue, and Sacraments in
both kinds, or so much as in one, otherwise then as a visible real material
Sacrifice both for the quick and the dead: Then no more preaching and
Catechizing in English out of the pure Fountain of the Scripture; we must part
with these inestimable Treasures for the filth of Egypt, viz. the Romish Church
for the Rule and Standard of our Faith, and her Service in Latin, with all the
rabble of her Will Worship and Superstition, for our Practice; which if we
shall not like of as the best, we shall for our satisfaction be sent to the
Inquisition, there adjudged to be Heretics, and so past their cure; and then,
as if it were pity to leave us so, tenderhearted fathers as they are! they will
turn us over to the secular Power, who will quickly rid themselves and their
Church of us, the same way as they did our renowned Progenitors in Q. Mary's
days. And then what will become of the Souls of our dear children, and the
posterity that shall succeed us, when they shall want the means of their
Conversion and Salvation, viz. the pure Gospel and Ordinances of Jesus Christ,
which every godly parent and Commonwealthsman had rather leave unto his
children, then the greatest earthly Inheritance that ever man was born to.

Having thus in all humility declared our selves by England, That while the
people of God in this Land have vented their heat against each other about
lesser points in Divinity, and the Parliament and Army conflicted by Council
and Force with many Enemies in reference to public Liberty, whereby the great
care, that otherwise might have been had of the Lords Vineyard, has been
hindered; the old vanquished Popish Party, Jesuits and Papists, are unawares
with indefatigable pains endeavoring all along to entice the people of this
Commonwealth unto the Popish Religion, and have made such great progress
therein by ways known not only to God, but (as we conceive) wise men also, as
that now they have taken the boldness to publish among the people of this
Nation diverse Impressions of several sorts of Popish Books in the English
Tongue, and printed in England within these last three Years, to the number of
(as we guess, reckoning 1500 to an Impression of each Book that has been in
that time printed) Thirty thousand at least: As if they were now confident of
completing their design, and as if (in their opinion of us) we were yet to
seek whether the Popish or Reformed Religion were the right Religion, and were
ashamed of the former Zeal of Church and State to preserve the people of this
Commonwealth from Romish Doctrine, Worship and Tyranny; and did now think their
natures and Religion more mild then when so much Blood of our now glorious
Ancestors was in cool blood most inhumanely shed by them, for holding, that the
Pope and his Bishops could not make an Article of Christian Faith, much less
were to be believed or obeyed in things contrary to the Canon of the Scripture;
or, that the very body of Christ now glorified in Heaven was not in ten
thousand places at one time upon earth: of many of which Popish Books both
their Titles and Contents, we do hereafter give a Catalogue, and do keep in our
custody one of each to make good our Information, if so commanded: And although
upon the Titles of most of the Books there be Paris, or other places beyond the
Sea, prefixed, as if they were printed there; yet we, and all the Booksellers
and Printers in London, that have seen or shall see them, do upon such sight
know that they are printed in London: And the Founders of Printing-letters that
live in London, do infallibly know, that the letters with which the said Books
are printed, were by them cast and made in London.

The Premises considered, we do humbly pray the England; yea and again, most
heartily implore the Parliament, and every Member thereof, by Gods and man's
expectations, your own public Professions and Engagements, and as ever you
expect to appear before God with comfort, who has put power into your hands to
do much for his beloved Spouse and Cause; That you would stir up your Strength
and your Zeal against the Enemies of both the Souls and Bodies of the people of
this Commonwealth, By suppressing Popish and Blasphemous Books, which are the
Nursery of Error, Idolatry, and Rebellion, Putrefaction and Shame of a Nation,
Provocation of Divine Vengeance, and Highway to eternal Perdition: And that if
the Act now depending, concerning the Company of Stationers and Printing, do
not make ample provision in the Premises, it may be accommodated to the
aforesaid purpose, as well as any other: And to the end so good a work may be
accomplished, and effectual means may be applied, we shall humbly offer our
Proposals (if commanded) how it maybe done, without any trouble or charge to
the State; In the mean time begging leave, that without offense we may say, we
humbly conceive, that we shall despair of ever seeing a sufficient Redress in
this case, unless the way of Licensing Books, by faithful able men that are
sound in the faith, be strictly enjoined, and an equitable penalty laid upon
all that print and publish, or cause to be printed and published, any Book not
Licensed, and the said penalty to be recovered by any that shall prosecute the
Offender at the Common Law, with good encouragement to the Prosecuter.

And lastly, Least the Parliaments great Affairs about War and Peace should
hinder such inconsiderable Informers as we are from being heard, we do beg (in
the Name of Christ) of all persons, of all degrees, whether Ministers of the
Gospel, Gentlemen, or others, by what Names soever distinguished, that are or
would be esteemed real Friends to true Religion, the Parliament and
Commonwealth of England, That they would improve all the interest they have
both in God and men in authority, for the effectual Suppression of Popish
Books, and stopping the growth of Popery.

The same Request to the Parliament and aforesaid Persons we humbly desire may
extend unto other Blasphemous Books also; The Names and Blasphemies of some of
which we likewise herewith tender.

Luke Fawn. Samuel Gellibrand. Joshua Kirton. John Rothwell. Thomas Underhill.
Nathaniel Webb.


The Catalogue and Contents of some of those Popish Books that have been
published in the English Tongue within these three last Years, and Printed in
ENGLAND.
1. THe Golden Treatise of Vincentius Lirinensis, 1651.

2. The Verity of Christian Faith, 1651.

3. The Felicity of a Christian Life, 1651.

4. The Profit of Believing, 1651.

5. Saint Austin's Care for or the Dead, 1651.

All which forementioned Books have more or less in them in favor of the Popish
Religion, as cunningly insinuating, that the Romish Church is that Universal
Church to which all must necessarily adhere, etc.

6. Parson's Resolutions, as he first put it forth without Bunny's Correction.

7. Sales his Introduction; a Book burned as Popish in the late Archbishops
days, as having many of the gross Points of Popery in it.

8. The Holy Court; which Book, with the other two foregoing it, are so well
known to many Scholars and judicious men in England to abound with Popish
Errors, that we need but name them.

9. The lost Sheep returned home, or the motives of the Conversion to the
Catholic Faith of Tho: Vain, D. D. Laboring by a great show of Learning and
Argumentation to evince the Popish Religion to be the only true Religion, the
Church of Rome the only true Church, and infallible; maintaining Latin
Service, the Communion in one kind, and most of the grossest points of Popery.

10. A Missive to his Majesty K. James, by Dr Carrier, written 39 years ago,
and reprinted 1649. containing the Motives of his Conversion to the Roman
Religion, with Inducements to that King to turn Papist: The Publisher
endevoring to make Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. odious; inferring from Mechanics
Claim to the Pulpit, the Disagreement that is among our selves, and the
miscarriages of particular persons; That our Religion is false; glorying much
in the Conversion of many Protestants to Popery of late; as, Dr Vain, Hugh
Paulin, Hen: Ireson, N. Read, Mr Rich: Nicholls, Mr Rich: Milesent, Mr Rich:
Crashaw, Mr Will: Rowlands, Mr Thomas Normington, Mr Joyner, Mr Blakistone, Mr
Edward Barker, Mr Eaton, Mr Peter Glue, Mr Jackson, Mr Cooper, Mr Jo: Crighton,
Mr Andrew Youngston, Mr Hugh Ross, Mr Tho: Johnston, Mr William Simple:
Persuading, that things being fallen to such an unconceivable Confusion in
England, it is no matter of wonder that so many turn to Popery, but that more
do not follow.

11. The Love of the Soul, by G. M. The whole scope of the Book is to persuade
people, That the Church of Rome is the one only true Church, and that
separation from her is sinful and damnable; and at the end of it are prefixed
some Popish Questions in Rhyme, which were answered by Mr Samuel Hiron forty
years ago.

12. A Manifest touching Mr W. P. Aversion from the Protestant Congregation,
and his Conversion to the Catholic Church: Maintaining all the gross Points
in Popery, affirming the Roman Church to be the only true Church, to which all
must join, from which none must separate upon pain of Damnation; That she is
infallible, and cannot teach any thing repugnant to the Word of God, no more
then God can teach contrary to himself; And that Protestants have no true
Scripture to build their Faith on.

13. The Examination of the late Act of the Convocation at Oxford, containing
their Reasons against the Scottish Covenant and Presbytery.

The whole drift of this Book is to deny our Religion to be true, because of
the Disunion between the Episcopalians and the Presbyterians; To slander and
reproach our Captains that led us out of Romish Egypt; assert Traditions in the
Popish sense, the Sacrament of the Mass, Prayers for the Dead, Purgatory, and
Invocation of Saints.

14. A Treatise entitled, The Right Religion Evinced, by L. B. 1652. Tending
to prove, That the Romish Church is the true and only Catholic Church,
Infallible Ground and Rule of Faith; maintaining the Real Presence, Adoration
and Bowing to the Host, Altars, Images, Relics, worshipping of and praying
to Angels, and Saints departed; asserting a perfect keeping of the
Commandments, The Priests power to forgive Sins in a proper sense, and humane
merits; Denying the Actions of Believers in Covenant to be Duties, Justifying
the Receiving the Communion under one kind, acknowledging Christ's Institution
to be otherwise, but not binding; and that all this must be yielded to if a man
would be saved.

15. Prayer to the Saints Vindicated, by F. P. 1652. Affirms the Lawfulness and
Duty of praying to Saints and Angels; That the Saints in Heaven know the
secrets of the hearts of men upon Earth; That the Saints in Heaven that were
poor on Earth have such power and authority by their prayers in Heaven, as to
receive into Heaven what faithful rich men they please; That those that
persevere in the denial of this Doctrine of Prayer to Saints, must perish
everlastingly in Hell, where the Saints shall see them, and rejoice in their
torment; And that no Honor, Worship, Adoration, Prostration both of Body and
Soul, is to be denied the Saints and Angels, but only visible Sacrifice, which
is (said to be) due to God alone.

16. A prudent and secure Choice, being a sure Landmark to all those who have
been tossed to and fro in these wavering times, by H. G. 1650. Beginning his
Prologue thus, viz. Sir, Since it has pleased God to put a period to the
common professed Religion of this Nation, and that by Authority of PARLIAMENT:
in Capitals the Papist prints it, and so we re-print it, that the Parliament
might take notice of it. The Book affirms, That what the Church of Rome holds
forth as matters of Faith, are Therefore to be believed as infallible Truths:
Pleads for real corporeal presence in the Eucharist, and offering up Christ in
the Mass as a due Sacrifice; maintains Auricular Confession, the visible
Headship of the Pope, Prayer to Saints departed, Worship to Images, Purgatory,
Free Will, Merit of good Works, Tradition, Indulgencies; That Scripture is
unsufficient to declare its own sense in things that must be believed upon pain
of Damnation; and that therefore the Church and the Church of Rome is the only
infallible Rule both to know what is the Word of God, and the sense thereof,
and what is to be believed; and that upon the belief of all this depends our
everlasting welfare.

17. A Treatise of Schism, by Scot.

18. The Christian Sodality, or Catholic Hive of Bees, by E. P. alias Gage,
as is said; Which expounds the Popish Primmer, justifies their Popish Days,
Worship, and the whole Religion of Popery: printed 1652.

19. The Christian Moderator, printed 1652. the fourth Edition. Pleading for a
Toleration of the Popish Religion; maintaining the real corporeal presence in
the Eucharist, prayer to Angels and Saints departed, etc. Putting a painted
Gloss upon the foul face of Popery, to make it appear otherwise then it is;
Making much mention of a sweet spirit, tenderness, humility, mutual Love, etc.
merely to abuse the people of this Commonwealth; for the world knows, that
those virtues never appeared in Papists toward Christians of a different
Belief, who are not (that we know of) tolerated to profess their Religion among
them, except by the achievement of the Sword taken up in their defense against
Popish cruelties: Nor does the Author in the least demonstrate how the
Protestants may be assured of a Toleration, in case the Papists shall at any
time become the major part, as being impossible for him or any others so to do,
until a Popish-General-Councel shall cancel some of their Points of Faith about
the Popes Supremacy, and Churches Infallibility; which Points all Papists must
and do believe, notwithstanding any thing they shall say to the contrary.

The Names and Blasphemies of some Books not Popish.

HOBS his LEVIATHAN, Affirms,

That all they to whom God has not supernaturally revealed the Scriptures, are
not obliged to obey them by any other Authority then that of the Commonwealth
residing in the Sovereign, who only has the Legislative power: p. 205.

That the Kingdom of God we pray for in the Lords Prayer, when we say, Thy
Kingdom come, is nothing else but a Civil Kingdom, governed by Gods Lievtenants
and Vicars upon Earth, and not a Spiritual: That the preaching of the Apostles
was the preaching of this Kingdom: p. 219. 220.

That God has a Sovereign Prophet and Vicegerent upon Earth, who is a
Christian Sovereign, that has next under God the Authority of governing
Christian men; and that by the Doctrine which in the Name of God he commands to
be taught as a sure Rule, we are to examine and try the truth of such Doctrines
as shall be advanced either with Miracles or without; and that if the Sovereign
disavow them, then we are no more to obey their voice: p. 232.

That the immortal Soul begins not in a man till the Resurrection: p. 241.

That the Tormentors of the damned, which the Scripture calls Satan, Devil,
Abaddon, are not any individual person, but an office and quality; and that by
Satan is meant any earthly Enemy of the Church: p. 244.

That the Torments of the damned after the Resurrection, shall be such an
earthly misery as many men now endure that are alive; that this misery shall be
but for a time, and that they shall then dye again, and be annihilated: p. 245.

That If our Prince command us to say with our tongue, We believe not in
Christ, we must obey the Prince; and that whatsoever a Subject is compelled to
in obedience to his Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own mind, but in
order to the Laws of is Country, that action is not his, but his Sovereigns;
nor is it he that in this case denies Christ before men, but his Governor, and
the Law of his Country: p. 271.

Asserts, that there have been no Martyrs since the Apostles days, but many
have needlessly cast away their lives: p. 273.

That actions of men can never be unlawful or sinful, but when they are against
the Law of the Commonwealth: p. 279. Denying, that the New Testament is in any
place to any person a Law, where the Law of that Commonwealth has not made it
so, p. 284. And as much he says of the whole Scripture elsewhere: with a great
deal more of such Blasphemous Stuff.

A Testimony to an Approaching Glory, by Joshua Sprigge:

Asserting, That the Sufferings of Christ for us were as it were but a Parable,
and that Gods heart was not set upon the very having a little Blood for the
sins of the people; but taking that Blood, speaks thereby to our Childishness,
who could not see how there could be a Reconciliation without Blood: p. 53.

That crucifying old Adams righteousness, is a greater Sacrifice to God then
the very sacrificing of the flesh of Christ: p. 54.

That the Humanity of Christ is a Form wherein God appears to the world; there
is a higher thing then Believing, and that is seeing and knowing the Father
without a Form, manifesting and revealing himself in his own immediate Light;
this I desire you to wait for, seek for, press toward, p. 56. And that So a
Believer does when he goes to God in the same Unction that was poured upon
Christ Jesus, and does not formally make use of the Name of Christ, as a man
would use the name of some great man, and beg for his sake, p. 58. Calls it
weakness to think that Christ does procure the love of the Father, p. 59.

The Racovian Catechism, printed (as in Latin, so also) in English: Denying the
Divinity of Christ, and the Divinity and Personality of the Holy Ghost, that
Christ made Satisfaction for our sins: with many other abominable Errors.

A Book written by Biddle, maintaining that the Holy Ghost is not God.

Concerning which two last Books, namely, the said Catechism in Latin (not
English) and Biddle's Book, we cannot but thankfully acknowledge that the
Parliament have showed their dislike of them, by causing a few that could be
taken to be burnt: But alas, there is no standing penal Law (that gives
sufficient encouragement to the Prosecutor, and investeth the Master and
Wardens of the Company of Stationers, or some others, with sufficient
Authority) to deter men from Writing, Printing and Publishing the like for the
future; whereby it comes to pass, that since the execution of that Justice some
have presumed to publish the foresaid Catechism in English, in affront to the
Parliament, and chiefly to the Lord Jesus, who is the true God and Eternal
Life, to him be Glory both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

