The Interest of England stated: OR A faithful and just Account of the Aims of
all Parties now pretending.

Distinctly treating of the Designements of The Roman Catholic. The Royalist.
The Presbyterian. The Anabaptist. The Army. The late Protector. The Parliament.


With their Effects in respect of themselves, of one another, and of the
Public.

CLEARLY EVIDENCING The unavoydable ruin upon all from longer contest: AND
Offering an Expedient for the composure of the respective Differences; to the
security and advantage, not only of every single interest, but to the bringing
solid, lasting Peace unto the Nation.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

The Interest of ENGLAND Stated.
TO have a thorough sense of our present Sufferings, and a certain knowledge of
the inevitable ruin, which our divisions (if not composed) will bring upon the
Public; as it is a matter of little difficulty in its self, so of very
inconsiderable use; that which would be more behoveful, were to find out and
expedient, for the alleviating the ills we now feel, and the prevention of
those we fear; both of which, having been by several means during a long tract
of time in vain attempted, the case is now by many given over as incurable; but
upon serious Consideration it appears, that not the Malignancy of our disease,
has occasioned those miscarriages, but the ill application of remedies has done
it. In particular, that men have not either desired to know, or to remove the
distempers of the Public, but labored to throw off their Single and immediate
pressures, and to that end, endeavored to advance the party they adhered to,
and to beat down all others: whereby it came about, that Divisions in stead of
Composute, have still grown wider; and passionate Hates instead of being
allayed, have risen higher, and been more exasperated. But it being certain,
that the real good of the Nation, consists not in the private benefit of single
Men, but the advantage of the Public; and that is made up, not by the Welfare
of any one party, but of all; it is evident, that the only means to procure the
general good, must be commensurate unto the whole Community; looking upon all
persons, not as Heads or Partisans of any private faction or Interest, but as
Members of the Nation; and the pretentions of single Men or parties, however
numerous, are only so far forth to be pursued, as they advance the other
general Interest. Which being laid down as evident and certain truth, the next
consideration will be, what are the Interests of all the several parties of the
Nation now on foot, and what the Public is; that so discovery may be made how
consistent the private aims are, both among themselves, and with the general:
and also how possible it is to find out an expedient, for the atcheivement of
the common good.

If we take a view of the several pretentions, carried on in the Nation apart,
we shall find the most considerable to be, the Roman Catholic, the Royalist,
the Presbyterian, the Anabaptist the Army, the Protectorian, the Parliament.

1. It Is the Roman Catholics aim not only to abrogate the penal Laws, and
become capable of all employments in the Commonwealth; but to introduce his
religion, to restore the rights of the Church, and utterly eradicate all that
he esteems Heresy.

2. It Is the Royalists desire to bring in the King a Conqueror, to recover
their losses in the late War, be rendered capable of civil employment, and have
the former Government of the Church.

3. It Is the Presbyterians desire to set up his discipline, to have the
Covenant reinforced, and only such as take it, to be employed in Church or
State; to be indempnified in reference to what they have done, and secured of
what they possess.

4. It Is the Wish of the Baptized Churches, that there might be no
Ecclesiastical Government of any kind, nor Ministerial function, or provision
for it; and that only persons so minded, should be capable of employment,
likewise to be indempnified for what they have done.

5. It Is the aim of the Army, to govern the Nation, to keep themselves from
being disbanded, or engaged it war, to secure their pay, and to be indempnified
for all past action.

6. It Is the desire of the Family of the late Protector to establish the Heir
of his House, that they may rule him, and he the Nation, and so both preserve
and advance themselves.

7. It Is the wish of the present Parliament, (as far as they have one common
design) to continue themselves in absolute power, by the specious name of a
popular Government; to new model and divide, and at last, take down the Army;
and finally under the pretense of a Committee of Parliament or Council of
State, set up an Oligarchy; resembling that of the thirty Tyrants in Athens.

Lastly, It Is the general interest of the Nation to establish the ancient
fundamental Laws, upon which every ones propriety and liberty are built, to
settle Religion, to procure a general Indemnity for all actions past, to
revive their languishing and almost dead trade, gain an alliance with our
neighbor States; to put the Government in such hands, as besides present
force, can plead a legal title to it; into the hands of such with whose private
interest that of the public not only consists, but in which it is necessarily
involved; which likewise does least contradict the aims of particular parties:
Lastly, the hands of such, whose counsel is fit to direct in matters of
deliberation, and courage fit to vindicate the injuries of the Nation.

Having impartially proposed the several interests that each party designs to
it self, we come now to consider how far they are attainable; or if attained,
how consistent with the public benefit, next how consistent with that of all
other parties respectively, and in fine how productive of the real benefit of
themselves.

First, as to the Roman Catholic pretensions of restoring to the Pope his
ancient revenue and jurisdiction, and the Church all that was alienated in
Henry the eighths time, it is no way feizable; the Perquisites of the Sea of
Rome, and the payments to the Pope being greater than our Contributions so much
complained of, and the impossibility of restitution of Church Lands is plain
from what was done in Queen Mary's days, when the greatest zealots for that
profession, chose rather to throw their Beads into the fire, than resign their
Conveyances of Abby-land; then as to his religion, it is visibly the ruin of
all other parties. Q. Mary's reformation by fire and faggot, with all the
terrors of the Inquisition, baing inseparable attendants on it: now the bulk of
the Nation being possessed of the usage they should have from the Roman
Catholics, if they prevailed, besides all other Antipathies deeply radicated
in the minds of far the greatest part of the Nation; it is morally impossible
it should ever introduct without a foreign force of such strength as to make
an absolute conquest; which would involve the whole Nation, and the Papists
themselves in one common ruin. The sword not distinguishing the Catholic from
the Heretic; The very words of a Spanish Friar, when demanded what they would
do with the English Catholics in 88.
and having only this kindness for its friends, to send them speedily to
Heaven, when the other were designed for Hell, and this the Catholics were
sensible of in the invasion of 88, assuring the Queen of as great fidelity as
they could expect from any of her Protestant Subjects.

Secondly, the Royalist, pretension of having the K. an absolute Conqueror, as
it would destroy the interest of all parties that have appeared against him or
his Father, would infringe the the liberties of the English Subjects in
general, and in fine, oppress the Cavaleir himself: besides, is no way
attainable by that party, being inconsiderable both in number and warlick
pre^arations to the rest: yet farther, should he so prevail, the looking back
for restitution of all damages past in so many years, were utterly against his
interest, and would forfeit the most absolute victory: no power being retained
by violence, however acquired thereby. And in those terms of difficulty, the
setting up the primitive Government of the Church, at least in its full height,
against so great a multitude of eager diffenters, according to probability will
not stand.

Thirdly the Presbyterian aims of setting up his Discipline, has the former
inconveniences, with the addition of some others; for besides that, its rise
must be the overthrow of all other parties, which are more considerable in the
Nation then themselves; that rigid Government no ways complies with the genius
of the Nation, nor the frame of our Municipal Laws: which the late King was
well aware of, when he conceded to the setting of it up for three years, being
fully satisfied how effectual an argument the experience of that short time
would be to persuade the Nation to endure so galling a heavy a yoke no longer;
as to the point of Indemnity, and that is secured sufficiently in the
preceding paragraph, for if the Cavaliers, who are the great sufferers must
have no reparations (as I am confident they expect more) there is no other
party else to fear the making any, and as the Case now stands in the Church,
the late discouragements for learning, have left so small a store of persons
fit for Ecclesiastical employments, that Livings will want Scholars of what
party soever, and be scarce supplied; and not Scholars be destitute of Livings.

Fourthly, the pretensions of the Baptized Churches have no less inconvenience
attending them: as first, importing the ruin of all other professions of
religion; the adherents to which are evidently not only the most numerous, but
infinitely the most substantial part of the Nation; then if attained, cannot
possibly subsist, it being a Maxim in policy, that Religion is the Cement of
Government, without a public profession of which, and the maintenance of
Learning and Ministry, Atheism and disorder must needs break in: withal, they
having a temporal Government, either in a single person, or community, to which
even themselves would unanimously submit, they cannot incorporate into a civil
society, of any kind. Lastly, the practices in Germany by the Anabaptists
there; their cruelty, and all manner of disorder; their taking away all
property of Estates, founding it in Grace and Saintship, with the hard
treatment the Papists in Ireland have found, and the Presbyterian Scots in the
North part of the same Kingdom have lately received from that party, make all
other infinitely dissatisfied in their acquiring any power over them.

Fifthly, as to the Armies governing the Nation; I shall not insist on the
inconsiderableness of their number, or the intolerableness of being ruled by
the sword, etc. there needs no more be said, but that a few weeks since they so
plainly saw the impossibility of it, that they were content to put the power
into the hands of them they had most highly disobliged of all men, and whose
interest visibly it was (and always will be) to pull them down; not knowing
otherwise how to dispose either of themselves, or the power they had taken from
the Protector, and the former Parliament; nay, are now content to have their
officers thrown out after an arbitrary manner, and those that remain, forced to
take Commissions from their new Masters, and old enemies; which are to last but
for a few months, and possibly be taken away before many days pass over. In
the mean time awed with the exclusion from indemnity, as also the raising
County Troops, and new Militia's, which (what ever is pretended) are designed
only to check and curb them: likewise, the Arrears so pitifully satisfied,
that they seem rather a jeer then payment; and yet they choose to submit to all
this, rather then venture the confusion of assuming the power into their own
hands.

6. The pretensions of the Protectorian Interest, are now so low, so odious;
and what is worse then that, ridiculous to the Nation, the several Members of
the Family, having been false to one another, and their best friends, and the
late Heir, having in his person betrayed so much folly and cowardice, (two
ingredients which will destroy any Government;) 'twould be impertinent to show
that it cannot be acquired, or if possibly returned, could not be settled; and
of the unattainablenesse of their design, the old Protector himself would be
further evidence, whose successes and repute in the World, gave him advantages
far before those, any of his Line can hope to have; and yet we see, he could
never get that title he so much thirsted for; and he had gained it (which it is
credibly reported, he designed upon that very day he dyed) it is visible to
prudent men, how fatal it would have been, even to him: But lastly, how far it
would be from the Interest of the Nation, to espouse such a quarrel, as the
maintenance of that Family with their lives and fortunes; let them be Judges,
who in their Addresses solemnly promised to do so, and within few weeks after
utterly deserted it.

7. The remnant Parliamentary Interest, is of like nature; that rises merely by
the Armies favor, and can stand only on its Ruin, and the Nations. Its plea
of right is so thin, that a sober person would be ashamed to own it; they being
(to pass by other failances) long ago, legally dissolved in the death of the
King: after apparently made unfree at least, by the seclusion of their Members.
Lastly, actually dissolved by the late Protector, which was acknowledged by as
many Members against themselves as sat in intermediate Parliaments; especially
in the last, which was called upon the old national account, and had the
authority of the Act, for a triennial Parliament to ground their convention:
and now to complete the Tyranny and Usurpation, this carcass of a Parliament,
dead many years ago, being conjured up from its ashes and rottenness, by the
omnipotence of the Army, continues the old seclusion still, and fills not up
the vacant places: nay, is so far from filling up, that its primary aim is to
overthrow the constitution of Parliaments; and though it pretends to
popularity, dares not refer it self to the free votes of the people; nor may
they hope to fool the Nation, with promises of not outsitting a prefixed time,
or their Rotations and Fantastical Elections, which are no way grounded on the
peoples choice, and besides lay no foundation of Settlement, as being
unpracticable; and what is more, when settled, variable, both by their present
Contrivers, and those future persons that shall be chosen; and lastly, by the
Army, without whose license nothing is valid, or of force: In short, its
pretensions are far more destructive to the Nation, then even the Protectorian
are, it being better to submit to the lust, and serve the ends of one Family,
then of twelve, or thirty, or what ever number the Olicharchy fixes. Its
subsistence depending merely upon this Army, whose visible Interest it is to
dissolve them; they cannot possibly bring about their ends, for should they
take down this, and model a new Army, the Interest of that would be the same,
though the men were changed; and the mutual ruin of each other, must still
continue necessary for the support of either.

From which premises we may conclude; that the pretensions of no party now on
foot in the Nation are attainable: or if attained, are conconsistent with the
good of other parts, or of the Nation; or in fine, their own: and from hence
likewise, one would be apt to conclude, that the ruin of the public is
inevitable; there being no door of hope left open to receive, no method
visible, to unite so distant and incompatible ends.

But notwithstanding all this, it is not impossible, no nor hard, to find an
Expedient that shall evacuate all these difficulties: not only establish the
general Concernment, but (exorbitant passion only retrencht) satisfy the real
Interest of every party, nay single person in the Nation.

Now to the cheerful reception of such an overture, I suppose there is no need
to persuade, nor more for to admonish, that words and names however rendered
odious, are not to fright us from our certain benefit, and dearest Interest.
All that is demanded here, is, that if upon serious consideration, the proposal
be found reasonable, men would be so kind to themselves as to receive it. The
Assertion I doubt not to make most plain and evident, and therefore shall as
plainly pronounce it. It Is this, The calling in the King, is the certain and
only means for the preservation of the Kingdom, and also of the rights and
Interest, of all single persons in it.

To make this evident in every part, I will retain the former Method, and take
a just account of all the before mentioned particulars, that there may be no
possibility left for Fallacy or Error.

I begin with the common national Interest, and that this accords with it,
becomes manifest; for that the first requisite, the establishing the
fundamental Laws, necessarily brings in the King; this likewise affords a legal
way for redressing of greivances of what kind soever, and a sure and full
Indemnity to all persons; will settle Religion upon such a Basis, as shall
give satisfaction to all that are for Government in the Church; as also those
that dissent therein. It being visible, that all English men are equally near
to him, to whom they relate not by the private names of Faction or Opinion, but
by that one common bond of Alleigance; there being no more reason why he should
be partial in his affections to them, while they all agree in Loyalty, (though
they differ in other matters;) than why a Father should be fond to one Son, and
discourage another (both being equally obedient) upon pretense of their diverse
hairs or complexions, though Tyrants and Usurpers have found it necessary still
to cajol and fool some one faction that they might make an interest which they
had not, and by any means gain a color and support to their usurpation. This
and this only will advance trade, which the Spanish and Danish quarrels have
almost destroyed, will give an alliance with neighbor States, his Family being
already engraffed into the principal Stems of Europe, and his future marriage
giving opportunity to make an advantageous affinity to strengthen those present
interests; this will take off the vast charge of intelligence, and bribes
hitherto employed merely against the restitution of his Family: will superceed
the necessity of those unreasonable wars, that were begun upon that single
account, (I need not instance in particulars to make my self understood.)
'Twill cut off the charge of the Appendages of this Crown, the Scottish and
Irish Nations; which are now from hence become a burden; besides a ground of
Everlasting Jealousy and danger. Yet further; the Government being put into
the Kings hands, 'twill be established not only by that power which is
committed to him; but by the more sure exactors of obedience; affection, and
duty. He being an hereditary Prince, his private interest must be the same with
that of the Nation; which too will not be limited by the present age, but reach
posterity. This likewise very well con^^^s with the interest of all private
parties, as anon shall be particularly made manifest: moreover, the Government
will be put into the hands of a person, so fit for employment as no one living
the like: his education through all hardships of fortune, his coverse abroad in
the Courts of the most considerable of his neighbor Princes; his managery of
business in his own person, his engagements in warlike hazzards with others
likewise of all kinds: his age perfectly mature, his understanding sharp to
apprehend; and resolution steady to pursue: joined with an infinite sweetness
of temper; concurring to make up so perfect a sufficiency for Empire, that the
most wanton wishes of men, cannot fancy any thing, that he will not either make
good, or out do. But farther, to manifest the restoring of his family to be the
only means of settling the Nation, I add this evident proof. That we have made
trial of all other forms of Government, and of his in another Line, all in
vain. First of an Aristocracy, while the House of Peers survived; then a
Democracy, in the House of Commons by it self: After, a Monarchy, in the old
Protector and his Son: and now an Oligarchy, in the present usurpers at
Westminster: so that there is nothing now left us, but either Anarchy or his
restitution; besides this, that the ancient regal Government is the desire of
the whole body of the Nation, becomes plain from hence, that all late
Parliaments however unequally chosen, have, (or were suspected to have)
designed, the reduction of it; and that this is the present sense of almost
every man, is so notorious, that the late Petition of July 6. addressed by the
men of Westminster to themselves, That themselves penned that Petition, was at
first easily conjectured, but now certainly known.
and for which they give themselves solemn thanks, knows not how to dissemble
it, but confesses in plain terms, That the interest of the late Kings Son is
cried up and promoted daily, upon pretense that there will be nothing but
confusion and tyranny until he come to govern: and that such as declare for a
Commonwealth, are for Anarchy and Confusion, and can never agree among
themselves what they would have.

I shall not farther enlarge upon this head, but proceed to what remains before
me; to justify the Necessity of bringing in the King, in reference to the
private concerns of every party in the Nation; and

1. It Is the interest of the Roman Catholic; for by that means the heavy
payments now on their Estates, with other burdens, will be taken off: And as
to the pressures of Penal Laws, they cannot but remember how far from grievous
they were in the late Kings time, the Catholics living here notwithstanding
them, in more flourishing condition than those of France, Italy, or Spain did,
under their respective Princes; and would do infinitely more under their
natural King, than if any forraigner should acquire the power by conquest:
Besides, they generally having adhered to the late King in his Wars, have no
reason to distrust the finding favorable treatment from his Son, and to share
that indulgence which he is ready to afford to even his greatest Enemies.

2. The Royallist and English Protestant, besides that, his principles obliege
him cheerfully to pay his obedience where it is due, and look no further, is
likewise by his interest concerned to be content with such a restitution of the
King as allows no private reparations for past sufferings; they thereby
acquiring full possession of what remains; and the settlement of the Nation
would make the smallest estate more advantageous than the greatest would be,
acquired by violence; which unavoydably would defeat all terms of union, and
involve the Nation in new Wars: So likewise, if the necessary parts of their
way of Worship be secured, (which no party would envy them, being in a manner
gratified as much themselves) other circumstantial things, would be easily
settled by a fair and amicable treaty.

3. It is the Presbyterians interest this; as being the only way to preserve
himself from ruin at the hands of those lesser parties that have grown up under
him; who utterly oppose all Government in the Church, the being and the
supports of the Ministerial function, and the encouragement of the Party in the
State. The speculative differences and contests with the Episcopal Divines, are
in the opinion of moderate men of either judgment, easily attoned: And this
compliance, as the most necessary, so will be the most honorable act to them
imaginable; silencing all those vehement suspicions, and hard censures, that
now pass uncontrolled; and justifying those pretensions of Loyalty to the King,
which were wrote in their Banners, and solemnly covenanted for in the beginning
of the War: Besides, is upon the matter what was desired at Uxbridge, and
agreed upon at the Isle of Wight. But if any of the party be unsatisfied
herein, let him consult the late very memorable Writings of Mr. Prynne, which
many have thought fit to deride, but no body seriously to confute, and he shall
find what will abundn^ly convince him.

4. As to the Interest of the Baptized Churches, their pretensions of throwing
down all other parties, being not feizable; it is their concern to acquiese in
the most moderate Church Government, which is certainly the Episcopal, confessed
to be such, even as exercised heretofore, by all parties in their disputes, and
differences with each other; and yet is fairly capable of such farther allays,
as shall appear to be for the peace of the Church and Nation. Besides, it being
a fundamental with them of the Independent way, to admit liberty of Conscience;
they have no reason to be angry, if persons of different Judgments proceed
according to their principles: And this being indulged to them, with the
assurance of enjoying their temporal possessions, there is nothing imaginable,
which with reason they can desire more. Their aerie Satisfaction of taking down
Tithes, being so far from yielding them any real advantage, that it is most
visible, all it will do must be this, to translate their payments from the
Clergy to State farmers. And by that time they have tasted the difference
between the precarious collections, and almost begging of a Minister, and the
cruel exactions and gripes, of a Publicans iron hands, I dare promise for them,
they will heartily unwish, all their unreasonable, and ill grounded desires in
that behalf.

5. It is the Interest of the Army to call in the King. For first, to be under
a single person, is so palpably their concern that there is scarce a common
Soldier among them, who is not sensible of it: and if so, then evidently, it is
better to be under him then any other; for thereby they cut off the necessity
of perpetual Wars, and so the hazzarding of all their acquisitions; thereby
they assure themselves, from those dangers of being taken down, stopped in pay,
and defeared of Arrears: He being the only person that can (with a free
Parliament) raise Contributions and Taxes in a legal manner, and to the
satisfaction of the Nation. And the only one that can trust them as a standing
body, which usurpers never must do, as is manifest by the treatment, the Army
has hither to had under their several Masters; for to pass by their present
usage, before decypher'd by me; The old Protector made them States and
properties, not only to assist his Tyranny, employing them upon the Enemies of
his particular, and not the Nations Interest: But did it also to ease himself
of such of them, as had more honesty, wit, or courage, then he thought fit for
his purposes. Hence they were cast upon the Irish, Scottish, Flanders, French,
Jamaica Service, turned on Shipboard in the Fleets, garbled, discarded, or
removed from place to place, seldom trusted long under the same Officers, nor
suffered to communicate Councels, or meet at a general Rendezvous. When on the
other side, a Prince that has a just title to support him, has no ground of
such suspicions, but reposing himself on the loyalty of his people, will
honorably, and with affection, treat, all that in any employment serve him. And
as to the person of the King, he has a natural and particular respect for this
Army; however they have deserved of him: admiring their valor and discipline,
even when employed against him; I will give but one instance, which, though it
may seem slight, is not so as to the point in hand. It Is this, In the late
Flanders service, upon the occasional mention of the Armies behavior, in the
engagements with the Spanish forces near Dunkirk, the taking of the Towns, and
some other Services of lesser moment, he was observed still to give such an
affectionate testimony to the English Gallantry, as was no way pleasing to the
less noble hearers, who liked to have nothing besides themselves commended.
Thus did he frequently contend for their honor, that fought against his honor,
and life to boot; and was their Champion, who were his Enemies. And indeed it
would be infinitely strange, that they, who so prodigally spent their blood by
Sea and Land, to establish an ungrateful Monster; whose recompense for the
greatest merits, was only the objecting unto new and greater dangers; whose
certainest pay was suspicion, affront, and injury; then afterward submitted to
his Son a person of no worth or credit, of whom this comparative commendation
can only be given, that he is not so very a Brute as his Brother; and (to close
all) assumed the long forgotten dregs of a cast Parliament, should envy to
themselves, the honor and advantage of being commanded by a Prince, of known
Integrity and Virtue; a Prince that loves them, even in despite of all their
injuries; and (which is the highest endearment among Soldiers) a Prince of
eminent personal Valor, which several of themselves are witness of,
especially at Worcester and Mardike, and if they pleased, might be in more and
fairer instances. Lastly a Prince, who is the only visible expedient upon
earth, to render at once, them and their posterity, and the whole Nation happy.
Were this directed to the French or Spanish Infantry, those venal Souls, that
understand nothing, besides pay and plunder; these arguments from reason,
national Interest and honor, would possibly be lost: But to the English Army,
that still has owned a public Spirit, where every common man, knows to direct
as well as to obey, and judge no less then execute; to have proposed the
Truth, must be enough: nor will they fail to fix their thoughts upon it, or
steer themselves as prudence shall instruct.

Lastly, as to the Interest of the Protectors party, and the Parliament, they
are concerned to call in the King; for it being impossible for them, to make
good their aims, it must be wisdom to secure themselves and their estates, and
take part in that Oblivion and amnesty, which he is ready to give, as also
those rewards, which, whoever serve him in any kind, (especially in being
instrumental to his restitution) will be sure to have.

Now to all this, I can foresee but one material objection, which is, that the
several forementioned parties, can not be secured, that the admission of the
King will not be insidious, and ensnaring to them; and that whatever
engagements he now makes, when he comes to power he will in likelihood rescind
and cancel. To which I briefly answer, that this is no real objection at all,
for some body or other must be trusted still, there being no living in the
World without mutual confidence; and whoever is invested with power, may do
injuriously, in despite of any foresight: Besides, amongst all these parties,
where each is exasperated against the other, there will be the same or greater
cause of Jealousy, if any of them were suffered to prevail. And 'twould be
worth the thinking of, whether it were not a manifest Judgment of God upon us,
that broke the treaty with the late King, upon suggestions, that it was not
safe to trust him; and chose to rely upon the faith of one of our fellow
Subjects: That he should prove the most perfidious person in the World, to all
that trusted him; to the Parliament, the Army, the Nation, and even his private
friends and allies; insomuch, that no history of any age or people, can yield a
parallel to him for falsenesse, perjury, hypocrisy, and and breach of faith;
and if this look like judgment, 'twill then be worth the weighing, whether it
become us to go on in our unfortunate infidel practice still? In cases of this
kind, there are but two ways of assurance, I mean so perfectly incontroulable,
as to be valid, if either of them both be present. The one is the honesty of
the person that engages, the other is his Interest; and here, not one of these
alone is present: but both concur; which certainly must make up a security,
beyond all doubt or question. As to the Honesty of the King, no malice has the
impudence to blast it: his Moderation, Sobriety, and Justice, being as well
known as his misfortunes are. Next, as to Interest, it visibly concerns him, to
be puctual in his engagements; First, to offer pardon to all that stand in need
of it, and then most faithfully to make it good, in each particular loss of
Credit, infallibly breaking the Merchant and private dealer, but ruining more
irrepirably the public national one; when on the other side, precise exact
performance, strangely supports both one and the other. Of the benefit hereof,
I shall give an eminent instance of late memory in his own Family, and
therefore of which we cannot suppose him ignorant. It is his Grandfather Henry
the fourth of France, who after long Wars coming to his right, besides his
relief from Q. Elizabeth, by no other humane aid, but the relenting and late
wisdom of his own people; and being forced to make a Peace, by many particular
Treaties, still was exact in keeping them; and received into his entire favor,
and solid friendship, all those who had fought against him; and governed his
most important affairs, both Civil and Military, by the counsel and conduct of
his sometimes Enemies, such as were not only the Duke of Novers, Villeroy, and
President Jeanin, but even the head of the League, the Duke of Maine himself;
to whom he committed the conduct of all the force of France, (though then
personally present) when the Prince of Parma came to relieve Amiens; and after,
to make good his own promise of Indemnity protected him, being questioned for
the Murder of Henry the third, by interposing his own supreme power when the
chambers of Parliament were ready to condemn him; though thereby he was sure to
undergo the imputation of rescuing so great a Malefactor against the clamours
of the people, the regular process of the Law, the passionate demands of a
disconsolate Widow Queen, and his own particular neernesses of the highest
mark, his relation both in Blood and in Succession. Yet by doing this, he not
only settled himself, but attained that greatness which no other method could
have contrived for him. And why we should think the King resolved not to
consult as well for himself, as his Grandfather did, I suppose it will puzzle
the wisest patrons of distrust, to give the least pretense or show of reason;
as also it would do, why We should not take pattern by that part of the Story
which as nearly concerns us; for they being exactly in the same case we now are
in, crumbled into as many divisions and subdivisions, as so great variety of
Interest and Religion, in that long Civil war could make; bearing an inveterate
mortal hatred each to other, and almost all of them to the King; yet seeing the
ruin approaching, both from themselves and strangers, the whole French Nation
did submit to that Prince against, whose throat their sword had so often
pointed, and whom they had for so many years devoted to hell as well as death,
under the title of Heritick and Apostate; and by so doing became suddenly the
most flourishing and the most potent people of Europe. But besides all this,
the King has yet a farther motive to offer Grace to all that will accept it,
and religiously to make it good, that is peculiar to himself, and of
proportionate value with him; the command and strict injunction of his dying
Father, whose memory he too much esteems, not to fulfill that legacy and last
bequest of his, were there no other motive to persuade him. His scrupulousness
in this particular is known to be such, as to become a charge against him, and
that with more than ordinary vehemence, from the hot-spurs of the two extreme
parties he has had occasion to deal with, the Catholic and the Pre^byterian.
The injunction I mean is notorious to every person, making up a great part of
the Missive, directed to the now present King, under the style of Prince of
Wales: The Kings Book Sect. 27.
I cannot forbear to insert a few lines as they fell from the Pen of the
incomparable Author: They run thus:

I have offered Acts of Indemnity and Oblivion in so great a latitude as may
include all that can but suspect themselves to be any way obnoxious to the
Laws; and which might serve to exclude all future jealousies and insecurities.

I would have you always propense to the same way, when ever it shall be
desired, and accepted, let it be granted, not only as an act of State policy
and nicessity, but of Christian charity and choice.

It is all I have now left me, a power to forgive those that have deprived me
of all; and I thank God I have a heart to do it, and joy as much in this grace
which God has given me, as in all my former enjoyments; for this is a greater
argument of God love to me, than any prosperity can be.

Be confident, as I am, that the most of all sides who have done amiss, have
done so, not out of malice, but misinformation, or misapprehension of things.

None will be more loyal and faithful to me and you, than those Subjects who
sensible of their Errors and our Injuries, will feel in their own souls most
vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make some reparations
for their former defects.

But, if all this be not enough to supersede suspicion and doubt, let me yet
add a farther testimony. The King admits at this day to his bosom and nearest
trust, several persons, that have been engaged against his father, and some of
them in actions most fatal to his affairs; an infallible assurance, that it is
only the fault of the rest, that they are not there too; more then this,
concerning a future performance to assure it, can not be said or done, except
it should please God to work Miracles, which I hope no body does now expect.

The short of all is. Without trusting some one or other, the Nation is
certainly destroyed, and no perfon in the World, besides the King, is in a
capacity to avert the impendent ruin, or can give the like security of himself,
as he can do; I will not now prescribe unto the Readers understanding, in
dictating an inference; but from the Premises, desire him at his leisure to
draw out the Conclusion.

Having thus without passion, partiality, or prejudice, endeavored clearly, to
lay down the exact case of the Nation, both in respect of its disease and cure:
'twill be superfluous to add perswasives; for men do not use to be importuned
to leave their torment or disease, or want rhetorical Enducements, after the
pleadings of Interest and Profit. I forbear therefore to address my self unto
affection, and to beg that thing, which visibly it concerns them that are
courted, to render their importunate request and suit: Nor will I enlarge upon
the Motives yet untoucht, drawn from Religion, and the respects of
Protestations, Covenants, and Oaths; as also native allegiance, or what is
infinitely considerable; Motives taken from the state of public affairs
abroad; our neighbor Nations, being now at peace among themselves, and looking
out for foreign War, thereby to employ their useless forces; pretense, and
color, and desire too, for the undertaking of which, we have given to every
one about us, in our late attempts on them; and likewise yields assurance, that
they shall succeed by our disagreement here among our selves. Let all this be
seriously weighed: I am factor for no iuterest or party, nor seek the thanks or
favor of any derson, but rather expect the fate of Reconcilers, to displease
every body: but let that succeed as it shall happen; the injury that I have
done, cannot certainly be esteemed great, all that is said, amounting but to
this very reasonable desire, that my fellow Subjects will remember these two
plain truths, that they are English men, and so consider the good of the
Nation; and then that they are Men, and so pursue their own.

The End.

