A FAMOVS VICTORY OBTAINED BY THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD BROOKS, AGANST THE
EARL OF NORTHAMTON near Keintith in Warwickshire on the third of August, 1642.

Ordered that this be Printed,

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parliament.



LONDON Printed for Henry Fowler, the sixth of August. 1642.

A FAMOUS VICTORY OBTAINED BY THE Right Honorable the Lord BROOKS, against the
Earl of NORTHAMPTON, on the third of August, 1642. near Keintith in
Warwickshire.
SIR,
AT the last meeting of the said Earl and the Lord Brooks I informed you upon
what Conditions they agreed on, namely, that there should be three days
warning given before the removal of any Ammunition from Banbury to Warwick
Castle, which was performed by the said Lord, for having sent a Message to the
said Earl that he was resolved to put the command of the High Court of
Parliament in execution, withal desiring him to desist from putting the
Commission of Array in execution, it being both illegal and destructive to the
peace of the Kingdom. Which Message being received by the Earl of
Northampton, He presently caused those of his party to arm themselves,
animating them on, and telling them that then was the time for them to do
their King and Country good and acceptable service; with many other vain
glorious speeches, which indeed were useful. At that time those of his parrie
for the major part being very cold in their affections toward that design, yet
nevertheless by his flattering Orations, he drew a considerable company to him
of Gentlemen and other poor men that were seduced by his pretense of standing
for the King; Which having obtained he put them into Order, and marched toward
Keintith unto a plain Heath over which the Lord Brooks was to march with his
Ammunition.

The Lord Brooks according to his word set forward, having only three hundred
Musketteers, sixty Pikes, and about two hundred Horse, being several well
affected Gentlemen that were Inhabitants in and about Banbury, nevertheless,
such was the affection of the said County toward the Parliament, and knowing
no way better to express it than to the Lord Brooks, which was a member
thereof, they resolved to lend their best aid and assistance to the said Lord,
to the end that thereby he might be the better enabled to discharge that trust
which was committed to him.

Wherefore they in several companies met him on the way, proffering their
lives and fortunes to be commanded by him, so that before he had marched three
miles be had about three thousand horse and foot, with which he marched till
he arrived the Heath, where the Earl of Northampton was accompanied with his
party: the sight of whom caused the said Lord to make a stand, which being
effected, he drew up his Foot into a complete Body, placing his Horses on the
wings, likewise his Ordnance being mounted on running carriages he drew up in
the middle, making a small division, to the end that if occasion were, they
might offend the enemy, and yet endure no hazard.

Having in this order placed them, He with a cheerful countenance asked them,
if they were resolved to stand it out, and to hazard their lives in the defense
of the King and Parliament.

They with a general shout confirmed it, showing such symptoms of their
forwardness, that made my Lord Brooks weep with very joy, giving them thanks
with such a hearty love, which wrought so with them, that they marched forward
with such confidence that they disheartened the other party, who were ready to
revolt before they came to parley; Nevertheless, the Lord Books entreated
them, as they esteemed the peace of the Kingdom, not for to shoot one Pistol
without they were enforced for their defense; only to use all means they
could for to outdare them, by that means to attain their desires without the
effusion of blood.

In the mean time, the Earl of Northampton had bestowed Lip-labor on his
valiant followers, and heartned them on, drawing them on within Pistoll-shot of
the Lord Brooks, which being done, they made a stand, and beat a Parley. Which
was answered by my Lord Brooks and twenty Gentlemen chose out of either party
as Guards for to secure them; both parties met and the Earl of Northampton
made his demands, which were to this effect:

1. That the said Lord Brooks should deliver him the Ammunition which he had in
his command, for to be employed in his Majesty's service.

2. That he should desist in putting the Militia in execution.

3. That he should resign Warwick Castle.

Withal threatening my Lord Brooks, that if he should deny his just, lawful,
and friendly Demands, (not doubting the resolution of his followers, and
knowing the justice of his cause) he would make that place their graves that
stood in opposition, giving them such reproachful words, that the twenty
Gentlemen that were elected as a Guard to the Lord Brooks, unexspectedly
disarmed the Guard on the other party, unhorsing of them before ever they knew
what the matter was; which the Earl seeing clapped spurs to his Horse and rid
to the Head of his Troops, bidding them give fire. Like Wise the Lord Brooks
caused his men to open to the right and left, which being done, the Adverse
party might see his Ordnance mounted, and his Cannon near ready to give fire:
Which they seeing in stead of fighting began to throw down their Arms and ran
away, some to the Lord Brooks, and some to their own Houses, leaving the Earl
none but one of his Gentlemen and two foot-boyes to attend him, which caused
the said Earl to try whether He or his foot-boyes could run fastest. Which
caused such a shouting on the other side, as was wonderful to hear.

This danger being over, the Lord Brooks caused the Arms to be gathered up
that they had left behind them and put them upon a Wagon; and afterward read a
Vote of the Lords and Commons, Concerning the Commission of Array, namely, that
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Commissions of Array
granted by his Majesty, are altogether illegal, destructive to the peace of
the Kingdom, against the Laws of the Land, and the liberty of the Subject;
withal encouraging them on to a readiness to obey the Parliament, and to
withstand the Commissioners of Array.

Which being done, He took his lourney forward, where I will leave Him and you,
till the next opportunity shall give occasion to inform you of His further
Proceedings.

From Banbury this 3. of August. 1642. Ordered that this be Printed and
published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament.



FINIS.

