FANATIQUE QUERIES, Proposed to the present ASSERTORS OF THE GOOD OLD CAUSE.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Praise-God-Barebones, the Rumps Leather-seller. March.2.
1659

FANATIQUE QUERIES, Proposed to the present Assertors of the GOOD OLD CAUSE.
Query I. Scotch Pill upon it may not cause an Apoplexy? II. Haslerig, or the
Devil, more inveterately hate Charles Stuart, since the one has got a great
part of his Lands, and the other is in possession of many of his Rebellious
Subjects? III. Prin stickles so boldly for the Family of the Stuarts, since he
may do that for his Ears, which another dare not for his Life. IV. to satisfy
the scrupulosity of some Desperado's, whether the Bulls-head in Cheapside had
not the greatest cause to Rejoice? V. Berry, and Col. Hewson have not betaken
themselves, the first to the crying of Smal-coal, and the second of Boots and
Shoes, since they vanished insensibly, with that Ignis fatuus, the Committee of
Safety, and have dis-appeared ever since. VI. Tichbourns Beard be not in danger
of being Singed at the discharging of the Guns in the Tower? VII. Ireton have
not taken up his Lodging in the Tower, for fear of being surprised by the City?
VIII. Quakers utter not the language of the Beast, since they speak at the Bull
and Mouth? IX. Tom Scot be not fitter for a Secretary of the Stews, than a
Secretary of State? and whether it would not better suit with his Genius, to be
Custos meretricum, than Custos Rotulorum? and whether Leadsom his man, be not
fitter to serve him as a Pimp or Trapan, than Clark, Promooter, or Informer? X.
Praise-God-Barebones were not a Nickname, since his Petition is neither to the
Praise of God, nor Honor of the King? XI. Lamberts Switches be not all broken,
since his Designs come to nothing? and whether his Lady be not the better
Soldier by the virtue of Nolls Breeches? XII. Anabaptists did not intend to
Carbonado the Rump, since they provided such a stock of long Knives? or whether
their intentions were to rip up the Scarlet Whore, and slaughter the Beast?
XIII. Sweden had not better have given Montelion a Gold Chain for telling
truth, than Will. Lilly, for flattering him to his own Destruction? XIV. George
Booth were more Fool or Knave? and whether Major General Overton may not make
Hull a Bedlam? XV. Anabaptists, or Fifth Monarchy-men be the better
Commonwealths men, since the second are resolved against all governments, and
the first are content with none? XVI. Jeremy Ives his Horse then forty pound at
the demolishing of St. Pulchers Church? XVII. Charles Needham did not rightly
christen his Pamphlet the Politic Mercury, since he has a dextrous faculty of
creeping into the breech of every rising Power? XVIII. Henry Vain, ought not to
be transposed Vain Sir Henry; and whether he be so wise a man as the world
takes him to be, since he was shit out of the Rump? XIX. Henry Hills deserve
not to be the States Printer, since, to flatter the times, and justify the Sale
of Kings and Bishops Lands, he corrupted that text in his Bible, Magistrates --
sent for the punishment of evil doers, and for the Land of them that do well,
to the land of them that do well; and whether this be not a sufficient
expiation for the crime of Polygamy? XX. Antimonarchical bawling Puritan
continued constant to his principles; and whether it is not now become evident
that their desire of innovation in Religion, and chang of Government proceeded
more from a vertigo in their own heads than any fault in the Regiment of Church
or State? XXI. Paul, Godliness is great gain, into gain is great Godliness?
XXII. Committee of Inspection, and Examination, to resolve them; and since we
may Query long enough, before we can find any good, Whether it be not time to
make an
END?
POSTSCRIPT.
Gentlemen,
THe times are indeed so tedious in their circulations and frenetique
transactions, multiplying the miseries of the Nation, as the Quakers do vain
circumlocutions, (still seeming as far from the pretended composure of our
differences, and restoration of our liberty, as when they began) that a little
to laugh at our own sorrow, seems the only moral means to renew our patience,
and recompose our thoughts for more solid considerations of the remedy of our
disease. In this, if we trouble the serious, the ingenuous will pardon it, and
we promise Loyal Hearts, as a recompense, some Orthodox State-Queries, more
worthy the perusal of the reserved.

Valete.

