A Famous VICTORY OBTAINED By the British Forces in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Wherein is set forth, the manner how they gave the Rebels battle near Black
Water, took all their Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, and beat them up to the
Seacoast, putting all of them to the Sword.

ALSO, The beating of the Popes Nuntio out of the Kingdom of Ireland.

And the number of men that were slain on both sides, and the names of the
chief Commanders that were taken by the British Forces.

Appointed to be Printed and Published by Order of Parliament, for general
satisfaction of the Kingdom of England.

London: Printed for E. Horton, March 1. 1647.

A Famous VICTORY OBTAINED By the British Forces against the Rebels in the
Kingdom of Ireland.
THe late welcome intelligence from the Kingdom of Ireland, does not a little
enbourage the faithful and unanimous hearts of the Kingdom of England, but
begins to dissolve, the unsavory mists, and fulsome Clouds, that has so much
annoyed the hearts of the English party: but now we hope to see a perfect
appearance, and by the Aid and Assistance of the two Covenanted Kindgdomes, to
hear of the happy vanquishing of the potent and Popish party in Ireland, which
(already) begins to give a Glorious glimpse to these two Kingdoms, as will
appear by the happy arrival of the last Post from Ireland, retaking the
gallant success of the English Forces as follows;

From Belfast in Jreland.
SIr, since the departurt of the Commissioners from this town, the Regiment of
Sir John Clotworthy has done excellent service near the Blackwater, and
within five or six days after they came for England. The manner thus, the
Rebels not a little provoked at the several inroads made upon them, gather
together all their boats, and manning them well, come near to the two Forts
the said Regiment keeps upon the Blackwater, and were building a great Fort,
for furnishing whereof they had brought Ordnance: Lieutenant Colonel
Occoneale, and the Major considering how hurtful to all the parts about the
completing of this work might be, made all their Boats ready, manned them
with 100. Musketeers, came upon the Rebels, who they found had almost finished
their work, killed many of them, who before they gave up the Ghost were left
gasping for life: took 36. prisoners, brought them to Antrim, and took
besides six of their Boats, all their Guns, whereof Major Roydons Frigot was
one, demollished the Rebels Work, and had it nos been done at that instant,
the Rebels had had two or three hundred men in it from Charlemont, who fled
amain back when they understood how it had fared with their fellows, this is
so much the more commendable and worthy of praise, as the damage would have
been, had they finished and furnished the same with all manner of ammunition
and victuals.

From Kilkenny.
Sir Richard Gifford is not taken, nor hurt, nor any of quality, only a Cornet
of the Marquess of Ormonds was taken, but restored since: When the Lord Digby
went to visit the Nuntio, after unworthy usage a Troop of Horse was sent after
to kill him, if they overtooke him, from which he escaped narrowly by riding
all night: Thou set them in slippery places: My Lord Digby would fain pass
to France, but thar he is hindered by the Parliaments ships on the one side,
and the Nuntio on the other, who will not permit him to go, unless he take an
Oath to act nothing prejudicial to his designs.

The Popish Irish Lords and Gentlsmen are grown too strong for the Clergy, and
have turned them out of their connsels (a good universal work) and have sent
for the Lords Castle Haven, Taffe, and Dillon, with others, to come thither,
intending to put the Nuntio out of the Kingdom, and its but reason, for he
said that Ireland was given by the Pope to Henry the second, to be Dominus
Hiberniae, upon condition to defend the Roman Religion, and if the King will
not do so, his holtnesse will look out a new tenant; but he must do no more
then look to make him hold possession, the herds of naked people over whom the
Clergy have power to adhere to him, The Nuntio outed, they go on for a peace,
or truce. The Earl of Clamorgun, Governor of Munster, and a poor one in
purse and power, attends their resolutions.

The Marquess of Ormond is about 4000 horse and foot, of which are some
hundreds Cavaliers, Preston between 6. and 7000. Owen Roe Oneale about 8000.
If all these join, being near 20000. the Parliament must send a great power,
and that must be attended by a great Fleet laden with Provisions, but of their
accord there is some question to be made.

Clanrickard is at Dublin so poor, that his credit will not cloth him, beaten
from his Country, thank himself.

A Discovery has been made, that all English, and Irish English shduld be
destroyed, some of the Oneals are in prison, with others, for endeavoring to
draw the people from old Oneale.

The reason of the difference, or not closing all this while, is because Ormond
will not suffer the Rebels to have any interest in Dublin, Tredaugh, or any
other places he holds.

From Munster in Ireland.
Two hundred and thirty English came lately to (...) town, six hundred and
nineteen being come before, all in 8. Companies, and are Col. Francis Roes:
Likewise 600. of Colonel Grayes, and 200. of Colonel Needhams, and 100.
Firelocks, there are about five hundred and fifty horse, and 700. foot in the
Garrison old, an additionall supply is earnestly desired, likewise provisions,
and yet if horse come before the end of April, there must be hay sent also:
many soldier are grown feeble for want of accommodations; the first week of
fair weather, and the raines cease, they intend to make adventures upon the
Enemy, to enlarge quarters, and get provisions, rather then to lie in Garrison
and perish; excellent resolutions.

There are in this Province many houses, customs, and estates in their hands
scarce friends no friends, yea enemies to the Parliament, which were there a
Committee, or any from Parliament to improve them, might give much life and
support to the soldiery, in a few months might be settled many thousands per
annum.

We have several Letters from the Kingdom of Ireland, intimating the gallant
success of the Protestant Forces in the Province of Ulster, who gave the
Rebels a great overthrow; and hearing of the Rebels near approach, sent forth
a party of horse and Dragoones, gave the enemy battle, killed many upon the
place, and took diverse prisoners, putting the rest to retreat, who stuck in
the Bogs, and after some hours (in a hot skirmish) the British Forces
returned in triumph, having routed the Enemy, and taken a great prize.

By other Letters from Ireland it is certified thus; That the Marquess of
Ormond has sent a Message to the Parliament of England, intimating his desire
now to yield up his Garrison of Dublin, Tredagh, etc, and all under his Command
to the Parliament, upon his former terms or demands, and has not sent any
Letter to his Majesty, desiring his consent: some Letters from others that came
by the bie say thus, now that he sees no rupture in England appears, nor any
possibility for him to hold the places in his hands, wanting all manner of
accommodations, he is willing to part with them, the Parliament having been
damnified many thousands by the former missing.

God grant and send a happy concurrence betwixt the Parliament and the
Marquess of Ormond for the effecting of this work, and that they may both
agree, to the comfort of many thousands of poor distressed Protestants in that
Kingdom of Ireland, and that in the mean time, some speedy relief might be
sent to those Forces which are there already.

FJNJS.

