Wing-Clipping NO CRIME: BEING AN ANSWER TO B. Bird's Reply TO THE Wandering
Bird's Wings Clipped.

Prove. 10.32. The Mouth of the Wioked speaks Frowardness.

Isa. 5.27. As a Cage is full of Birds, so are their Houses full of Deceit.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-yard in Lombard Street. 1696.

THere are yet many unclean Birds, and Remains of the Seeds of evil Doers, of
whom the Lord has said, They shall never be Renowned, that are exercised in
their evil Works of speaking falsely, and misrepresenting a despised People,
that the great God, in his rich Love, through Jesus Christ his Son, has
visited with his divine Light, and quickened by his eternal Spirit, and unto
whom its given not only to believe, but also to suffer for his Namesake, in
and through whom, and by what he has done and suffered, even Jesus of
Nazareth, concerning whom there was a Murmurring among the People in Days past,
of whom some have said, he was a good Man, and others said Nay; but he deceived
the People, and so have some said of us his Followers, and of his Ministers in
these Days, as they did of the Apostles in Days past, who were counted
Deceivers, and yet True; and went through evil Report and good Report; yet in
all things approved themselves the Ministers of God in much Patience, as do his
in this day; yet doubt not, but as they live and abide in him, they shall not
only be hated of Men, separated from and reproached, (and all manner of Evil
spoken against them falsely for his Namesake) but shall also partake of his
Blessing, although they may have Curses from that evil Generation and Seed of
evil Doers, yet they firmly believe the Lord of Hosts will perform his Word,
Isa. 12.23. And rise up against them, and cut off from Babylon, the Name and
Remnant, Son and Nephew, and will also make it a Possession for the Bitterns
and Pools of Water, and will sweep it with the Besom of Destruction, as said
the Lord of Host.

And although Gog and Magog, Runagates and Apostates, may take Counsel
together, I firmly believe it shall come to naught; and although they speak the
Word, it shall not stand; For God is with us.

Now to B. Bird's Pamphlet.
Wing-Clipping no Crime, etc.
HAving clipped a wandering Bird's Wings, he is now angry and retorts, and says,
There have been many Clippers hanged lately; and that I should have forborne
Clipping this Year for Luck's sake.

Howbeit, I fear not that Fate for clipping his Wings; neither can he prove
that any have been Hanged this Year or last, for that kind of Clipping.

But now he cannot fly as he would, he flutters and makes a Noise, and shows
what he would do if he could, viz. Confute what I said; which he is so far
from, that he don't adventure against a part of it, but fluttters and chatters,
and as confidently as ignorantly, pretends to do that which he is not able, now
his Wings are clipped, viz. To prove from Scripture and Experience, That Christ,
the true Light that lights every Man that comes into the World (who said, I
am the Light of the World) is not above the Scriptures: For his asserting the
contrary, would render him that has built the House, less honorable than the
House; or that Spirit which inspired the Holy Men to write the Scriptures, not
above, but inferior to the Scriptures. And for proof, that the Scriptures is
above Christ, and that my denying it is contrary to Scripture, he quotes 2 Cor.
4.4. The God of this World has blinded the minds of them that believe not,
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine into them.

Now, how this proves that its contrary to Scripture, to say, That Christ the
Light, is above the Scriptures, I shall leave those that are acquainted
therewith to judge: And whether this does not rather prove, that he joins with
the God of this World, as much as in him lies, to blind People's Minds, and
beget a slight in them to the Light of the glorious Gospel, lest it should
shine unto them, and they should believe therein.

Again he asserts, with his confident ipse dixit, it is contrary to Experience,
that Christ the Light is above the Scriptures. And for proof says, W. Pen in
his account of the Indians in Pensilvania, tells us, They are very ignorant in
Matters of Religion, page 2.

Is not this a notable Proof, because the Indians are ignorant in Matters of
Religion, therefore Christ (that Light) whom I affirmed was preferrable to, or
above the Scriptures, is not above the Scripture, but contrary to both the
Scripture and Experience? This puts me in mind of a Question he asks in p. 6.
How long may a poor Parish Minister Preach before he make up a Purse? Answ.
Long enough, if he be no better than he, by his Writing, appears to be. And if
he has no better than this to give People, he need not complain of my saying,
That he, and such as he, cause People to spend Money for that which is not
Bread; as in p. 7.

But if B. B. should say that he did not say, Christ was not above the
Scriptures, but the Light within, which we profess; then I charge him to show
where, in any of my former, I preferred any Light within, but Christ above the
Scriptures. And let him, if he can, prove that Christ is, or can be, any more
divided or separated from his Light within Men, than from his Spirit.

And being B. B. mentions our Yearly Meeting, 1694. p. 1 and p. 5. falsely and
wickedly says, That we would lay aside the Lord that bought us, who is now in
Heaven at the right Hand of God, for the Imagination of our own Hearts, p. 7.
where he also speaks of G. K. I will here insert what G. K. said in 1694.
viz. That the Light within being God, the Word and the Spirit, in every Man, is
sufficient to reveal to every Man all that is needful to his eternal Salvation;
which let B. B. confute if he can, and show whether G. K. does not exalt the
Light within, above the Scriptures, as much as we; and then let him consider,
whether we deny the Lord that bought us, because we own Christ to be
spiritually in our Hearts.

Concerning the Scripture.
P. 2. B. B. says, You pretend you have an honorable Esteem of these Holy
Writings, and account them the best in all the World; and yet you dishonor the
Scriptures very much by crying up a Light within every Man above them: And what
is this but a Pagan Design, to bring Men back to Paganism? And then he adds,
The Light within is not above the Scriptures.

Answ. We have an honorable Esteem for the Holy Scriptures, and do so esteem
them as above: But I deny that we dishonor them, by giving preference to
Christ, any more than himself did, when he said, Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. And
ye will nor come to me that ye might have Life. So we desire that People would
read and search the Scriptures, which testify of him, as we also do, and would
not have People think they can have eternal Life by them; for although they
testify of him, yet they must come to him if they would have Life. And if this
be a Pagan Design, we are guilty thereof; but if not, then B. B. is a false
Accuser and Asserter, in saying, The Light within, i. e. Christ, is not above
the Scriptures. As also he is for saying, That God has made the
Scripture Light, Judge of our Light within; because the Scripture says, The
Father has committed all Judgment to the Son, who is that Light that we prefer
and own.

Toncerning Perfection.
P. 2. B. B. says our Doctrine, That no Man ever lived upon Earth without Sin,
except the Man Christ Jesus; thou call a Sin-pleasing Doctrine.

Answ. Here he varies his Position; I did not say so, but did oppose his
saying, That we may keep our Allegiance to Christ, although we cannot live
without transgressing God's Law: And his saying, It Is impossible, while here,
perfectly to keep his Commandments: And that they may not live without Sin. It
was on this I said, our Allegiance to God and Christ is Truth and Faithfulness,
in whom as we believe and are obedient; we are by the Grace of God and Spirit
of Christ, enabled to discharge our Duty to God. But to assert, It Is IMPOSSIBLE
for Christians, while here, perfectly to perform their Duty to God, and that we
may not live without Sin, renders not only the Christian Worship and Service,
in all the parts of it, imperfect, but also renders the Devil more powerful to
lead and keep People in Sin, than Christ Jesus (to whom all Power both in
Heaven and Earth is given) is to lead and keep People out of Sin. And in p. 3.
he says, Thy Doctrine of living without Sin, or breaking God's Commands, is a
sin-pleasing Doctrine.

Answ. I deny that its a sin pleasing Doctrine to teach, That by Christ Jesus
(who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to put an end to sin) Man may
be enabled, to keep God's Command; but its rather a Christ-pleasing Doctrine;
for he said, Be ye Perfect as your Heavenly Father is Perfect; and its said, Be
ye Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy. And in the same, p. 3. B. B. says, I
do believe that it is Man's duty to serve God truly, and this good Men do, and
yet cannot acquit themselves of Sin.

Answ. I agree with him if he means by any Power or Strength of their own, but
that, that which make good Men such, is not sufficient to enable them to acquit
themselves of Sin. I deny, yet am of his Mind thus far when he says, God's
Commands are not grievous to good Men, they keep them with all their Hearts,
but dissent from him in his saying, They fail in the keeping of them, and that
they may not live without Sin; as if there were a necessity for Men to Sin.
This is such a piece of Contradiction and Nonsense, that I think, none but one
without Sense would assert, as B. B. has. And that also where he says, We may
keep our Allegiance to Christ, although we cannot live without transgressing
God's Law. And to this Head in my former Reply, p. 5, 6, 7. I have writ fully,
to which I refer; and in his next advise him to bring one Scripture if he can,
to prove, That its impossible while here, perfectly to keep God's Commands,
through the help and assistance of Jesus Christ; or that there is a necessity
for true Christians to sin, so long as they live in this World; and that good
Men keep God's Commands withal their Hearts, yet they fail in the keeping of
them; and then I may lay my Hand on my Mouth, or say, Erit mibi magnus Apollo.

And for B. B.'s. saying, p 3. That the Church of England lifted King James
upon the Throne, and asserted his Right of Succession, though the House of
Commons voted, That there was no passibility of preserving the Life of King
Charles II. while the Papists had any hopes of the Duke's thus Succeeding him.

I may only Answer, I esteem it no concern of mine, either to life him upon the
Throne, or put him from it; and, if the Church of England were concerned in
both, and esteem it their Honor, and agreeable to the Doctrine of
Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, let them answer for that, and prove it;
for its not my Business to vindicate: Nor the Murder of his Father, or to tell
who were concerned therein, or that they were B. B.'s quondam Friends; but that
this scribbling Priest B. would suggest these things, and insinuate from them
and King James being kind to us, that we were Papists, are not conclusive. I
doubt not, but those that are acquainted with our Principles, know them to be
as remote from Popery, as B. B's is from true Charity and Sincerity.

Concerning Tithes.
In p. 4. he says, Thou criest down Tithes as Jewish, though it was paid to
Melchesedeck by Abraham, while Levi was in his Loins, Heb. 7. Again, ibid. Thou
call it a forced Maintenance, though it be given by the King and People in
Parliament.

Answ. I do say they are Jewish, and were given by the Levitical Law to the
Priests of that Law; and verily they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive
the Office of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the People
according to the Law; that is, of their Brethren though they come out of the
Loins of Abraham, ver. 7. And it was not only for them, but the Stranger, and
the Fatherless and the Widow, which are within the Gates, that were to come and
Eat, and be satisfied with these Tithes.

Now if B. B. be of this Tribe, and appertaining to this Priesthood, and under
this Law, he should kill Beast-Sacrifice, and let the Poor, the Widow and the
Fatherless, partake of the Tithe with him; but if he grants the Priesthood is
changed, he must acknowledge there is of necessity a change also of the Law.

The Law then being changed that gave them, its on his part to prove, That
Christ in the New Testament did anew give them to his Gospel Ministers for
their Maintenance, or enjoin or direct his Followers to pay Tithes. Again, the
Reason does not remain, viz. the Levites had no Inheritance among their
Brethren, and their whole time was taken up in the Discharge of their Office;
but now many that Christ has called to be his Ministers have Inheritance among
their Brethren, and Employments, by which, with the use of their own Hands,
they can have, and do administer to their own Necessities, as Paul did; although
I do grant that the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, and that they who Preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel, as I also do esteem that such, having
Food and Raiment, should therewith be content, and a sufficient Support to
such, I acknowledge ought not to be wanting, in case they stand in need. But
that Tithes are Christian; or that Melchisedec's receiving the Tenth of the
Spoils which Abraham freely gave him, proves Tithes Christian or a
Gospel-Maintenance Ordered, or ordained by Christ for his Ministers, I deny:
For he said to them he sent forth, Freely ye have received, freely give. And if
B. B.'s Hearers freely give him the Tenths or Fifths I shall not quarrel with
them for giving, nor him for receiving.

But a forced Maintenance from them, or to those who do not Esteem B. B. a
Gospel Minister, nor those whose Spirit, Practice and Doctrine, declare the
contrary; I say, a forced Maintenance from any, to such that are not Gospel
Ministers is not Scriptural.

And his pleading for Tithes by a humane Authority or Law to force them, is no
Scripture Warrant, for Payment thereof in the Gospel Day. Although its a Christian
Duty for such Passively and Patiently to suffer, when they are Prosecuted,
because they cannot for Conscience sake be Active in paying such a forced
Maintenance, to those that falsely call themselves Gospel Ministers; as many
have greatly suffered by such for a very small matter demanded. But how
agreeable to Christ's Doctrine and his Ministers Example, it was for B. B. or is
for any such as he, that do not Esteem us to be Christians, to sue at Law,
spoil Goods, Imprison till Death, and endeavor to Ruin Men, Widows and their
Families for Tithes toward their Maintenance, as some have: I leave to the
truly Wise to Judge, and if he owns the Scriptures to be the only Rule of Faith
and Practice, let him produce one Scripture to show that ever any of Christ's
Ministers so did to Jews or Gentiles that were or were not of them.

And I would have him know, its not the Law of the Land that ought always to
oblige Christians, and the People of God, in every thing to be active in what
it requires; neither are they justly condemnable for concientiously refusing so
to be in all things.

But B. B. says, p. 5. You may with as much Honesty pick their Pockets as keep
them away: I deny that, for picking a Man's Pocket employs taking privily and
thievishly that from him, which he has honestly got or labored for. And
withholding or substracting of Tithes, is only keeping that which he has
honestly labored and been at Charge for, from him that did not labor for it.

P. 5. How easy is it for any Seducer and Deceiver to pretend a Commission?
This B. B. speaks with respect to false Ministers; and no doubt but he is
very sensible, that its easy for him or any Seducer and Deceiver as well as
he, to pretend a Commission to preach, if they have a little Learning, and can
procure Induction and Ordination from a Bishop, esteem themselves to be truly
Ordained, although they have not the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery,
and that they are Ministers of the Gospel, and have a Right to the Tenths of
the People, as Pigs, Hens, Geese, Corn, Hay and Fruits; and if they have it not
Quarterly, they will, (like the false Prophets of Old, and like B. B.) sue at
Law, trouble, molest and prepare War against such; then for treble Damages or
Sequestration; and O! the Spoil, Ruin and Havoc that these will make; that is,
such as B. B. although I believe there are those of them that are more
moderate, and tender and conscientious, and that rather incline to take them in
kind, than spend five times more than the pretended Dues to gain them so; for I
have known that above 50 l. have been taken for 20 s. demanded for Tithes; and
two Persecuted for 7 and 8 Farthings, till the Charges have amounted to 17 l.
And if any can believe these, and such like Doings, represents such
Prosecutors, true Gospel Ministers, that take the Holy Scriptures only for
their Rule of Faith and Practice therein, let them if they will; for my part, I
shall rather believe, that those that are called of God and ordained by Jesus
Christ, to this Work, are his Ministers, although B. B. is so offended with me
for saying, as he quotes me, p. 5. viz.

Concerning Ordination.
Thou say, That God and Jesus Christ only have Power to make Ministers of
the Gospel, and ordain them to that Work.

Yea truly, I am of that Mind; and if he believes any other have Power to make
Gospel Ministers, and to ordain them to that Work, I Dissent from him. And his
finding fault with this implies, That he esteems Men have Power to make
Ministers of the Gospel, and ordain them to that Work, and not God and Jesus
Christ only. Is this agreeable to the Holy Scriptures? See John 21. where
Christ says to his, As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. And said
Paul, I was sent of God. By which it appears, it was God and Christ that sent
Gospel Ministers.

But B B. quotes Titus 1.5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 2.2. And because Paul
writ to Titus to ordain Elders, and the Presbyters laid on their Hands; and
Paul advises Timothy to commit to faithful Men the things that he heared of
him, who shall be able to teach others. B. B. would infer, That the Presbyters
(or Bishops now the Tide is turned) have Power to make Ministers of the Gospel,
and ordain them to that Work, and is not willing to leave this only unto God
and Jesus Christ, but would have them esteemed so qualified as to make and
ordain Ministers of the Gospel. But if we have none of God's making, nor God
and Christ's ordaining, I fear they will be such that will run when God never
sent them; and that will say, Thus says the Lord; when the Lord never spoke by
them, and will not profit the People at all.

What he returns on me for asserting the true Ministers are Ordained by God and
Jesus Christ; I retort on him, that we have nothing but his bare word for proof.

I did in my last, with respect to Ordination advise him not to prevaricate nor
evade, but tell what Church of England it was from whence he and his Brethren
first had their Ordination. And the Reason I so advised him, was, because he
said in his former, We had Ordination in the Church of England, before Rome
departed from the Faith. Upon which I asked him, Whether it was a Protestant
Church of England or a Popish, that they had Ordination in, before Rome
departed from the Faith? on which I advised him not to prevaricate nor evade,
but tell what Church of England it was.

And now he says, The Gospel was preached in this Island in the Primitive
Times of Cristianity, and that there were seven Bishops among the Britains at
the time of St. Austin's Landing in Kent; so that there was no need of going to
Rome for Ordination. But what is this to the purpose? Were they a Protestant
Church of England? And was it before Rome departed from the Faith? This is that
he is to prove if he can; or can he prove a Succession of Bishops from the
Apostle's Days, without going to Rome, I tro not.

And for a Retreat thither he begins to provide, saying, p. 6. Notwithstanding
the Corruptions in the Church of Rome, their Ordination might not be so far
corrupted, but that it might give Men a lawful Call to preach the Gospel, and
to reject their Errors.

So, she may be corrupted; yet this corrupt Romish Church may give Men a lawful
Call to preach the Gospel; and then those, so lawfully Called, may turn against
her, and take her Tithes, Profits, Glebe-lands and Church Lands from her, turn
her out, and call her Whore into the Bargain. And hold they are true Sons
ordained of the corrupted Whore, that is apostatized from the Christian Faith
and Doctrine to preach the Gospel, to rail at her, to revile, sue and molest
others, and in scorn, with design, to blacken them, as B. B. does the Quakers;
saying, Your Synagogue will, in a little time, be annexed to the Mother Church,
and to believe as the Church of Rome believes; which, says he, p. 2. is a
Popish Foundation of Faith.

Then let B. B. consider, Whether he is not already joined to his Mother,
whatever his Synagogue is? And whether he has not a Popish Foundation of
Faith, if he believe as the Church of Rome does; and, That they have Power to
make Ministers of the Gospel, and ordain them to that Work. Let the Sober and
Judicious determine, Whether this be agreeable either to Truth, or the
Scriptures of Truth. And seeing B. Bird is so highly offended with me, for
saying, God and Jesus Christ only have Power to make Ministers of the Gospel,
and ordain them to that Work. I will refer him to Jus Divinum Ministerii
Evangelici, published by the Provincial Assembly of London, his quondam
Friends, saying on this Subject, p. 168. For we know it is the Prerogative
Royal of the Lord Jesus Christ, to appoint Offices and Officers in his Church.
It is Christ ONLY that institutes the Office, and that furnishes and fitreth
Men with Graces and Abilities for the Discharge of so great an Employment, with
willing and ready Minds to give up themselves to so holy Services. It is Christ
ONLY that sets the Laws and Rules, according to which they must act. And seeing
B. B. is such a busy and officious Scribler, that busieth himself in others
Quarrels, let him quarrel with this also if he please, and seek to confute it.

Concerning Baptism.
P. 5. B. B. says, Christ's Ministers baptize with Water, in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, according to their Commission, Mat. 28.19. And
administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, according to his own
Institution, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26.

Answ. I deny that those that baptize with Water, do it according to the
Commission which Christ gave to his Disciples, Matthew. 28.19, 20. I may repeat
the foregoing Words and the Commission. All Power (said Jesus) is given unto me
in Heaven and Earth; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you to the end of
the World. Amen. Now observe, there is no mention of Water, therefore they that
baptize with Water, do it not according to the express Words of Christ's
Commission.

Again observe, That Teaching goes before Baptizing; and that Infants are not
capable of such Teaching; and the end of their Teaching was to observe all
things whatsoever Christ commanded, which Infants are not capable to do, nor
any according to B. Bird; for he says, We may not live without siin, and that
its impossible to keep God's Commands: And if this Priest Bird be not made and
ordained a Minister by God, and sent by Jesus Christ, he is not Commissioned to
either Teach or Baptize. And till he proves himself a Gospel Minister, truly
Ordained and rightly Commissioned to Preach and Baptize with Water. I need not
enlarge on this Head, only I do acknowledge, for satisfaction of others, That I
do believe that Christ's Ministers are to teach all Nations, baptizing them in,
or into the Name of the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost, and that all those that
are so Baptized, are in, through and by that Name, Power and Spirit, made
Members of that Body, of which Christ is the Head, and of that Church which is
in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Concerning the Supper.
I do also deny that 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. proves Christ Institution of the
Supper, but is a Repitition of what Christ did before his Crucifixion, at the
close of the Feast of the Passover; and none of the Evangelists, that give an
account thereof, make any mention that Christ said, As often as ye eat this
Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he come.

Luke 21.9. does indeed give an Account that Christ said, Do this in
remembrance of me; but limits no time. And Goodwin in his Antiquities, Lib. 3.
Cap. 2. p. 110. shows it was a Jewish Rite or Ceremony; which Christ using,
although he varied something from their Form, as being minded to spiritualize his
Disciples, and by that to show forth to them, that his Body was to be broke and
his Blood shed for them, and the Sins of the World. Yet he told them, as we may
read John 6.53. to 57. Jesus says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you:
And also says, He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. Which plainly shows, none can have Life in them or be true
Christians, but who so do; and those that so do he dwells in, and they in
him. And no doubt but those in whom he dwells, will, by his Spirit (which he
says to his Disciples, shall bring all things to your remembrance) have these
things brought to their remembrance, and it will keep them, as they live
therein, in a living and sensible remembrance of the great Love of God in
sending his Son, and the great Love of Christ in having his Body broke and his
Blood shed for us: and this Spirit will fill the Hearts and Mouths of such with
a Hymn of Praises and a Song of Thanksgiving unto the Lord God and the Lamb,
that was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore.

So by these the substance is enjoyed; and then what necessity is there for
such to retain the use of the outward and visible Sign, when the inward and
Spiritual Grace is received? Or can any think that the Spirit will not do what
Christ said it should? Or, that the use of the Sign is of absolute necessity to
bring them to the right performance and full discharge of that Duty and Worship
that is due to God, which is in the Spirit and in the Truth, and can be only and
alone acceptably performed to God and Christ in the Spirit, according to
Christ's Words? Or must that spiritual Worship be completed by Signs and
Figures, which were made use of in the time of the Law, and were the Shadows of
the good Things, but the Substance was Christ? And if the Lord gives us him,
will he not with him give us all things? And what lack then can there be to
such that knows him to dwell in their Hearts by Faith, in whom the Treasures of
Wisdom are hid, and in whom all Fullness dwells? Surely its well with these: And
except Jesus Christ be in us does not Paul say, me are Reprobates. Oh read
seriously these Things, and consider and ponder them, and the Lord give all, by
his Holy Spirit, an Understanding, that they may be wise to the Salvation of
their Souls, and yet not above what is written: For those that own the
Scriptures to be the only Rule of Faith and Practice, and that all Doctrins are
to be plainly proved by them, should bring express Scriptures for those things
which they esteem Christ's Institutions and his Ordinances, or otherwise never
press them on those that by the Scripture, nor the Spirit of God in themselves,
are enjoined or led thereunto. Oh therefore that all might come to have their
Minds turned from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power unto God, that
thereby they might receive and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; come and see
their States as they really are in the sight of of God, and be made truly
sensible of their own Weakness, Blindness and Ignorance, and through Obedience
thereto and by walking therein, and being inspired by God's holy Spirit, have a
clear Understanding and a right Judgment in all things, and Experience, a
receiving Power to become the Sons of God; and by walking in this Light of
Jesus Christ (so much opposed and hated by those that do Evil) might know
Fellowship with God and the Blood of Christ, to cleanse them from all
Unrighteousness; that being God's Children, he might feed them with that living
Bread, whereby they may be nourished up unto Eternal Life; which is my hearty
desire for B. B. and all People, notwithstanding it is our (as it ever was the
Lot of the Followers of Christ) to meet with many Tribulations, and endure a
great fight of Afflictions, and to go through cruel Mockings, and esteemed
false, when true; movers of Sedition, when they sought Peace and ensued it; and
to be evil spoken of, and to have our way every where spoken against; and the
slanderous Tongues and Pens of Malicious Men, exercised and employed against
us; and when they have cast forth their Lies and Slanders, like Floods, one to
quote another, as if our Accusers were to be our Judges; for this B. B. he
quotes F. Bugg, T. Crisp, George Keith and the Snake in the Grass; and they
again quote one another; so that the Authority is semper ibidem, the bare
confident Say-so's, and false Accusations of our apparent Enemies and enviovs
Apostates.

Now, if I should quote for Proofs against the Church of England, what the
Presbyterians say and write against them, or what the Papists write against
them, would it be taken for good proof? If so, I should soon render them not
only Innovators, Ceremony-mongers and Apostates, but Heretics and no true
Christians. But alas! for want of better Proofs, B. B. is forced to bring what
our refuted Adversaries say, and then insinuate on his own Authority, that we
are no Christians. Oh the confidence of this Priest! For if so, though a
Presbyterian, an Independent, or an Anabaptist, he would own me. And yet how
has he and some of his Brethren, persecuted both Presbyterians, Independants
and Anabaptists, for their Non conformity to their Church. Oh! the Deceit and
Hypocrisy of this Man! thus to collogue with them; What Thanks will the Church
of England give him for this? Was the breaking up their Meetings, Fining and
Imprisoning them, and thundering out Bulls of Excommunication against them, by
the Church of England, because they were Christians? Or is that the Bread that
such Protestant Ministers did break to them and People, as B. B. brags of, p.
7. Or was this the Bread that Christ and his Apostles did break to the latter?
I say nay. And therefore B. B. thou art the unnatural Father, that gives
Stone-walls rather than Bread, that cause People to be enclosed between them
for Nonconformity to your Church, or for not putting into your Mouths, whereby
many have been prevented to get Bread for themselves and Families. Surely, I
may retort and say, No wise Man will part with his Ingenuity for such a
Persecutors Christianity; but B. B. has so little of either to part with, that
he need not fear being deprived. For in his last he complains, That his worthy
Friend, or some other, clapped a Title to his former without his Previty; for
what he did was in a private Letter to a Friend, upon whose Request it was
printed without my privity, and the Title is not mine; I was merely drawn in to
bring up the Rear, said B. B. And now he complains I have not Answered his 1st
Sheet, which was a Letter to his Ingenious Mr. Clap. Oh! how he commends his
Mr. Clap now, and before complains, he was drawn in to bring up the Rear.

I wish his worthy Mr. Clap and he did show more Christianity and Ingenuity,
than to be so officious and busied besides their Business, to encourage one
another in such an evil Work of belying and falsely misrepresenting the People
called Quakers and their Principles, which I hope in this and my former I have
showed B. B. has (with his Mr. Clap's Assistance) as if he was minded to do
something to pleasure his old Friends the Presbyterians, who, in their Day, was
as busy, as bitter in persecuting the Quakers when they had Power, as now to
revile and falsely accuse them, and like Herod and Pilate can agree in this evil
Work: Yet the worst I wish them is unfeigned Repentance to the acknowledgment
of the Truth, and that they might by true Love and Christian Conversation,
coupled with God's holy Fear, by sound Doctrine and clear Proofs from the Holy
Scriptures, without their corrupt Meanings and false Glosses, approve
themselves true Christians, and demonstrate thereby their Doctrins and
Practices to be agreeable thereto. And for his advising me to read The Snake in
the Grass; I answer, I have; and find that Author is one of his Brethren,
exercised in the same evil Work, of misrepresenting the People called Quakers
and their Doctrins, and quoting for proof such Pooks writ against them, that
have been already answered, as he may also in a short time see that Book
answered, which then I would have him read the Answer as I have the Book.

Land. October. 12. 1696. JOHN FIELD.


