THE Scorner Rebuked, Or A REPLY to an Atheistical LIBELLER.
Prove. 19.29. Judgments are prepared for Scorners, and Stripes for the back of
Fools.
HAving met with The Sauciness of a Seducer Rebuked, A Scandalous Pamphlet so
Entitled, Or The Pride and folly of an Ignorant Scribbler made manifest. In
Preface of which he has manifest his En^y as well as Scorn and Scurrility,
together with Dr. Moors, from his Mystery of Godliness, p. 533. Where he says
in his Title Page as quoted, Quakerism is a mere flam of the Devil, a smooth
Tale to seduce the simple from their Allegiance to Christ. And from whence I
observe, how they Insinuate that Allegiance is due to Christ, and he
consequently must be a King or Ruler; yet how many are Alleging that its not
possible while we are here to keep Christ's Commands (of which number I account
this Author) or to live here without Transgressing Gods Law. So that the
Allegiance (we are insinuated to draw people from) that is due unto Christ, is
not accounted by them Possible while here to be fully paid, neither is so paid
by them. And indeed with grief it may be truly said, that too many that own
Christ in Words and so profess him, fall so short of paying that Allegiance du^
to him, that they are found in Rebellion against him his Light and Spirit in
their Hearts, and that God tha^ made them, and will so continue if they do not
receive^ believe, and walk in him that is that Light in whom al^ the Nations of
them that are Saved must Walk, tha^ pay that Allegiance, Obedience and
Reverence that i^ due to him; And as many fall short of their Allegiance to
Christ, Love to their Neighbor, and goo^ Manners, so this Scribbling Libeller
has manifest himself of this Number, 1. By his Blasphemy against the Light
within, the Quakers Light, (which is no other then the Light of Christ Jesus)
calling it an Idol the great Diana, by whom the Jacks of all Trades have their
wealth, Ignis fatui, etc. 2. By calling us, a Fanatic^ sort of People, the
spawn of Munster Reformers, a by-blo^ of the juggling Jesuits, or derive our
Pedigree from the Ir^nopolitan Fathers, or whether we are of the Mun^geral Race
who have licked up Socinus his Vomit. And further to show how like in Spirit he
is to the old Persecutors; he seems offended that we feel the Warmth o^
Toleration by saying since they felt that they swarm amon^ us. But let me tell
him, we have also felt the Lashe^ and Severity of his Brethren, the heat of
their Ange^ for it was fierce, the warmth of their Wrath, for i^ was cruel: Who
did both Whip, Brand, Cut off Ear^ and Hanged in New England, when Power was i^
their hands.

And we have also patiently undergone many hardships, and cruel sufferings from
our Persecutors her^ when some that in time of Sunshine, and under the warmth
of Indulgence, in fair Weather, could mak^ fair show, and great appearance, but
when once the Storm has risen, the Wind of Persecution blew strong and the Sun
thereof shone hot, they have been scorche^ up, and blown away, their Meeting
Houses Empty an^ shut up, their Preachers Absconded, their flocks Scattered:
And then Paul Baskes was remembered, then their Christian Policy was used, then
to Church for fear of 20 l. per Month, or least they should be Excommunicated,
and suffer Imprisonment. Now when the Lord by his Providence has brought it to
pass, that the hearts of the Government are inclined toward us, and give us
the liberty of Exercising our tender Consciences. This Nameless Author his Mr.
Tross's Advocate, like a Night Bird sends forth his Mournful Noat, and Vents
his Displeasure at the warmth we enjoy, plainly showing what he wants to be at.
And its not to be doubted but if he had power he would Lash more severely with
his Whip, (their old Instrument) then he has with his Pen. But we humbly thank
the Lord and the Government for the present Ease we Enjoy, by the Restraining
such bitter Spirits from Venting their Malice on that wise against us. But we
can say of this and all our Enemies, the Lord forgive them, and incline their
Hearts to keep his Law. And he is also offended that the people come to our
Meetings saying, Its just with God to give them up to strange Delusions to
believe Lies.

Why so angry? what must people take all upon trust, may they not hear for
themselves, and follow the Christian Advice. Try all things hold fast that
which is good. But to conclude he says, If what I have writ in this Treatise
be an Antidote to any against that spreading Evil (viz Quakerism) my Labor
will not be lost. Poor Man, what pains thou have taken to bring forth a Brat,
thou do not own, what must J. N. be blamed for having his Book Midwifed (as
thou Phrases it) into the World by a Nameless Printer, and must the Name of thy
Fathers Brat be concealed; only thou tells he is one studious to know and
practice the Doctrine according to Godliness.

But what a Proficient he has manifest himself in this study, let me now
examine from a few places (...) his Book relating to the Light of Christ, and
the Holy Scriptures. For much of it is such empty stuff, and t^ so little
purpose unless to manifest his folly, and sco^fing Spirit, that its not worth
minding. I shall fir^^ set down what he quotes of Jos. Not. p. 6. I. ^ and
therefore I desire the Reader to keep thy min^ near to the Light of Jesus
Christ, in thy own heart (...) Conscience, that so thou may understand wha^
thou read.

To which this Libeller Replys thus,

After a small Blunder, the (1st.) for thee, o^ comes the rare Cotholican, with
which those Quac^ do greater Wonders, then ever did Ponteus wit^ his Balsom,
Oynment, and that is the Light within Reader, if thou can but get Joseph Not
to spare the a few Ounces of this Choice Medicine called Lig^ within, prize it
above Aurum Fotabile or the Phil^sophers Stone.

Now Observe what a Proficient he is in the Doctrine and Practice of Godliness,
who makes such a scoffi^ at the Light of Jesus Christ comparing it to Ponte^
Balsam, and scornfully ca ling it a choice Medicin^ Now compare this with the
Testimony of the Ho^^ Scriptures, Jo. 8.12. Then spoke Jesus again unto the
saying, I am the Light of the World, he that follows n^ shall not walk in
Darkness, but shall have the light of Lif^ and Jo. 1.8. He was not that Light,
but was sent to be^ witness of that Light, that was the true Light that lighte^
every man, that comes in the World.

And its great contempt and scorn in him thus t^ compare it, and to Insinuate
as if the Light of Jes^^ Christ was to be sold by Ounces, for it was, that and
(...) other but the Light of Jesus Christ, that Jos. Not desire the Reader to
keep his mind near to And although this A^thor pretends to know and practice the
Doctrine according to Godliness, he appears more like an Atheist filled with
Scorn and Derision, for he proceeds, But if he will not part with any of it,
follow my Directions, and thou may obtain it thy self, is not this like
Simon Magus, and p. 7. He farther proceeds in his deriding manner thus, Deny
Scripture, Revile Magistrates, reproach Ministers, cast off Ordinances, gratify
the desires of thy Carnal heart, follow the Dictat^s of thy muddy Brains,
whenever thy giddy head turns round, pretend to Visions and Revelations: And
when thou art thus accoutered, Read the Quakers Books, and keep close to their
silent Meetings, and thou art in a very fair way to get this rare secret.

Now if this be like one studious to know and practice Godliness, or a scoffing
Atheist, I leave to his Master Hallet, and his Master Tross, and the rest of
their Brethren, with all that read this to Judge, whether this is the way to
attain unto the Light of Jesus Christ. I.N. desired his Reader to keep his mind
near unto, which is that which shines in Peoples Hearts and Consciences, and
shows them Sin, and manifests the corrupt desires of their Carnal Hearts, and
lets them see they are sinners against God and Christ: And will lead and guide
all those that believe in it, and receive it unto Gods Holy Hill, and to his
Tabernacles, and by walking in it they will come to know a being Cleansed from
all Unrighteousness by the Blood of Jesus Christ. But he goes on p. 7.

1. Quest. Is this Light of Jesus Christ in the heart and Conscience; God or
Creature, finite or infinite?

Answer. The Life in the Word that was in the Beginning with God, and was God,
is the true Light, that lights every man that comes into the World, and is
not a Creature or finite.

Then he proceeds to his 2d Question for he puts great stress on 3 or 4.
Questions, for he has propounded, and bids put home these Questions, and if he
do not boggle or Equivocate, its ten to one but he will betray gross Ignorance,

Oh the conceit he has of his own Questions, come lets hear and Answer his
second.

2 Quest. p. 7. Is it Christ himself, who was Crucified, without the Walls of
Jerusalem or something distinct from Christ?

Answer, The Life which is the Light of Men is the Life and Light of the same
Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, was put to Death upon the Cross (as
concerning the flesh) quickened and raised by the Spirit, and ascended into
Glory. Yet this his Divine Life and Light never dyed, nor was put to death.

But he follows his Question thus, If he say it is Christ himself enquire of
him, whether this Light is in every man's heart and Conscience, was born of the
Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, dyed upon the Cross, ascended into
Heaven, after its Resurrection, and sits at the right hand of God; all these
things we know are true of Christ.

Answ. And so say I all these things are true of Christ according to the Flesh,
although we do not believe him to be so, i. e. according to the flesh in every
man, yet he is owned by us called Quakers according unto holy Scripture
Testimony both in the flesh and in the Spirit, see Peter 3.18. and Heb. 2.18.
for in that he himself has suffered; and also Acts 17.3. and Heb 13.12.
Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the People with his own Blood,
suffered without the Gate.

And none of this is Blasphemy to neither does this betray gross Ignorance on
our parts, but of his as may further appear in answer to his other Questions.

3. Quest. If he say it is something distinct from Christ: ask him whether it
be a Body or Spirit.

Answ. This is Answered in Reply to the former, that it was Christ himself that
suffered as concerning the flesh, and was quickened and raised by the Spirit.
And this Author says p. 14. That God suffered, but it is Blasphemy to say the
Godhead suffered. And if he either thought we had, or expected we should affirm
that that Divine Life and Light of Christ we profess, believe in, and expect
Salvation by, did ever dye, he is grossly mistaken for we own Christ in the
Flesh, and Christ in the Spirit, Christ within, and Christ without, to be but
one and the same Christ, under different appearances; and all they that will
impartially Examine our Christian Doctrines by the Holy Scriptures (like the
noble Bareans) will find them according thereunto, notwithstanding this Author
says, Perhaps he may hereafter show the contrary, But we fear him not.

And he proceeds in his Question thus; Whether it be a Body or a Spirit; if he
say it is a Body as Barklay, It Is Vehiculum Dei, the Spiritual Body of Christ,
the Flesh and Blood of Christ, which came down from Heaven. Desire him to deal
freely with thee as a friend; and inform thee how this flesh and blood can be
in so many thousand Hearts and Consciences at once, as there are Men and Women
upon the face of the Earth, how can a Body reach from Pensilvania to Exon. p. 7.

Answ. 1st. As to these Questions, because he puts such a stress on them, I
have taken the more notice of them; and as to that Light of Jesus Christ in the
heart, which he queries, whether it be a Body or Spirit, we say it is the Life
of that Word that was God, and was in the beginning with God, by whom all
things were made. And as to the Humane Nature of Christ, he says himself p 14
It was a Creature and Rob. Barkley does not say, the Godhead is a Creature, so
that Rob. Barkley does not want to be reconciled unto George Whitehead nor
their Doctrines unto Truth. But this Pamphleteer goes on Reasoning or querying
like the unbelieving Jews who said how can this Man give us his Flesh to Eat,
and says this Adversary, How this Flesh and Blood of Christ can be in so many
thousand Hearts and Consciences as once, and how a Body can reach from
Pensilvania to Exon. By which it appears to me, notwithstanding his Learning,
he shows himself ignorant, for he says, unless you ea^e my fl sh, and drink my
blood you have no life in you, Joh. 6.53. again he says, he that eats my fl
sh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, and I will raise him up
at the last day. A Mystery I fear this Libeller does not understand, for as if
Believers in Christ in Exon and P^nsilvania could not both partake of the Flesh
of Christ, is not this to limit him. For he says p. 8. If we Read Christ in
y^u, then this is the Sense, viz. Those saving Graces Fai h and Love, etc. by
which Christ dwells in our hearts.

And can any of these saving Graces be wrought in the Heart but by Christ; and
if he works them there, must he not be in the heart; and why should this
nameless Author be offended at Christ's being in People, and his Light shining
in their Hearts and Consciences, what would he have nothing but sin and Satan
in Peoples Hearts; that in evil doing they might be kept, hating the Light
because their Deeds are evil, and refusing to bring them to it. Sure those are
never like to be happy in this World, nor in that which is to come, that live
and dye in Rebellion against the Light of Christ; nor those will never know
Christ, who is stronger then the strong man Armed, (the Devil) and can spoil
his Goods, (sin and lust) if they do not know and receive Christ within where
the sin and Lust have had a place; how should he spoil his Goods, destroy the
sin, and mortify the Lust, and fulfill the Prophecy of him, viz. put an end to
sin, and finish transgression, and bring in everlasting Righteousness.

But to Return, its further observable, how scornfully, contemptuous and
Atheistical and Blasphemous this Libeller is against the Light, manifesting
thereby, that he is of the Seed of Evil doers, that shall never be renowned.

Page 10. He says, The Light within is the great Diana by whom these Jacks of
all Trades have their wealth. Hence it is that these Craftsmen speak so
honorably of the Idol. Great is the Quakers Light within, it is to be preferred
to the Scripture. By this we are to understand the Scriptures; this is a higher
and Superior Rule which we ought especially to attend; This is one of the
Foundations on which the damnable Errors of the Quakers are built.

Answ. Observe the Rage and Blasphemy of this officious Presbiterian Advocate:
First how he Queries if this Light of Christ in the Heart and Conscience, be
God or Creature, finite or infinite, and in a few Pages says its an Idol; O
what horrid Blasphemy is this, what the Light of Jesus Christ in the Conscience
an Idol; and have the Jacks of all Trades their Wealth by this, surely if his
Pious Mr. Flavel, his ingenious Mr. Hallet, and his Reverend Mr. Tross as he
calls them, have no better Advocates then this Scurrilous Airy Libeller, and
envious Scribler, they will get little credit by him: but he goes on Ironically
and Scoffingly, saying, great is the Quakers Light within, is to be preferred
to the Scriptures, by this we are to try Thoughts, Words and Actions, by this
we are to understand the Scriptures.

Answ And is it not very true that Christ's Light is to be preferred to the
Scriptures because it was before the Scriptures; For Christ's Light which is the
Life of that Word that was in the Beginning with God, and was God, must needs
be before the Scriptures, and is no Creature or Finite.

And this the Author to the Hebrews declares to be quick and powerful, sharper
then a two edged Sword, dividing between the Joints and the Marrow, the Soul
and the Spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart;
and this the Scriptures of themselves cannot do. Yet this poor dark-man, seems
not willing to allow it to be a higher and superior Rule, to which we ought
especially to attend, and yet it must be granted, that Christ who is this Word,
in whom the Life which is the Light of Men is superior to the Scriptures, for
the Holy men of God, writ the Scriptures as moved by the Holy Ghost, or Spirit
of Christ, and that Holy spirit from whence they came, must needs be greater
then the Scriptures that are given forth by it.

But he further manifests his bitter Spirit, by affirming that the Light within
is one of the Foundations on which the damnable Doctrine of the Quakers are
built.

Answ. This is false, what are damnable Errors built on the Light? On what
Light are these damnable Errors built, or what are them damnable Errors the
Quakers hold? Let him demonstrate this if he can. Oh the blindness and
Blasphemy of this Man: Surely if his Mr. Hallet, or his Gospel Minister Mr.
Tross teaches him no better then this or that these are the Fruits of their
Ministry, they will have but small reputation by him. Again, If to say that
Christ's Light within is to be preferred to the Scriptures, and that by it we
are to try Thoughts Words and Actions, and to understand the Scriptures, are
rotten Assertions (as he Phrases them) pray what are sound, surely its not this
Authors Assertions that the Light within is an Idol, and the Scriptures are the
only supreme and sufficient Rule of Faith and Life.

These are neither sound nor Scriptural, for if the Scriptures are the only
Rule, then there is no other, if supreme then what is above them, does not this
set the Letter above the Spirit, or the Scriptures above Christ, are not these
erroneous sayings.

And his 11th page he says, A Christian tryes and examines his Thoughts, Words
and Actions by the Scriptures.

Answ. But the Scriptures cannot immediately tell or show unto any man what his
Thoughts, Words and Actions are, for its the living powerful Word of God that
is a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, see Amos the 4. ch and
last verse, and Heb. 4.12. And its this that must quicken unto God, and teach
man how to think, speak and do as he ought: And its the Light of Jesus Christ
that shines in Peoples hearts, that shows or manifests unto them all those
thoughts, words and actions that are reprovable, according unto the Apostles
Testimony, Ephesians. 5.13. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by
the Light: For whatsoever does make manifest is ^ight: And therefore, said
Christ the Light. Whoever think to have life in the Scriptures, which testify
of Christ, will fall under Christ's reprehension if they do not come to him, for
he said ye search, or search ye the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come to
me, that ye may have Life, Joh. 5.39, 40.

And in page 11. he says, the Pagans Rule is the light of Nature, and the
Quakers Rule the Light within.

Answ. Now if the Quakers Rule is not a saving Light and of the Divine Nature,
what light is it? For he plainly declares them to be two, and not one and the
same Light. And yet says, The Pagans Rule is good in its kind and place, it
discovers the Being, Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, so as to leave them
without Excuse, who do not walk according to it; but it cannot discover Christ,
by whom alone sinners can be saved.

Answ. How does it discover the Power, Wisdom and goodness of God, and yet not
discover Christ by whom alone sinners can be saved: Surely if it discovers the
Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, it discovers Christ, for Paul says, 1 Cor.
1.23, 24. We Preach Christ Crucified unto the Jews a stumbling block, unto the
Greeks foolishness, but unto them that are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.

And indeed Christ's Light, which the People called Quakers believe in is of a
Divine and saving Nature, although this Author charges J. N. with Blasphemy for
calling the Light within (which we profess) Christ's Light within, yet we do
most sincerely declare, we neither Preach, Believe in, nor expect Salvation by
any other Light then Christ Jesus, the dear Son of Gods Love, made of a Woman
under the Law, Gal. 4.4. even him who was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the spirit, seen of Angels Preached unto the Gentlies, Believed on in the
World, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3.16.

And page 12. he says, I grant that Christ has given us a Rule, and the Holy
spirit enables all the People of God to walk according to it.

Answ. What then, is the Spirit greater then the Rule, or the Rule ineffectual
without the Spirit, does not this plainly imply one of these, and if the Spirit
be greater, or the Rule ineffectual without it, why does this Scribler say the
Scriptures is the only supreme and sufficient Rule.

Is not this plain contradiction; yet in the same Page scornfully says i. e.
thus, Rare edifying Discourse, Christ is the only Rule, the gift of Gods spirit
in our own Hearts is the Rule, the Holy Ghost is the Rule, the Light within is
the Rule, the Light of Jesus is the Rule.

Ans. And does it then become him thus scornfully to Write, O well would it
have been for him, that these had been his Rule, for then he would have been
better ruled, and guided his Pen better then he has. But he runs farther,
saying The Spirit is so far from being our Rule, that God has given us his
written Word to try whether we have the spirit thereby.

Answ. And if this were true, those that were before the Scriptures, or Written
Word as he calls it, was, how could they tell whether they had the Spirit or
no? Now how did the Apostles and primitive Christians that were before the New
Testament was writ, know they had the Spirit, was it by the Old Testament, and
was that then the written word by which they knew they had the spirit, and if
that were the written word, by which they k^^w they had the Spirit, and was not
the Evangelists the Word, and the Epistles in the New Testament the written
Word, then how many Written Words are there, and by the same Rule he calls the
Scriptures the Word of God, may not those aforenamed be called the Word, and if
there be so many Words of God, how far short will this fall of what the Quakers
believe that Christ is the Eternal Word of God, and the Holy Scriptures the
Words of God. And if he will affirm, those that have not the Scriptures cannot
tell, whether they have the Spirit or no, let him show what Scripture he h th
for it; for does not the Scripture say, by this we know w^ are of God, by the
spirit which he has given us; but if we cannot know whether we have the Spirit
but by the Scriptures, we cannot tell whether we are of God or nay, but by the
Scriptures; but is not this contradictory to the Scriptures, and besides his
only and supreme Rule. But we would have all know we own, esteem, and truly
value the Holy Scriptures, have often so declared in all sincerity and
uprightness of Heart, that all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. and are able to make Wise unto salvation, through
faith in Christ Jesus. Notwithstanding this Libeller says, for which we have
only his ipse dixit, that we give the Holy Scriptures, the Epethites of carnal
Letter, a dead killing Letter, the Husk, which is fit for nothing but Swine. p.
20. which I deny, and charge on him as a notorious, false and lying slander,
which his Pamphlet abounds with, and are not worthy taking notice of: nor to
spend Time and Paper to answer.

But having thus in brief shown some of the Errors and Contradictions of this
nameless Author, and detected him for his Scurrilous and abusive Pamphlet, I
shall ddress my self to the Inhabitants in and about Exon, and all to whom
these may come, in whom there are any degree of Christian Charity and Godly
sincerity.

I do in the holy fear of Almighty God, and in the good will of him that dwelt
in the burning Bush; and the Bowels of him that dyed for us, and rose again for
our Justification, sincerely declare my Friends have no other end in their
Writing and Preaching, but that all people might be gathered unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, and brought unto his Light and Spirit in all their hearts, that
by it they may come to see their states, and be made truly sensible of their
conditions, and through receiving and believing in Christ the light, may come
to know him to reveal the Father unto them, that the saving knowledge of the
only true God, and Jesus Christ, they may come to receive, and thereby be made
partakers of eternal Life, and by the work of his Word and Spirit in their
hearts, might know all that to be wrought out which the Light manifest to be
contrary to the mind and Will of God, and by this Spirit might know the true
Baptism, and the inward washing with pure Water (the holy Spirit) by the the
Word of God, that they may be truly fitted for Gods heavenly Kingdom, and know
an entrance thereunto. And by this Spirit (the best Rule) may Worship God
accceptably through Jesus Christ, and be enabled daily to live unto him, to the
praise of his Grace, and might enjoy peace, and have the comfort of the holy
Scriptures and the things of God opened unto them by it knowing, as the Apostle
said, that as no man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man that is
in him, so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God, because they
are spiritually discerned, and not to be attained unto by outward Letarature,
or wearisome study of any man that receives not this Spirit. And therefore we
call to all to cease from men and their Teachings, that are in their Carnal
state, and Earthly Wisdom, and dark conceivings, and turn their mind inward to
the saving Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, to receive, and believe in it, that
you may be the Children of it, and by walking in it, may know the precious
virtue of the Blood of Jesus Christ to cleans you from all unrighteousness, and
bring you into that state wherein you may find peace and acceptance with God
through Jesus Christ his dear Son our Lord and be enabled by him to bear his
Yoke, take up his Cross to deny your selves and follow him through the many
tribulations, and to endure cruel Mockings, and to suffer reproach as its our
lot, for his sake that suffered the contradiction of sinners for our sake; so
that the life of true Religion you might feel and enjoy in your selves, and not
remain under the windy Doctrines of Men their empty forms and Ceremonies, but
come to Christ the substance, by harkening to his Voice, and opening the Door
of your hearts by Faith and let him in, that he may sup with you, and you with
him, and drink of the Cup of his Blessing, know the Communion of Saints, an^
the breaking of Bread, which is the Body of Christ, and to know a being built
upon him, the sure foundation, that ye may be able to stand in that day wherein
all men's foundations shall be tried, and may know Bread in your own Houses, and
Water in your own Cisterns, Oil in your own Lamps, that when the cry is,
prepare to meet the Bridegroom, tho at Midnight you may be ready; and to enter
in with the bridegroom to the Marriage Chamber. Oh awake awake you careless
professors of Christ, do not sleep, in your empty forms and lifeless Profession
of Christianity, but get Oil in your Lamps, grace in your hearts that he may
shine forth in your lives and Conversations, and do not in Works deny him, whom
in Words ye profess for he sees and beholds you, marks your ways, knows your
Works, and will reward you accordingly.

Says your Friend, JOHN FIELD.

A POSCRIPT By another hand.
SOber Reader, to whom this may come, the holy Scriptures of truth bears a
large Testimony against wicked persons, especially against Scorners, Scoffers
and Mockers, and of the Judgment and wrath of God against them, as ye may read
Pro, 1 22. to the end: and as hateful and rejected of God so the Scorner is
abomination to men, pro. 24.9. many other places of Scripture testify against
them even as the worst of men.

The Scriptures are fulfilled in our day, viz. in the last days shall come
Mockers and Scoffers, walking after their ungodly Lusts, and the Children of
the Lord in former Ages were set as Gazing stocks and signs and wonders, and
accounted as the Offscouring of all, and now its not strange that the same
thing happens to us.

Now the end of Writing these Lines are tenderly to advise and warn the Readers
to beware of that light, vain, scoffing Spirit, which in the said Book is
manifested, and not to suffer the same Spirit to arise in them, or to be taken
with it. The Author having concealed his name, I have given forth these Lines
to pursue his vain wicked spirit, and warn others to take heed of it. I leave
it all to the Lord from whom he, we, and all shall receive a Reward according
to our deeds.

The aforesaid Book is stuffed with so much scorning and vain scurilous Language,
as if the Author were even set in the seat of the Scornful, and made it his
work to utter out folly and wickedness, and his pleasure and delight therein
(utterly contrary to true Wisdom and Christianity it self) greatly condemned in
the holy Scriptures of Truth, as appears by some of his vain light scoffing and
scorning Expressions, with his vilifying and r^proaching the People called
Quak^rs, follows, viz. A Fanatical sort of people commonly culled Quakers, from
their trembling and raving when they told their Dreams, being acted in the same
manner, as the Heathen Southsayers buzing the ignorant in the Ears with their
Intellible Jorgan, this odumbred Sect, Spawn of the Munster Reformer, a by blow
of the Juggling Jesuits, or Mungril Race, who licked up Socimus 's Vomit,
inspired with John Leydons Euthusiasims, and have sucked in Popish perfection
and Infallibility. Now how has he powered out his Wicedness like a flood, the
Lord rebuke him: does he consider, that in the day of Judgment every idle word
must be accounted for, how much then the multitude of his scorns, scoffs and
jears; Oh vain man, let him repent. And now in this his scornful spirit he will
undertake to interpret Scripture and talk of Piety, and vindicate some persons
as pious, and calls one a Reverend Divine and our stoutest Champions, If they
be such as he Intimates they will account the Vindication of such a Scorner, a
Disgrace, unto them. It would have been well if he had consulted and considered
the Holy Scriptures before he had thus powered out his vanity reproach and
scorn, it may be he will say they are a rule, but he never had any such Example
from Christ, or his Apostles. Oh vain man, remember God will bring thee to
Judgment for these things, and therefore thou should not be high minded, but
fear the great God, who will give a reward to eveey one according to their
deeds, from whom thou cannot hide thy self tho thou hidest thy name from
public view, and tho I know not who thou art, yet thy wor^ manifests what thou
art. I have written this in love to thee and all to whom this may come and
leave the issue to the Lord.

By a well wisher for the good of all people. J. BATT.


