A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Sir Roger -- and Mr. Rob. Ferg -- In NEW GATE Relating to
the PLOT.
Sir Rog. THe Worthy Mr. Ferg --


Mr. Ferg. The Reverend Sir Roger.


Sir Rog. Oh Sir, this is a smile of Fortune indeed, when in this melancholy
Region of Abdication I am permitted, thanks to a kind Jailer, the conversation
of the celebrated Mr. Ferg --, whose Person though I never had the Honor to be
acquainted with, yet his Name and Merits have been my particular Familliarity.


Ferg. Yes Sir, I understand my Name and Merits have been your particular
Intimacy; you have been both their Herald and Historian, and have blazoned
them in capital BLACKS in many a fair Observator.


Sir Rog. Really Sir, you do me a great deal of right; I have never been
sparing of Black and White: The flourishes of my Quill have been profusely
generous. I never saw any shining Feature, or Mosaic face, from Great Noll's
Nose to Little Titus his Chin, but I have played the kind Lely. A beautiful Pen
should never want Drapery, where my pencil could furnish it.


Ferg. It Is worthily said of you. You speak like a plain Dealer.


Sir Roger. But, Mr Ferguson, I have had a long desire of kissing your Hand by
the way of congratulation, and welcome to our side. From a Saul to a Paul, a
Persecutor to a Devote; as there is joy even in Heaven at a sinner's conversion,
give me leave to express no common Transport, in gaining so considerable a
Patron to our glorious though, at present, drooping Cause.


Ferg. Ay, Sir Roger, I am a sort of a Come-over, to that drooping Cause, as
you call it, Ecce signum, these Bonds.


Sir Roger. Ay, that is our common misfortune. But, Mr. Ferg --, I hope the
great Truths that I have so long preached, published and recorded, amongst the
many Eyes they have opened, have had some illumination upon Mr. Ferg --; for I
should be proud of being any ways instrumental to so eminent a Conversion.


Ferg. Nay, Sir Roger, not to boast any great operation upon me; for I am a
meet Volunteer, and my whole Illumination is purely my own, nevertheless I must
give thee this immortal Applause, That the protestant Zealots that have had any
hand in this Plot, or been well-wishers toward it, are most, if not all, thy
Disciples; and all that die in it, are no better than thy Martyrs.


Sir Rog. Good Heaven forbid! My Martyrs! What, draw innocent Blood upon my
head: Lord have mercy on Me. I hope you are not in earnest.


Ferg. Nay, it is too true for a Jest. I say nothing but what I can prove.


Sir Rog. How prove Sir! I hope you do not set up for an Evidence.


Ferg. No, Sir Roger, as I am a bonny Scot, I am more a Gentleman than to make
a Peacher; not but my natural, personal Tenderness would go far, to tempt my
mortal Frailty that way: However there is no danger of me in that Case, for had
I an inclination toward it, I am afraid the World wants Faith, and a Ferg --
's Oracles would find but few Believers: And therefore pray Sir Roger, dispel
that bodily fear: All I have to say is only Inter nos.


Sir Rog. Nay, then you have dispelled my fear, and therefore pray go on with
this bloody* Charge against me, for I dare stand any Arraignment, where there is
neither the face of Judge nor Jury, Mr. Ferg --.


Ferg. Say you so? Then pray tell me what are all our Jacobite Fools, but
Pupils and Proselites to those two Pillars of thy Church, Jure Divino and
Passive Obedience.


Sir Roger. And what have you to object against those two Pillars?


Ferg. Nay, no great matter, but only that a very weak Sampson may totter them:
For, in short, what is thy Divine Right from above, and our Non-Resistance
below, and all thy long-winded Arguments upon that Subject, any more than so
many high flown Enthusiasms, to help up the Golden Image of an Arbitrary
Nebuchadnezar, whilst that Fidle of thine, thy Observators, have been the
Psaltreys and Sackbuts, to tune us to fall down and worship. A King, at this
rate by thy Assertion, provided his direct Succession be unquestionable, in
nothing else, though never so indirect, can be questionable: For he may Be what
he please, and Do what he Please, Set up what he please, and Pull down what he
please, Swear what we and our Laws please, and perform what he and his No Law
please; Run away from his People when he pleases, and Return when and how he
please: In fine, That a Right Line sanctifies all Wrong; That the True Blood in
his Veins* Entitules him to the whole Blood in our Veins; And that if he please
to take it, we must please to give it him, unless our Tears or Prayers can
shield off the Blow; for Sir Roger is pleased to allow no other Edge-Tool or
Armor, Offensive or Defensive for our protection.


Sir Rog. Lord Sir, I am all amazement: can you talk at this wild rate, and be
one of us?


Ferg. One of You! Ay, never the worse for talking, old Boy. It Is a sign I am
the more* ingenuous Friend to your Cause, when List under your Bannor, ex mero
motu, frankly and generously: Not blindly drawn into a party by Cob-web
Arguments, the Gin to catch Wood-cocks; Men of Sense are above it.


Sir Rog. But sure you don't think that the Right of our Great Master, his
Divine Right of Royal Inheritance in his Caim to 3 Crowns a Triffle to be thus
jested with?


Ferg. Jest Sir! All Jest. There neither is, nor ever was any such Divine Right
in the World.


Sir Rog. How! No Divine Right.


Ferg. Right is so far from any Claim Divine, that 'twas always the Creation of
Power, and Sanction of the Community. If a Lineal Chain of Succession be all
thy Foundation, Prithee, in what part of the World will thou find it? How many
times since the Conquest in 27 Raigns has that Succession been broken, (and if
once broken, it is never truly rejoined again): For instance, between the Houses
of York and Lancashire, those quondam hot, and sometime bloody Disputants of
Sovereignty, How have Kings been deposed? What Changes made? and yet the
present* Allegiance never questioned nor disputed. What Divine Right had Harry
the 7th. when the world will tell you his best Title lay in his Queen, and yet
we never read that his People either murmured or quarreled his Recognition to
the Throne, by Act of Parliament, out of any Grievance, that the Duke of
Richmond was their Crowned Head, and their Crowned Heiress but a subject: Nor,
as I ever heard, did his Son Harry the 8th. his Successor, upon the death of
his Mother, claim possession before his Father's decease, by any Pretension* of
better Royal Blood in his own, than his Father had in his Veins.


Sir Roger. But certainly the Divine Right of Monarchs --


Ferg. Is a mere sophistry. The Juggle of Priestcraft, and pretension of
Superstition. So far from any thing of Divine in the case, that God Almighty
himself Abdicated (or very little better) the very first King even of his own
making; laid Misgovernment to his charge, and Anointed his Successor even
before his death, and that too in the person of his darling David, the Man
after his own heart; so far from a Son or Right Heir of Saul, that he was no
Kin to the Family, so little was Royal Succession the Care of Heaven, or ought
to be the Quarrel of Man.


Sir Roger. Truly, Mr. Ferg --, you talk strange bug words, but what ever your
own private Opinion is, I hope you do not broach these Tenants amongst our
Jacobite Friends.


Ferg. Quite contrary, Sir Roger, for where populus vult decipi decipiatur. The
Wise know better. Shall we be worse than the Race of Ham, uncover our own
nakedness? No, Sir Roger, not all Evangelica veritas, but some pia Fraus.
There Is stratagem to be used in a Church Millitant, as well as a Camp
Millitant, not all down right strength of Reason in one, nor length of Sword in
the other: For Example, pray who were greater Assertors of that Jus Divinum
Doctrine than our two last dying Friends, and as they had lived so strenuous in
it, did not the wise managers of their death, those sweetners of Mortality, the
3 Tyburn Absolvers, very prudently take care that they should dye in it as
strenuously too. Ay, Sir Roger* we must not be those false Traitors to our
Cause, as to bewray our own Nest.


Sir Rog. Verily, Mr. Ferg --, you discourse the Politics of our Cause
extremely well. But to satisfy one Curiosity, pray let me quit this subject,
and without offense be so bold as to ask you one single Question.


Ferg. A double one, and welcome, Sir.


Sir Rog. Considering then the Character the World gives of You, your
Fluctuating Principles and uneasiness in all Governments, how comes it that
those worthy Gentlemen, concerned in this Glorious, tho dangerous Enterprise,
dust lodge so great and Important a Trust with such volatile Mercury, as Mr.
Ferg -- 's?


Ferg. My Character, say you! Why it is the only thing that recommended me to
their Confidence. For pray, to compare Cases between us; you are Zealots and
Partisans in a Conspiracy (forsooth) out of a principle of Right and Justice.
But I am animated by a Sprightlier Fire* am for Mutiny and Mischief, right or
wrong. You act by dictates of Conscience and Honor; but I have been slighted
and disobliged by the present Government, and my Motives against it are Spite
and Revenge. And Revenge never weighs nor disputes, when on the contrary,
Honor may be tender and scrupulous: Besides, yours is but the Love, but mine
the Lust of Rebellion: and Love may sometimes cool, when Lust always burns.


Sir Rog. In troth, Mr. Ferg --, this Argument savours a little too much of the
Libertine. But you are a glorious Don John, and I am satisfied the worthy
Gentlemen could not have made a nobler Choice, than such a Friend and Champion,
as Mr. Ferg --.


Ferg. Nay Sir, since you touch me in that sensible part, I must tell you
farther, That I am always the Almanzor of a Conspiracy. Almanzor-like, I know
neither one side nor to'ther, any longer then I am pushing in it: But then like
an Almanzor too, no Man pushes so heartily and so home as I do. And for
distinctions of which King, or what King, in short, I run a muck at all Kings;
and indeed at all Religions too: For, between Friends, My King, my Country, my
Religion, my Heaven, are all centured in my self.


Sir Rog. Really Mr. Ferg --, you here give me so extraordinary; and withal so
ingenious a Declaration, that I must acknowledge you a person truly worthy
Admiration, though not altogether Imitation. For though you are an absolute
Original, and that no mean one, Yet, I confess, it is such a one as I durst not
Copy. My tenderer Morals are a little more nice and squeamish; however to give
you your due renown; I heartily wish that all the Hands and Hearts, engaged in
this Pious and honest Confederacy, had been all of your Nerve and Mould. For
then, we might have hoped to have had an answerable success to the greatness of
the undertaking, and Resolution of the Undertakers, and not to have had it thus
poorly miscarry, by so many Sieves and Spunges, the Leaky false Brothers, whose
Cowardly Revolts and Apostasy has so weakly and basely betrayed, it to our
whole Causes utter Confusion and Ruin. For truly, Sir, though I my self cannot
come up to your Heights, however I must do you this Right, to own you one of
the most quallified Instruments, to embark in any such Religious and Righteous
bold* Cause. For indeed, it is always my Maxim, That provided the Dagger be but
Consecrated, no matter whether the hand be or no.


Ferg. There you say Right, Sir Roger; For we have Holy Writ on our side in
that point. For do we not read that Cyrus the Great, though a Heathen and
Infidel, is called the Servant of God: viz. For the great ends for which God
had raised him. And with the same parity of Reason, our Grand Patron Lewis, is
the most Christian Servant of Jesus, though the most Faithful sworn Brother of
Mahomet.


Sir Rog. Nay, Mr. Ferg --, now you talk of such Great Men in their Age, as a
Cyrus: and a Lewis. From their Great Examples, I think it but highly
reasonable, and every ways honorable, that every Man that has the least
glowing spark of Ambition in his Veins, should, and ought to signalize himself,
by doing something that may make him Great and Famous in his Generation.


Ferg. Famous in his Generation! Is that all? Ay, Famous to Posterity. That was
always my Principle: To be a Constantine, or an Erostratus, to Found Churches,
or Destroy Churches; Raise States, or subvert them; to do something Great
either one way or the other; (no matter which) to attempt any thing, and shrink
at nothing, that may leave an Immortal Name behind me.


Sir Rog. Nay, Mr. Ferg --, there we differ* An Erostratus is a little too
much. I declare I was never that hardy Bout^^eu neither. It Is true, now you
talk of that Famous Incendiary, I confess, That fanning the Coals, or lighting
the Train, to Fire or blow up a Conventicle has been my particular Masterpiece
and Glory. I was ever a professed Nero at such a Conflagration, and Sung to my
Fidle, as heartily, as that Illustious Roman to his Harp, at such a Bonefire.
But as to the Church of England, I was ever so wholly in her Interests (as our
dea^ departed has it) so very tender there, till her Protection and
preservation was ever so near and dear to me, that I avow my self her professed
Knight Errant, her Dimock, her Champion* etc. And now to tell you the very top
of my Ambition, and height of all my hopes, and indeed the only great thing
that I designed should immortallize my Name, was one glorious Projection that I
had formed for the Church of England's service. Oh! 'twas the only grand (...)
my fifty years* Bellows had been blowing for. My whole Great Birth, my M^nerv^,
my --


Ferg. And pray, What was this glorious Projection?


Sir Rog. You may remember, how, at the first Protestant Wane and Dawn of
Popery, in my Observators, I projected an Accommodation --


Ferg. Between both Churches.


Sir Rog. Right Sir, an amicable Reconciliation between the old Roman Mother,
and the Young* English Virgin Church: For mark you me Sir, to carry on this
great work, having ^t that time a wonderful Influence over^ the C^^rgy.


Ferg. Influence! Ay, Sir Roger, thou were whole and sole Lord of their
Ascendant: An Absolute Pontifex Maximus amongst 'em; He the Servus Servorum,
and thou the Guide of Guides. But pray go on.


Sir Roger. Then, what with that Ascendance, and my own dint of Eloquence, I
had projected, as I told you, such an Accommodation, such an Eternal Foundation
of Peace, such Pillars of an Irenicum, that had not the obstinacy of the Times
obstructed so glorious a Pile, I had built a Tower that should have reached
Heaven, without the danger of one Tongue of Confusion: Brought the Lamb and the
Lion to couch together* so lovingly and harmlessly, that instead of a M^^^lin
at one end of the Town, and a (...)-Church at another, we had saved all that
trouble; so ^rusht, so quallified, so composed all Jars, till even from a Paul's
to a Pa^^r^ss, from the highest to the lowest, one Roof should have held Both,
as perfectly reconciled, as a Dancing-School and a Meeting House: Nay, with all
that sisterly Love, even to the quietness and innocence of a Switzerland
Congregation; not one Church amongst us but should have had Mass in the
Morning, and Common Prayer in the Afternoon.


Ferg. Nay, this Design was great indeed.


Sir Roger. Great! Ay, What could be greater, especially on the Church of
England's side? For what could have aggrandized the Church of England more,
than her generous Hospitallity* in Adopting, Naturalizing and Incorporating so
considerable an Addition to her Strength, Wealth and Fortunes. Whilst like one
Empire, but two Czars, our Church by this Hand-in-hand Reign, had arrived to
the height even of an Absolute Muscovite Monarchy.


Ferg. Upon my Veracity* Sir Roger, I never heard of a Design more Heroic.


Sir Rog. Ay, Mr. Ferg. had my Good Fortune been but answerable to my Good
Parts, without Vanity let me tell you, I and my Politics, had set up my Royal
Pupil James, (pardon my boldness) a second Great Alexander, and my self the
Great Aristotle.


Ferg. Ay, no doubt Sir Roger.


Sir Rog. Nay, to credit my Good Parts, I always acted upon a Good Principle. I
was ever for steering by the Chart of a good Conscience; and though I have
stood up so high for Royal Prerogative, so I always abhorred Invasion of Rights
and Property; as the whole practice of my Life, even in my own most diminitive*
Concerns and Converse with Mankind, sufficiently testify.


Ferg. So very tender Conscienced say you, in all your Concerns! Nay, there you
must pardon me. For I have heard a kind of an Outcry amongst some Authors and
Booksellers.


Sir Rog. That would pick a hole in my Scutcheon. Alas! poor snarlers. I know
their Malice. Look you, Mr. Fer --, in my Reign of Imprimatur, when I was
Sovereign Comptroller of the Press, I have made bold sometime, with a little
innocent Pyracy, borrowed an Earing or two from the Egyptian Vermin. For when
a good Copy came to my hands, I refused it a License, and writ upon the subject
my self: And all the Justice in the World* For was not my Commission Absolute*
I the Lord of the Glebe* and consequently the first Fruits my own. If that be
their feeble sting against me -- Look you Sir, at this very time am I now
translating the Volume of the Famous Jos^phus. It Is true, the Original
Proprietor of that Divine History has looked upon the Copy as an Estate and
Inheritance. Much good may do him, with his Right and Title I* (...) ^^th a
^ri^kum in Lege* such a fly dash of the ^^n* to do his Business for him, wh^^st
by an old ^^ur of a little new English put upon it, I Will trip up his heels
for it as fair and honestly, as the best fair Full in a Lincoln's Inn Rounds.

I Here a Messenger to call Sir Rog. ever to the Marshalsea, broke off the
Conference.


London, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall.


