FRIENDLY ADVICE In the SPIRIT of LOVE Unto Believing PARENTS, And their tender
OFFSPRING in Relation to their Christian Education.

By J. F. and R. S.

And ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Children obey your Parents in
the Lord, for this is right, Ephesians. 6. 1. London, Printed in the Year 1688.

A short Introductory Epistle unto Believing Parents.
THese following Lines presented to your Perusal, are not written out of any
affectation to be seen in Print or desire of becoming a Teacher or Instructor
to others, but in unfeigned Love, a real good Will to you and all whom it may
concern; and to stir up your pure minds by way of Remembrance, unto that
Christian Duty, and faithful discharge thereof, which God Almighty has laid
upon and enjoins us unto, so that we may with Joy give an Account unto Him who
is the great Lord of all, at whose will we hold and enjoy what soever we have
that is good, and must therefore give an account to Him of our Stewardship, and
receive a Reward from him accordingly; for our Gold, our Silver, and all our
Substance we receive, it is He that lends it us. And therefore we ought to be
careful that none of it be employed in any other service but in His, (and what is
with His good liking) for certainly those that have the greatest share, ought
not to wast or spend any of it, to the gratifying of the lust of the Eye, the
lust of the Flesh, or pride of Life; because these things are not of the
Father, but of the World, and therefore are not in the least to be Countenanced
or Encouraged by any of Gods Children (whom he has gathered out of the World)
either in themselves or their Children, which indeed are the Blessing of God,
as a good Wife is his Gift, and the vine from whence they Spring, and they like
Olive Plants shall sit round about the Table of him that fears the Lord and
walks in his Wales, yea, they shall inherit the earth But some that have made a
wrong use of that plenty, God has blessed them with, have gratifyed a Mind and
Spirit in their Offspring that should have been Curbed and kept under, whereby
they have increased and grown up in that which after has been a grief to their
Parents and many others, and a great hurt to their tender Children; yea, some
have been so Cockered and fondly used, that when they have grown up, they have
been ready to blame their Parents. Now this has been for want of keeping in
that pure and heavenly Wisdom which is truly profitable to direct. And
therefore my sincere desire and earnest Prayer to Almighty God is, that we all
wait upon the Lord, so that we may know him to guide us by his Counsel, and
receive Wisdom from Him, to bring up our Children in his fear, and what in us
lies not only reprove them for evil, but restrain them from it (and all things
that are of that kind and nature) and endeavor to train them up in that which
teaches to hate Pride and Arrogance (two Reigning Sins) and also every evilway,
that so they and we may be heirs of the blessing of Almighty God, and in the
end that Crowns ad, lay down our heads in Peace, and rest with Him for
evermore, so wishes, and so prays your Friend.

CHAP. I.
Dear Friends,
HAving been for some years past Exercised in the Instruction and Education of
Children, I found a stirring in my heart, and a concern came over my Spirit in
the Love of God, to wit as follows.

The Lord (whom we may now call out God) has been pleased to visit us, with
the visitation of His tender Love, and by His Holy Arm and Divine Hand has
gathered, and is gathering a Remnant out of those Ways, Customs, Fashions,
Forms, and Worships, that are in the World that lies in wickedness (which we as
well as others were once in) but now the Counsel of God in us, and unto us, is,
that we touch not, neither taste nor handle any of those things, but be separate
from them, that the Lord may receive us as His, being bought and purchased by
Him; not with Gold nor with Salver, nor any Corruptible thing, but by the
precious blood of Christ who dyed and suffered for us.

And dear Friends, as we are thus called and gathered by the Lord from the
Worlds Ways, Customs, Fashions, Languages, and whatsoever is evil; so we no
doubt ought to use our utmost endeavors to preserve out Children and
Offspring out of them, and Restrain them from them, lest they be corrupted
with them, and their minds and affections set more upon them, then that Holy
Way, Truth, and Profession that every honest Friend in Truth desires his
Children and Offspring may be Educated and trained up in; and blessed be the
Lord that there is a Remnant that have received that Holy Unction which is able
to teach them all things. And as its Teachings are kept to, learnt and followed
will, lead out of ail that which offends the Lord and grieves his People, and
is unbecoming our Holy Profession, and that Plainness and Simplicity, which
Truth now as formerly leads into, by which we and out Children have appeared
unto the World a separate People; not only from their Forms, Worships, and
Religions, but their Language, foolish Fashions, antic Dresses, superfluous
Apparel, and costly Array. And therefore dear Friends, as we have known the
Judgments of God in our selves for these things, and through Judgment have
known a being edeemed out of them; let not any of us Countenance or Encourage
any of our Children, or them we have the Government of in them. But take the
Wise Man's Counsel and Advice, and labor in the love of God to train up our
Children in the way they should walk, that they may not depart from it when
they are Old; but stand up and succeed us in a Testimony for the Lord His Way,
Truth, and the true Christian Profession, and may manifestly be the trained up
Scholars and true Disciples of Him, in whom we have believed by their taking
up their daily Cross, to all things contrary to the self denying life of a true
Christian; that the Blessing of God which is the best Postion, and makes truly
rich, may be upon them.

CHAP. II. A few words of tender Advice, and Counsel unto the Children of
believing Parents; exhorting them to Obedience according to Christ's Example,
and not to fimfy themselves, but be lowly, and to fear God.
OH! remember your Creator in the days of your Youth before the evil day come,
and be subject to your Parents, in your tender years, as Christ our Lord was
unto his according to the Flesh, even at twelve years of Age; as ye read in the
holy Scriptures: He was not Stubborn nor Willful, he was not Heady nor high
Minded, he lusted not after the Fashions and Customs of the evil World, nor
after gay Clothing, nor rich Apparel; but in all things did the Will of His
Heavenly Father that sent him. Therefore take Him for your Example, and obey
your Parents, and be subject to them in all things, that they Advise and
Counsel you for your good, here and hereafter, for what will all the finery
avail when you come to dye, and why should any be so concerned to finifie a
little Dust and Ashes or House of Clay, which may fall in a moment or twinkling
of an Eye, and neglect chat which tends to their Souls everlasting good.

Oh! therefore let me in treat you, to mind the holy fear of Almighty God,
which will preserve you out of these things, and have regard to the Holy
Witness, Light, Grace, and Spirit of God in your own hearts, which will let you
see that you should not be Heady, High Minded, Willful, Surly, or Stubborn; but
Meek, Lowly, Humble, and Submissive, and then you will be 'liker Christ: But the
Heady High Minded, Wild, Wanton, and Proud, they are like him that is the King
over all the Children of Pride, Job 41.34. And it was he that lead the
Daughters of Zion into Haughtiness, and taught them to walk with stretched
forth Necks, and Wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they went; whereby the
Lord was so displeased, as to threaten to smite with a Scab the Crown of the
Daughter of Zion, and to discover their secret parts. But as you mind and have
regard to the Light and good Spirit of God and learn of it, you will be taught
to deny these things and be preserved (as you abide in it) from saying any bad
Words, telling any idle and false Stories, or speaking any Untruths, although it
were to excuse your selves: Oh! therefore I beseech you have regard to it, do
not despise it, nor quench the motions of it; and then you will be a Comfort to
your Parents, a rejoicing to your Friends, and good Examples to other Children
with whom you converse or are among; and will cause the holy Truth to be well
spoken of, and make the Profession of it more to shine. But if you flight the
Counsel of your tender Parents, Tutors, and Friends, Remember a day of Calamity
will come, and that you must one day appear before Him that will bring every
work to Judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil; and for every idle Word you must give an Account in the day of Judgment,
as Christ said, Mat. 12.36. And if then thou art found of that Number, that
have set at naught God Counsel immediately by his Spirit in thy own heart, and
instrumentally through thy Parents, Tutors, or Friends, and would not regard
any of their Reproof, Then the Lord will mock at thy Calamity, and laugh when
thy fear comes; when Distress and Anguish comes upon thee, the Lord God
Almighty therefore incline more and more the hearts of them (that are young and
tender) unto him, and to stand in his awe and holy fear; that so you may lack
no good thing, but may daily know the Lord to lead you in His way, that you may
find Rest and Peace to your Souls Eternally, when ever it shall please the Lord
to take you hence.

CHAP. III. An Exhortation to Children, tenderly Advising them to improve their
precious time, and to avoid the reading unprofitable Books, and telling idle
Tales; as also, to read and learn the Holy Scripture according to the Examples
of Ancient Protestants.
ANd this is in my Mind, in much Love and Tenderness, by way of Counsel;
further to add to you, who are the tender Offspring of believing Parents, that
you may be careful to improve your precious time, which comes upon you with a
silent foot, and swiftly passes away. And therefore may out days here be aptly
compared to a Weavers Shuttle, and our Life to a Bubble in the Water, which
suddenly rises, and in a Moment is down and no more to be seen; so it may be
said of all Mankind, the young as well as they of riper years, they are here to
day in a Mortal State, and to morrow may launch out either into Eternal
Happiness, or everlasting Woe. And therefore let me entreat and persuade you for
your present good, and future happiness, not to spend nor squander away your
precious time, in Wildness, Vanity, or Foolish Delights; neither in the
Hearing, Telling, or Reading any idle Tales, false Stories, lying Histories, or
foolish Verses that tend not to any Godly Edifying, or informing your
understandings in that which is good; but rather to the filling your Minds with
unprofitable matter, which often occasions such like Discourse, for out of the
Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, and that commonly, which Peoples minds
are most filled with, and taken up with all, that they mostly talk of and
discourse about; let me therefore prevail with you frequently to Read the Holy
Scriptures, and learn to say some Chapters thereof without looking on the Book.
For the Waldenses who were a Religious People in their days, and great
Sufferers for their Religion, took more care to have their Children Read and
learn the Holy Scriptures, then to gratify their vain Minds, and Childish
Humors; for in the History of the Waldenses, Book. 1. c. 5. P. 29. its said as
touching Erudition, Rainerius has said, that they teach their Children, yea,
even their Daughters, the Epistles and the Gospels.

Jacobus de Riberia says, that they were so well instructed in the Scriptures,
that he has heard a plain Countryman repeat the Book of Job Word by word, and
diverse others that could perfectly repeat the whole New Testament. And indeed
it is much better to spend your time thus, and will be more comfort to your
honest Patents and rejoicing to your Friends, that heartily wish and pray for
your Welfare, then to see you play it away in Wildness and Vanity, and letting
out your minds and lustings after the foolish fashions and vain Customs of the
World, which will never procure any comfort to your tender Parents. Therefore
once more I earnestly entreat you in unfeigned love to relinquish, forsake, and
deny your selves of those things that tends to your hurt, and let not the
subtle Enemy that lies in wait to Ensnare, Captivate, and draw away your minds
from the Principal of Truth (the Light and Spirit of Christ in your hearts and
Consciences) or prevail upon you with any of his suggestions, that such an one
does so, or thus, and why may not I, and such an one has come to Meetings
long, and is esteemed an honest Friend, and he or she wares this, speaks that,
or does the other thing, and they should be our Examples, and therefore why may
not I. These often are the suggestions of Satan, to draw and allure the minds
of the young and tender from Truth in themselves, and to strengthen them in
that which many times they know they ought not to do, and believe would be
better if they did not, and by these and such like allurements of Satan, they
are sometimes drawn away to their own Souls hurt, and grief of their tender
Parents and Friends. And therefore lend not an Ear to him herein, for Satan's
design is only to draw thee into and continue thee in Sin, that thou might be
hardened against God, the reproof of his Spirit in thy heart, and the reproos
and Counsel of thy Friends and tender Parents, and you may read the fearful
portion of such, Prove. 29. 1. But if thou stand in awe of God, and abides in
his fear, thou will be preserved out of these and all evil things, and will be
taught to deny them, and wilt receive Wisdom from God, who is the fountain of
it, to order thy Affairs with discretion, and will learn by it to honor thy
Father and thy Mother according to Gods Command; to be subject to your Tutors,
respectful to your Elders, loving to your Friends and Companions, and this will
close that evil Eye Which Satan is ready to open in you, to look at this thing
in one, and that in another, and to make an ill use thereof. And therefore live
in Gods fear that preserves you out of these things and you will have Gods
blessing, obtain his Favor, feel his Presence, be servants in his House, yea,
heirs of his Kingdom, and inheritors among the Saints in Light, and receivers
of a weighty Crown of Glory, as ye live and dye in Gods fear. And therefore
this is the sum and conclusion of the whole matter, as Solomon said, fear God
and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man. So in that true
love and tenderness in which I began, I shall conclude with hearty desires,
that you all may love and embrace that good Spirit of God in your own hearts,
that inclines to love Virtue, Temperance, Meekness, Gentleness, Humility, and
the fear of God; and will if you will love and obey it bring forth in you the
fruits of his Spirit which is in all goodness; and then you will not reject this
Counsel and Advice of him who is your real and allured Friend,

John Field.

POSTSCRIPT.
ANd to show that it has been the care of reputed Heathens, as well as
Christians, that their Children might be well Educated, and gave their Advice
accordingly. Take these following Instances.

Plutarch a Heathen Schoolmaster to the Emperiour of Trajan, in his Book
concerning the Education of Children, before he proceeds to many good precepts
for the virtuous Education of Youth more grown up, Advises that even Nurses
retrain from telling Children Fables.

And Phocylides (also instanced by him) says, that one ought to teach one even
when a Child, things that are good. History Walden. Book 1. of their Doctrine,
c. 3. p. 22. We must serve our Fathers and Mothers with all out Power, never
debatinging or question with them with hard and bitter Speeches; but we must
answer them humbly, and hearken lovingly to their Reprehensions; we must
likewise honor them by Administering unto them things necessary for this Life.
For Fathers and Mothers have nourished their Children with their own Flesh
their proper substance; and Children nourish their Parents with that which is
without their flesh, being impossible they should restore to them those
benifits they have received of them. And touching the Instruction we have
received of our Parents, we must obey them in whatsoever shall tend to our
Salvation, and to a good end.

And p. 38. of the same Book, a certain learned Father says, that costly
Apparel, Superfluity in Diet, Flay, Idleness, and Sleep, fatten the Body,
nourish Luxury, weaken the Spirit, and lead the Soul into death. And therefore
they commend a spare Diet, Labor, short Sleep, and poor Garments.

Oh! that all People and Children, and especially, those that profess the Holy
Truth, would follow the good Counsel and take the wholsesome advice of these
People, who were under such a Godly care for their tender Offering. Surely, I
may say of them they would not adorn their Daughters with Gold, or put them on
Gold Chains, nor their Sons into slanting curled Periwiggs, who gave this
Christian Advise; which indeed, that Truth which Almighty God has blessed a
Remnant with the knowledge of answers unto, and will no doubt lead all them that
heartily love and saithfully follow it, into that Plainness which becomes them
that are of Jacobs (the Plain Man's seed) and preserve every such one from going
into (or practicing) those things that the unchangeable Spirit of God, in and
through the Apostle of Christ advised unto, as in 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

Dear Friends,

MY sincere desire and earnest breathing unto God has been, is, and I hope
ever shall be, that we may every one both Male and Female of all degrees, who
have received the Truth in the love of it, increase in faithful obedience unto
the same, so shall our strength in the in ward man be renewed, and our
understanding more and more divinely opened, and kept open: by which we shall
be in a fit Capacity to see and discern the deep workings of the Mystery of
Iniquity at all times, who is not wanting now in a season of outward Liberty to
use his endeavors to draw forth the mind from its inward retirements and
constant watchings in the Spirit, Light and Life, which we have in Measure
received from the Father of Lights, into a careless easeful state to whom the
woe is, and a standing idle in this day to lose our reward.

Now this I can truly say, that the Lords Arm of Power is not shortened that it
cannot save, but as we have known it revealed for our deliverance, and have in
Measure witnessed Salvation by it; so it is the same now as ever it was, ready
and able to preserve the mind, and keep it out of the snares which the Enemy
lies to catch us in.

But this Principally I have to signify, that the Enemy is not contented to
seek our hurt alone, but also he has a deep design upon our tender Children
the Offspring of our Bodies, endeavoring to corrupt them by drawing forth
their Minds after the Vanity and Folly, Customs, and Fashions that is found
without in the World that lies in Wickedness, that so he may thereby harden
their hearts, and turn them against the appearance of Truth within themselves;
that so the holy seed which God has sown, may not spring up in them to prepare
them in their tender years, as Vessels for the Lords own use, nor to know and
remember the God of their Fathers, and that they may not succeed them as true
Heirs of the blessings of the most High, nor be faithful witnesses in their
Generation, in a Holy Life and Conversation.

Of this I am deeply sensible, and have more then an Ordinary exercise for the
youth of our time, because of which I am drawn forth in Bowels of tender love,
earnestly to entreat and beseech all believing Parents to put too their help,
as the Lord shall enable (who is ready and willing as we breath to him) with
might and power to work against this Enemy, and endeavor to undermine his
wicked designs. First, in being good Examples of Virtue and Piety to our tender
Children, and shuning every appearance that tends to the contrary. And
secondly, not to be overcome with an extreme of love or fondness, because
thereby (many times, and too often) such things are overlookt and past by,
which in the very bud, ought rather to be discountenanced with reproof or
correction, as tending to the strengthening of the Enemy in his wicked designs
as above mentioned.

Oh that there were not cause for me to break forth into a Lamentation for the
sake of many poor Children, who are hurt through their Parents extreme love or
foolish fondness over them; but Oh! my Soul has and does lament over them.
Saying, if there be any Truth in this Proves, [that it is possible to kill
with kindness] I am sure (with grief do I mention it) that many tender Children
are like to be distroyed by this extreme Fondness from their fond Parents,
except it be prevented by a timely Moderation.

And sure, I am the Lord is displeased with such Parents whoever they are,
whether Rich or Poor, for he is no respecter of Persons; for tho this Proverb
shall be no more used, Jer. 31. v 29, 30. In those days they shall say no more,
the Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on Edg;
But every one shall dye for his own iniquity, every man that eats the sower
Grapes, his Teeth shall be set on Edg.

Yet where Parents through neglect of their duty of being good Examples to
their Children in a holy life and Conversation, in the fear of God to give good
Counsel, and instruct their Children in that which is good, and encouraging
them therein; warning them of evil, reproving them and correcting for the same.
I say, where Parents are thus negligent of their Duty to their tender Children,
the Enemy does prevail and bring to pass his designs, leads them down to the
Chambers of Death and Darkness, where the Woe and Misery is; the blood of such
Children will be required at their hands, Eze. 3.18. When I say unto the
Wicked, thou shall surely die, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to
warn the Wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, the same Wicked Man
shall dye in his Iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand.

But when Parents performs their Duty toward their Children, by letting their
Light shine forth before them in a Holy Life and Conversation, not sparing good
Counsel and Instruction in that which is good, warning and correcting them for
Evil; yet notwithstanding, their Children turns their back on the good Counsel,
and persist in their Iniquity, and turns not from it, they shall die therein,
and their blood shall lie at their own Doors, and their Parents shall be clear,
Eze. 3.19. Yet if thou warn the Wicked, and he turn not from his Wickedness,
not from his Wicked way, he shall dye in hit Iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy So^^*

From one that has an exercise in body and spirit, for the sake of such
Parents and Children as cause the Truth to suffer in themselves and others,
because of their undutifulness to God and each other. Richard Scoryer.
Wansworth the 15th. 7th. Month, 88.
THE END,

