HIND's RAMBLE, OR, The Description of his manner and course of life. WHEREIN
Is related the several Robberies he has committed in England, and the Escapes
he has made upon several occasions. WITH His voyage into Holland, and how he
cheated a Dutchman there of 200. l. And from thence went into Ireland, where
he did many Robberies, and was wounded by some of his own Party. WITH A
RELATION OF HIS GOING TO THE SCOTCH KING, Where he was made Scoutmaster
General, and afterward (as it is generally reported) was the only man that
conveyed the Scotch King to London, who since is shipped away for beyond Seas. A
Book full of Delight, every Story affording its particular Jest.

London, Printed for George Latham, 1651.

depiction of two armoured knights on horseback firing pistols

To the Judicious READER.
FANTACIES may take place as well as Histories, and sometimes a man may as well
print you the description of a man notable in his art, as well as notorious in
his ways: it may be well said of him, That the like is not to be seen or ever
heard of; his experience has made him an absolute Artist in his profession: He
may be likened to a place, which is called, Nonesuch; and the same may be said
of him; for all the Histories in the World cannot afford the like president; It
is a book full of delight and fit for vacant hours: Thus leaving it to the
censure of the world: I rest,

Your loving Friend G. F.

HIND'S RAMBLE, OR, The Description of his manner and course of life. WHEREIN,
Is related the several Roberies He has committed in England, and the Escapes
he has made upon several occasions.
1. How Hind first learnt his Art, under one Bishop Allen.
ALL men if they learn an Art serve some time to it, as Hind did to one Allen,
who named himself, Lord Bishop of Durham, or of some other place, as his
business lay.

This Allen was once a Tradesman in London, but trading failing, sold his stock
to set up another trade: so he bought a Coach and four Horses, and had six men
to wait on him in Livery Cloaks, with a Gentleman Usher: He habited himself in
a Ruff, a square Cap, Lawn Sleeves, and his long Gown: So riding in this State
they did many Robberies undiscovered; for when any Gentleman Rod their way,
they would leave their Cloaks in the Coach, and do a Robbery, and then put
their Booty into the Coach, and get their Livery Cloaks on their backs; if any
hue and cry came after them, they would never suspect any of the Bishops men:
so when they came to any Inn, the Bishop was honored, as much as a man of his
quality, for his Gentleman Usher stood bear all the while he was at dinner or
supper. But this did not hold long, for they were discovered by some words; but
having notice there of, they went far from the place, after they were known or
discovered: And now they plotted to get rid of their Coach, for they were
afraid that would betray them: whereupon they begun their plot; and as they rid
along the Downs, they saw a handsome old Shepherd to whom they said old man, If
you please to be merry to night with us, you shall do as we do; so the old man
or as willing to go with them: Allon told him, That he would make him L. Bishop
for that night: So they put on the Bishops habit on the Shepherd, and it did
become him very well then they instructed him how to behave himself: So they
came to the Inn, where in great pomp they supped: Supper being ended, the
Bishops servants went to have their Lord to bed: he being in bed they came
down, and told the Host, that their Lord was fallen very sick, and that he
desired a Doctor; so they enquired for a Doctor, but there was none in 7.
miles: then they forged letters that all the men were sent with spare horses to
fetch friends, some to see their Lord, and some for the Doctor: that they left
no servants to wait on the Bishop. They had also charged the shepherd not to
knock till they came to him the next day; and they caused the people of the
house not to go to their Lord till he knocked for them, and then to carry him a
Caudle: So they conveyed away their Bishops Robes, and left the Shepherds Coat
by his bedside: so these Lads bid farwell to their Shepherd and their Coach:
but about 10 of the clock in the morning the Shepherd awaked, as out of a
dream, and knocked for the people, who brought him up a Caudle; he asked where
were all his men; who answered that some were gone for a Doctor, and some for
his friends; he bid the servant go down for his Master; the servant well eying
the Shepherd, said to his Master; Sir, The Bishop has a Canvas shirt on as
black as the Devil; and there is a pair of shoes stands by the Bed, as full of
hob-nailes, as the sky is full of stars; and there lies a threedbare coat on
the bed, that is fit for nothing but to make shoo clouts; so the host went up
to see his guest, which by this time had dressed himself in his own habit; who
when he saw his host, said, Friend, I have been robbed to night of mine honor;
but they left me mine own clothes: whereat the host began to laugh; and say
unto the Shepherd: my Lord, If you please to buy you two Coach Horses, I will
lend you a Coach and Harness to carry your honor to the sheepfold: So the
Shepherd related all the story to the host; and left them his Coach for the
reckoning, and bid them adieu.

2. How Bishop Allen was afterward taken and hanged at Tiburn, and Hand escaped.
BISHOP Allen afterward was taken near London, with more of his Company, who
were all hanged at Tiburn; Hind only escaped to set up his Masters trade, and
no doubt but if he were taken, he would follow his Masters steps so far as
Tiburn. Hind being in the company, escaped by leaving his horse in the stable,
and trusting to his own heels, fled for his life; but now he walks on foot,
having neither a horse nor money to buy one, but he resolves to get both, or to
lose his head-peece.

3. How Hind Robbed a Gentleman, and furnished himself with a Horse, Money, and
Clothes.
HIND having lost his horse, whereby his trade failed, was resolved to get one,
or to follow the trade on foot, and for to color his knavery, put himself into
the habit of a Shepherd, with a pike staff of seven foot long in his hand, and
then travels toward Banbury; where in his rode he espied a Gentleman coming
down a hill leading his horse in his hand; Hind, as if he took no notice of the
Gentleman, went whistting the tune of an ordinary psalm; when the Gentleman
came to the foot of the hill, where Hind now stood whistling his Psalm; the
Gentleman inquired of him the time of the day, he answered him very civily; but
as the Gentleman was getting on his horse, his back being toward Hind, Hind
hit him such a stroke between the head and the shoulders, that he made him
measure his length on the ground; Hind presently seized on his money and cloak,
horse and sword, and left him his old coat and his pike staff, to beat on the
hoof as he had done, and money he gave him back to bear his charges: But to
this day, The Gentleman loves not the taken of a Psalm. But now Hind being well
horsed, and having money and good clothes, went to Banbury, where he was
entertained in a Troop, and quickly acquainted himself with some of his own
profession; and now he begins to rob Cum Privilegio.

Hind being in Banbury Garrison, where he had good shelter for all his knavery,
he makes a new trade: For no Carrier could pass his Roads, without paying
Tribute to his Company, or losing the best of their goods: but rather then the
Carriers would be always haunted for uncertain sums, they promise him and his
Company a certain stipend a week to let them pass: You may easily believe that
these Lads did as vigilantly watch their coming from London for their promised
money; as the Excise-men did in those days, watch the Cattle going to
Smith-Field.

But when the Parliaments Forces went against Banbury, and his Trade there
began to fail; He thought it no Robery to borrow Sir William Comptons best
horse, who was the Governor then of that Garrison, to keep up his Trade in the
Highway, seeing his Garrison failed.

4. How Hind Robbed a Gentleman in Yorkshire, and afterward came to the Inn
where he lay, to Sup with him; but did not.
A Gentleman coming from York; intended his Journey for London, by accident met
Hind; Who soon made him deliver what money he had: Hind delivers him back
twenty shillings, to bear his Charges till his Credit would furnish him again:
So the Gentleman rod on his Journey to the next Town, where he was well known
by an Innkeeper; then being alighted, desired the Host to get supper ready: so
the Gentleman went to his Chamber: In the mean time in comes Hind, and asked if
there were any Gentlemen that went to London: the Host answered, yes, there was
one Gentleman alone, and would be glad of any good Company: So Hind went up to
the Gentleman's Chamber, and saluted him: The Gentleman said, Sir, sit down, and
I will tell you how I was robbed to day; and I durst have sworn you had been
the man, but that your hair is short, and his was long; Sir, said Hind, do you
know his horse if you see him: yes, said the Gentleman, very well: To satisfy
you, said Hind, you shall see mine: So Hind went down, and fetched his Horse out
of the Stable, and asked the Gentleman if that were the Horse: He answered, I,
I, that is the Horse; Then Sir, said Hind, I cannot sup with you to night, if
you know my horse better then my self.

5 How Hind served two Bailies and a Usurer.
HInd riding through a little Town in Warwickshire, he saw a Tumult in the
street; so he rid up to them, and desired to know the occasion of the Tumult;
one told him, that an honest Innkeeper was Arrested for twenty pound, and that
the man was undon if he had not some relief speedily; So Hind asked the man if
he would give him any Security, if he should pay the Debt for him: the poor man
being over joyed for this unlookt-for news; told him, that he would make over
all that he had to him for the Security: So Hind had the Usurer and the
Bailies into the house, demanded the bond, paid the Usurer all he demanded,
giving the Bailies their Fees; and sent for a Scrivner to make over the
Innkeepers goods to him; which being done, they departed; Hind being not
unmindfull to enquire of the Usurers way he was to go; went after him; and said
to him, Friend, I lent you twenty pound, but I must have it again: The Usurer
said, You paid me so much money on a Bond: Hind said, It is no time to dispute
it now: So he took from the old Usurer his own twenty pound, and twenty pound
more, which he had got by his Usury: So Hind rod back to the Inn, and gave the
Host his Writing again, and five pounds, and told him, that he had good luck by
lending his money to honest men.

6 How Hind served a Committee-man who disguised himself for fear of Robbing.
A Committee-man having occasion to travel from Warwick toward London, for to
buy many Commodities; hearing that there was robbing in that Road; fitted
himself with an old Gray Coat, out at the Elbowes, and an old Mare; and boots
instead of Stirups, hanged at a Saddle that was not worth three pence, and a
Bridle of the same price: Now rides he merrily, thinking no Highway-man would
set on him: but Money ill got, will be ill spent: For he chanced to meet with
Hind; who asked what he was; he replied, that he was an old man going to get
relief among his friends; so Hind gave him a Piece in gold, and bid him drink
his health, and be merry at his Inn: the old Miser thinking to please Hind,
Coined two or three great oaths presently, and said, He would be drunk with
drinking his health that night: So Hind, parted from him; and the old man went
to his Inn, and set up his Mare; then he called for half a pint of Sack; and
after the first glass was down, he began to say that he escaped the greatest
danger that ever he was in; for, I met with Hind, said he; and instead of
robbing of me, he gave me a Piece in gold, and bid me drink his health; but I
will see him hanged before I will spend a penny for his sake: Hang him Rogue,
he robs all honest men; only Cavaliers, he lets them go: I Will put his gold
amongst my own: I would have given ten pound to have bin rid of him, when first
I met him; so after a short supper, he went to bed. Hind came to the Inn; and
using to lie there; they told him what the Committee-man had said of him. Hind
let the old man travel first in the morning: and about an hour after, Hind
rides after him; and when he had overtaken him; he asked the old man if he
drunk his health: I Sir, said he, I was never so drunk in my life as I was last
night; for I drunk the Kings health the Queens, the Princes, and your health
ten times over: Hind said unto him, friend, I have found you in many lies: and
now I will make you all me Rogue for something: So Hind made him untie his
greasy snapsack; where he found 50 l. in gold, and his own piece besides. So
the Committee-man to cheer up himself, resolved to borrow of the State so much
money, before he went another Journey.

7 How Hind borrowed money of a poor man, and paid it him double, at a time and
place appointed.
HInd being deceived of such prizes as he thought most sure of: had spent all
the money he had with him: so betimes in the morning he waited an opportunity
to furnish himself, as people were going to a Fair; and meeting with a poor man
going to buy a Cow at the Fair. Hind bid him stand and deliver such money as he
had; The poor man did pull out of his pocket a hankerchief, wherein was four
pound: the poor man wept to Hind, and told him it was all that he had in the
world, and that he was undone if he took it away: Hind told him he should not
lose one penny by him; but that he would double his money: and appointed to
meet him at a Village near to the place where the poor man dwelt: so Hind did
take but three pound from the poor man, and went his way; then the poor man
went to the Fair among his neighbors, who asked him the occasion of his
melancholy; he answered, That the Market was dear, therefore he would stay
till the next Fair: so he went home making no body acquainted with what had
happened to him: But when the day came that he should meet Hind, who had altered
his name to the poor man, he went and enquired for such a Gentleman at the
place appointed; who was directed by the man of the house to his Chamber: Hind
presently entertained him well, and gave him six pound to buy him two Cows; so
the poor man thankt him, and told him that if he had never paid him, he would
never have disclosed: So Hind seeing him simply honest, and true-hearted, gave
him twenty shillings more, and bid him pray for James Hind; and so sent him
away.

8 How Hind Robbed a Gentlemen in Hide Park, neatly, of one hundred pound.
HInd being well horsed, went into Hide Park to see a race; but riding by the
Coaches, spies a bag of money lying by a Gentleman, to whom Hind used some
Discourse; but a Race beginning, the Gentleman caused his Coach to stand still,
that he might judge which horse ran best: Hind's head being not idle how to get
this money; the time being now or never; rod by the Coach, and takes the bag in
his hand, and rides the way of the Park toward Tiburn: The Gentleman cries out
I am robbed, I am robbed; so some Gentlemen rid after him, but in vain; for his
horse leapt the pale into the Road, where he staid, till the Gentlemen came to
the gate, but their horses being unwilling to leap such places, were forced to
stay: Hind said, Gentlemen, I will refer it to you all, if I have not won the
wager; so he bid them farewell.

9. How Hind served a Gentleman were he was and put a trick upon him hansomly.
HInd being persued hard, after he had done a Robbery, was forced to leap his
horse over a hedge, where there was a foot-way went to a private Gentleman's
house; so he quickly left the Road, that he feared no danger; then he knocked
at the door, and desired to speak with the Master of the house; the Gentleman
came and desired his will; Sir, said Hind, I am a Gentleman strai'd one of my
way, and was persued by thieves; and so I shall desire you to give me
entertainment for this night: The Gentleman desired Hind to alight; and caused
his horse to be set up: Hind gave the Gentl. Servant 5 shillings and desired
him to be careful of the horse; the Gentleman having brought Hind into his
Parler, made him welcome: So after supper, Hind would see his horse: so the
Gentleman went with him into the Stable: Sir, said the Gentleman, I have such a
fancy to your horse, that I will give you any money for him, and another horse
to boot: Sir, said Hind, to morrow we will make a bargain: So they went to bed:
and in the morning Hind and the Gentleman were bargaining for his horse; Hind
bid the Gentleman's servant ride the horse before them: Upon on this, the
Gentleman gave Hind fifty pound and another horse worth twenty pound: So Hind
desired the Gentleman that he might show him some tricks on his horse: Hind
presently leapt on the horse, and showed him sport: So he seeing his
opportunity, leapt over a gate into a way that led to a Town; but he returned
and called the Gentleman, and gave him his fifty pound again; and said, Sir,
You have entertained me civilly, therefore I were unworthy, if I should have
carried your money with me: So giving the Gentleman a word to pass all
Highway-men of his Gang, bid him farewell.

How Hind served the County Troop of Oxford; and how he with six of his Gang,
hambstring'd their horses and sent them home on foot.
HInd having done many Robberies in Oxfordshire, many of the County Troop were
employed to take him; he having Intelligence of it, got six of his Gang to ride
with him to Woodstick; but in the way they met with 12 of the County Troop:
Hind and his Lads being used to the sport; rid up to them, and bid them deliver
such money as they had, or they were all dead men: they presently yielded upon
Quarter; being but Tongue Soldiers: and only set on horseback to fetch
Contribution: So Hind and his Company hambstringed all their horses; and bid
them say to their Committee, that they met with Hind; who desired them to send
better horses, and stouter men, or they will not take Hind: So the Troops went
on foot home to carry their news.

How he neatly robbed a Parson of forty pound in gold, which he had hid in the
Collar of his Doublet, after he was robbed of all his silver, the day before.
A Parson riding from Coventrey toward London; by some petty Thieves was
Robbed of his silver: Hind overtook the Parson, and asked him which way he rid:
The Parson told him that he did intend for London; Sir, said the Parson, I was
robbed of all my silver to day; and so was I, said Hind, but I hid my gold in my
boots: Nay, I believe, that mine is as safe, said the Parson; for I have
quilted it in the Collar of my doublet: Hind was not a little glad, when he
heard where his money lay: so being near their Inn, they supt together, and
went to bed; in the morning the Parson calls Hind up; and told him that he
would be glad of his Company: so they rid together: Hind asked the Parson, If
he could guess what Trade he was,: no said the Parson; then said Hind, I am a
Cutter; for I must cut the Collar of your dublet off, before I shall come to
your money: Having so done, he left the Parson forty pound lighter then he
found him.

13. Hind 's voyage into Holland, and his return: and how he cheated a
Dutchman of 200. pounds.
HIND having done so many Robberies he was constrained to leave England and to
go for Holland; he being among Merchants there, desired them to give him a bill
of Exchange for two hundred pound, one of the Merchants appointed him to come
to a Tavern, where he would receive the money and give him a letter of advice,
and a bill of Exchange: So Hind paid the Merchant 200. pounds, and the Merchant
gave him a bill of Exchange and a letter of advice to a Merchant in London to
pay the money upon sight: so Hind plied Haunce with wine till he made him take
a nap; and then he took his money from him, and left him to pay the reckoning,
and shipped himself that night for England, where he received 200. pounds upon
sight of his bill. Thus you see Hind having no priveledge to Rob in Holland,
found a trick to cheat the Duchman.

14. How Hind Robbed a Gentleman of 30. pounds, that was desirous to give 20.
pounds to see him.
HIND overtook a Gentleman as he rid on the Road, and they fell in discourse;
so the Gentleman was saying, That he would give 20. pounds to see Hind; but as
they were riding the Gentleman fancied Hind's Horse: Sir, said the Gentleman,
What money shall I give you to change horses with me; 40. pound said Hind, I
will give you 30. in gold said the Gentleman, so Hind, said, Sir, ride him; so
the Gentleman gave him 30. pounds in gold and his horse, but as they rid along
there was a ditch; Sir, said Hind, leap him over this Ditch; I cannot said the
Gentleman, Hind desired the Gentleman to alight, so he got on his own horse,
and leapt over the Ditch; and when he was on the otherside, he said, Sir, You
would give 20. pound to see Hind, now you have seen him: but the other 10.
pound was for riding my horse; so now I think you have seen enough of him for
one time: So bid him farewell.

15. Hind 's voyage into Ireland. and how he robbed Castlehaven of 1500.
pounds, and afterward delivered it to Ormond, who gave him 500. pounds to
share among his Companions.
HIND being desirous to see Ireland when Ormond and Inchequeen were there; went
over: where he did many robberies; but chiefly this is specified of him:
Ormond, Inchequeeen, Castlehaven, Clanrickard, and other great persons of their
party, were all at play at dice for great sums of money; it was Ormonds and
Inchequeens fortune to lose 1500. to Castlehaven, who ever being greedy of
money: thought it not safe till he had sent it to a Castle four miles from the
place where he won it: Hind being by when the money was won and lost; got some
Lads together, and waited the coming of the money which was carried on horses
in bags; Hind met with Castlehaven's servants and took their charge from them,
and sent them away; so Hind with his Companions carried the money to Ormond;
who gave him 500. pound to share among his Companions; but Ormond could not
forbear, but told Castlehaven, that he knew who robbed him; Castlehaven was
very desirous to know who it was; Ormond told him that upon his reputation he
would show him the men; if he would engage upon his reputation that he would
not prosecute them; having made their engagement to each other, Ormond sent for
Hind and his gang to come to him, who presently came and presented themselves
before Ormond; who called them severally and gave them 20. shilings a piece
privately, but to Hind he gave 5. pounds, so they departed: when they were
gone, Ormond said to Castlehaven, Sir, how like you these men, these were the
men that had your money; said Castlehaven, They were stout men, and by their
looks my money will not last long with them, Ormond said, Sir, they have left
you 500. pound in my hand; so he paid him the money, and got 500. pounds
himself: so all parties were pleased.

16. How Hind was wounded in Ireland by some of his own party.
HIND being at his old trade had taken a booty; but some of his own Company was
discontented, because they had not Equal shares: But when thieves fall out, it is
no small fray ends the contreversie: for Hind was wounded in the left hand,
that he has not the use of it; it would have been better for many an honest
man, that he had been born without arms: for he has done as many robberies as
ever was done by any man, and to escape Justice as he has done. After this
fray he came for England.

17. How Hind handsomely escaped from Country men, when they had beset him
whilst he was at dinner in an Inn.
HIND was in an Inn at dinner, and was discovered by a servant of the house to
some neighbors that he was there near; so there was a tumult gathered about
the house; when Hind understood their intention he came down stairs; and said
to the Country men; Gentlemen have a care for Hind stands with his pistol
cockt, and his sword drawn; so the people retired to the street door; in the
mean time he went to the stable and took his horse and went out at the Inn
gate, and said to the common people, Who do you stay for; said they, We stay to
take Hind: said Hind, If you stay there till he be taken, you may stay till
Doomsday in the afternoon: and so rode his way.

18. How Hind Robbed a Captain of a Troop of Horse.
HIND riding somewhat hard, overtook a Captain which was riding to his Troop:
who desired Hind to bear him company to his Quarters; so as they rid, the
Captain had a great fancy to buy Hind's Mare of him; and to ease his mind,
said, Sir, If you will sell your Mare, I will give you any money for her, and a
good horse to boot: Hind being not stupid, said, Sir, If you will give me sixty
pound, and the horse you ride on, you shall have my Mare; she is the fleetest
Mare in England: Sir, said the Captain, That is too much for her; but rather
then I will leave her, you shall have my horse and fifty pound: So they agreed
to ride each others horse a little way; but the Captain overtaking his Troop,
caused them to stand till he came back; so he rod on Hinds Mare from the place
where the Troop staid, about a quarter of a mile; and only Hind to bear him
company: so Hind alighted and gave the Captain his horse, and received his Mare
again; then said Hind, let me see what money you will give me to boot, Sir for
exchange: The Captain willing to have his Mare, pulled out of his Pocket a
Purse, wherein was one hundred and threescore pounds in good Gold: Hind seeing
this; thought that delays would breed dangers: and to prevent it, drew a
private Pistol, and set it to the Captains breast, and caused him to deliver his
money: so Hind having his gold; told him he would keep him company a little
way; but it proved a little way indeed; for the next cross way, Hind bid him
adeu: so the Captain went alone to his Troop, which might have had a Guard; but
now he rides more guarded then regarded: For it is with him, as with the old
Proverb; When the Steed is stolen, shut the Stabledvor.

How Hind escaped taking at Oxford, coming thither in the Disguise of a
Scholars Gown.
HInd having conversation with a Scholar of Maudlen College in Oxford: leaving
his horse half a mile out of the Town, went to see his friend; and put on a
Gown like a Scholar. And now he walks to Oxford, where he meets a Country
fellow, who for all his disguise knew him, and went and told the Guard that
there was Hind; the Soldiers presently seized on him, and began to pull him:
Gentlemen, said he, I am very like the man you speak of; but I am a Scollar
here: The Soldiers seeing his hair short, and in so civil an habit, did
forbear to press on him too much: Hind, when he had liberty, said, Gentlemen, I
have many friends in Town, and you would do me much discredit: here is twenty
shillings for you to drink, and let no people follow me; and so he went into a
house to drink, having only two Soldiers to attend him: where he feigned
himself very hungry: and gave the Soldiers good drink and good meat, and twenty
shillings apiece; but he making an excuse to untruss a point, left his Gown on
the Table; but he staid not long, but leapt over a pale, and went the back-way
out of the Town, and left his Gown and the Soldiers to pay a saucie Reckoning.

THere was a general Report that James Hind was Scout Master-Generall to the
Scotch King: But this was uncertain; for many Fables were raised of him: some
beyond his deserts; and some below his Spirit. There were many flying speeches,
that Hind should be the man who should convey away the Scotch King from the
fight at Worcester; and that he should bring him to London, where he went for
Holland: but if this were true, he has done things not to be parallelled; but
if not true, he has the name of it. All that can be said of him that was good,
is, That he was charitable to the poor; and was a man that never murdered any
on the Road; and always gave men a jest for their money: Therefore of the
Knaves, the honestest of the Pack.

HIND was a man but of mean stature; his Carriage before people was civil; his
Countenance smiling, good Language; civilly Clothed; no great Spender or
Ranter in Taverns. But these were only Cloaks to deceive honest men of their
money.

Many of his actions savoured of Gallantry: Most of Wit; but least of Honesty.

FINIS.
The Contents.
Page 1. 1. How Hind first learnt his Art, under one Bishop Allen, Page 12. 2.
How Bishop Allen was afterward taken and hanged at Tiburn, and Hind escaped.
Page 13. 3. How Hind Robbed a Gentleman, and furnished himself with a Horse,
Money, and Clothes. Page 16. 4. How Hind Robbed a Gentleman in Yorkshire; and
afterward came to the Inn where he lay, to Sup with him; but did not. Page 16.
5. How Hind served two Balyiffs and an Usurer. Page 18. 6. How Hind served a
Committee-man who dsguised himself for fear of Robbing. Page 21. 7. How Hind
borrowed money of a poor man, and paid him double, at the time and place
appointed. Page 23. 8. How Hind Robbed a Gentleman in Hide- Park, neatly, of
one hundred pound. Page 24. 9. How Hind served a Gentleman where he was, and
put a jest upon him handsomely. Page 27. 10. How Hind served the County Troop of
Oxford; and how he with six of his Gang, hambstring'd their horses and sent
them home on foot. Page 28. 11. How he neatly robbed a Parson of forty pound in
gold, which he had hid in the Collar of his Doublet, after he was robbed of his
silver the day before. Page 29. 12. Hind 's voyage into Holland; and his
return: and how he cheated a Dutchman of 200. pounds. Page 31. 13. How Hind
robbed a Gentleman of 30. pound, that was desirous to give 20. pounds to see
him. Page 32. 14. Hind 's voyage into Ireland; and how he robbed Castlehaven of
1500. pounds, and afterward delivered it to Ormond, who gave him 500. pounds
to share among his Campanions. Page 34. 14. How Hind was wounded in Ireland by
some of his own Party. Page 35. 15. How Hind handsomely escaped Country men,
when they had beset him whilst he was at dinner in an Inn. Page 37. 18. How
Hind Robbed a Captain of a Troop of Horse. Page 38. 19. How Hind escaped taking
at Oxford, coming there in the Disguise of a Scholars Gown. Page 41. 20. A
Relation of his conducting the King of Scots from Worcester to London. Page 42.
21. A Description of Hind.
FINIS.

