A DIALOGUE BETWEEN ^^r Roger -- and Mr. Rob. Ferg -- In NEWGATE, Relating to
the PLOT.
^^r Rog. THe worthy Mr. Ferg --


(...). Ferg. The Reverend Sir Roger.


Sir Rog. Oh Sir, this is a smile of Fortune indeed, when in this ^^lancholly
Region of Abdication, I am permitted, thanks to a ^^d Jailer, the conversation
of the celebrated Mr. Ferg --, ^^ose Person though I never had the Honor to be
acquainted ^^th, yet his Name and Merits have been my particular Familia^^^y.


(...) Ferg. Yes Sir, I understand my Name and Merits have been ^ur particular
Intimacy; you have been both their Herald and ^^storian, and have Blazoned
them in Capital BLACKS in many ^ir Observator.


Sir Rog. Really Sir, you do me a great deal of Right; I have ^^ver been
sparing of Black and White: The flourishes of my ^ill have been profusely
generous. I never saw any shining nature, or Mosaic face, from Great Nou's
Nose, to Little Titus (...) Chin, but I have played the kind Lely. A beautiful
Pen should ^ver want Drapery, where my Pensil could furnish it.


Ferg. It Is worthily said of you. You speak like a plain ^aler.


Sir Roger. But, Mr. Ferguson, I have had a long desire of kissing your Hand by
the way of Congratulation, and welcom^ to our side. From a Saul to a Paul, a
Persecutor to a Devote as there is joy even in Heaven at a sinners conversion,
give m^ leave to express no common Transport, in gaining so considerable a
Patron to our glorious though at present, drooping Cause


Ferg. Ay, Sir Roger, I am a sort of a Come-over, to that drooping Cause, as
you call it, Ecce signum, these Bonds.


Sir Roger, Ay, that is our common misfortune. But, Mr. Ferg -- I hope the great
Truths that I have so long Preached, published and recorded, amongst the many
Eyes they have opened, have ha^ some illumination upon Mr. Ferg --; for I
should be proud of being any ways instrumental to so eminent Conversion.


Ferg. Nay, Sir Roger, not to boast any great operation upon me for I am a mere
Volunteer, and my whole Illumination is purely my own, nevertheless I must give
thee this immortal Applause That the Protestant Zealots that have had any hand
in this Plo^ or been well-wishers toward it, are most, if not all, thy
Diciples; and all that die in it, are no better than thy Martyrs.


Sir Roger, Good Heaven forbid! My Martyrs! What, draw innocent Blood upon my
head: Lord have mercy on me. I hop^ you are not in earnest.


Ferg. Nay, It Is too true for a Jest. I say nothing but what can prove.


Sir Rog. How prove Sir! I hope you do not set up for an Evidence.


Ferg. No, Sir Roger, as I am a bonny Scot, I am more a Gentleman than to make
a Peather; not but my natural, personal tenderness would go far, to tempt my
mortal Frailty that way: How ever there is no danger of me in that case, for had
I an inclination toward it, I am afraid the World wants faith, and a Ferg --
Oracles would find but few Believers: And therefore pray Si^ Roger, dispell
that bodily fear: All I have to say is only Intenes.


Sir Roger. Nay, then you have dispelled my fear, and there ^re pray go on with
this bloody Charge against me, for I dare and any Arraignment, where there is
neither the face of Judge or Jury, Mr. Ferg --.


Ferg. Say you so? Then pray tell me what are all our Jacobite ^ools, but
Pupils and Proselites to those two Pillars of thy Church, ^re Divino and
Passive Obedience.


Sir Roger. And what have you to object against those two ^illars?


Ferg. Nay, no great matter tbut only that a very weak Samp^^n may totter them:
For, in short, what is thy Divine Right ^^om above, and our Non-Resistances
below, and all thy Long-^inded Arguments upon that Subject, any more that so
many ^^gh flown Enthusiasms, to help up the Golden Image of an Arbi^^ary
Nebuchadnezar, whilst that Fidle of thine, thy Observa^^rs have been the
Psaltreys, and Sackbuts to tune us to fall down ^^d worship. A King, at this
rate, by thy Assertion, provided his ^^rect Succession, be unquestionable, in
nothing else, though ^ver so indirect, can be questionable: For he may Be what
he ^^se, and Do what he pleases Set up what he please, and pull ^own what he
please, swear what we and our Laws please, and ^^form what he and his no Law
please; Run away from his Peo^^e when he pleases, and Return when and how he
please: In fine, ^^at a Right Line sanctifies all Wrong, That the True Blood in
(...) Veins, Enlitles him to the whole Blood in our Veins: And ^^at if he
please to take it, we must please to give it him, unless ^^r Tears or Prayers
can shield off the Blow; for Sir Rodger is leas'd to allow no other Edge-Tool,
or Armor, Offensive or ^efensive; for our Protection.


Sir Rog. Lord Sir, I am all amazement: Can you talk at this ^^ild rate, and be
one of us?


^erg, One of You! Ay, never the worse for talking, old Boy. ^is a Sign I am
the more ingenious Friend to your Cause, when (...) list under your Banner, ex
mero motu, frankly and generously: Not blindly drawn into a party by Cob-web
Arugments, the Gin to catch Wood-cocks; Men of Sense are above it.


Sir Rog. But sure you don't think that the Right of our Great Master, his
Divine Right of Royal Inheritance in his Claim to Crowns a Triffle to be thus
jested with?


Ferg. Jest Sir! All Jest. There neither is, nor ever was an^ such Divine Right
in the World.


Sir Rog. How! No Divine Right.


Ferg. Right is so far from any Claim Divine, that it was alway^ the Creation of
Power, and Sanction of the Community. If ^ Lineal Chain of Succession be all
thy Foundation; Prithee, i^ what part of the World will thou find i^? How many
time^ since the Conquest in 27 Reigns, has that Succession been broken, (and if
once broken, it is never truly rejoined again:) For instance, between the Houses
of York and Lancashire, these quo^dam hot, and sometimes bloody Disputants of
Soveraignity, how have Kings been deposed? What Changes made? and yet the
present Allegiance never questioned nor disputed. What Divine Right had Harry
the 7th, when the World will tell you his bes^ Title, lay in his Queen, and yet
we never read that his People either murmured, or quarreled his Recognition to
the Throne by Act of Parliament, out of any Grievance, that the Duke o^
Richmond was their Crowned-head, and their Crowned heire^ but a Subject: Nor,
as I ever heard, did his Son Harry the 8th, his Successor, upon the death of
his Mother, claim possession before his Father's decease, by any Pretension of
better Royal Blood in his own, than his Father had in his Veins.


Sir Roger, But certainly the Divine Right of Monarchs --


Ferg. Is a mere sophistry, The Juggle of Priestcraft, and pre^ension of
Superstition. So far from any thing of Divine in the case, that God Almighty
himself Abdicated (or very little better) the very first King even of his own
making; laid Misgovernment to his charge, and Anointed his Successor even
before his death, and that too in the person of his darling David, the Man
after his own heart; so far from a Son, or Right Heir of (...) that he was no
Kin to the family; so little was Royal Suc^^^sion the Care of Heaven, or ought
to be the Quarrel of ^^n.


Sir Roger, Truly, Mr. Ferg --, you talk strange bug words, (...) what ever
your own private Opinion is, I hope you do not ^^ach those Tenants amongst your
Jacobite friends.


Ferg. Quite contrary, Sir Roger, for where popelus vult ducipi ^^piatur. The
Wise know better. Shall we be worse than the Race of (...), uncover our own
nakedness? No, Sir Roger, not all Evan^^^a veritias, but some pia fraus.
There Is stratagem to be used in church Militant, as well as a Camp Militant,
not all downright ^^ngth of Reason in one, nor length of Sword in the other:
(...) Example, pray who were greater Assertors of that jus Divi^^ Doctrine,
than our two last dying Friends, and as they had ^^d so strenuous in it, did
not the wise managers of their death, ^^se sweetness of Mortality; the 3.
Tyburn Absolvers, very prud^^ly take care that they should dye in it
strenuously too. Ay, Roger, we must now be those false Traitors to our Cause,
as bew ray our own Nest.


Sir Rog. Verily, Mr. Ferg --, you discourse the Politics ^ur Cause extremely
well. But to satisfy one Curiosity, pray ^^me quit this subject, and without
offense be so bold as to ask ^ one single Question.


Ferg. A double one, and welcome, Sir.


Sir Rog. Considering then the Character the World gives of (...), your
Fluctuating Principles, and uneasiness in all Govern^^^ts, how comes it that
those worthy Gentlemen, concerned in (...) glorious, tho dangerous Enterprise,
durst lodge so great and im^^ant a Trust with such volatile Mercury, as Mr.
Ferg -- 's?


Ferg. My Character, say you! Why? it is the only thing that ^^mmended me to
their Confidence. For pray, to compare (...) between us; you are Zealots and
Partisans in a Conspiracy ^^^sooth) out of a principle of Right and Justice.
But I am animated by a Sprightlier Fire; am for Mutiny and Mischi^^ right or
wrong. You act by dictates of Conscience and Honor but I have been slighted
and disobliged by the present Gove^^ment, and my Motives against it are Spite
and Revenge: A Revenge never weighs nor disputes, when on the contrary, H^nour
may be tender and scrupulous: Besides, yours is but t^ Love, but mine the Lust
of Rebellion: and Love may sometim^ cool, when Lust always burns.


Sir Rog, In troth, Mr. Ferg --, this Argument savours a lit^^ too much of the
Libertine. But you are a glorious Don John a^ I am satisfied the worthy
Gentlemen could not have made a no^ler Choice, than such a Friend and Champion,
as Mr. Ferg --.


Ferg. Nay Sir, since you touch me in that sensible part, I m^ tell you
farther, That I am always the Almanzor of a Conspir^cy, Almanzor-like, I know
neither one side nor to'ther, any longer than I am pushing in it: But then like
an Almanzor too, (...) Man pushes so heartily and so home as I do. And for
distinct^ons of which King, or what King, in short, I run amuck at (...) Kings;
and indeed at all Religions too: For, between Frien^ my King, my Country, my
Religion, my Heaven, are all c^^tured in my self


Sir Rog. Really Mr. Ferg --, you here give me so extrao^dinary, and withal so
ingenious a Declaration, that I must a^knowledge you a person truly worthy
Admiration, though not a^together Imitation. For though you are an absolute
Original, a^ that no mean one, Yet, I confess, it is such a one as I durst n^
Copy. My tenderer Morals are a little more nice and sqweamis^ however to give
you your due renown; I heartily wish that a^^ the Hands and Hearts, engaged in
this Pious and honest Confed^racy, had been all of your Nerve and Mould. For
then, we might have hoped to have had an answerable success to the greatness
(...) the undertaking, and Resolution of the Undertakers, and not (...) have
had it thus poorly miscarry, by so many Sieves and Spung^ the Leaky false
Brothers, whose Cowardly Revolts and Apost^cy ^as so weakly and basely
betrayed, it to our whole Causes ut^^^ Confusion and Ruin. For truly, Sir,
though I myself can^^^ come up to your Heights, however I must do you this
Right, ^wn you one of the most qualified Instruments, to embark in (...) such
Religious and Righteous bold Cause. For indeed, it is ^^y my Maxim, That
provided the Dagger be but consecrated, no ^^r whether the hand be or no.


Ferg. There you say Right, Sir Roger; For we have holy Writ ^^ur side in that
point. For we do not read that Tyrus the Great, (...) Heathen and Infidel, is
called the Servant of God. viz. (...) the great ends for which God had raised
him. And with the (...) parity of Reason, our Grand Patron Lewis, is the most
^^^^^tian Servant of Jesus, though the most Faithful Sworn Bro^ of Mahomet.


(...) Rog. Nay, Mr. Ferg --, now you talk of such Great (...) in their Age, as
a Cyrus and a Lewis. From their great Ex^^^es, I think it but highly
reasonable, and every ways honour^^^^ that every Man that has the least glowing
spark of Ambiti^^ this (...)Veins, should, and ought to signalize himself, by
doing thing that may make him Great and Famous in his Genera^^^^


^^rg. Famous in his Generation! Is that all? Ay, Famous to ^^rity. That was
always my Principle: To be a Constantine, (...) Erostratus, to Found Churches,
or to Destroy Churches; (...) States, or subvert them; to do something Great
either one (...) or the other; (no matter which:) to attempt any thing, ^^rink at
nothing, that may leave an Immortal Name behind (...)


(...) Rog. Nay, Mr. Ferg --, there we differ. An Erostratus ^^tle too much. I
declare I was never that hardy Boutefeu ^^er. It Is true, now you talk of that
Famous Incendiary, I ^^ss, That fanning the Coals, or lighting the Train, to
Fire ^^w up a Conventicle has been my particular Masterpiece and (...). I was
ever a professed Nero at such a Conflagration, and Sung to my Fidle, as heartily,
as that Illustrious Roman to (...) Harp, at such a Bonefire. But as to the
Church of England, I (...) ever so wholly in her Interests (as our dear
departed has it) (...) very tender there, till her protection and preservation
was (...) so near and dear to me, that I avow my self her professed Kni^ Errant,
her Dimock, her Champion etc. And now to tell (...) the very top of my
Ambition, and height of all my hopes, and (...) deed the only great thing that
I designed should immortalize (...) Name, was one glorious Projection that I
had formed for Church of England's service. Oh! 'twas the only grand E^ my
fifty years Bellows had been blowing for. My whole G^ Birth, my Minerva, my --


Ferg. And pray, What was this glorious Projection?


Sir Rog. You may remember, how, at the first Protestant W^ and Dawn of Popery,
in my Observators, I projected an Acc^modation --


Ferg. Between both Churches.


Sir Rog. Right Sir, an amicable Reconciliation between (...) old Roman Mother,
and the Young English Virgin Church: (...) mark you me Sir, to carry on this
great work, having at (...) time a wonderful Influence over the Clergy.


Ferg. Influence! Ay, Sir Roger, thou were whole and sole (...) of their
Ascendant: An Absolute Pontifex Maximus amongst (...) He the Servus Servorum,
and thou the Guide of Guides. But go on.


Sir Roger. Then, what with that Ascendance, and my own (...) of Eloquence, I
had projected, as I told you, such an Accom^dation, such an Eternal Foundation
of Peace, such Pillars (...) Irenicum, that had not the obstinacy of the Times
obstruct ^^ glorious a Pile, I had built a Tower that should have reached ^ven,
without the danger of one Tongue of Confusion: Bro^ the Lamb and Lion to couch
together, so lovingly and har^ly, that instead of a Maudlin at one end of the
Town, and a C^ Church at another, we had saved all that trouble; so hushed, so
(...) (...) so composed all Jars, till even from a Paul's to a Pancrass, from
^ighest to the lowest, one Roof should have hold Both, as ^^ftly reconciled, as
a Dancing School and a Meeting House: (...) with all that sisterly Love, even
to the quietness and inno^ of a Switzerland Congregation: not one Church
amongst (...) should have had Mass in the Morning, and Common Pray^ the
Afternoon.


^^rg. Nay, this Design was great indeed.


(...) Roger. Great! Ay, What could be greater, especially on (...) Church of
England's side? For what could have aggrandiz^ Church of England more, than her
generous Hospitality, ^dopting, Naturalizing and Incorporating so considerable
an ^^tion to her Strength, Wealth and Fortunes. Whilst like Empire, but two
Czars, our Church by this Hand-in-hand (...), had arrived to the height even of
an Absolute Muscovite ^^^arochy.


^^rg. Upon my Veracity, Sir Roger, I never heard of a De^ more Heroic.


(...) Rog. Ay, Mr. Ferg, had my Good Fortune been but answer^ to my Good
Parts, without Vanity let me tell you, I, and ^oliticks, had set up my Royal
Pupil James, (pardon my ^ness) a second Great Alexander, and my self the Great
A^.


^^rg. Ay, no doubt Sir Roger.


(...) Rog. Nay, to credit my Good Parts, I always acted upon ^^od Principle, I
was ever for steering by the Chart of a Good ^^^^cience, and though I have
stood up so high for Royal Pre^^ive, So I always abhorred Invasion of Rights
and Property as ^hole practice of my Life, even in my own most diminitive
^^^erns and Converse with Mankind, sufficiently testify.


^^rg. So very tender Conscienced say you, in all your Concerns! (...) there
you must pardon me. For I have heard a kind of an ^^ry amongst some Authors and
Booksellers.


(...) Rog. That would pick a hole in my Scutchion. Alas! poor snarlers, I know
their Malice. Look you, Mr. Fer --, in (...) Reign of Imprimatur, when I was
Sovereign Comptroller of t^^ Press, I have made bold sometimes, with a little
innocent Pyra^ borrowed an Earing or two from the Egyptian Vermin. For wh^^ a
good Copy came to my hands, I refused it a License, and writ upon the subject
my self: And all the Justice in the World. F^ was not my Commission Absolute, I
the Lord of the Glebe; a^ consequently the first Fruits my own. If that be
their feel ^^sting against me -- Look you Sir, at this very time am I now
tra^^lating the Volume of the Famous Josephus. It Is true, the Orig^nal
Proprietor of that Divine History has looked upon the Co^ as an Estate and
Inheritance. Much good may it do him, with (...) Right and Title. I Will find him
a trickum in Lege, such a sly da^ of the Pen, to do his Business for him,
whilst by an old slur (...) a little new English put upon it, I Will trip up his
heels for it as fa^ and honestly, as the best fair Fall in a Lincoln's Inn Rounds.

[Here a Messenger to call Sir Rog. over to the Marshalsea, bro^ off the
Conference.


Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andre^ Anderson, Printer
to His most Excellent Majesty, 1696


