The Fifth Monarchy, OR KINGDOM OF CHRIST, In opposition to the BEAST'S,
Asserted, By the Solemn League and Covenant, several learned Divines, the late
General and Army, (viz.) in their Declaration at Muslebrough, August 1650.
wherein the Old Cause is Stated, Appeals made, the Scottish blood spilt, and the
Banners yet in Westminster Hall witnessing the great decision then given on
Christ's side. Also, by a Letter from the Officers of the Army in England, to
their Brethren in Ireland, the 11 of May, 1653. justifying on Christ's account,
the Dissolution of the Parliament; and consonant thereunto, the Generals Speech
to those that succeeded in the Government, the fourth of July following. With a
short Application, and some brief Proposals grounded on Scripture, in order to
a lasting Settlement in this hour of distraction, the Foundations being out of
course.

Luke 17.32. Remember Lots Wife.

Zach. 12.23. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all people;
and in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all
that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of
the earth be gathered together against it.

LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman. 1659.

PREFACE.
IT being manifest, that very many formerly engaged in the work of God, with
their lives in their hands, in much appearing zeal and self-denial, have (as
their own expression is) warped aside, soon forgetting his works, with their
vows and promises in the day of distress, and falling in love with this worlds
glory, the profitable pleasant things thereof, have some of them in the last
past years set themselves in opposition to such as plead for the prosecution of
the Lords work, and full following of him therein, sometime loading them with
reproaches of discontented, giddy, fanatic, Munster-spirited people; It may
not be unseasonable, when the least ground of hope is given that they are not
wholly fallen under the Lords displeasure, so as no more to be owned in his
work, in sincere and unfeigned love to present to their view (if the Lord
please to improve and bless it for their further recovery) what was held forth
formerly by the Parliament and Army, and some who in those days were esteemed
Seers; consented unto also in solemn Engagements by the dispersed throughout
the Land, lovers of God, his Ways and People, in asserting The Cause then
contended for unto blood, and which still remains as an Obligation unto others
to be pressing after.

Englands Engagement by all sorts in the Solemn League and Covenant.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, of the Kingdom of England, Scotland and
Ireland;

Having before our eyes the Glory of God, and the Advancement of the Kingdom of
JESUS CHRIST,

Each of us for himself, with our hands lifted up-to the most high God, do
swear that we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of
God, in our several places and callings, endeavor,

The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and
the Example of the best Reformed Churches: and that we shall in like manner,
without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that
is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours and
Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism and Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound
Doctrine and the Power of Godliness: lest we partake in other men's sins, and
thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues; and that the Lord may be one,
and his Name one, in the three Kingdoms, etc.

And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at the
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: most humbly
beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our designs and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and
safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning
under or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same or
like Association or Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the
KINGDOM OF JESUS CHRIST, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms
and Commonwealths.

And consonant hereunto, the Army in their Declaration of Muslebrough, tell the
Scots, We did many of us rejoice at the Covenant, because we found in it
strains toward these ends, viz. the destruction of Antichrist, the advancement
of the KINGDOM OF JESUS CHRIST, the Deliverance and Reformation of his Church
in the establishment of his ordinances amongst us according to his Word, and
the just civil Liberties of English men; although some being more enlightened,
did apprehend it to be so mixed with worldly interest, that they justly seared
the INTEREST OF JESUS CHIST would be but only pretended to, and the interest
of this world, and of Antichrist himself, carried on in a vizard, as we have
since had abundance experience of. And let us in the presence of the Lord
further assure you, that we have already examined our Conscience as before the
Lord, and have a clear assurance in our hearts, that he will countenance us in
this action, and that we do not break any Covenant which we have sworn before
God, Angels and Men; but would be content (should we not thereby idolize the
Covenant) to march to any Engagement with you, if called thereunto by the Lord,
with the Covenant on the tops of our Pikes: and let the Lord judge who has
observed the ends of the Covenant best, we or you.

In Mr. Burrough's Sermon before the House at the public Thanksgiving, Sept 7.
1641. for the peace concluded betwixt England and Scotland, he has this
passage:

Page 44.
God in this latter age is about to raise himself a glorious Name in the world,
to set up his King upon his holy Hill, to make Jerusalem the praise of the
whole earth.

This that has been already done, (viz. by the Scots and Parliaments
Conjunction against King and Bishops) is a preparation for, a forerunner of,
and a furtherance to, this great and glorious work of God: and blessed are
those men whom God shall please to make instrumental herein.

The greatest-blow that ever was given to the Antichristian Government, is that
which now it has had. Babylon is fallen, is fallen; so fallen, as it shall
never rise again in power. We hear a noise not only from many waters, but from
the thunder, saying, Hallelujah, the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, Rev. 19.6.
The voice from the many waters, was from the people; but that was despised,
contemned: but the voice from the thunder, is from those in places of dignity
and power; and this voice is terrible to the Adversary.

Mr. Thomas Goodwin in his Sermons many years since at Antholins, upon Ephe.
1.21,22. called, The world to come.

Page 28, 29.
This Kingdom of Christ shall break in pieces and consume all other Kingdoms;
this will eat out all the Monarchies and glory of the world.

And not only destroy Heathenism and Judaism, but will not cease till he has
thrown down every rag, all that dross and defilement that Antichrist and Popery
brought into the world: which dispensation we are now under; we are working up
still to a purer world, it is still this new world working up to its
perfection, and Jesus Christ will never rest till he has not only thrown out
all the dross of this world both of Doctrine and Worship, which conformity to
the world ha^h brought in; but for a further degree of this work, Jesus Christ
will not rest till he has brought in the generality of men in the world to be
subject to himself. The world (according to Scripture) consists of Jews and
Gentiles; and how bitterly does the Apostle complain in his time of Gods
outting off the Jews, the generality of the Nation being cast off? and for the
Gentiles, says he, Who has believed our report? There was a very few of them
in comparison, that did come in to Christ; but there will come a time when this
new world shall have a further perfection, when the generality of mankind, Jew
and Gentile, shall come in to Christ. The world was made for him, and he shall
have it before he has done. Romans 11.26. All Israel shall be saved: there he
tells us of a new world of the Jews; and for the Gentiles he tells you, They
shall be cast in. The vail shall be taken from off all Nations, Esaias 25.1.
There shall be one shepherd and one sheepfold, of Jews and Gentiles; and that
as large as all the world, John 10.16. This was never yet fulfilled. Read the
Prophets, and you shall read strange things of glorious times that shall be
here on earth of all Nations coming into the Church, the mountain of the Lords
house being set on the top of the mountains, and all Nations flowing unto it;
and of the great Prosperity that shall be: which was never yet fulfilled.

Further, Mr. Thomas Goodwin in his Sermon before the House, Feb. 25. 1645.
called, The great Interest of States and Kingdoms.

Page 8, 9
Having been giving some instances how God had reproved Kings for the sakes of
his people, mentions that eminent instance of Abraham's subduing the four Kings,
Genesis 14. the Type of the four Monarchs, and the Saints subduing of them.

Page 10.
Thus, says he, he began the world at first, and this very Victory is made a
leading case, a standing encouragement to the sons of Abraham, the Saints, for
ever after, Esa. 41.2. Who raised up the righteous man from the East, ( namely,
this Abraham) and called him to his foot, gave the Nations before him, and made
him rule over Kings? ( he means those very Kings in the 14 of Genesis:) he gave
them as dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow: he pursued them,
and past safely. Did God do this for one or two of the Saints, and will he not
go on? What says the fourth verse? Who has wrought and done it, calling the
Generations from the beginning? I the Lord am the first, and with the last I am
he. I began to do thus with Abraham, and I will go on to do so even to the last
for the sons of Abraham: and that this is his meaning, read 8, 10, 14, verses.

Page 32.
As he caught the Jewish Princes and Priests in their craftiness against
Christ; so will he for ever do those that offer violence to his Saints,
especially when out of state and worldly ends and interests.

Page 39.
And he shall overcome; for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they
that are with him are called, Chosen and faithful: you know the little Stone,
Christ and his Saints, shall dash all to pieces.

Page 45.
Christ being peculiarly the King of Saints his interest is to maintain, defend
and take part with them against all those that do malign them, as he did the
Nation of the Jews. It is his title, and his most royal title, and the greatest
title, that he is King of Saints: he prefers it to his title of being King
of Nations; that vanishes, and is not mentioned in comparison of it. This
therefore answerably must be his greatest interest, which of all other he now
pursues. And therefore, if all those Nations in which his Saints are, do not
bow to, and comply with it, he will show himself that he is King of Saints and
of Nations by ruining of them. As the greatest interest of the Devils Kingdom
is to persecute those that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus; so is it the greatest interest of the kingdom of Jesus Christ to
preserve his Saints, and to confound those that injure them: for he is King of
Saints.

And further, in the old Testament, when this his Kingdom was further off, and
longer to come, yet you see how strongly he drove on this design then; but in
the New Testament he is ascended, and personally as man invested into it. We
see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 12. whose faith was as real in
this, as our sight can be; and he sits there expecting, as thinking the time
long till all his enemies are subdued, Heb. 10.13. which the same Apostle
elsewhere interprets, and therein speaks home to the point in hand, the
putting down all Rule and Dominion that are opposite to his Saints, 1 Cor.
15.24,25. And accordingly in all those Psalms where ever his ascension and
investiture into his Kingdom at Gods right hand is prophesied of, there the
ruin or conversion of Kings and Kingdoms are also spoken and prophesied of:
read Psalm 2. Psalm 68. Psalm 110. And let me add this to all, That as the
shorter time Satan has, the more is his rage; so the shorter time Christ has,
and the nearer he is to the possession of his Kingdom, the more is his zeal for
his Saints, and indignation against his Enemies. His heart is set upon it, and
the more eager does his desire become every day to attain his long-expected
Kingdom, and to throw down all that oppose it; and therefore we see that in
this latter age he has made such changes in the world; we have seen him do
that in a few years, that he has not done in a hundred years before: for he
being King of Nations, he pursues his interest; and being more near his
Kingdom, he takes it with violence: we are now within the whirl of it,
therefore his motions are rapt. Hence therefore all States and Kingdoms had
need now (of all times else) to be instructed, and accordingly comply with this
interest of Christ: it is more especially now then ever, their greatest
interest: it is well for us that Jesus Christ is our King, who is the King of
kings, and King of Saints; and withal, that he is so near the enjoyment of his
Kingdom.

Page 44.
Jesus Christ wins ground of us every day, and works us up age after age to a
further Reformation, to more light and holiness; and so he will do, till he
has perfectly overcome every Popish Principle out of them.

Page 57.
I am confident of it, that Christ, that King of Saints, that is in heaven, he
will not rest till such time as he has made us one; if not injudgment, yet in
forbearance; and that if we will not take warning, and will not agree it, that
either Antichrist or Jesus Christ himself will come in upon us, and we shall be
made to do it one way or other.

Page 58.
I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden
themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth
be gathered together against it. And you that are the Governors of Judah,
shall be as a hearth of fire amongst the wood, and a torch of fire in a sheaf,
all that oppose you, and rise up against you, shall be but as so many straws.
Take a sack of Straw great for Bulk, and lay it upon a few coals of fire upon
a hearth; and what will become of them all? though they cover the fire a while,
yet they will soon be consumed and burnt up.

Page 42, 43.
The Saints have vouchsafed them by God a privilege in ruling and governing
this world, and the Providence of God therein: they are Privy-Counsellours to
the great King of kings, who governs all the States and Kingdoms of this world:
And God does give the Saints a Commission to set up and pull down by their
prayers and intercessions. The old Testament speaks in a high language, Esa.
45.11 Concerning the work of my hands command you me. Who speaks this? the
words before are, Thus says the holy One of Israel, etc. it would have been
blasphemy for us to have said it. Then he goes on, bringing in the Lord
speaking thus; Behold, I that am thus your Maker, give you leave to dispose by
your prayers the great works of my hands which concern my children, my sons;
the affairs of Kingdoms, even so far as they relate to their good: and says,
upon this occasion he raised up Cyrus, and pulled down the Babylonian Monarchy,
because they by their prayers had sought this.

Further, Dr. Owen in his Sermon, Heb. 12.27.

Page 14.
All the present States of the world are cemented together by Antichristian
lime; and unless they be so shaken as to have every cranny, searched and brusht,
there will be no quiet habitations for Lord Christ and his people.

Page 25,
The Heavens and the Earth of the Nations in their present constitution, are
directly formed to the interest of Antichrist, which by notable advantages at
their first moulding, and continued insinuation, ever since, has so riveted it
self into the very Fundamentals of them, that no digging or myning without an
Earthquake will cast up the Foundation stones thereof.

Page 35.
Is it not evident to him that has but half an eye, that the whole present
constitution of the Governments of the Nations, is so cemented with
Antichristian Mortar from the very top to the bottom, that without a thorough
shaking, they cannot be cleansed? And a little after: This only is certain, it
(the said shaking) shall not stop nor receive its period, before the interest
of Antichristianity be wholly separated from the power of these Nations.

And further says, that no Atonement shall be made for the blood of the Saints
slain under the notion of Heretics, nor expiation be allowed, whilst a toe of
the Image; or bone of the Beast, is left unbroken. And again, that which does
and shall stick upon Potentates to their ruin, is not so much their own, or
any other interest, as the very dregs of this Papal Antichristian interest
thrust into their Oaths and Obligations, for no other end in the world but to
keep the Lord Jesus out of his Throne.

In the Book that gives an account of New Englands settlement, and some Laws
for Government, published for the use of that Colony, printed London -- 56.

Though they humbly acknowledge, that the supreme power of making Laws, and of
repealing of them, belongs to God only; and that by him this power is given to
Jesus Christ as Mediator, Mat. 28.19. John 5.22. and that the Laws for holiness
and righteousness are already made and given us in the Scriptures, which in
matters moral, or of moral equity, may not be altered by humane power or
authority; Moses only showed Israel the Laws and Statutes of God; and the
Sanhedrim (the highest Court amongst the Jews) must attend those Laws: Yet
Civil Courts and Rulers are the Ministers of God, for the good of the people,
and have power to declare, publish and establish the Laws he has made.

In Fox's Martyrol. 1 Volume p. 139. is recorded an Epistle of Eleutherius,
Bishop of Rome, sent to K. Lucius, the first Christian K in England. 169.

You require of us the Roman Laws, and the Emperors to be sent over to you,
that you may practice the same, and put them in ure within your Realm.

The Roman Laws and Emperors we may reprove, but the Law of God we may not: ye
have received of late through Gods mercy in the Realm of Brittany, the Law and
faith of Christ; you have with you within the Realm, both the parts of the
Scriptures: out of them, by Gods grace, with the Counsel of your Realm, take ye
a Law; and by that Law, through Gods sufferance, rule your kingdom, according
to the saying of the Psalmist, O God, give thy judgments to the King and thy
justice to the Kings son* he said not The judgment and (...)

The Letter of the General Council of the Army to their Brethren in their
several Quarters and Garrisons, upon their march into Scotland, 1650.
Dear Christian Friends,
AS it has pleased our heavenly Father to call both you and us in these latter
days to wait upon him in his great and terrible works, so the glory of his
appearances has been exceeding great in those Services. And we trust the
record of his Love is kept with delight in your heart, as we desire it may be
upon our own for ever. And surely, the true use of those precious Experiments
wherewith he has enriched us in this work, is to strengthen our Faith, and
quicken our hearts to a more cheerful attendance on Christ in what further
Service he shall appoint us. To what End cends that wonderful return of the
Pr^ers of his people in those continued and swift Successes God has afforded
our Brethren in IRELAND, but to quicken us to a lively improvement of our
interest in Christ, by taking those pledges of his Love as means to raise our
hearts to expect much more? And what can be expected less from us after all
such full meals of Mercies, but to be strengthened to Conflect with greater
difficulties, and to follow the LAMB more fully then ever? We nave had a
breathing time, while our Brethren have been bringing forth the deliverance of
IRELAND through sore pangs: And now the Symptoms of traveling pain begin to
take hold upon us; and as that glorion birth has been thus far brought forth
in IRELAND through the Prayers of the Saints, so we are encouraged to believe
(while we find the spirit of Prayer crying earnestly for the accomplishment of
CHRIST'S designs through all these dark dispensations) that the Close will be
the bringing forth of Zions deliverance: And to that end (deat Friends) we are
hold in the Name of our Lord whom ye love, to provoke you to fervent Prayer (at
this time) for the clear manifestation of the presence of Christ with us, in
whatever service he shall call us unto. We are now again alarmed by him to come
forth into the field; but both our Work and the Issue is only and wholly known
to himself. Pray for us, that we may not ^ant that Pillar of five before us,
and the Cloud behind us; and that we may be found faithful Servants waiting
only upon our Lords good pleasure, and ler both you and us be instant in
Prayer, for the uniting of the hearts of all that fear the Lord in this and our
Neighbor Nation of SCOTLAND, that there may not be found any of the generation
of the Just, joining Issue with those that support the Beast, and oppose the
advancement of the KINGDOM of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the King of Saints: But
that some special and signal discovery of the good Will of God to his people
may now appear, in separating the precious from the vile, both in their
counsels and actions: And it is most earnestly desired, that ^ervent
Supplication and Prayer be made for all such of us as shall be called to the
management of Public Affairs, that the Lord would make his way plain before
us; That so in all our undertakings we may be subservient to the affairs of
Jesus Christ, and walk in love (as becomes Saints) toward all dissatisfied
Brethren both in ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, that our indeared affection to them, as
to the lot of Gods inheritance, may appear in all our demeanors toward them,
and in theirs toward us; That so the enemies of CHRIST may be disappointed,
and these Clouds of Division scattered, to the abundant Glory and Praise of
God, and comfort of all his people. Who knows but yet (after the late too great
Unchristian Differences between the Children of the same Father) this may be
the day wherein shall be begun the fulfilling of those glorious promises (which
God has made to his people) in the last days, And I will give them one heart
and one way, Jer. 32.39. and, That Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah
shall not vex Ephraim, Isa. 11.12,13,14 And that we may be active and constant
in the work of the Lord, we farther provoke you to be earnest with him on the
behalf of all the Saints, and particularly for us, that our hearts may be taken
off from the poor low things of this world: That we may not seek our selves,
nor great things for our selves, but the glory and honor of JESUS CHRIST, who
has so gratiousl^ owned us, and manifested his glorious presence with us,
through all the many temptations and trials that we have been exercised under,
and the sore trouble our eyes have seen; All which he has done, that he might
humble us, and that he might prove us, to do us good in the latter end.

And for all these ends, the Lord has stirred up our hearts to set apart the
Fifth day of the next week, being the Thirtieth of this present Month, ( May
30. 1650) as a solemn time to seek his Face, in and about this work. Wherein
(hoping you will join with us) we defire that both you and we may be humbled
before the Lord, for all our former and latter evils that we have commi^ted,
notwithstanding the multitude of his tender mercies toward us. It may be,
since we have been at ease, we have contracted rust; the Lord make us every one
sensible of the plague of his own heart, and grant that this may be a cleansing
day; that he would both reprove, and enable us to turn at his reproof; that so
what employment soever the Lord calls us unto, we may go to it leaving our
sins behind us: And let us with all fervency of spirit pray that the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would so pour out his Spirit upon us, that
thereby our hearts being purged from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, our
holy conversation may declare us to be the people of the Lord, yea, the Army of
the LAMB, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords, whose followers are called,
Chosen and saithful.

And since the Lord has taught us, that to hang down the head as a Bulrush for
a day, is not such a fast as he has chosen; we do further therefore lay it
upon our own hearts and yours, that if any (either Officer or Soldier) be
guilty of any prosaneness, to the scandal of the Gospel; discovery thereof may
be made, and such course therein ^ken, as may be agreeable to the Gospel, and
Discipline of the Army.

Further, that we use our utmost endeavors in our several places to reform
those gross Enormities of Drunkenness, Swearing, open Profanation of the Lords
day, and contempt of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which are too much to be
sound in the Army; that so as much as in us lies, we may purge out every
accursed thing from amongst us.

Dear Brethren, let us labor (through the power of the Spirit of Christ) to
sanctify our selves and the Camp, for the LORD that is in the midst of us, is
a holy God; and let us not too much presume upon our former mercies, but well
consider what the Lord has said to his own people that were as nearly related
to him as we can be, Josh. 24.19 The Lord he is a holy and a jealous God, he
will not forgive your transgressions and your sins: if you forsake the Lord,
and serve strange Gods, then he will turn and consume you, and do you hurt,
after that he has done you good: and again, Josh 7.12 13. Read the words: as
also Isaiah 63.8,9,10. (Read the words:) Oh let these Scriptures and others to
the same purpose, deeply ^ffect us; that so, whilst we are used as a Rod of
iron in Christ's hand to dash his enemies in pieces, we our selves may serve him
with fear, and rej^yce with trembling. All that now seem to be on Christ's
side, will not hold out unto the end. Be we faithful unto death, and Christ
will give us a Crown of life.

Dear Friends, we shall earnestly long to hear from you, to the end we may know
how the Lord is pleased to affect your hearts with these things, and what
impressions of his Spirit he shall (through his Word) set upon you after you
have sought his face with us about the same, that so we may further know
(through you) his will concerning us. And we shall not fail in this and all
other opportunities to seek the Lord for you, that you may be preserved from
every evil to his glorious Kingdom, that you may be kept blameless and
harmless, the sons of God without rebuke. And we beseech you in the spirit of
love and meekness, to stir up all that fear God, amongst whom you converse,
(yea, though of different judgments, as to the form of Church Government) to
seek the Lord with us in these things: for sure it cannot but be the desire of
every one that is a living member of Christ's body, that the work of Christ
should prosper, and that all that fear the Lord may be of one heart and one
mind, in the things that concern his great affairs, in a time when his work is
to establish his own Kingdom in the ruin of BABYLON, as (in the apprehension
of many of his people) it is this day. Thus presenting our most indeared
affection to you, we heartily recommend you into the Bosom of Jesus Christ,
and rest,

Your Christian Friends and fellow Soldiers.
White Hall, May 20. 1650. To all our dear Friends and Fellow Soldiers that
fear the Lord. Will. Constable William Roe Rich. Sa^key Griffith Lloyd T.
Harrison He. Haynes Will. Style Stephen White Nath. Rich W. Stane Tobias Bridge
Nic. Lockier Edw Whalley Will. Goffe Jo. Merreman Thomas Hancock Charles
Fleetwood Azariah Husbands Will. Gough George Joyce Tho. Pride John Blackwel
Edw. Orpin Tho. Else Math. Tomlinson Jo. Mason Robert Barrow Tho. Bayley John
Okey Jenkin Lloyd Samson Lark Isaac Knight Paul Sismey.
We desire that what Return you make hereof, be directed to Colonel Barkestead
at White Hall, to be by him communicated to the Officers at the Headquarters.



A DECLARATION OF The English ARMY now in SCOTLAND.
TO The people of SCOTLAND, especially those a mong them, that know and fear
the LORD;
We the Officers and Soldiers of the English Army, do send Greeting.
AT the beginning of the great and wonderful workings of GOD in these two
Nations of England and Scotland, we the Underofficers and Soldiers of the
English Army now in Scotland, were (most of us, if not all) men of private
Callings, and not at all interested in matters of Public and State Affairs;
but yet very many of us, in whom the Lord had begun to reveal himself in the
Face of Jesus Christ, were sensible of the ANTICHRISTIAN Tyranny that was
exercised by the late King and his Prelates, over the Coxsciences, Bodies and
Estates of the true Spiritual Church of Jesus Christ; namely, those that were
born again, and united to him hy his Spirit; who were then by that
Antichristian crew, termed Puritans, Sectaries, Schismatics, etc. and for not
conforming to all the Canons and Ordinances of their Nation-Church, were
frequently imprisoned, banished, and otherwise grievously molested at the
pleasure of those that then ruled amongst us. Under these sad sufferings of the
people of God, our souls mourned: and understanding by the manifold gracious
promises in the Word of God, that a time of deliverance was to be expected to
the Church of CHRIST, and destruction and ruin to BABYLON; Our hearts,
together with all truly godly in England, were exceedingly stirred up to pray
to the Lord, even day and night, that he would Arise to dectroy ANTICHRIST, and
to save his people. Whilst this Spirit of Prayer was poured forth upon Gods
people in England, attempts are made upon Scotland, to bring them to a
conformity in religious Worship, by endeavoring to impose upon them a Popish
Service Book, which was through the great goodness of God, by his people in
Scotland, rejected; which made the wrath of the late King and his Prelates, wax
so hot against them, so as Scotland had no other way to preserve it self, but
by coming into England with an Army; which the godly in England did not then
count an Invasion to destroy England, no more then they do this our present
march for the ruin of Scotland: but rejoiced to see some appearing against
that ANTICHRISTIAN power that had persecuted the Saints; and were assured, That
the LORD was come forth to answer the many Prayers and Tears that were then
poured, and pouring forth for that purpose: and therefore so far as we had any
opportunity, farthered the designs of that Army; some of us hazzarding our
lives, by spreading their Book, entitled, The SCOTS INTENTIONS, and pleading
for the justness of their Proceedings.

Let us remember, how the Lord was pleased graciously to answer the prayers of
his people at that time, in their deliverance from the Army raised by the late
King and his Prelates, for the destruction of all the people of God in England
and Scotland: insomuch, That soon after, Scotland sits in Peace, enjoying their
former Liberties, without being imposed upon by the Antichristian Prelacy in
England; and England obtains a Parliament; to whom they have opportunity to
complain of their grievances, and through the great goodness of God so
constituted, that grievances are heard, and overtures made to the late King for
their redress: which was so irksome to his Oppressing, Tyrannical and Bloody
Spirit, that he again betook himself to overthrew the Parliament by force; and
to that end, entertains the Officers of the Army that had gone forth against
our Brethren of Scotland; and withdrawing himself from his Parliament, an
appearance of a Civil War begins; which being made known to us the inseriout
Officers and Soldiers of this Army, (then in our private Callings) we found
our hearts extraordinarily stirred up by the LORD to assist the Parliament
against the King; being abundantly satisfied in our judgments and consciences,
that we were called forth by the Lord, to be instrumental to bring about that,
which was our continual prayer to God, (viz.) The DESTRUCTION of ANTICHRIST,
and the deliverance of his CHURCH and PEOPLE. And upon this simple account, we
engaged, not knowing the deep policies of worldly Statesmen, and have ever
since hazarded our lives in the high places of the field, (where we have seen
the wonders of the Lord) against all the opposers of this work of Jesus Christ;
whom we have all along seen going with us, and making our way plain before us.
And having these things singly in our eye, namely, the destrustion of
Antichrist, the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the Deliverance and
Reiormation of his Church, in the Establishment of his Ordinances amongst them
in purity according to his Word; and the just civil Liberties of Englishmen: we
did many of us rejoice at the Covenant, because we found in it a strain toward
these ends, although some being more enlightened, did apprehend it to be so mixed
with worldly interest, that they justly feared, the interest of JESUS CHRIST
would be only pretended to, and the interests of this world, yea, of
ANTICHRIST himself carried under a vizard, as we have since had abundant
experience of; which has made us (we confess) not to idoliz; the Covenant, (as
we fear too many do) though we trust, it will appear before God, Angels and
Men, that we shall ever pursue its true and lawful ends, according to the plain
candid meaning thereof; though we do not upon every occasion urge the Covenant,
(as we see every party, though as far different as light and darkness, apt to
do) the Lord having by his Word and by his Spirit convinced us of our duty
therein, though there had been no such Covenant at all entered into.

But when we saw that under pretense of the Covenant, a corrupt party in
Parliament, by their worldly policy, after the War was ended in England, and
the late Kings party subdued, with the loss of thousands of the lives of
Saints, (whose death is precious in the sight of the Lord) did endeavor to set
up the King upon his own terms, and with him to establish a National Church
Government, not in all things agreeable to the WORD OF GOD, but is destructive
to the just Liberties of the true Spiritual Church of Christ, which he has by
his own most precious blood purchased for them, and is now come forth to bestow
upon them: which did sufficiently demonstrate it self by the dealings of the
then Masterbuilders with the Churches of Jesus Christ, in and about London,
that were then threatened to be dissolved, and Laws made to prevent the
Communion of Saints with one another, except only in that one public Form then
about to be established, to the astonishment of many of us that had lifted up
our hands to God, and sworn to endeavor a Reformation according to the Word of
God; and therefore after much waiting upon God by prayer, and examining our own
hearts, about the ends and sincerity thereof, we were abundantly satisfied,
that it was not only lawful, but our duty to keep our Arms in our hands, till
the ends beforementioned should be accomplished; and to that purpose, the Army,
whereof we are a part, did refuse to disband, did march up to London to propose
to the Parliament a way of Establishment that might be more for the carrying on
of the ends of Religion and Liberty, though therein we were not at that time
successful, yet most wonderfully and graciously preserved by the Lord, and
extraordinarily convinced, after much seeking the Face of God, that our failing
was in endeavoring to set up the King upon any terms, he being a man of so
much blood, that the Lord would have no peace with him, nor any that should go
about to establish him: Whereupon, after his own hard heart had hindered him
from yiedling to any overtures that were made to him by the Parliament, through
whom all the Armies Proposals were to be tendered and a second War more
dangerous then the former contrived by him, and his Son now with you, together
with those in Scotland that ^ated us of the Army of England under the name of
Sectaries, being by the unspeakable goodness and mighty power of God waded
through, and a second testimony given from Heaven, to justify the proceedings
of his poor servants against that bloody Antichristian brood, though with the
loss of many precious Saints; we were then powerfully convinced, that the Lords
purpose was to deal with the late King as a man of blood: And being persuaded
in our consciences, That he and his Monarchy was one of the ten horns of the
Beast spoken of, Rev. 17.12,13,14,15. and being witnesses to so much of the
innocent blood of the Saints that he had shed in supporting the Beast; and
considering the loud cries of the souls of the Saints under the Altar, we were
extraordinarily carried forth to desire Justice upon the King, that man of
blood: And to that purpose petitioned our Superior Officers, and the
Parliament, to bring him to Justice: which accordingly, by an high hand of
Providence was brought to pass; which Act we are confident the Lord will own,
in preserving the Commonwealth of England against all Kingdoms and Nations,
that shall adventure to meddle with them upon that account. When God executes
his judgments upon Malefactors, let none go about to resist: When he brings
forth those his Enemies that will not suffer Jesus Christ to be King in the
midst of his Saints, and breaks them in pieces like a Potters vessel; let not
Scotland, nor any other Nation say, What do thou? We fear they have been too
busy already: the Lord that sees the secrets of all hearts, knows, the
compliance of Scotland with the late Kings Issue now with you, was in order to
disturb the Peace of England, for being Gods Executioners upon a bloody Tyrant,
and a supporter of the Throne of the Beast: But blessed be the Lord, the crafty
are taken in their own suare: England sits in peace, whilst Scotland receives
into their chief City, their new King, at the very hour wherein an Army had
marched 300 miles, is sacing them at the very gates. We wish our Brethren of
Scotland, especially those that truly fear the Lord, would consider these
things, and not slight the Providence of God so much as they do: When Scotland
chose new gods, and would have a King out of a Family that God had rejected,
then was War in the Gates: And though we do not think Providence alone, a
sufficient rule for Gods people to walk by, yet we do know that the Lord speaks
to his people by his Providence as well as by his Word; and he is angry with
his people that do not take notice thereof, and promises blessing to those
that do, Psa. 107. and the latter end.

And here give us leave (not in a boasting spirit, but in meekness and fear) to
tell you, That we are persuaded we are poor unworthy instruments in Gods hand
to break his Enemies, and preserve his people. You have acknowledged us in your
own papers to be a rod of iron to dash in pieces the Malignants: but withal
say, We must now be broken in pieces, because we now set our selves against the
Lor of Gods inheritance. Let us here speak for our selves; yea, the Lord speak
for us, who knows our hearts, and all our ways: we value the Churches of Jesus
Christ, who are the Lot of Gods inheritance, ten thousand times above our own
lives; yea, we do bless the Lord, we are not only a Rod of Iron, to dash the
common enemies in pieces, but also a hedge (though very unworthy) about Christ's
Vineyard; and if we know our own hearts, where ever the Lot of Gods inheritance
shall appear to be found in Scotland, we shall think it our duty to the utmost
hazard of our lives, to preserve the same: But if there be any that have taken
counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, whom the Lord has
decreed to set upon his holy Hill of Zion; we are persuaded the Lord has
brought us hither as instruments, through which he will speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. We desire it may be known to you
our Brethren of Scotland, that we are not Soldiers of Fortune, we are not
merely the servants of men, we have not only proclaimed Jesus Christ, the King
of Saints, to be our King by Profession; but desire to submit to him upon his
own terms, and to admit him to the exercise of his Royal Authority in our
hearts, and to follow him whithersoever he goes, he having of his own good
will entered into a Covenant of Grace with his poor Saints; and be assured, it
is he that leads us into Scotland, as he has done in England and Ireland.
And therefore we do in the spirit of brotherly love, and of the fear of the
Lord, beseech you to look about you; for our Lord Jesus is coming amongst you
as a refiners fire, and as Fullers soap: and blessed are those in whom the
least dram of sincerity shall be found.

We have a Paper directed to us from the people of Scotland, it having been
publicly made known to us at the head of our Regiments; wherein we are first
desired to consider the lawfulness of our marching into Scotland. We bless God,
we did that before we came; and are abundantly satisfied, that we are brought
hither by the Lord: nay, many of us lying under temptations of flesh and blood,
and going about to frame excuses to take us from this march, found, that to
have staid behind, had been to have turned our backs upon Jesus Christ, and to
have deprived our selves of much sweet communion with God, that now through his
goodness we do enjoy.

We have also considered the Arguments, by which you go about to weaken the
grounds of the Parliaments, and our Superior Officers, leading us into
Scotland; and must needs give you this Return: That we are still abundantly
established in this belief, that what the Parliament of England has done in
sending us into Scotland, has been of absolute necessity to preserve
themselves from being destroyed in their Religion and Liberties, which they
have been at so much cost both of Blood and Treasure, to purchase and preserve:
and therefore by the way we must needs tell you, that we cannot endure to hear
them called A pretended Parliament; which we desire you to take notice of, that
if you write to us again, you would speak more reverently of the Authority of
our Nation, or else we shall easily think you will upon every occasion be ready
to invade England, that you may set up an Authority, which you may call lawful.

And let us, as in the prefence of the Lord, further assure you, That we have
already examined our consciences, as before the Lord, and have a clear
assurance in our hearts, That he will countenance us in this action, and that
we do not break any Covenant which we have sworn before God, Angels and Men;
but could be contented, should we not thereby idolize the Covenant, to march to
any Engagement with you, if called thereunto by the Lord, with the Covenant on
the tops of our Pikes; and let the Lord judge who has observed the Ends of the
Covenant best, you or we? Yet we do acknowledge, we have not been the exact
Performers, though not the wilful breakers thereof: our consciences also bear
us record, we do above any thing in the world, desire the Union of the two
Nations; and it is our prayer daily. That those that fear the Lord in England
and Scotland, may become one in the hand of the Lord, and join together in the
advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and throwing down, and trampling
upon the Seat of the Beast. Why should not Scotland as well as England,
rejoice to see the horns of the Beast cut off, that we may join together, to
hate the Whore, and to burn her flesh with fire? The Lord is our witness,
(whom we fear) we come not to oppress you, or shed your blood; we have cried to
the Lord, again and again, to prevent it: we have sent you our Declaration of
Love to the People of God in Scotland, which some amongst you, though they
pretended to answer, yet do most injuriously and unchristianly keep from their
sight; nay, most falsely mis-representing us as a people come with intentions to
destroy the poor inhabitants, and that we are left of our God to be destroyed:
but we have made our prayer to the Lord, and made known before him their
sayings, who have told the people of Scotland, that God has forsaken us; and
therefore bid them persecute and take us, for now the Sectaries day is come,
etc. But the Lord is still with us, he is our Refuge, and a present help in
trouble, ready to be found: we do believe, the cry of the oppressed in Scotland
will be heard, and woe to those that are the Cause thereof. Our Quarrel is still
against Malignants, the Root whereof is now, through the evil policy of some
Statesmen, become the head of Scotland. We dare not quarrel with those whose
hearts are upright with Jesus Christ, and faithful and loving to England; but
with those who are most treacherous and false to both: and therefore we day
not any of us, though tempted thereto by your papers, be so carnally wise, as
to desert the Cause and Work of Jesus Christ, in which we have hitherto been
so long and so miraculously carried on. Do you think we are men so weakly
principled, as to be persuaded without the least strength of Argument to desert
the interest of out own Nation, and expose thousands of the precious Saints of
Jesus Christ, to be trampled upon as the dirt in the streets, when the Lord is
about to put on their beautiful garments, and to make them a praise in the
earth? Or can we (think you) betray our superior Officers, in whom we see so
much of the sweet Spirit of Jesus Christ, into your hands, whose mouths are
opened wide to devour them? We pray you not to wait for such a thing. The Lord
has brought us hither by his Providence, and upon him we shall with confidence
depend, till we see a glorious Issue, which we humbly and heartily desire may
be without the effusion of any more blood; and (if it be the Will of God) both
speedy and comfortable to you and us, that we may return with joy into England,
and leave Scotland rejoicing that an English Army has been amongst them: which
possibly may be the sooner effected, were you and we suffered to confer, and
open our hearts one to another: we do believe much of the bitterness of spirit
would be allayed in our Brethren of Scotland, did they know how exceedingly we
are slandered by the pens and tongues of many of your Kirk-men, concerning our
Religion and faith toward God, which though we may not vainly boast of, yet
according to the Apostles direction, we are ready to give an answer to the
meanest Christian in Scotland that shall ask a reason of the faith and hope
that is in us, with meekness and fear. And indeed, we account our best way of
contending with those slanders, is to pray the Lord to make our hearts sound in
his Statutes, that we be not ashamed, that so we sanctifying the Lord God in
our hearts, and having a good conscience, they that speak evil of us as of
evildoers, may be ashamed whilst they falsely accuse our good conversation in
Christ.

And thus have we in the naked plainness of our souls, opened our hearts unto
you, our dear Brethren, that fear the Lord in Scotland, where ever you be
found, whether in the highest Councils, or the pooest Cottages, who though you
now be scattered, the Lord will in his due time bring you together, and bind
you up as his Jewels, and make you one with those that fear the Lord amongst
us: which the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our God and
Father also, bring to pass in his due time; and in the mean time make both you
and us wise to understand the things that concern the exalting of Christ's
Kingdom: That in all our undertakings we may be subservient to the Affairs of
Jesus Christ; and above all things, take heed how we stir up any of the powers
or strength of this world to destroy one another. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Prince of Peace, be with you. Amen.

From the Leaguer at Muslebrough, August 1. 1650.
Which said Declaration, was sent to the Scots, enclosed in a Letter of the
General to this purpose, viz. That the Underofficers and Soldiers in the
English Army had desired him to send to them this their Declaration; which he
tells them was not a crafty politic one, but a plain simple spiritual one,
such as it is, God knows; and God also will in due time make manifest. And do
we multiply these words as men? Or do we them for the Lord Christ and his
peoples sake? etc. concluding, Your humble Servant, O. Cromwell.

And further, in their Declaration, Agust 16. in answer to the Paper of the
general Assembly, they conclude thus: We shall close with our hearty
supplications, That the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would in due
time cast down all the Earthly Combinations of all sorts of men that set up
themselves and their own corrupt interest in the room of that Scepter of
Righteousness which he has given into the hands of his Son. Published by the
special appointment of the Council of State.

For the Right Honorable, Charles Fleetwood Esquire; Commander in chief of the
Forces in Ireland, to be communicated to our dear friends the Officers under
his Command.
Right Honorable, and our dear Christian Friends!
WHen we consider the many and wonderful things, which the Lord has of late
years brought to pass in these three Nations, in the subduing of great Armies,
and casting down all the strong Holds of the Enemy, in pouring contempt upon
Princes, and great men, that have not kissed, but opposed the Lord Jesus, in
the work he has been and is still carrying on in the World; and in taking down
and altering forms of Government, that have been in these Nations, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, we cannot but cry out, Great and mavelous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty: just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints; who shall
not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thy judgments are made
manifest.

As you were witnesses of, and active in some of those great changes that have
formerly been made, so we doubt not but you have (though at a distance) felt
the late Earthquake, and have heard of the sudden Dissolution of the
Parliament: which yet being so great a Revolution, we thought it our duty to
send you this Letter, to the end we might therein let you know the frame of our
hearts, and how desirous we are, that you and we, may, in the midst of the
great dispensations of God, still continue steadfast in one spirit; that so, if
it be the Will of t he Lord, we may be further instrumental in bringing about
those things which may be to the glory of God, the good of his people, and the
peace and welfare of the Commonwealth.

It would require more time then we have now to spare, to give you a particular
and full account, of all the grounds and reasons upon which this great Action
was undertaken; and therefore therein we shall refer you to the Declaration of
the Lord General and his Council of Officers, of the 22 of April last, and to
your own observations, concerning the ill management of Affairs by the late
Parliament: only we shall say, that this last dangerous remedy of a
Dissolution, was not used, till all other ways had been by us assayed, and by
them rejected. And therefore, after four years expectation (since the change of
the Government) finding no performance of those things that tend to the
settlement of the Commonwealth, in Peace and Righteousness: and being
abundantly satisfied upon long experience, That the Parliament, as it was
constituted, were so far from being the instruments of perfecting the work of
the Lord, that this whole Cause was in great danger to perish under their
hands, for which there has been so vast an expense of Blood and Treasure.
After much seeking the Face of God, and taking counsel one with another, it was
generally apprehended, that the only way left us, was, To endeavor a speedy
Change in the Supreme Authority, that so the perpetual fitting of the
Parliament may be prevented; and the Government laid upon the shoulders of such
men as might hopefully give us the fruit of all our Labor and Blood, and
encourage good men to be still willing to hazard their lives against the common
Enemy; which, as things lately stood, many had little heart to do. And it was
in our hearts, to seek this thing in such a way, that the Parliament might have
had the honor of it; but it pleased not the Lord to give them an heart to
incline to the Motions made in order thereunto, by the General, in the name of
himself and his Officers, many of which were present; but rather to endeavor a
hasty and inconsiderate passing of an Act for a new Representative; the danger
whereof, was very evident, and was by the General, at a Meeting with many of
the Members of Parliament, and Officers of the Army, abundantly demonstrated to
them, which yet the next day was so earnestly and precipitantly persisted in,
that it was found necessary to put them to a sudden Dissolution, which also we
hope the Lord will make the Medium to future good: of which there is the more
expectation, because it has pleased God, who has the hearts of all men in his
own hand, so to order the spirits of men, that not only the Army and Fleet, do
most unanimously concur and agree, but also the generality of all sorts of
people do rejoice therein; insomuch that there is not the appearance of the
least disturbance. And it is the continual and fervent prayers of all the
people of God, that this great Change, may have the extraordinary blessing of
God upon it.

By this enclosed Declaration, you will perceive what provision is made for the
present management of Affairs, till persons of approved Fidelity and Honesty
may be called to take upon them the Supreme Authority of this Commonwealth:
which being done, we may have cause to hope, the Lord will make them a future
blessing to us.

Dear Friends, we are persuaded this is the Lords own work, and ought to be
mavellous in our eyes: the Lord has once and again pulled down the Mighty from
their seats, and we trust it is that himself may reign: and therefore, let the
earth rejoice, and these our Islands be glad thereof; for though clouds and
darkness be round about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation
of his Throne. The Lord is terrible in his doings, therefore the guilty world
will tremble, but Sionshall hear and be glad, and the daughters of Judah shall
rejoice because of his judgments. Let us therefore (dear Brethren) serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling; for we are not without hope, that
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the King of Saints, will henceforth show himself
to be the King of Nations also.

We do not doubt but the Lord will make your hearts as ours, in this great
business, and that as the Lord has wonderfully stirred up the heart of his
Excellency the Lord General, to put himself upon God, in this great
undertaking, for the interest of Jesus Christ and his people; so we shall
adhere to him and one to another therein. We know your sincere love to Christ
and his people is such, that we shall use no Arguments unto you, but only mind
you, That when the Lord called you to the service of Ireland, at a solemn
meeting of the Officers designed for Ireland, with those that remained here,
after that we had, with many prayers and tears recommended one another into the
bosom of Christ, we did also in the presence of each other, and before the
Lord, solemnly submit our selves and all our affairs to be whollyat his
dispose; resolving through the influence of his Spirit in all our politic
undertakings, not to seek our selves but the advancement of the affairs and
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. In this Spirit, and with these Resolutions,
we parted with one another, and the Lord has blessed us hitherto, and lo! we
are yet alive, though thousands of our dear Brethren who engaged with us, are
dead. The Lord grant we may with our lives be instrumental to carry on and
preserve that Cause and Interest, which was by them valued above their lives;
and whose blood cries loud to us to persevere therein unto the end.

Let us therefore, we beseech you, provoke both you and our selves, not to
consult with carnal reason in these great Mutations, but let us labor by faith
to see the Lord carry on his own work, and to manifest our selves, whom God
has called and chosen to these stations wherein we stand, to be also faithful
in doing the work unto which he shall appoint us.

Dear Brethren, the work has hitherto been to break and pull down, which every
one almost seems to be good at; but it is now the expectation of good men,
that Building and Establishing work shall follow; for which yet, there are not
in our view many fit, and therefore it will be your duty and ours, to pray
without ceasing, that those whom God shall call to the Government, may be men
full of the Holy Ghost, and of Power, and may have his continual presence in
the carrying on of so great a work, on the issue whereof depends (as we are
persuaded) the interest of the Saints, throughout the whole world.

Now the Lord keep our hearts close to himself, that so, however things go
about, we may be found walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ, in faith
toward God, in love one toward another, and in Peace and Righteousness
toward all men. Which that we may do, let us earnestly beg your continual and
servent Prayers, even as we desire to make mention of you, as often as we
encompass the Throne of Grace, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we
are,

Your most affectionate Friends and Brethren, John Lambert John Disbrow Edward
Whalley Thomas Harrison William Constable Adrian Scroop Nathaniel Rich Matthew
Tomlinson Philip Twisleton Thomas Pride Thomas Cooper William Goffe Ralph
Coblet Francis Hacker Charles Worsley Francis White Thomas Kelsey Thomas Biscoe
Robert Swallow Roger Alsopp Arthur Husbands Griffith Lloyd John Mason Thomas
Saunders John Hodgson Jeoffrey Elatson Edward Orpin Samuel Lark John Caitnes
John Wigan Edward Walley Richard Merest John Robinson Edmund Chillenden George
Smithson William Packer William Style Francis Allen William Farley William
Malin Richard Hatter.


Phil. 1.18. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in
truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.


The spiritually wise cannot but soon discern, whether the breathings of the
Lords holy Spirit are more visible in this, then the Armies late (as it is
called) repentance; and the chief Officers may do well to consider, whether it
were not better with them, when they avouched the Lord to be their God, even
Christ to be the King of Nations, then since (changing their glory into shame)
they are found amongst the scoffers, saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? and they may observe the dissolution of the Parliament: however many
now would have it accounted only a precipitate Act of their General, yet it
had a very serious and deliberate owning by them, who can no otherwise be
justified in that or formet undertakings, thereby following the Lord in paths
untroden, contradictory to this old Antichristian worlds frame and
constitution, or as their own expression in their Letter is, By resigning
themselves and all their affairs to be wholly at the Lords dispose, resolving
through the influence of his Spirit in all their public undertakings, not to
seek themselves, but the advansement of the Affairs and Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But how faithfully this has been observed, the light in their
own consciences can best satisfy them, if they dare ask the question.

The Lord General CROMWELL His SPEECH, At the Council Chamger, to the Persons
then Assembled by Summons, July 4. 1653.
GENTLEMEN,
I Suppose the Summons that has been instrumental to bring you hither, gives
you well to understand the cause of your being here. Howbeit, having something
to impart, which is an Instrument drawn up by the consent and advice of the
principal Officers of the Army, which is a little (as we conceive) more
significant, then that other of Summons; we have that here to tender you. And
we have somewhat likewise further to say to you, for our own exoneration; and
we hope it may be somewhat further to your satisfaction. And therefore seeing
you sit here somewhat uneasy, by reason of the scantness of the Room, and the
heat of the weather, I shall contract my self with respect to that.

Series of Providence in the Nation.
I have not thought it amiss, a little to mind you of that Series of
Providence, wherein the Lord hitherto has dispensed wonderful things to these
Nations, from the beginning of our Troubles to this very day. If I should look
much backward, we might remember the state of affairs as they were before the
short, and that which was the last Parliament: in what a posture the things of
this Nation stood, does so well, I presume, occur to all your memories and
knowledges, that I shall not need to look so far backward, nor yet to the
beginning of those Hostile actions that past between the King that was, and the
then-Parliament. And indeed, should I begin this labor, the things that would
fall necessarily before you, would rather be fit for a History, then for a
Discourse, at this present.

But thus far we may look back: Winnowing the Army.
You very well know, after diverse turnings of affairs, it pleased God, much
about the midst of this War, to winnow, as I may so say, the Forces of this
Nation, and to put them into the hands of men of other Principles then those
that did engage at the first. By what strange providence that also was brought
about, would ask more time then is allotted me, to remember you of. Indeed,
there are Stories that do recite those transactions, and give Narratives of
matter of fact: but those things wherein the life and power of them lay, those
strange windings and turnings of Providence, those very great appearances of
God, in crossing and thwarting the designs of men, that he might raise up a
poor and contemptible company of men, neither versed in Military affairs, nor
having much natural propensity to them, The life and power of the work, lay in
the Armies owning a principle of godlieness.
even through the OWNING OF A PRINCIPLE OF GODLINESS, of Religion: which so
soon as it came to be owned, the state of affairs put upon that foot of
account, how God blessed them, and all undertakings, by the rising of that most
improbable, despicable, contemptible means, for that we must for ever own, you
very well know.

What the several successes have been, is not fit to mention at this time,
neither; though I must confess I thought to have enlarged my self upon this
Subject, Considering Providence a special duty, and a means to strengthen faith
for future.
forasmuch as the CONSIDERING the WORKS of GOD, and the OPERATION OF HIS HANDS,
is a principal part of our duty, and a great encouragement to the strengthening
of our hands, and of our faith for that which is behind. And then having given
us those mavelous dispensations, amongst other ends, for that was a most
principal end, as to us, in this revolution of affairs, and issues of those
Successes God was pleased to give this Nation, and the Authority that then
stood, were very great things brought about; besides those dints that were upon
those Nations and places where they were carried on, even in the Civil affairs,
to the bringing offenders to justice, even the GREATEST; to the bringing the
state of this Government to the Name at least of a Commonwealth; to the
searching and sifting of all Places and Persons; Proceeds with King, Peers and
Commons.
the KING removed, and brought to justice, and many great ones with him; the
House of PEERS laid aside; the House of COMMONS, the Representative of the
people of England, it self, winnowed, sifted, and brought to a handful, as you
may very well remember.

And truly, God would not rest there, (for, by the way, although it be fit for
us to entitle our failings and miscarriages to our selves, yet the gloriousness
of the work may well be attributed to God himself, and may be called His
strange work.)

You may remember well, that at the change of the Government there was not an
end of our Troubles, although that year were such things transacted, Memorable
1648.
as indeed made it to be the most MEMORABLE YEAR (I mean, 1648.) that ever this
Nation saw; so many Insurrections, Invasions, secret Designs, open and public
Attempts, quashed in so short a time, and this by the very signal appearances
of God himself, I hope we shall never forget.

You know also, (as I said before) that as the effect of that Memorable year,
1648. was to lay the Foundation of bringing Delinquents to punishment; so it
was of the change of the Government: although it be true, if we had time to
speak, the carriages of some in trust, in most eminent trust, was such, as
would have frustrated to us the hopes of all our undertakings, had not God
miraculously prevented: Closure with King, God prevented.
I mean, by that Closure that would have been endeavored with the King,
whereby we should have put into his hands all that Cause and Interest we had
opposed, and had had nothing to have secured us, but a little piece of Paper.

Nations exercise finished at Worcester, 1651.
But things going on, how it pleased the Lord to keep this Nation in exercise
both at Sea and Land, and what GOD wrought in Ireland and Scotland, you
likewise know, until the Lord had finished all that trouble, upon the matter, by
the mavelous salvation wrought at WORCESTER.

I confess to you, I am very much troubled in my spirit, that the necessity of
affairs does require that I should be so short in these things, because I told
you before, This is the leanest part of the Transaction, to wit, an Historical
Narration; there being in every Dispensation, (whether the Kings going from the
Parliament, the pulling down the Bishops, purging the House at that time by
their going away to assist the King, change of Government) whatever it was, not
any of those things, but has a remarkable point of Providence set upon it,
that he that runs may read. Therefore I am heartily sorry, that in point of
time I cannot be particular in those things, which I did principally desigue
this day, thereby to provoke and stir up your hearts and mine to gratitude and
confidence.

Passages since Worcester.
I shall now begin a little to remember you the PASSAGES that have been
transacted since WORCESTER sight; whence coming with my Fellow-Officers and
Soldiers, we expected, and had some reasonable confidence, that our
expectations should not be frustrate; That the Authority that then was, having
such a History to look back unto, such a God that appeared for them so
eminently, so visibly, that even our enemies many times confessed that God
himself was engaged against them, or they should never have been brought so
low, nor disappointed in every undertaking: [for that may be said (by the way)
had we miscarried but once, where had we been?] Expectations of returns worthy
such mercies, advancing the true interest on the three Nations.
I say, We did think, and had some reasonable confidence, that coming up then,
the mercies that God had showed, the expectations that were in the hearts of
all good men, would have prompted those that were in Authority to have done
those good things, which might by honest men have been judged a return fit for
such a God, and worthy of such mercies; and indeed, a discharge of duty to
those, for whom all these mercies have been showed, that is, the Interest of
the three Nations, the true interest of the three Nations.

And if I should now labor to be particular in enumerating some businesses
that have been transacted from that time, till the dissolution of the late
Parliament, indeed I should be upon a Theme would be very troublesome to my
self. The necessity and duty on the Army for dissolving the long Parliament.
For I must say for my self and Fellow-Officers, we have rather desired and
studied healing, then to rake into sores, and look backward, to render things
in those colors that would not be very well pleasing to any good eye to look
upon. Only this we must say, for our own exoneration, and as thereby laying
some foundation for the making evident the necessity and duty that was
incumbent upon us, to make this last great Change, I think it will not be amiss
to offer a word or two in that, not taking pleasure to rake into the business,
were not there some kind of necessity so to do.

Which they sought to heal and prevent,
Indeed we may say, without commending our selves, I mean my self and those
Gentlemen that have been engaged in the Military affairs, that upon our return,
we came fully bent in our hearts and thoughts, to desire and use all fair and
lawful means we could, to have had the Nation to reap the fruit of all that
blood and treasure that had been expended in this cause; and we have had many
desires and thirstings in our spirits, to find out ways and means, wherein we
might any ways be instrumental, to help it forward; 1. By Petition of August,
1652.
and we were very tender, for a long time, so much as to Petition, till August
last, or thereabouts, we never offered to Petition. But some of our then
Members, and others, having good acquaintance and relation to diverse members of
the Parliament; we did from time to time solicit, that which we thought (if
there had been no body to prompt them, no body to call upon them) would have
been listened to, out of ingenuity and integrity in them that had opportunity to
have answered our expectations: And truly, when we saw nothing would be done,
we did (as we thought, according to our duty, remind them by a Petition; which
Petition, I suppose the most of you have seen, which we delivered either in
July or August last: what effect that had, is likewise very well known; the
truth is, we had no return at all; all the satisfaction for us, was, but a few
words given us; the businesses petitioned for, most of them (we were told) were
under consideration; and those that were not, had very little or no
consideration at all.

Finding the people dissatisfied, in every corner of the Nation, and bringing
home to our doors the nonperformance of those things that had been promised,
and were of due to be performed; we did think our selves concerned; we
endeavored as became honest men, to keep up the reputation of honest men in
the world; 2. By a meeting with some of the Parliament; 10 or 12 times
beseeching them to discharge their duty and trust to God and Man freely: But
all in vain.
and therefore we had diverse times endeavored to obtain a meeting with diverse
Members of Parliament; and truly we did not begin this, till October last; and
in those meetings did in all faithfulness and sincerity, beseech them, that
they would be mindful of their duty to God and man, and of the discharge of
their trust to God and man: I believe these Gentlemen that are many of them
here, can tell, that we had at the least ten or twelve meetings; most humbly
begging and beseeching them, that of their own accords, they would do those
good things, that had been promised; that so it might appear, they did not do
them by any suggestion from the Army, but of their own ingenuity: so tender
were we to preserve them in the reputation and opinion of the people, to the
uttermost. And having had many of those meetings, and declaring plainly, that
the issue would be the judgment and displeasure of God against them, the
dissatisfaction of the People, and the putting things into a confusion: Yet how
little we did prevail, we well know, and we believe is not unknown to you.

3. By close considering what other way to have. recourse unto.
At the last, when we saw indeed that things would not be laid to heart, we had
a serious consideration amongst our selves, what other way to have recourse
unto; and when indeed we came to those close considerations, they began to take
the Act of the NEW REPRESENTATIVE to heart, and seemed exceeding willing to put
it on; the which, had it been done, or would it have been done, with that
integrity, with that caution, that would have saved this Cause, and the
Interest we have been so long engaged in; there could nothing have happened to
our judgments, more welcome then that would have been: Necessity of their
dissolution. 1. From their endeavors to perpetuate themselves.
But finding plainly, that the intendment of it, was not to give the people
that Right of choice, although it had been, but a seeming right, either the
seeming to give the people that choice intended and designed, to recrute the
House, the better to PERPETUATE THEMSELVES: And truly, having diverse of us been
spoken to, to that end, that we should give way to it; a thing to which we had
a perpetual aversation; which we did abominate the thoughts of; we always
declared our judgments against it, and our dissatisfaction; but yet they would
not hear of a New REPRESENTATIVE, before it lay three years before them,
without proceeding with one line considerably in it: They that could not endure
to hear of it; then, when we came to our close considerations, then instead of
protracting, they did make as much preposterous have, of the other hand, and
ran into that extremity; and finding that this spirit was not according to God,
and that the whole weight of this cause (which must needs have been very dear
unto us, who have so often adventured our lives for it; and we believe is so to
you) when we saw plainly that there was not so much consideration how to assert
it, or to provide security for it; and indeed to cross these, that they
reckoned the most troublesome people they had to deal with, which was the Army,
which by this time was sufficiently their displeasure: when we saw this, that
had power in our hands, truly to let the business go to such an issue as this,
was to throw back the cause into the hands of them we first fought with; we
came to this first conclusion amongst our selves, that if we had been fought
out of it, necessity would have taught us patience; 2. That the Army might not
be found Traitors to God and Man
but to be taken from us so unworthily, we should be rendered the worst people
in the world, and we should become TRAITORS BOTH TO GOD AND MAN. And when God
had laid this to our hearts, and that we found the interest of his people was
grown cheap, and not laid to heart, and if we came to competition of things,
the cause even among themselves, would (even almost in every thing) go to the
ground: this did add more consideration to us, that there was a duty incumbent
upon us. And truly, I speak it in the presence of some that are here, that were
at the close consultations (I may say) as before the Lord, the thinking of an
act of violence was to us worse than any Engagement that ever we were in yet;
and worse to us than the utmost hazard of our lives, that could be; so
unwilling were we, so tender were we, so desirous were we if it were possible,
that these men might have quit their places with honor: And truly, this I am
the longer upon, because it has been in our hearts and consciences, our
Justification, and has never yet been imparted through to the Nation; and we
had rather begin with you to do it, then to have done it before; and do think
indeed, that these transactions be more proper for a verbal communication, then
to have put it into writing: I doubt, whosoever had put it in writing, would
have been tempted to have dipped his pen in anger and wrath. But affairs being at
this posture, that we saw plainly and evidently in some Critical things, 3. The
cause of the people despised by them.
that the Cause of the people of God was a despised thing; truly then we did
believe, that the hands of other men, must be the hands that must be trusted
with it; and then we thought high time for us, to look about us, and to be
sensible of our duty. If I should take up your time, to tell you, what
instances we have to satisfy our Judgments and Consciences, that these were
not vain imaginations, and things that were petitioned for; but that fell
within the compass of our certain knowledge and sense; should I repeat these
things to you, I should do that which I would avoid, to take into these things
too much: 4. A corrupt self-seeking Spirit in them.
only this, if any body were in competition, for any place of real and signal
Trust, how hard and difficult a thing it were to get any thing to be carried,
without making parties; without things indeed, unworthy of a Parliament. And
when things must be carried so in a Supreme Authority; indeed, I think, it is
not as it ought to be. But when it came to other Trials, in that Case of Wales,
which I must confess, for my own part, I set my self upon, if I should inform
what discountenance that business of the poor people of God, there had; 5.
Discountenance upon the people of God in Wales.
who had watching over them, men like so many wolves, ready to catch the Lamb,
as soon as it was brought out into the world: how signally they threw that
business under foot, to the discountenancing of the honest people there, and to
the countenancing of the malignant party of this Commonwealth. I need but say,
it was so; many have felt by sad experience it was so, who will better impart
that business to you, which (for my self and fellow-Officers) I think it was as
perfect a trial of their spirits, as any thing; it being known to many of us,
that God kindles a seed there: indeed hardly to be paralleled since the
Primitive times. I would this had been all the instances; Good to Gods people
under the several forms never intended.
but finding which way their spirits went, and finding that good was never
intended to the people of God, (I mean when I say so) that large comprehension
of them, under the several forms of godliness in this Nation; when I saw that
tenderness was forgotten, to them all (though it was very true, that by their
hands and means, through the blessing of God, they sat were they did) and
affairs, (not to speak it boastingly) had been instrumentally brought to that
issue they were brought to, by the hands of those poor creatures; we thought
this an evil requital. I will not say they were at the uttermost pitch of
Reformation, although I could say, that one thing, the REGULATION of the LAW so
much groaned under in that posture it now is in; there was many words spoken
for it, we know many months together, was not time enough, to pass over one
word called Encumbrances: I say, finding that this was the spirit and
complexion of them, that though these were faults, for which no man should have
dared to lift his hand, simply for their faults, and failings, Neglect of
reforming the Laws.
when yet we saw their intendment was to perpetuate themselves, and men of this
spirit, for some had it from their own mouths, from their own designs, who
could not endure to hear of being dissolved; this was an high breach of Trust,
if they had been a Parliament never violated, fitting as free, and as clear as
ever any sat in ENGLAND; yet if they would go about to perpetuate themselves,
we did think this to be so high a breach of trust, as greater could not be. And
we did not go by guess in this; and to be out of doubt in it, we did (having
that conference among our selves, whereof we gave account) we did desire once
more, the night before the difsolution, [and it had been in our desires, some
two or three days before] that we might speak with some of the principal
persons of the house, that we might with ingenuity open our hearts to them, to
the end we might be either convinced of the ground of their principles and
intentions, to the good of the Nation; or if we could not be convinced, they
would hear our offer, or expedient to prevent this mischief; and indeed we
could not prevail for two or three days, till the night before the dissolution:
there is a touch of this in that our DECLARATION; we had often desired it, at
that time we attained; there were above Twenty of them who were members not of
the least consideration, for interest and ability, with whom we desired to
discourse those things, and had discourse with them; and it pleased the
Gentlemen Officers of the Army to desire me to offer their sense to them; and
indeed it was shortly carried thus; we told them, that the Reason of our desire
to wait upon them, was, that we might know from them, what security lay in the
way of their proceedings so hastily with their Representative, wherein they had
made a few qualifications, (such as they were) and how the whole business
should be executed, we have no account of; and we desired them they would be
pleased, and we thought we had an interest in our lives, estates, and families,
as well as the worst people of the Nation; and that we might be bold, to ask
satisfaction in that; and if they did proceed in honest ways, as might be safe
to the Nation, we might acquiesce therein: When we pressed them to give
satisfaction in this, the Answer was made, that nothing could be good to the
Nation, but the continuance of this Parliament. We wondered that we should have
such a return: we said little to that.

But seeing they would not give us that which might satisfy us that their way
was honest and safe, they would give us leave to make our Objections; We did
tell them, that we thought that way they were going in, would be impracticable:
we could not tell them how it would be brought to pass, to send out an Act of
Parliament into the Country, to have qualifications in an Act to be the Rules
of Electors and Elected, and not to know who should execute this; desired to
know whether the next Parliament were not like to consist of all Presbyters? No
qualifications to seclude Presbyters and Newters
Whether those Qualifications would hinder them? or Newters? and though it be
our desire to value and esteem of that Judgment, only they having been as we
know, having deserted this cause and interest, upon the Kings account, and upon
that closure between them and the Neighbour-Nation; we do think, we must
confess, we had as good have delivered up our Cause into the hands of any, as
into the hands of interessed and biased men; for it is one thing to live
friendly and brotherly; to bear with, and love a person of another judgment in
Religion: another thing to have any so far set into the saddle upon that
account, as that it should be in them, to have all the rest of their Brethren
at mercy. Having had this discourse, making these Objections, of bringing in
Neuters, or such as should impose upon their Brethren, or such as had given
testimony to the Kings party: and objecting to the danger of it, in drawing the
concourse of all people, to arraign every individual person, which indeed did
fall obviously in, and the issue would certainly have been, the putting it into
the hands of men that had little affection to this Cause. The Answer again was
made, [and it was confessed by some, that these Objections did lie; But answer
was mde] by a very eminent person, at the same time, as before, that nothing
would save the Nation, but the continuance of this Parliament. This being so,
we humbly proposed an expedient of ours, which was indeed, to desire that the
Government being in that condition it was, and things being under so much ill
sense abroad, and so likely to come to consusion in every respect, if it went
on; so we desired they would devolve the trust over to persons of honor and
integrity, that were well known, men well-affected to Religion, and the
interest of the Nation: which (we told them, and was confessed) had been no new
thing, when these Nations had been under the like hurly-burly and distractions;
and it was confessed by them, it had been no new thing; we had been at labor
to get presidents to convince them of it. And we told them these things we
offered out of that deep sense we had of the good of the Nations, and the Cause
of Christ; And being Answered to that, nothing would save the Nation but the
continuance of that Parliament (although they would not say, they would
perpetuate it) at that time least of all.

But finding their endeavors did directly tend to it, they gave us this
Answer, That the things we had offered, were of a tender and very weighty
consideration. They did make Objections how we should raise money, and some
other Objections: we told them, that that we offered as an expedient, because
we thought better then that for which no reason was, or thought would be given;
we desired them, to lay the thing seriously to heart: they told us, they would
take consideration of these things till the morning, that they would sleep upon
them. And I think that there was scarce any day, that there sat above 50 or 52
or 53. At the parting, two or three of the chief ones, the very chiefest of
them, did tell us, that they would endeavor the suspending the proceedings of
the Representative, the next day, till they had a further conference; and we
did acquiesce; and had hope, if our expedient would take up a loving debate,
the next day we should have some such issue of our debate, as would have given
a satisfaction to all.

They went away late at night: and the next morning we considering how to order
that which we had to offer to them; when they were to meet in the Evening, word
was brought, they were proceeding with a Representative, with all the eagerness
they could: we did not believe persons of such quality could do it: a second
and a third Messenger told us, they had almost finished it, and had brought it
to that issue with that have, that had never been before; leaving out the
things that did necessarily relate to due qualifications, as we have heard
since, resolved to make it a paper Bill, not to ingross it; that they might
make the quicker dispatch of it. Thus to have thrown all the liberties of the
Nation into the hands that never bled for it; upon this account, we thought it
our duty not to suffer it: and upon this the House was dissolved.

Old Parliament dissolved to preserve the Cause.
This we tell you, that you may so know, that what has been done in the
dissolution of this Parliamont, was as necessary to be done, as the
preservation of this cause; 1. The Assembly called.
and that necessity that led us to do that, has brought us to this issue, of
exercising an extraordinary way, and course, to draw your selves together upon
this account, that you are men who know the Lord, and have made observations of
his mavelous dispensations, and may be trusted with this cause. It remains,
for I shall not acquaint you further with that that relates to your taking upon
you this great business, that being contained in this Paper, in my hand, which
I do offer presently to you, to read, having done that which we thought to have
done upon this ground of necessity, which we know was not feigned necessity,
but real and true, 2. That the Government might not fall.
to the end the Government might not be at a loss, 3. To manifest the
selfdenyal of the Army.
to the end we might manifest to the world the singleness of our hearts, and
integrity, who did those things not to grasp after the power our selves, to
keep it in a Military hand, no not for a day, as far as God enables us with
strength and ability, to put it into the hands that might be called from
several parts of the Nation; this necessity I say, and we hope may say, for our
selves, this integrity of laboring to divest the Sword of the power and
authority in the civil administration of it, has been that that has moved us,
to conclude of this course; and having done that, we think we cannot with the
discharge of our consciences, but offer somewhat unto you, as I said before,
for our own exoneration, it having been the practice of others who have
voluntarily and out of sense of duty divested themselves, and devolved the
Government into the hands of others, it having been the practice, where such
things have been done, and very consonant to reason, together with the
authority, to lay a charge, in such away, as we hope we do, and to press to the
duty, which we have a word or two to offer to you. Truly GOD has called you to
this work, by (I think) as wonderful providence as ever past upon the sons of
men in so short a time. And truly, I think, taking the Arguments of necessity,
(for the Government must not fall) take the appearances of the Will of God in
this thing, I am sure you would have been loath it should have been resigned
into the hands of wicked men and enemies. I am sure, God would not have it so:
It comes therefore to you by way of necessity, it comes to you by the way of
the wise Providence of God, though through weak hands; and therefore, I think,
it coming through our hands, though such as we are, it may not be taken ill, if
we offer to you something as to the discharge of that trust which is incumbent
upon you: And although I seem to speak that which may have the face of a
charge, it is a very humble one; and he that means to be a servant to you, who
are called to the exercise of the supreme Authority, to discharge that, which
he conceives is his duty, in his own and his fellows names; to you I hope who
will take it in good part. And truly, I shall not hold you long in that,
because I hope it is written in your hearts, to approve your selves to God
only; This Scripture I shall remember to you, which has been much upon my
spirit, Hosea 11 and 12 verse, Yet Judah rules with God, and is faithful among
the Saints; Charges the old Parliament in their fasting and praying to compass
God about with lies.
it is said before, Ephraim did compass God about with lies, and Israel with
deceit: how God has been compassed about with Fastings and Thanksgivings, and
other exercises and transactions, I think we have all to lament: why truly you
are called by God, to rule with him, and for him; and you are called to be
faithful with the Saints, who have been somewhat instrumental to your call: he
that rules over men, (the Scripture says) he must be just, ruling in the fear
of God.

And truly, it is better to pray for you, then to counsel you in that, that you
may exercise the judgment of mercy, and truth; I say, it is better for you to
do it, then to advise you, to ask wisdom from heaven for you; which I am
confident many thousands of Saints do this day, and have done, and will do,
through the permission of God, and his assistance, to advise you; only truly I
thought of a Scripture likewise that seems to be but a Scripture of common
application to every man as a Christian, wherein he is counseled to ask
wisdom; and he is told what is that wisdom that is from above, it is pure,
peaceable, gentle, casie to be entreated, full of good fruits, without
partiality, without hypocrisy; and my thoughts ran thus upon this, that the
executing of the judgment of truth, [for that is the judgment that you must
have Wisdom from above for, and that is pure, that will teach you to execute
the judgment of truth, and then] if God give you hearts to be easy to be
entreated, to be peaceable spirits, to be full of good fruits, bearing good
fruits to the Nation, to men as men, to the people of God, to all in their
several stations; this wisdom will teach you to execute the judgment of Mercy
and Truth. And I have little more to say to this; I shall rather bend my
prayers for you in that behalf (as I said before) and I know many others do
also. Truly, the judgment of truth will teach you, to be as just toward an
Unbeleever, as toward a Believer; and it is our duty to do so. I confess, I
have often said it foolishly, If I would miscarry, I would rather do it to a
Believer then to an Unbeleever; perhaps it is a Paradox; but let us take heed
of doing it to either, exercising injustice to either: if God fill our hearts
with such a spirit as Moses and Paul had, which was not only a spirit for the
Believers among the people of God, but for the whole people, he would have dyed
for them; and so Paul to his Countrymen according to the flesh, he could have
dyed for them: truly this will help us to execute the judgment of Truth and
Mercy also.

A second thing is, to desire you would be faithful with the Saints; and I
hope, whatever others may think, ought to be to us all matter of tejoycing,
that as one person our Savior was touched with our infirmities, that he might
be pitiful: I do think this Assembly thus called, is very much touched with the
common infirmity of the Saints; and I hope that will teach you to pity others;
that so Saints of one sort may not be our interest; but that we may have
respect unto all, though of different judgments; And if I did seem to speak any
thing that might seem to reflect upon those of the Presbyterian Judgment, I
think, if you have not an interest of love for them, will hardly answer this
faithfulness to his Saints. I confess, in my pilgrimage, and some exercises I
have had abroad, I did read that Scripture often in Isaiah 41 and 19. When God
gave me and some of my fellows, what he would there and elsewhere, which he
performed for us, and what would he do? to what end? That he might plant in the
wilderness the Cedar, and the Shitta tree, and the Myrtle tree, and the Palm
tree together. To what end? That they might know, and consider, and understand
together, that the hand of the Lord has done this; And that the Lord has
created it, that he wrought all salvation and deliverance, which he has
wrought, for the good of the whole flock; therefore I beseech you (but I think
I need not) have a care of the whole flock, love all the Sheep, love the Lambs,
love all, and tender all, and cherish all, and countenance all, in all things
that are good; and if the poorest Christian, the most mistaken Christian,
should desire to live peaceably and quietly under you, soberly and humbly
desire to lead a life in godliness and honesty; let him be protected.

I think I need as little advise you concerning the propagation of the Gospel,
and encouraging such Ministers and such a Ministry, as be faithful in the Land,
upon whom the true character is, Men that have truly received the spirit for
such a use, which Christians will be well able to discern, and do; men that
have received Gifts from him that ascended on high, and led Captivity Captive,
for the work before mentioned: and truly, the Apostle, Romans 12. when he had
summoned up all the Mercies of God, and the goodness of God, (and has
discoursed of the foundations of the Gospel, and of the several things that are
the subject of his discourse, in the 11 first Chapters) after he has besonght
them to offer up their Souls and Bodies a living sacrifice to God, Romans 12.
he beseeches not to esteem more highly of themselves then they ought, but
that they would be humble and sober minded, and not stretch themselves beyond
their line; but they would have a care to those that had received Gifts to
these uses there mentioned. I speak not (it is far from my heart) for a
Ministry deriving it self through the Papacy, and pretending to that which is
so much insisted upon to be succession: the true succession is through the
Spirit, given in that measure that the Spirit is given; and that is a right
succession; but I need not discourse of these things to you; I am persuaded you
are taught of God, in a greater measure then my self in these things; indeed I
have but one word more to say, and that is, though in that perhaps I shall show
my weakness, it is by way of encouragement to you, to go on in this work.

And give me leave to begin thus: I confess I never looked to see such a day as
this, it may be nor you, Owning Christ in accepting the Call.
when Jesus Christ shall be owned as he is this day, and in this world Jesus
Christ is owned this day by you all, and you own him by your willingness in
appearing here, and you manifest this (as far as poor creatures can) to be a
day of the power of Christ by your willingness: Psa. 110.1.
I know you remember that Scripture in Psalm 110.3. The people shall be willing
in the day of thy Power; God does manifest it to be a day of the power of Jesus
Christ.

Having through so much blood, and so much trials as have been upon these
Nations, made this to be one of the great issues thereof, The Saints called to
Rule.
to have a people called to the Supreme Authority upon such an avowed account,
God has owned his Son by this, and you by your willingness do own Jesus
Christ; and therefore for my part, I confess I did never look to see such a
sight: perhaps you are not known by face one to another; but we must tell you
this, that indeed we have not allowed our selves in the choice of one person,
in whom we had not this good hope, that there was Faith in Jesus Christ, and
love unto all his Saints and People: And thus God has owned you in the face
and eyes of the world, and thus by your coming hither have you owned him, as it
is in Isaiah 43.21. It is an high expression, and look to your own hearts,
whether now or hereafter God shall apply it to you: Esa. 43.21
This people (says he) I have formed for my self, that they might show forth
my praise. It is a memorable place, and I hope not unfitly applied, God apply
it to each of your hearts. Why these called of God. 7. Reasons:
I shall not descant upon the words, they are plain, you are as like the
forming of God as ever people were: 1. Their not seeking to come into Power.
if any man should ask you one by one, and should tender a Book to you, you
would date to swear, that neither directly nor indirectly did you seek to come
hither; you have been passive in coming hither, in being called hither, and
that is an active word, This people I have formed. Consider the Circumstances,
by which you are called together, through what dissiculties, through what
strivings, through what blood you are come hither; Neither you nor I, nor no
man living, three months ago, had a thought to have seen such a company,
taking upon them, or rather being called to the supreme Authority; and
therefore own your call.

Indeed, I think, as it may be truly said, that never was a supreme Authority,
consisting of so numerous a Body as you are, which I believe are above 140,
were never in the supreme Authority, under such a Notion, in such a way of
owning of God, and being owned by him; and therefore I say also, never a people
formed for such a purpose (so called) if it were time to compare your standing
with those that have been called by the suffrages of the people, who can tell
how soon God may fit the People for such a thing, and who would defire any
thing more in the world, but that it might be so? I would all the Lords people
were Prophets, I would they were fit to be called, and fit to call; The Reason
why the Nation is not fit to choose, because not owning Christ's interest.
and it is the longing of our hearts to see them once own the INTEREST OF JESUS
CHRIST; and give me leave to say, if I know any thing in the world, what is
there more like to win the people to the Interest and love of God? Nay, what a
duty will lie upon you to have your conversation such, as that they may love
you, that they may see you lay out your time and spirits for them? Is not this
the most likely way to bring them to their Liberties? and do you not by this
put it upon God to find the time and the season for it? by pouring forth his
Spirit, at least by convincing them, Regal power, thraldom and bondage.
that as men fearing God have fought them out of their thraldom and bondage
under the Regal Power, so men fearing God rule them in the fear of God, and
take care to administer good unto them; but this is some digression. (I say)
own your call; for indeed it is mavelous, and it is of God, 2. Reason,
unthought of, unprojected by them
and it has been unprojected, unthought of by you and us; and that has been
the way God has dealt with us all along, to keep things from our eyes; that
what we have acted, we have seen nothing before us; which also is a witness in
some measure to our integrity; (I say) you are called with a high Call, and why
should we be afraid to say, or think, 3. Because agreeable to the Word of
Promise
that this way, may be the door to usher in things that God has promised and
prophesied of, and to set the hearts of his people to wait for, and expect? We
know who they are that shall war WITH THE LAMB against his enemies. Rev. 17.14
19.14.
They shall BE a people CALLED, CHOSEN AND FAITHFUL, and has in the Military
way, (we must speak it without flattery) I believe you know it, he has acted
with them, and for them, and now in the Civil Power and Authority, and these
are not ill Prognostications for that good we wait for: 4. Because called upon
the account of godliness, the way that God did all thy work in the Army.
indeed, I do think something is at the door, we are at the threshold, and
therefore it becomes us to lift up our heads, and to encourage our selves in
the Lord: and we have some of us thought it our duty to endeavor this way, not
vainly looking on that Prophecy in Daniel, Dan. 2.44.
And the Kingdom shall not be delivered to another people. Truly, God has
brought it into your hands, by his owning and blessing, and calling out a
Military Power, God has persuaded their hearts to be instrumental in calling
you, and this has been set upon our hearts, and upon all the faithful in the
Land, 5. Called by the Saints.
it may be that it is not our duty to deliver it over to any other people, and
that Scripture may be fulfilling now to us, but I may be beyond my line.

But I thank God, I have my hopes exercised in these things, and so I am
persuaded are yours: truly, seeing that these things are so, that you are at
the edge of the Promises and Prophesies, at least if there were neither Promise
for this nor Prophecy, your coveting the best things, endeavoring after the
best things, and as I have said elsewhere, if I were to choose the meanest
Officer in the Army or Commonwealth, The most Prudential way.
I would choose a godly Man that has Principles, especially where trust is to
be committed, because I know where to have a man that has Principles. I
believe if any man of you should choose a Servant, you would do so, and I would
all our Magistrates were so chosen, that may be some effect of this; it is our
duty to choose men that fear the Lord, to praise the Lord, yea, 6. Because such
should praise the Lord in their work.
such as the Lord forms for himself, and he expects not praises from others:
this being so, it puts me in mind of another Scripture, Psalm 68.22. which
indeed is a glorious Prophecy, and I am persuaded fo the Gospel, or it may be
of the Jews; also there it is prophesied, He will bring his people again out of
the depths of the Sea, as once he led Israel through the red Sea; and it may be
some do think God is bringing the Jews home to their station from the Isles of
the Sea: surely when God sets up the glory of the Gospel Church, it shall be
gathering people out of deep waters, out of the multitude of waters; such are
his people, drawn out of the multitudes of the Nations, and people of the
world. And that Psalm will be very glorious in many other parts of it, When he
gave the word, great was the company of them that published it; Kings of the
Armies did flee apace, and she that tarried at home divided the spoil: and
although ye have lain among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with siver, and her feathers with yellow gold. And indeed, the triumph
of that Psalm is exceeding high and great, and God is accomplishing it; and the
close of it, that closes with my heart, and I am persuaded will with yours
also; That God shakes Hills and Mountains, and they reel, and God has a Hill
too, and his Hill is as the Hill of Bashan, and the Chariots of God are twenty
thousand of Angels, and God will dwell upon this Hill for ever. Truly, I am
sorry that I have troubled you, in such a place of heat as this is, so long;
all that I have to say in mine own Name, and in the Names of my
Fellow-Officers, (who have joined with me in this work) That we shall commend
you to the Grace of GOD, and to the guidance of his Spirit, having thus far
served you, (or rather OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST IN IT) we are, as we hope, and
shall be, ready in our stations, according as the Providence of God shall lead
us, Promising Subjection.
to be subservient to the Work of God, and the Authority (which we reckon) God
has set over us. 7. Because the Officers both by Sea and Land, the Churches
and godly people of the Nation, (unsought for, unprojected) gave their hearty
concurrence and desire, herein.
And Although we have no Formal thing to present you with, to which the hands
and outward visible expressions of the hearts of the Officers of the three
Nations are set, yet we may say for them, and we may say also with confidence
for our Brethren at Sea, with whom neither in Scotland nor Ireland, nor at Sea,
has any Artifice been used to persuade their Approbations to this work: yet we
can say, That their consent and affections has flowed in to us from all parts
beyond our expectations; and we are confident we may say with all confidence,
That we have had their approbations, and full consent, unsought indeed to the
other work, so that you have their hearts and affections in this; and not only
they, but we have very many Papers from the Churches of God, throughout the
Nation wonderfully both approving what has been done in removing Obstacles,
and approving what we have done in this very thing. And having said this, I
shall trouble you no more; but if you will be pleased that this instrument may
be read, which I have signed by the advice of the Council of Officers, we shall
then laave you to your own thoughts, and to the guidance of God, to order and
dispose of your selves for further Meetings as you shall see cause.

Acts 11.51. And this spoke he, not of himself; but being high Priest that
year, he prophesied.


FINIS.
A Brief Application ON The Foregoing PAPERS.
ARe these things so? Have we been, and are we so solemnly engaged to the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom, by carrying on a through Reformation according
to the Word of God?

Has there been a Cause of Gods and Christ's pleaded and asserted, which the
upright-hearted in these Nations have owned and adhered to, and which the
superstitious, wicked and profane have scorned and opposed?

Have we been pleading and engaging to blood for Christ against Antichrist? And
is it so, that the Military work never throve until it was put upon that avowed
account, (viz.) men of Principles, fearing God, engaged in it, and making that
the avowed qualification to admit into Office and Trust amonst them?

Has Charles the Father, and his Bishops? Charles the Son, and his Scottish
Presbytery, as Tyrannous and Antichristian, beastly and whorish, as the heads
of the false Magistracy and Ministry, as Enemies to the Kingdom and Interest of
Jesus Christ, and Supporters of the Throne of the Beast; been, with all their
Adherents by Sea and Land, engaged with, vanquished and subdued, broken like
Potters vessels, and the righteous judgments of God executed upon many of the
heads of them as Traitors and Rebels?

Was King and Kingship, as standing in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ,
being as was said, one of the ten horns of the Beast, Rev. 17. taken away?

Was the Parliamentary Authority defaced, garbled, purged, and at last utterly
broke, as Obstructers hereof, and that by the Army at their desire, and to the
great joy of most of the godly in the Land, as having lost the Spirit of the
Cause, and so far degenerated into a selfish and persecuting Spirit, that there
appeared an enmity thereto?

And lastly, was there another people called eminently by the Lord, to own,
assert and carry on this cause and interest of Christ's Kingly Authority, to
whom all due subjection was promised for Christ's sake, as to an Authority God
had set over them to such an end?

1 Quest. Whether it will not necessarily follow, that either the Parliament,
Army, Ministers, and others, that have thus stated, asserted, engaged in such a
cause as Gods and Christ's, and founding it upon the Word of God, to the shaking
and breaking all visible Rule and Government, which for so many hundred years
has in Church and State been over us in these Nations, have either been grossly
deluded, and so become guilty of all the blood that has been spilt in this
quarrel, and consequently a company of Munster-spirited Tyrants, Traitors and
Murderers, as it has been reflected upon them, and so ought to repent in dust
and ashes, and to endeavor all due satisfaction possible to Cavaleers, Scots,
Prelates and Presbyters; or if stated upon sound principles of Truth and
Righteousness, which the Lord has eminently owned and led to, step by step,
and that all this shaking, overturning, that has been made in Church and
State, in order to the pulling down of Babylon, and exalting the Kingdom of his
Son, is warranted and justified by the holy Scripture; then doubtless ought
this Cause to be owned, adhered unto, and pressed after, with all zeal and
fidelity, and they are to be esteemed Apostates, Revolters and Backsliders,
that shall decline or turn aside herefrom?

2 Quest. Whether the Army, who in so much seeming light and love to God,
bringing this glorious cause into the hands of his people, (having broken down
the National constitution) with a declared subjection to them for Christ's sake,
are not guilty of most dreadful Apostasy and Rebellion against him, his Crown
and Dignity?

First, in breaking that Assembly so by the Lord in that eminent manner called
together, whilst in the faithful prosecution of the said cause.

Secondly, in setting up their Apostate General, and afterward his Son, even
in contradiction to all the Lords wondersul works amongst us, as heads of
Church and State, and to whom were made all those blasphemous dreadsul
Addresses, Oaths and Engagements, to the licking up their vomit again, owning
and establishing all the Pride, Tyranny and Idolatry under new names and
pretenses, that had been so contemptuously cast down amongst us, (viz.)
Kingship, Peerage and Prelacy, under the terms of Protector, an Other House and
Tryers, who being set up, and an assay made to confirm all by Parliament, their
Counsel being confounded, so that they could not bring about their Enterprises,
as a further fruit of backsliding, the Army have sought out another invention
to withstand the true heir the Lord Jesus, and kept him from his right, by
calling together such as formerly were by them dissolved, for want of spirit,
and being in opposition to the Lords work; and that it was so in truth, have
not very many of them given sufficient evidence, by being Principals in the
late Apostasy? and the generality such as stuck not to lift up their hands to
the most High, that they would be true and faithful to the now deposed Usurper?
And those few of renown amongst them, whose integrity was tried, it 's to be
feared, in the conclusion, may serve for little more then to give countenance
to what further their deceived hearts are lusting after, of which some proof is
already given in their votes for continuing the oppression in paying Tithes,
keeping from sale Hampton Court and White hall; but more especially their Act
of Indemnity sufficiently justifying the wicked, and consequently condemning
the righteous.

3 Quest. Whether they who have owned the Lord in all his dispensations in the
midst of all these oppositions and declension of others, ought not to be
esteemed the well-affected to the Cause of God, his people and this Nation?
rather then slanderously reported Munster-spirited and fanatic?

Obj. What would these people have? The Cavaleeres old and new, with the
Commonwealths-men, have somewhat to offer; but these neither know what they
say, or whereof they affirm.

Answ. Were it granted they were so weak as not to be able to hold forth some
well-composed Model of Government, being still it may be better at pulling
down, as is said page 24. line 10. then building up and establishing works; is
this a good Argument to slight any rational dissatisfaction to what is now set
up? If Episcopacy had never been taken away until some well ordered Church
Government had been offered to succeed it by the Puritans, (who were then
esteemed as ignoraut, giddy and fanatique because they did not) would it not
have remained to this day? But for further satisfaction, there are four things
in the Assirmative, wherein there seems to be a general agreement amongst this
people, tending much to settlement upon a righteous Foundation.

1. In reference to their Sovereign,
That the Lord Jesus Christ (in whose Name, and by whose blessing and strength
the mighty works have been effected amongst us, against Tyranny in the Civil,
and Antichristianism in the Ecclesiastic State) may be publicly owned Our
only Lord and King; from whom, as the head, all Power, Rule and Authority in
Church and State, is to be derived, in opposition to every other Title; without
which alteration, since the Foundations are out of course, it will be utterly
impossible there should be any subsistence for that: the Image-Government, or
fourth Beasts constitution, must as certainly be overturned and broken, to give
way to this Fifth Kingdom, as the other were broken to give way to the fourth,
Dan. 2.

1 Timothy 6.15. He is the blessed and only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of
lords.

John 5.27. And has given him Authority to execute judgment also: because he
is the Son of man.

Isaiah 9.6. The Government shall be upon his shoulders.

Obj. How can Christ be said to be our King? is he not in heaven?

Answ. God was Isreal's King of old, though heaven was his habitation, 1 Chronicles.
29.23.

Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. 2 Chronicles. 9.8.

When Israel would imitate other Nations in making them a King, they did not
reject Samuel, but the Lord from reigning over them, 1 Samuel 8.7.

And Gideen said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my Son; the
Lord shall rule over them.

Why therefore should it be thought strange, that Christ Jesus should be
admitted to his regal Authority, though in Heaven, to whom the Father has
given all power in Heaven and Earth? And why may not Christ be owned Head of
the State as of the Church, there being hundreds of Congregations through grace
in these Nations, that admit of no other Head or Lawgiver in the Church? And
why may he not as well Rule over and amongst us, as suffer with us all the time
of Antichrists Reign, all that is done to his, being done unto himself? And
these things are asserted in the Covenant, but more fully by the General and
Officers of the Army in their forementioned Letters and Declarations.

2. In reference to Laws,
That the Laws of this great King, as they are recorded in the Old and New
Testament, remaining in force since his death, be the declared Laws of this
Nation, in opposition to the Heathenish, Tyrannous and Popish Laws yet in force
amongst us.

Isai. 8.19. Should not a people seek unto their god? to the Laws, to the
Testimonies?

Isa. 23.22. The Lord is our Lawgiver, he is our King, he will save us.

Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.

Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation so great as has statutes and judgments so righteous as
all this Law set before you?

Keep therefore and do them: for this is your wisdom and understanding in the
sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this
generation is a wise and understanding people.

Deuteronomy. 17.18,19,20. And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his
Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book: and it shall be
with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn
to fear the Lord his God, that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren.

It Is a Maxim in the Law, asserted by Finch the great Lawyer, Cook and others,
that no Act of Parliament, or Law repugnant to the Law of God, is of any force:
but how well our Lawmakers have lived up hereto, read Mr. Boon's Examen legum
Angliae; who comparing our Laws with the Scriptures, finds 68 Laws expressly
contrary to the Scriptures.

Read that excellent Letter of Eleutherius to King Lucius, page 8. what light
herein was declared for in that day.

3. In reference to the Administrators.
That the people most read, and best practicers of this excellent and perfect
Law, be chosen out to the Administration thereof under Christ, in opposition to
the ignorant, profane and scandalous; and all, both old and new Malignants,
that have visibly opposed him in his Word and Works, and not given some
suitable testimony of repentance.

Exodus 18.21. Number. 11.16. Deuteronomy. 1.13. Thoushalt provide of all the people, able
men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over
them to be Rulers.

2 Samuel 23.2,3,4. The Spirit of the Lord spoke, and the Rock of Israel said, He
that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

Isai. 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors
as at the beginning.

Which principle is further asserted,

1. By the Armies Petition, 13 August, 1652. who pray, that only men fearing
God, and hating covetousness, should be put into places of Authority and Trust,
and that all profane, scandalous and disaffected persons should be outed; and
the neglect hereof, given as one of the grounds of the Parliaments dissolution.

2. By the present Assembly at Westminster in their Declaration May 9. 1659.
That all such as shall be in any place of Trust and Power within this
Commonwealth, be able for the discharge of such Trust, and that they be persons
fearing God, that have given testimony of their true love to all the people of
God, and of their faithfuiness to the cause of this Commonwealth, according to
their Declaration of the seventh of May, 1659. in which Declaration they
further say, That they shall vigorously endeavor the carrying on of
Reformation so much desired, and so often declared for, to the end there may be
a godly and faithful Magistracy and Ministry upheld in these Nations, to the
glory and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reviving and making glad
the hearts of the upright in the Land. But how well these good words are put in
practice, look within their own walls, and may you not find diverse of the late
Tyrants Council, that persecuted and imprisoned so many of Gods people for
their faithful witness to the Cause?

Is not their Speaker one of the new upstart Lords? and are there not many
others of the same stamp that sat in the Other House?

How many are there that swore Allegiance and fidelity, both to the deceased
and late deposed Protector?

How many scandalous persons?

How many unworthy Mercenary Lawyers?

And will these men pass for men fearing God, true Lovers of Gods people, and
faithful to the Cause? Are such like to carry on a vigorous and through
Reformation so much desired, to the glory and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and making glad the hearts of the upright?

4. In reference to the Ecclesiastical State.
1. That a through Reformation be pressed after, according as is expressed in the
Covenant, agreeable to the Word of God, and best reformed Churches.

2. That such a Ministry may without restraint go forth, as are faithful, and
have received the Spirit, and gifts from on high for such a work, and that are
made able Ministers of the New Testament, accepting Christ's work out of love to
souls, together with such wages as he has left in his word.

3. That all Ecclesiastical Officers and Offices (so called) depending upon the
Hierarchy, may be extirpated root and branch, whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Patrons, etc. with their Maintenance, Tithes, Offerings, Oblations, Obventions,
Tenths, First Fruits, as deriving their Rise and Authority from Antichrist,
supported by the Beast, and for which there is not the least footing in the
Word of God.

4. That the Magistrate intermeddle not in the matters of Christ's Church, or
Spiritual concernment, imposing either Ministry maintenance, or forms of
worship, suited to his interest; which has been the ground of all body and
soul-oppression.

These being faithfully observed, will administer equal and impartial justice
to every one, and tend to the recovery of the primitive (and prophesied to be
restored) Ordinance of Magistracy, making it a terror to evil doers, and a
praise to them that do well, so that none in well-doing, of what persuasion
soever, can have cause to doubt of being protected in their persons and
proprieties from such as shall attempt upon any pretense whatsoever to invade
the same, or of being in an equal capacity with others qualified for electing
or being elected to a participation of Rule, as any ability for the same may be
given to them.

Page 23. line 35. for politic, read public. Page 25. line 16. for thereby,
read then by. Page 33. line 8. for petitioned for, read pretended to.
There are other lesser faults; but these needfully require amendment with the
Pen, or mention of them in an Errata.

FINIS.

