STAYPODIDA KAI STAYPONIK. THE Doctrine and Dominion OF THE CROSS: In an
Historical Narration and Spiritual Application of the PASSION of JESUS.

Written first in Latin by John Ferus Public Preacher in the City of Mentz.
Now turned into English for the good of this Nation.

By Henry Pinnell.

Together with a Preface of the Translator, containing the Necessity of knowing
and conforming unto the Cross of Christ. Short considerations of
Predestination, Redemption, Free Will, and Original sin.

He that serves in his Generation faithfully, answers the end of his
Creation fully, and shall never lose the hope of his salvation finally.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, 1659.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THE Transcription of the following Treatise is an Account of some vacant time,
when I was sequesterd from other employment: The subject matter of it did
generally concur and suit with that state and measure of Faith I was then in;
and being persuaded that it may yet be useful for them whose growth in the
Mystery of the Cross is not come to that perfection as not to need Counsel
and Encouragement therein, I have for their sake made it public. And though I
cannot minister to the strong, yet I would gladly be serviceable to the weak.
What I have here prefixed, (agreeable to the nature of the ensuing Discourse) is
done to satisfy the desire of many friends, and in hope to profit others. The
sum of what I have to say, is comprehended in this Proposition, viz. That there
is a Necessity of knowing and conforming unto the death of Christ.

2. There does not want full and pregnant proof of Scripture to confirm the
Truth of this Proposition; It is a faithful saying, For if we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him; If we suffer, we shall also reign with him;
If we deny him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.11,12. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, etc. If we be dead with Christ,
etc. Romans 6.5,8. Let none dream of Justification unto life, or of the new birth
which only enters into the Kingdom of God, without the likeness and image of
Christ in his humiliation. And therefore the Apostle does not content himself
with the knowledge only that Christ died, but desires also a conformity to his
death, Phil. 3.10. A strong curb and smart scourge to all notional and
licentious Gospellers. The reasons also of this Proposition are weighty and
considerable: 1.
As first,

3. We can have no benefit of the life of Christ, but by conformity to his
death. Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the
life also of Jesus might be manifest in our body, etc. 2 Cor. 4.10,11. What
need we carry the death, dying, and marks of the Lord Jesus in our body and
mortal flesh, if the life of Christ could otherwise or more easily appear? The
life of a Believer is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. There Is no coming at
the full Glory of this life, but by breaking through death unto it: See Romans
6.3. etc. the place before cited. The dead men of God are quickened by the dead
body of Christ, Isa. 26.19. No future Resurrection unto life, but by an
antecedent death in the body: Except the grain of Wheat die, it abides alone,
and is not quickened, John 12.24. 1 Cor. 15.36. The touch of a dead Prophet
revived the body of another dead man, 2 King. 13.21. Who is this dead Prophet,
but the true and spiritual Elisha, my Lord that saves, the Lord of my
salvation, my saving Lord, Jesus Christ the great Prophet of the most high God,
who died for our sins, and was raised again for our Justification? This Elisha,
this Jesus let us follow, not only from Galilee to Jerusalem, but from
Jerusalem also here below, the outward and litteral Service, and Worship, unto
Mount Calvery, and from thence to the Sepulcher; thither let us hasten with
Mary Magdalen, aad the two other Disciples, and there let us wait; we shall
have some Angelical invitation to come near, and see the place where the Lord
lay. The Lord is risen, and has left room enough in his grave to receive all
that inquire into the Mystery of his death. Into this Sepulcher let us descend
by a true operating says, working a conformity in us unto his death: Let us
touch, not the flesh, but the bones of this great Elisha; Let us not lay bold
on the weakness of the mortal nature, but upon the Power of his endless life. 2.
Secondly,

4. Without this conformity there is no freedom from sin. We must resist unto
Blood, striving against sin; for without blood there is no Remission: And that
our minds may not be weary, nor faint, Let us consider him that suffered such
contradiction of sinners, Heb. 12.3,4. 1 John 1.7. Lev. 17.11. Heb. 9.22. The
Prophet Ezekiel describes the Sickness and Remedy of a sinner under the
borrowed speech of a newborn Child, Ezekiel. 16. Which place of the Prophet, (I
think) is much mistaken by many, who understand it of the natural birth, and
accordingly from thence conclude all Children guilty of original sin in the
common acceptance of it: which to me seems most improbable. For Children, by
natural as well as spiritual Propagation, are an Heritage and Reward of the
Lord, Genesis 30.2. Psalm 127.3. Acts 17.28.
Our very bodily Being, Substance and Existence is the Workmanship of God,
Psalm 119.73. and Psalm 139.5,13,16. Now if Children be guilty of sin as soon
as they draw breath, yea, before they be born, this would be some stain upon
the Work-manship of God, according to whose Will, and not according to man's, it
is that Children are propagated. Again, One of Gods Laws would be broken by
observing another Ordinance of his own, which would bring confusion upon the
orderly works and methodical ways of God. For God has made a Law, That the son
shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, Ezekiel. 18.20. Now if Children should
be guilty of Adams sia as soon as they be born, it would make many religious
and conscientious persons be at a stand concerning marriage, which is the first
and great Ordinance of God, for fear lest they should be Instruments to fill
the world with sinners, rather than with Saints. And indeed how can that state
be honorable, and the bed undefiled, if it should produce nothing but such an
unclean Offspring? Heb. 13.4.

5. I shall only add this Quaere, viz Is Marriage an Ordinance of God
instituted (among other ends) for the propagation of Mankind? I suppose it
granted. I ask then, Did God ever make and intend such an Ordinance, the
observation whereof does unavoidably increase sin in the world? If so, How is
he acquitted fram having a hand in man's sin? The wicked heart of man has shifts
and evasions to extenuate and excuse his sin. Why, He is not so much to be
blamed; 'twas his Fathers and Mothers fault rather then his; Hominum quoque
mors est, quae nes cunque promunt alieno imponere tergo.
they begat and brought him forth in sin; how could he help it? Nay, rather
then take shame to himself, God must bear the blame of all, as one that
destined him to that Event: And this is not counted for Blasphemy. Well, But if
thou could not hinder or prevent thy Fathers fault, must thou needs commit
the same thy self? Why will thou marry to make the world more sinful, and
cause thy Children to cry out against thee for infecting them with sin? But he
that can understand the fifth Chapter of Genesis, and also Wisdom 7. and 8.
Chap. he will not be bound to the Traditions of men concerning original sin.
Wherefore when we find sin in us, let us not complain of our Parents; curse not
the very Devil, lest it fall on thy self, Ecclus. 21.27. Much less impute it to
God, Jam. 1.13,14. But let us take shame to our selves: this will keep us low,
and humble, and watchful over our selves.

6. If any shall object, and say, that Children cannot come clean into the
world because of the uncleanness of their Parents, who are the Instruments of
their Propagation, for which they urge Psalm 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, in
sin did my mother warm me. I answer, (1) With the Examiners of the Assembly of
Divines Confession of Faith: Had David no father and another but Jesse and his
wife? (2) What if David (like his son Solomon) was fashioned in the womb to be
flesh, and compacted in blood, ( Wisd. 7.2.) Does it therefore follow that he
was made sinful, and born sinfully unclean? Might he not have a good spirit
and a clean soul breathed into an undefiled body? Wisd. 8.19,20. Is not a fresh
fish spawned in the brackish sea? And when the spirit of life enters into it,
does the salt water change the fresh property of its nature? It is God that
forms us in the belly, we are his work-manship, and be (though none but he)
can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean; His work is perfect,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. He can produce a fresh fish in a brinish sea. But, (3) If the
strength of the Argument for a personal pollution of Children in their
conception and birth do lie in this Proposition, viz. That the Instruments of
their generation are unclean, and from hence an affirmative conclusion be
inferred, viz. Therefore the Children also must be inherently and really
sinful; then I say a very great inconvenience (if not a gross absurdity) will
follow from the like way of arguing in a matter of greater moment. As for
example: The Redemption of mankind by the blood of Christ was a pure, perfect,
holy and undefiled work; and the fore Knowledge, Counsel and Purpose of God
that he should be delivered to death was an unspotted Act in God; yet the death
of Christ being effected and brought about by the Interposition and Conjuction
of wicked hands, ( Acts 2.23.) that oblation of Christ for sin to work out our
Redemption, must (if the former reasoning hold good) be stained, and
consequently become imperfect and insufficient to accomplish that which he did
intend and undertake, by reason of those wicked Instruments which had a hand in
bringing it to pass. Now if there be such a Critical and Spagyrick skill in the
divine Wisdom as to separate the precious thoughts of God, and keep them
distinct from the vile plots and purposes of wicked men in the sin-offering of
Christ, whereby that sacrifice became no way defective; why can he not bring
forth Children of the womb, which are the work of his hands, without any
hereditary defilement, notwithstanding the inordinate affections and unruly
passions of their parents? (4) Add hereunto, That there is a spiritual
begetting of a holy seed and righteous people into the life of God, a
nourishing of their Faith, Hope, etc. in that life unto a full measure, and
perfect growth, and stature of Christ by the Spirit and Word of God in the true
preaching of the true Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Ephesians. 4.11,12,13 Col. 1.28. So that
the state and life of a Believer (as a Believer) must be perfect here or never,
unless we grant a Purgatory. Which state and life of the Believer is here
completed by the concurrence and cooperation of the Ministers of Christ, 2
Cor. 6.1. But these Preachers you will say (according to the opinion of those
who say, there is, or can be none perfect upon earth) are not without their
particular failings and infirmities, none of them; no, not the best of them:
and yet you dare not deny but that the work of God in their Repentance, Faith,
Hope, etc. is perfect, notwithstanding the Ministers imperfection. If the wise
and holy God knows how to distinguish the work of his Spirit and Grace, and
preserve it entire and pure from tht Obliquity of the Creature in the greater
and more difficult work; can he not do so in things of lesser moment? For
doubtless the Serpent is more desirous and industrious to blend and mingle his
lies, and the deceit of his false Prophets with the Truth of God in the
Conversion of a sinner, then he is studious and diligent to defile the minds of
Parents, and inject a venomous quality into their Children in the womb;
(although his malicious endeavor is not wanting in this also) because he well
knows, that if a man be once turned from the error of his ways, and perfectly
united unto God, he is then quite out of his reach, he has no hopes of ever
gaining such a one: but though God bring a man as clean into the world as he
did Adam, yet he thinks he may have time and opportunity to seduce him by his
subtilty, as well as he did prevail against Eve in the beginning. Again, (5)
Let it be granted that some Children are, and have been conceived and brought
forth guilty of their parents sin; it does not follow that all have been, and
are so born, unless you conclude with the forementioned sort of men, that
there are none so redeemed and sanctified as to know one another with pure and
undefiled souls: or else that there is no such mutual Knowledge after
Conversion and Regeneration, which you will not (I suppose) affirm: Or else you
must say that a good Tree and pure fountain may send forth bad fruit and filthy
water. True it is, That Eve brought forth her eldest child, and called his name
Cain, a wicked man, in the figure of the fall, Genesis 4.1. And it is as true, That
Adam begat a son in his own likeness, in the image of God, after his
Restoration, or new Creation, Genesis 5.1,3. What difference some men make now
adays between the Children of Bel^evers and Unbelievers, baptizing some, and
denying others, grounding the reason of their so doing upon Acts 2.39. 1 Cor.
7.14. is no negative Argument against the point in hand. (6) Lastly. Whereas
the main proof to conclude Children guilty of sin in the womb, is taken from
that of David, Psalm 51.5. it will not be altogether lost labor to consider,
whether that Text will not admit of another genuine reading besides that which
our Translators render. The word [(...)] here rendered, I was fashioned, may as
well be turned, I have been afraid, sore troubled, grieved, etc. And so [(...)]
In sin has my mother conceived me, may be read, In sin has my mother warmed
me, or, Calefacta est matter de me, my mother has been warmed, heated by me; so
Pagnin. My mother has brought me forth with sorrow and pain, Cum dolere
parturiit me matter; so Symmachus and Aquila, two of the ancientest Translators,
as Theodoret cites them. So thaet the Text, with the Context, may admit this
Paraphrastical reading; i. e. Against thee, thee only have I (not my mother,
but I) sinned: taking all the shame and guilt upon himself, not charging his
Mother with the cause of his sin against Uriah and his Wife. And now behold in,
by, or for this iniquity ( viz. the sin of evil concupiscence, as the Chaldee
calls it, the Original of his Actual sin) I am exceedingly afflicted and very
much grieved. My Mother (indeed) brought me forth with sorrowful labor and
painful Travel, ( Genesis 3.16.) for she has sinned against thee, and she
(perhaps being in sin) conceived me. But her sin was not the cause of my
Adultery and Murder, that was my own Act; nor did her sin make me guilty, for
the child shall not bear the iniquity of the Father: but when I had lusted, I
sinned; and when I had committed the sin, I became liable to the condemnation
of death: My father and mother are not to be blamed. To this purpose Anselmus
reasons the case; If Adam (says he) could not traduce or convey over his
original Righteousness to his posterity, neither could be transmit his original
unrighteousness; but he could not the one, nor the other. But this may seem to
contradict what was said of Adams begetting Seth. Therefore I say that it is
not in the Will, and at the pleasure of man to beget Children which shall prove
either good or bad, however a good or a bad man may beget such as may be good
or evil. And they are good, either as they continue as God made them, or else
by returning again into that state by Repentance and Faith in Christ; or they
are bad by consenting unto the motions and temptations of sin and Satan. So
Cain was not evil as he came out of Gods hands, but as he was born, and became
a child of the devil.

That heat wherewith David warmed his mother (as Pagnin reads it) was not any
sin of him in her womb; for there the child does not defile the mother, but (as
they say) the mother the child: But his mother might well be troubled to see
her son commit such heinous sins as Adultery and Murder, and say as another
does, Prove. 31.1,2,3,4 5. What my son, the son of my womb! Give not thy
strength unto women, etc. It is not for thee, O David, my son, it is not for
thee to commit such wickedness against the Lord who has saved thee from the
Lion, the Bear, and the uncircumcised Philistin, and has made thee King over
Israel; it is not for thee so to requite thy God, it does not become thee, I am
sorry to hear such things of thee. So that David might justly complain against
himself, and say, Against thee only have I, even I, sinned, and done this evil
in thy fight, for which I am now so greatly perplexed, and for which my mother
is incensed, and so highly displeased with me. What violence is offered to this
Text and Context, or to the general scope of the whole Scripture by this manner
of reading, I do not yet understand.

This might further be insisted upon, but that I am not about a Treatise, but a
Preface. I do not peremtorily and arrogantly impose these things, but meekly
offer them to the consideration of those who are more learned and illuminate,
if happily the Truth and glory of God by this occasion may be brought more to
light. I know I have trod besides the beaten road; but if curiosity and
singularity, rather then simplicity and integrity were my guides, I should not
adventure any further.

7. Wherefore I rather take that place of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 16. to signify
and demonstrate the corrupt, fallen and sinful state of man, into which he is
begotten by the deceitful and destructive spirit, after he has received the
natural life from his Parents: (Not denying but that literally and historically
it holds forth the Idolatrous state, into which Judah and Jerusalem were then
degenerated.) Canaan signifies Humility or a Merchant.
And this spiritual sense seems to be most aimed at by the Allegory: For there
is a time when we all wander into the land of Canaan, when we are seduced by a
voluntary show of Humility, Col. 2.18. to become Merchants for Heaven by our
chosen Righteousness and legal works; are rather Factors for Satan, selling our
selves to iniquity and sin for naught, and parting with our precious souls for
no money. In this Cananitish Country we find ten native lusts, (answerable to
the number of the Inbabitants in Canaan, Genesis 15.19,20,21.) standing in
opposition to the ten Precepts and seed of God. These disobedient properties
are begotten by that Amorite, the vain Talker, great Pratler, cruel Rebel, that
Father of lies, the Devil, who was a liar from the beginning, who by his
sleights and cunning craftiness, fair speeches and subtle delusions lay in
wait to beguil our first parents, and cheat them of the pearl of their
innocence, being now an Amoritish father unto them, begetting them into the
disobedience and rebellion of his own nature, having been himself a cursed
Rebel before. To this Amoritish father, the Hittite, our whorish heart, the
true Hittite, being broken asunder from God, joyneth, and becomes a mother is
bring forth the sinful brood: Lust when it has conceived brings forth sin,
and when it is finished, brings forth death, James 1.15. And thus we come to
be denominated sinners and Children of wrath. And so neither do I deny original
sin, but grant there is a time for sin to have its original and beginning in
us, as it had in Adam.

8. Thus we have found out man's sickness, what it is, how he catches it, and
is infected with it. His Remedy and Recovery is there also described; I spread
my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I swear unto thee, and
entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine,
verse 8. The skirt wherewith God covers us, before he enters into Covenant
with us, is the death of Christ, the blood of the everlasting Covenant, as will
appear anon when the signification of the skirt shall be explained. I have yet
further to show you, that all our freedom from sin is by the death and blood of
Christ, whether we consider sin, First, In respect of the power of it, which is
exercised, either in with holding from good, or drawing into evil; of both
which the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.19,20. Secondly, In respect of the filth of
it: Sin is a filthy thing, an unclean, corrupt, rotten thing, like the
putrified matter of an Ulcer, Sore, Apostemation, or running issue, Lev. 15.2
Isa. 1.6. Mat. 9.20. Thirdly, In respect of the guilt of it. Sin is always
accompanied with guilt, it never goes without it, either sensibly, or
insensibly: How heavy did it lie on Cain Judas? etc. Fourthly, In respect of
the deformity of it. Sin is an uncomly, unseemly, ugly thing: it makes a man
not look like himself, it defaceth Gods Image in man, so that he cannot, he
does not, or will not know him: Verily I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity.
Sin is a spot, ( Deuteronomy. 32.5.) which causes a blot or blemish where it is. It
is no beauty spot, and I could wish that the beauty-spots of our times did not
arise from this filthy spot of sin: Fifthly In respect of the enmity of it. Sin
stands in utter hatred and detestation to all good. Purity and Holiness, Genesis
3.15. Gal. 5.17. Sixthly, In regard of the curse. Sin has a most doleful and
lamentable execration annexed unto it, In sorrow shall thou conceive, cursed is
the ground for thy sake, in the sweat of thy brow shall thou eat thy bread,
cursed art thou above all cattle, and above every beast of the field, Genesis 3.

9. Now there can be no deliverance from sin in any of these considerations
without death. The death of Christ is our original Copy, acoording to which
there is a necessity for us to write. For as much then as Christ has suffered
for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind, for he that
has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1. No freedom from
sin, till there be a conformity to Christ's sufferings in the flesh. It is with
us as it was with Israel of old: We are strangers and bondmen in a sinful
Egypt, in an Egyptian nature of sin; we groan, and would gladly be gone out
of it, but cannot, nor shall we till the Paschal Lamb be offered, Exodus 12. And
as that Lamb was to be offered in the same land, out of which Israel was to be
delivered; so must we, by the oblation of Christ, offer up our selves in that
state, out of which we would be set at liberty. Let us present our bodies a
living sacrifice, and lay all our living lusts upon the Altar of the Cross. Let
us die in the body, and live in the spirit, suffer in the flesh, and cease from
sin. Christ has been, as it were, plainly pictured forth before our eyes,
(...), crucified in us, in our nature. Let us noe trample upon his blood; Let
us not turn this Grace of God into wantonness, nor make Christ to become of
none effect to us. Thirdly,

10. Without this knowledge of Christ's death, and conformity to it, all our
other parts and gifts, let them seem never so great, large, spacious, high,
strong, excellent, yea, holy and spiritual, they will all vanish, and come to
nothing, if they be not confirmed to us in the blood of the Covenant. It Is the
observation of a learned and Mr. William Bridge.
pious man, That an Hypocrite may pray away all his graces. If our Gifts and
Graces be not deeply rooted in the mortification, they may easily evaporate in
the hollow expressions of a verbal and empty prayer; Knowledge will expire into
pride, and puff up the mind where it is; true Humility will vanish into a
voluntary show of it; Charity will be blasted with ostentation, etc. if it be
not poised, regulated, limited and modified by a serious and unfeigned
self-denial. A man may borrow or steal, he may filch, flock and pilfer the Word
of the Lord from his Neighbor, Jer. 23.30. He may pick up a great many good
sayings and sentences of grave and godly men, and with them make a shift to
patch and piece up a Prayer or Sermon, and if the memory be good, or the Notes
fairly written, a man may seem to be gayly adorned with the rich indowments of
a large furnished mind.

11. We read in 2 King. 6. what the sons of the Prophets said to Elisha, and
what they did, by his consent, when they were straightened for room. It is said,
they asked leave to fell timber at Jordan, that they might enlarge their
dwelling: The Prophet grants their desire. But one, wiser then the rest among
them, bethought himself that it was wisdom to have the Prophets company, and
not to go about the business altogether upon their own head: he asks, and the
Prophet yields; away they go to Jordan, every man with his Ax or Hatchet in
his hand; only one had none of his own, but was fain to borrow his tool to work
with: down go the trees: But this man lost his Hatchet before he could cut down
his Beam; the head flew from the helve, and fell into Jordan, yer he could
finish his work; he makes his moan to his Master, complaining, that it was
borrowed: the Prophet puts a stick of wood into the water, and the Iron
swimmeth; the man recovers it again, and makes an end of what he had began.

12. All Scripture is spiritual; for it was given by inspiration, and therefore
the spirituallest sense must needs come nearest the mind of the Spirit.
There is a spiritual use to be made of this spiritual part of Scripture, which
the holy Spirit of God has directed to be written, and taken care that it be
kept upon Record. The place where Elisha and the young Prophets were at first,
is supposed to be at Dothan, which signifies a Gift, Satute or Law; sometimes
it is rendered a Defection, or falling short of what it does or should press
unto. And this latter sense will agree well enough with the former: For the
Law, which was the gift of God from mount Sinai, made nothing perfect, Heb.
7.19. This place is mentioned but twice in all the Scriptures; as first in Genesis
37,17. Hither Joseph's brethren rambled without their fathers knowledge or
consent, even eight miles from Shechem where their business was, like good
husbands as they were, and here they first conspire their brothers death:
Shechem signifies a Lot, Portion, Shoulder or Tomb
To teach us that when we gad and wander from the true Shechem, the lot which
God has appointed us, and the business which he has set us to do, when we
omit our duty, neglect our obedience, when we withdraw our shoulder from the
burden of Christ, and pull our neck from his yoke, it will be no advantage to
run to Dothan; all our Letter-learnedness and Scripture-knowledge will stand us
in little stead, yea it will incense and enrage us against the Mystery of
Christ, and instigate us with an irregular zeal to conspire the death of our
true Joseph; it was by the learned in the letter and in the Law, the Scribes,
Pharisees and Lawyers, who forsook the royal Law of Love and Obedience, yet
were literally zealous, it was by these that Christ suffered, and still does
suffer. There are that are called Jews, and yet are of the very Synagogue of
Satan. Thus the Law without the spirit of life is a dead and killing letter, a
Ministration of Condemnation. If the spiritual Jacob be not with us at Dothan,
we shall plot and contrive our dearest brother Joseph's death.

13. But here (2 Kin. 6.) we have Elisha conversing in Dothan with the sons of
the Prophets, who being inflamed with his presence, importune him for greater
enlargement. Doubtless there is a time when our true Elisha Christ Jesus
walks with his Children, in low, legal, literal and fleshly Ministrations,
nurseth them up with milk like babes, and allows them Tutors and Governors in
their Non age. Only let us beware that we do not with the Scribes and Pharisees,
stick to the empty letter, that we ramble not to Dothan, when neither old Jacob
our father, nor Elisha our Prophet is there; let us not run after the servant
when he is cast out of doors, nor hearken to Moses when Christ is come; for
then though we make our boast of the Law, yet shall we dishonor God by
breaking it; Romans 2. Now we shall know if Christ be yet with us under the Law:
if so, our hearts will be inflamed, and long for greater enlargement, and
complain of our present straitnings; whereas a mere literal and formal
Christian loves his ease, is content to stand at a stay, will not endure to
hear of removing farther then he has already attained, cries out against all
notions more spiritual then his own, as Delusions, Dreams, Enthusiasms, etc.
But the true sons of the spiritual Prophet are still groaning after the
manifestation and glorious freedom of the sons of God, Romans 8. And therefore
they are ever crying out, My father, my father, O Christ, O Lord Jesus, thou
everlasting father, I am straightened, enlarge my heart that I may run the ways of
thy Commandments; I am straightened where I now am: make room, give place that I
may dwell in the everlasting habitations, Isa. 49.20. I am content to break
through death to come to those Mansions: I am weary of this Tabernacle; remove
my Tent, uncloth me, that I may be clothed, and let mortality be swallowed up
of life. Go with me to Jordan, baptize me in that river; how am I straightened
till it be accomplished? Mortify the sinful lusts and affections of my flesh,
crucify my old man day by day; rend his vail of flesh, that with open face. I
may behold thy glory, be changed into the same image, and come to the spirits
of just men made perfect, and to the Spirit of the Lord, where is liberty and
perfect freeedom, 2 Cor 3.17,18. Heb. 12.23.

14.This is the nature and property of them that are taught of God, and have
learned and obeyed the truth as it is in Jesus. But then there are some even
among these Children of the Prophets, the true Professors of Godliness, who go
along for a while undiscerned, like Cain, Judas, the man at the marriage feast,
and this man here among the sons of the Prophets; they make a great show and
bustle about Religion, a great stir and noise there is about Christ crucified,
and subduing of their lusts; they hack and hew at the tree, and talk much of
mortification; but before they can effect it, the Axflies from the helve, their
gifts and parts fail them, and the work is at a stand, And why? Surely their
gifts were borrowed, and did not flow from their obedience to Christ, and
experience of his Doctrine, but they picked a notion from one, a sentence from
another, they laid a great many good words in the memory, and these they made
use of in the self-will and wisdom, in the lust of the flesh, the pride of
life, vainglory and ostentation, seeming to be wise, but knowing nothing as
they ought to know, patching up a self-conceited Righteousness, thereby
deluding their own souls. And then they will be made to acknowledge, and say,
Alas, Lord, they were borrowed. Now there is no remedy for such till these fall
off from a man's self, and fall into Jordan, the river of Judgment and
Condemnation, till a man deny himself, and sell or lose all that he has; then
the true Elisha makes the Iron to swim, that he may go and finish his work.
Thus he that loses his life shall save it; and he that parts with House,
Land, Goods, Father, Friends, Gifts, Parts, Indowments, etc. shall receive them
again in this life an hundred fold. Happy are they whose loss is their gain.
But fourthly,

15. There is no ascending to the highest enjoyment, except we first descend
into the deepest abasement. It is said of Christ, that he humbled himself even
to the death of the Cross; and for that cause, God has highly exalted him, and
given him a name above every name, Phil. 2,8,9. If we also would have a name
better then that of sons and daughters: if we would be called Hephtzi-bah and
Beulah, Isa. 62.4. Ruth 3.7,9
let us do as Ruth did unto Boaz, let us lie down at the feet of Christ, and
desire him to cast the skirt of his garment over us, as one nigh of kin unto
us. Christ has a twofold garment, the one of Glory and Majesty, in which he
walks among the Angels and the spiritual Church; He clotheth himself with
Light as with a garment, Psalm 104.2 His raiment is white as the Light. Mat.
17.20. Rev. 1.13. His other garment is of shame and baseness. With this he
conversed among men upon earth; He was found in fashion as a servant, Phil.
2.8. In the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. He was made sin for us, 2 Cor.
5.21. In this humane nature of ours was his Diety clothed, and hid for a
season; The lowest state of this humanity, the very border, hem or skirt of
which garment, that touches the ground, was the great humiliation of Christ,
humbling himself to the most ignominious and shameful death of the Cross.

16. If therefore we would have Christ do the office of a kinsman to us; (for
he is our kins-man, nigh unto us, flesh of our flesh, and bone of bone, one
that is not ashamed to call us brethren, who has right to redeem us) if we
would have him take away our reproach of barrenness, and make us fruitful in
the knowledge of himself: let us lie down at his feet, humble our selves to
walk as he walked, desire him to spread his skirt over us, to conform us to his
death; that we may be transformed into the likeness of his Resurrection. If we
would have our sinful name, our name of shame blotted out, if we would have
our bloody issue stopped, let us do as the woman in the Gospel, let us press
through the press of all worldly and fleshly encumbrances and discouragements,
resolving within our selves, that if we may but touch this hem of his garment
we shall be whole, Mat. 9.20,21. Mar. 5.27,28. For doubtless all that do touch
it really, truly, believingly, spiritually and indeed, are made perfectly
whole, Mat. 14.36.

17. The necessity of descending into this low estate of self-denial,
Humiliation, Mortification and Death, is fully and significantly proposed by
our blessed Lord and Redeemer, John 10. where he says, that he is the door of
the sheep: The door is the entrance into the house, and is placed in the lowest
part thereof, at the bottom, not at the top of the house. Christ is our new and
living way. When Longinus the soldier pierced his side with the spear, there
was an entrance, a door made for us into the holiest, that we might go into it
with liberty or boldness, to be saved, and go in and out and find pasture, John
10.7,9. and chap. 19.34. Hebrews 10.19,20.

18. But woe and alas! how many spiritual Thieves and Robbers are there now
adays in the world? How many pass by the door, and seek to climb into the
sheepfold some other way? There are too many who profess the death of Christ
with their tongue, but in their deeds deny and make void the same. Men can talk
much of free Grace and Justification by the death of Christ; but continue
hypocrites, deceitful, proud, envious, ambitious, covetous, contentious, etc.
Corruption optimi, p^ssima.
This is to turn the Grace of God into wanttonness, and corrupt the best
things, which is the worst thing of all. These are Thieves and Robbers, who
think to steal into the Sheepfold of the divine Nature without crucifying the
flash with the affections and lusts: Such thieves cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. For such men rob Christ of the virtue of his sufferings
and death, and make him die in vain, in that they refuse to fill up that which
is behind of the afflictions of Christ in their flesh, Col. 1.24. and deny to
bear about in their body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10. Psalm 76.4.
But God is of more Honor and Might then the hills of the Robbers, more
glorious and more excellent then the mountains of prey; he will pull down these
mighty ones from their seat, he will abase these high, lofty, vain conceited
men, and exalt the humble and meek. Ephesians 4.28.
Wherefore let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor in Gods
Vineyard, doing his work and will; not slothful in this great business, but
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, and working out his own salvation with
fear and trembling, Romans 12.11. Phil. 2.12. 5.
Fifthly,

19. So long as men continue in the old state of their sinful nature, they can
have no assurance of the life to come; therefore it is necessary that they
know, and conform to the death of Christ, for the crucifying of that which
hinders their assurance. When Hezekiah was sick, the sign of his recovery was
the Suns going back ten degrees, 2 King. 20.10. This retrogradation of the
Firmamental Sun in the Dyal of Ahaz, the Jewish Doctors do mystically apply to
the Exinanition of the Sun of Righteousness, to Christ's emptying himself till
he became of no reputation, whose declination from the height of his fathers
glory, till he came under the contradiction of sinners against the shame of the
Cross, they distribute it into ten degrees. The first gradual descent toward
his abasement was into an Angel; for he is the Angel or Messenger of the great
Counsel of God, who came out of the bosom of the Father to reveal him unto the
sons of men, and is as willing a Messenger from man to present his desires with
much incense unto God, John 1.18. Rev. 8 3. His second descent was into the
Patriarcks, the figures of himself, filling them with the Mystery of himself;
for he that ascended did also first descend into the lowest parts, that he
might fill all things. The third degree was in giving the Law, in which he
spoke to the Jews, and which was disposed by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.
Fourthly, Into Joshua, as being the true Joshna or Jesus that leads the whole
Israel of God into the spiritual land of Promise. His fifth descent was seen in
the Judges, it being he that governed that people by those men, who is the
great Judge of the quick and the dead, before whose Judgment seat all must
appear to give an account of things done in the body. His sixth in the Kings of
the Jews, in whom he reigned over that people as the true and rightful King of
the inward and faithful Jew. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, was his
unrepealable title upon the Cross, John 19.19,22. Psalm 2.6.
He it is that is set as King upon the mount of Gods holiness, to reign in
Righteousness, Isa 32.1. To be Ruler in Israel, Mic. 5.2. Who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. Seventhly, In the Prophets: It is he that spoke
by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke
1.70. This is the Prophet which Moses said should come up after him, whom we
ought to hear, Deuteronomy. 18.15. To fulfill that saying, And they shall be all
taught of God, Isa. 54.13. John 6.45. Eighthly, In the high Priests, for they
were all but shadows, of whom Christ was the substance: read the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Ninthly, In man, when he assumed our nature. It was for us men, and
our salvation that the Almighty Word of God leapt down from Heaven like a
fierce man of War into the midst of a land of destruction, and was incarnate by
the holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, and was made flesh, (...), and pitched his
Tent among us, or in us, Wisd. 18.15,16. John 1.14. Tenthly, In his Humiliation
unto that ignominious death of the Cross. Here was the winter Solstice, or
shortest day of the year, at which time some say Christ was born: This is the
tenth degree of descent in the Dyal of Ahaz; the lowest and utmost declination
of the Sun of Righteousness was in his death, burial and descention into hell.

20. What censure soever the eight first Degrees may undergo, as Cabalistical
conceits, is not much material: There can be no Dspute about the two last by
any that acknowledge Christ to be come in the flesh. For he was truly a man in
our nature, with which nature of ours he harnessed himself, like a man of War,
(Exodus 15.3.) and fought it out hand to fist in a single Duel with the Devil;
in which Combat he stood it out unto the death, and thereby overcame him that
had the power of death, to wit, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. And withal vanquishing
death and hell, 1 Cor. 15.55. Hos. 13.14. Read Col. 2.14,15.
Thus he put off his harness of flesh and blood, (of which he took part with
the Children, Heb. 2.) as well as put it on; No man took it from him, 1 Kings
20.11. John 10.18.

21. Thus Christ when he was in the height of his perfection, in perfect Glory,
filling all in all, the fullness and end of the Law for Righteousness, the
Lawgiver above the Law, yet in the fullness of time was made of a woman, made
under the Law, became a curse for us, to redeem us from the curse of the Law,
Gal. 3.13. and chap. 4.4. By this going back-ward of Christ unto the tenth
degree of death, we have hope of life to come. His going back-ward was his
progress to his journeyes end; for his ways are not our ways, but rather
contrary to them. Thus our true Joseph having been in prison, and taken out
from among men, is afterward rightly called Zaphnath-paaneah, i.e. a man to
whom secrets are revealed, or in the Egyptian tongue, a Savior of the world,
Genesis 41.14,45. Isa. 53.8. John 3.17. and chap. 12.47. Let us imitate our Lord;
for even hereunto are we called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Let us resist unto
blood, striving against sin, suffering in the flesh, that we may cease from
sin, Heb. 12.4. 1 Pet. 4 1. Ponder these things seriously. 6.
Sixthly,

22. We cannot understand nor submit unto the Gospel, unless we know and
conform unto the death of Christ. The sum of the Gospel is Christ crucified, 1
Cor. 2.2. There is a doleful doom denounced against all those that obey not
this Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.7,8,9,10. It is not enough for
us to make our boast of the Gospel, except we obey it, no advantage comes by
it; Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the Will of the Father, Mat. 7.21. He that does the
Will, shall know the Doctrine, John 7.17. Now we must know, that every man is
brutish in his knowledge, and born a wild Asses Colt, Jer. 10.14. Job 11.12.
Psalm 92.6. Wherefore it is necessary that every man take up his Cross daily,
and crucify this brutish man which is so ignorant of the Mystery of God, and
altogether incapable to understand it, and put on the new man which is created
after God in Righteousness, Holiness, and Knowledge, 1 Cor. 2.14. Ephesians.
4.22,23,24. Col. 3.9,10. The old must be put off before the new can be put on.
Obedience is the best Usher unto knowledge. 7.
Seventhly,

23. The grand Mystery of iniquity works in the contrary Doctrine. When the
Devil suspected what ruin and desolation was like to come upon his kingdom by
the death of Christ, he did what possibly he could to save his life by Pilates
wife. And so he is still stirring some to be enemies to his Cross, Phil 3.18.
The old subtle Serpent argues with us, as he did with our first Parents: Yea,
says he, does God require such strictness and circumspect walking? does he
(think ye) delight to afflict his creature, the work of his hands? will he have
thee die, mortify and crucify thy self? Far be it from thee, These things
shall not happen unto thee, Mat. 16.22,23. Has not Christ suffered for thy
sins? has not he made full satisfaction, and done all for thee? Is there any
thing left for thee to do? Can thou add to the virtue of his blood? Will thou
fall back again to the Law, and be justified by the works thereof? Is not this
flat Popery? Away, away with these legal and pensive thoughts, they make thee
melancholy, dull and indisposed to good things. Will thou separate not only
from the profane Gentile, but from the outward and formal Jew also? Can thou
by taking thought, add one Cubit to his stature? Were not the works finished
from the foundation of the world? Mat. 6.27. Heb. 4 3. Be not righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise; Why should thou destroy thy self?
Eccles. 7.16.

24. Look upon the high and mighty professors of the world; Are not the preud
among them happy, and they that tempt God by Pride, Ambition, Covetousness,
Hypocrisy, Perjury, breach of Promises, Covenants, Vows, Oaths and
Protestations, Rebellion, Domineering, are they not delivered, delivered to do
all abominations? Does not their Bull gender, and fails not? have they not
more then heart can wish, so that pride compasses them about as a chain, and
violence covers them as a Garment? Mal. 3.15. Jer. 7.9,10,11. etc. Job.
21.10. Psalm 73.4,5,6,7. Take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, to morrow
shall be as this day. Thus the crafty Serpent insinnateth his damnable
Doctrine, by his false Prophets, into the minds of simple, ignorant,
presumptuous Gospellers themselves; Whereas the true Believer says, It is his
meat and drink to do the Will of his Lord and Master, (John 4.34.) To beat down
his body, and bring it into subjection, 1 Cor 9.27. Nothing is more glory to
him then such tribulation; he takes pleasure in such necessity and distresses
for Christ's sake, and is glad that he can die daily, that the world may be
crucified unto him, and he unto the world, Romans 5.3. 2 Cor. 12.10. 1 Cor.
15.31. Gal. 6.14. 8.
Eighthly,

25. Without this knowledge and conformity there can be no perseverance in
Godliness. The Hypocrite will not pray always, he cannot; many begin to run
well, but are driven back from obeying the Truth, Gal. 5.7. They are clogd with
the care of preserving the worldly life, they are full yet with their youthful
lusts, and the sins of their riper years: These youths shall faint, and such
young men utterly fail, because they do not eat and drink the flesh and blood
of the Son of man, that they might have life and strength to persevere; they do
not (by eating and drinking) incorporate the living bread and drink by a lively
faith, that they might grow thereby, Isa. 40.30, John 6.33.35,48,51. unto verse
59. 1 Pet. 2.2. and 2 Pet. 3.18. But the righteous shall hold on his way, and
he that has clean hands, that has washed them in innocence, in the innocent
blood of the Lamb, he shall wax stronger and stronger; his light shall be as
the shining light, which increases to a perfect day, Job 17.9. Prove. 10.29.
and chap. 4.18. But they that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, and
mount up with wings as Eagles, Psalm. 103.5. Isa. 40.31. The Eagle is sharp of
sight, swift and lofty in flight, it can soar up, and look upon the Sun: So do
all true Believers who have anointed their eyes with the spiritual eye salve
(Rev. 3.18.) which makes them quick-sighted; but then (like Eagles) they
resort unto the Carcass, Mat. 24.28. They have continual Recourse unto the
crucified body of Christ, refreshing themselves with that heavenly food,
turning it into the nourishment of their inward and new man, and growing up
therein unto a likeness and conformity unto that food. These do not miscarry,
nor come short of their aim. 9.
Ninthly,

26. There can be no due performance of any acceptable service unto God without
it. The Apostle exhorts us, ( Romans 12.1.) to offer up our bodies a living
sacrifice, acceptable to God. For it is said of Cain, That he offered unto the
Lord of the fruit of the ground, Genesis 4.3. He brought an earthly, dead,
liveless offering, and was not accepted. But Abel brought of the fat of the
flock. verse 4. He offered the Firstling of his fold, a pure, clean, lively
sacrifice, unto which God had respect; it was more excellent then his Brothers,
Heb. 11.4. How came this to pass? The Apostle tells us, it was by faith. The
life of faith is in death, and by death; that lives when we are dead; I am
crucified with Christ, yet I live, and I live in the flesh by the faith of the
Son of God, Gal. 2.20. He had a life in the flesh after he was dead to the
flesh. Faith indeed shall cease, but it is not till the end of the second life.
The principal act of faith is exercised in death, the death of Christ, and is a
conforming virtue or power unto the likeness thereof by mortification and
offering up of the flesh with the affections and lusts unto death, Gal. 5.24.
God accepts nothing but what is done in this faith, by this faith in the Son
of God, John 15.5. Heb. 11.5.

27. We read in 1 Samuel 15.9. That Saul spared Agag the King, and the best of
the spoil; but that which was vile, and refuse, and good for nothing, that he
and the people utterly dastroyed. Saul was an hypocritical Tyrant, ambitiously
aspiring to a Kingdom, and got it: God gave a King in his anger. He that aims
at the Scepter is not the best Saint.

28. Saul was a right Machiavilian, he knew the high way to the Crown. When
Ephraim spoke trembling he exalted himself in Israel, Hos. 13.1.
When he was mean and low in a poor condition, and little in his own sight, he
could bow and cringe, flatter, fawn upon and comply with the vulgar, bemoan and
pity the burdens of the poor people, especially the good people of the land;
he could stand cap in hand to the meanest, and like Absalom, court them into a
good conceit of his Clemency and care of their welfare, assuring them that if
it were in his power to remedy it, things should not be carried as they are;
but first he put himself into a soldiers posture, 2. Sam. 15.1,2,3,4,5. Now he
rode post in the right rode to be the head of the Tribes of Israel, Commander
in chief over the military Forces, 1 Samuel 15.17. yea God himself might so far
have his work to do under his proud design, as to give him a Call to be King,
and fight his battles, as is plain in the place cited, which might confirm him
in a good opinion of himself to undertake the Government, especially if some
musty Prophesies had been raked together, and by a Court-Parasite particularly
applied to him: It Is as common for the highest as the meanest to be deluded,
and mistake or mis-use many passages of Gods Providence. But now he is King, he
grows covetous and self-ended; he falls upon the spoil and the prey of the
enemy, who seemed before to contemn all self-interest and advantage, Sam.
15.19. His feigned and forged excuse of reserving it for Gods worship would not
serve his turn. How faulty then are those who do not so much as pretend any
thing for Gods service, but openly convert the common loss into their private
gain? This is that which will involve a Nation in broils and blood.

29. But alas! How many such Saul's has the world seen since Saul's time? who
can part with that which is not worth the keeping, but withold from God that
which he requires as his due. If God call for the heart, they bring him the
lip and tongue only: If God require spirit and Truth, they offer in the
mountain, and at Jerusalem: they put him off with complements, outside
service, formality, and a State-Religion. Dissembling Pharisees, they exact and
pay Tithe of Mint and Rue, but neglect Judgment, Mercy, Faith, the love of God
and their Neighbor, Mat. 23.23. When God commands the best and fattest to be
given him, they put him off with the leanest, with the fruit of the ground: If
they pretend to dedicate the best unto God, they intend to make their own
advantage out of it. They may refrain from Extortion, Adultery, etc. but
continue proud, heady, high-minaed, covetous, etc. yet be very devout too, fast
twice in the week, give a small Alms out of their superfluity and ill gotten
goods, pay Tithes, give their Minister his due, and applaud him, censure all
that be contrary-minded to them as profane. etc. Isa. 65.4,5. Luke 18.11,12.

30. Those sacrifices are acceptable to God that are turned into ashes, Psalm
20.3. This must be done by fire the heavenly fire of zeal and love, which
separateth and consumes the gross body of flesh, and turns and reduces all
into a pure essential and spiritual body; out of which ashet is made the savory
salt of the heavenly nature which seasoneth all things. And therefore the Lord
is said to plead with all flesh by fire, Isa. 66.16. He has his fire in Zion,
and his furnace in Jerusalem, Isa, 31.9. with which refining fire he does
purify the sons of Levi, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
Righteousness, Mal. 3.3. Mat. 3.12. No oblation in Righteousness, but by fire:
it is the fire of the Spirit that consumes the fuel of the flesh, Romans 8.13. We
must pass through water and fire before we can come into the wealthly place,
Psalm 66.12. Without fire we cannot subsist in the natural life, much less can
we perform the Actions of the spiritual life without it.

31. Under the Law the daily sacrifice was not to cease, Number. 28.3,4. and this
Oblation was to be made by fire. He that causes this to cease, is the He-goat,
Dan. 9.29.
Dan. 8.11,12,13. The vile person, Dan. 11.21,31. the Beast, the Whore, the
false Prophet that speaks lies in the name of the Lord: It is Anti Christ
that sets up a Religion in the world without the Cross. Whosoever is zealous
toward God without Self-denial, Mortification, and conformity to the death of
Christ, his zeal is not according to knowledge, which will make him seek to
establish his own in stead of Gods Righteousness, Romans 10.2,3. Whosoever
rejects the Cross can be no true Christian. Wherefore think it not strange
concerning this fiery trial also which is to come upon you, as though some
strange thing happened unto you; But rejoice rather, although (...), The
righteous is not saved without great labor and pains, hard struggling and
striving, sore Combats and Conflicts, 1 Pet. 4.12,13,17,18. Make not that way
too wide, which God has made strait. All must go the narrow way, who would
enter into life; For every one must be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
must be salted with salt, Mar. 9.49. 10.
Tenthly,

32. No right attention or obedience to the Will of God without it. The ear,
says Aristotle, is the Organ of Discipline; and St. Paul says, That faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. But there are some that be uncircumcised in heart
and ears, Acts 7.51. dead in the uncircumcision of their flesh, Col. 2.13. The
inner ear lies in the heart; We must circumcise the fore skin thereof, Jer.
4.4. For the true Circumcision is that of the heart, Romans 2.29. The heart is
the fountain of filthiness, Mat. 15.18,19,20. If this be not washed from
wickedness by the washing of of regeneration, we cannot be saved; for it will
wax gross and fat, and make the ears dull of hearing, Jer. 4.14. Tit. 3.5. Mat.
13.14,15. In the Levitical Law the sons of Aaron the Priests were to have the
blood of the sacrifice put upon the tip of their right ear, the Thumbs of their
right hand, and the great Toes of their right feet, Lev. 8.24. Those whom
Christ does make Priests unto God, (1. Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6.) he does cleanse and
purify from head to foot, from top to Toe, that he may present them to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy, and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. He will sprinkle our ears, that
they mey be healed of that poisonous Dectrine of Disobedience, those venomous
Charms of the old serpent, and be unstopt to hear what the Lord shall say. He
will sprinkle our right thumbs that we may be ready to do the Will of our
Father which is in Heaven: He will sprinkle our right Toes, that we may walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, showing out of a good Conversation
our works with meekness of Wisdom, proving indeed that we are endued with
knowledge, Ephesians. 5.15. Jam. 3.13. The cleanness of our feet must show the
cleanness of our head: If our feet be clean, it does imply that our hands and
our head are washed, John 13.10. Pure Practice cannot be without true
knowledge. If we receive Christ for Wisdom, we must receive him also for
Obedience: As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, Col
2.6. Christ came to wash head, hands and feet; to cleanse our Infancy, Youth
and old Age; to purify the three essential parts of man; to sanctify us
throughout, in Spirit, Soul and Body, 1 These. 5.23. Again,

33. It is the best Guardian to the inner man. The outward man is liable to
many dangers; but the inward is subject to many more: The outward may have
great assauls, but the inner much greater: We wrestle not with flesh and blood,
but with Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickedness in heavenly
places, or things, Ephesians. 6.12. The War in Heaven is hotter and sharper then that
on earth: That on earth is with men, that in Heaven is agaiust the old great
red Dragon, Rev. 12.7. A cut in the flesh is easily born and cured; but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? The one lets out the blood, the other poisons it;
the one lanceth the skin, the other pierces the heart. Heart-wounds (though
not incurable, yet) are hard to be cured. Most Combats of the outward man are
in the day time, when he can see to defend himself; but the Conflicts of the
inner man are in the night as well as the day, and as often, when that restless
roaring Lion seeks to devour us, 1 Pet. 5.8. Faith cannot be idle or sottishsy
secure; for it never wants an enemy. As it is not without an enemy, so it is
not destitute of Refuge and Aid; it has the clefts of the Rock the open ribs
of Christ to shelter and secure it self in, Can. 2.14. This is the strong hold
we are to flee unto, the mountain and banner of safety: His Banner over me was
love, Can. 2.4, He loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20.

34. This Ensign of the Cross is that which terrifieth our spiritual enemies;
the sight of it does conquer and chase them away. But then we must hold it in
our eye, and in our hand, look upon him whom we have pierced, and beholding his
sufferings, suffer with him, smite our breasts, and return; let us search and
try our ways, our works, our thoughts, and turn to the Lord. It is reported of
Constantine, that in one of his battles he saw the sign of the Cross over his
head in the air, with this Motto, In hoc signo vinces, this is that which shall
give thee victory: Luke 23.48. Lam. 3.4^.
doubtless we cannot get the Day, or win the field without it. Our inner man
cannot ride on prosperously, except this march in the Van, and beat down them
that hate us. Nor can we keep what we have got, but by this means. Non minor
est virtus qua^ quaerere parta tuerl.
And therefore we find it recorded of Hester, that she did the commands of
Mordecai after she came to the Crown, like as when she was brought up with him,
Hest. 2.7,20.

35. Hester and Mordecai were two captive Jews, carried away in the Captivity
by Nebuchadonezer into Babylon. Hester was left an Orphan, of whom her kins-man
Mordecai took care after the death of her Father and Mother. Now these things
(as the Apostle says in the like case) are an Allegory, and have their
mystical signification. Hester is as much as to say Hidden, and may imply the
hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. Mordecai is bitter contrition, or teaching
contrition, and was Guardian to Hester. Whereby we are instructed, that
affliction, or the Cross is a good Protector, Tutor, Fosterer and Nurse to the
inner man. Ego in flagello paratus sum, says the vulgar Latin, Psalm, 38.17.
the scourge is our Sehoolmaster. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child;
but the rod of Correction shall drive it far from him, Prove. 22.15. Thy Rod and
thy staff comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. Our light Afflictions which are but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day,
verse 16. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ, 1 Cor. 1.5. Wherefore faint not when thou art rebuked,
it is for thy profit and good, that thou may be partaker of Gods holiness,
Heb. 12.5,9,10. Neither must we think that this Cross and Rod is of use unto us
in our Nonage or Childhood only, but that it is profitable for us in our
riper years also; not only whilst we are children in understanding, but when we
are grown in Christ; when we come to the Crown, as well as when we lay in
captivity. Too many cast off the Cross too soon, and so expose themselves to
the snares of the wicked one. Hadassa observed and obeyed Mordecai in her
Royalty as well as in her slavery, and this became the safety of her self and
of all the Jews. Twelfthly,

36. It is the best Preservative against Schism and Heresy. When Bigthan and
Teresh, the two Chamberlains of Ahasuerus had conspired treason, Est. 2.21,22.
and sought to lay hands on their Master the King, the plot was discovered and
disappointed by Mordecai who sat in the Kings gate. If this Scripture (as all
should) be spiritually applied, it will suit with our purpose in hand. What the
meaning of Mordecai is, you have already heard. Bigthan is derived from (...)
Meat, and (...) Dare to give, also Tradere to give up, or betray, as it is said
of Pilate, Tradidit Jesum voluntati eorum, Luke 23.25. He delivered Jesus to
their Will. Haereticus est qui dogmata veritatis corrumpit; Schismaticus, qui
vincula unitatis disrumpit.
Bigthan then is one that gives meat, but that gives or casts the Childrens
bread unto dogs, and may personate the Heretic, who does pervert and corrupt
the Doctrine of Truth, teaching Placentia flattering Fallacies, sowing Pillows
to men's Elbows, giving the Promises to the vile, and threats to the precious
ones. Teresh springs from (...) to make poor, to rend, tear, destroy: and may
well signify the Schismatic, who breaks the Unity of the spirit, Faith,
Truth, pure Doctrine, and the bond of peace. By these two Traitors the King of
Glory is in danger to be crucified afresh; not in Heaven, but in our hearts;
not in his person, but in the faith of him. Let Mordecai sit in the Kings gate;
Prove. 4.23.
make him the Porter of the heart; he will spy out the treasonous thoughts
that offer to make insurrection against our true Ahasuerus, our blessed head.
And when he has discovered the danger, reward and exalt him, and hang proud
Haman that makes the trouble and uproar in the soul, that multiplieth
Rebellion: No matter what becomes of him, he is but the son of Amedatha, a
troubler of the Law, one that seeks to make that void on earth which God has
established for ever in Heaven: An Agagite, a proud aspiring fellow that would
rule before he know how to obey, climb to the top of the house before he has
passed the Portal; Set Mordecai to watch him. The Cross is the royal standard;
the Kings person is always near it, very near it, and is secured by it in us,
though not in himself, Again,

37. We cannot approach unto God and his altar, or draw nigh unto Christ, but
by mortification through Christ! If we would reason (...) Praeparare,
Disputare, Arguere, if we would prepare our selves to dispute, reason or argue
with God, we must first wash and make us clean, put away the evil of our
doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1.16,18. We must wash our
hands in innocence before we can compass Gods Altar, Psalm 26.6. We cannot lay
our gift upon the Altar, it must lie only before the Altar until we have made
reconciliation with our elder Brother first, and with our younger brethren too,
by crucifying that enmity which is in us against them, Mat. 5.23,24. Our
Disobedience, Malice, Envy and Hatred is done away by the washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3.3,5. And therefore Moses was commanded to place the Laver
between the Tent of the congregation and the Altar, that they might wash as
they went between the one and the other, Exodus 40.30. Let us keep our hands and
feet clean, and then we may go boldly to the Throne of Grace, and find help in
time of need. Again,

38. It is the only Seed-plot and Nursery of true peace with God and man. As
toward God, they that sow in tears, shall reap in singing, Psalm 126.5,6.
Sorrow is the seminary of solace; Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall
be comforted. Mat. 5.4. It causes a diligent care and watchfulness against
that which would disturb our peace, 2 Cor. 7.11. Peace shall be restored to the
Mourners, Isa. 57.18,19. Bitter Roots bear pleasant fruit; sweet is the comfort
of the Cross. Godly sorrow is the womb of the greatest gladness: Although the
Travel be in pain, yet the birth is with Joy that a man-child is born into the
(little) world, John 16.21. Mary signifies bitterness, she was the mother of
Christ. That which the mother, the creature calls Benoni, the son of my
grief, God the Father may name Benjamin, the son of his right hand's The man of
sorrows, Isa. 53.3. is the man of Gods right hand, whom he has made strong for
himself, Psalm 80.17. That mighty one upon whom the Lord has laid help for all
mankind also, Psalm. 89 19 The days man that is able to lay his hands both on
God and man, and can save to the utmost, Job 9.33. Hebrew. 7.25.

39. Christ is said to be our Peace, reconciling both in himself, staying the
enmity, but no otherways then by the Cross, Ephesians. 2.14,15,16 Col. 1.20,21. The
strength of God is in his arm, and the arm of God is Christ, Isa. 53.1. John
12.38. This is that high hand and outstretched arm of the Lord, with which he
smitteth the first born of our lusts, the strength of Ham, the power of that
subtle and crafty one, and brings us out of the Egyptian straits of the old
nature, Psalm 78.51. and 136.10,12. But when Christ has smitten the first born
of our lusts, and destroyed the strength of our corruptions in our Egypt, our
old nature, in his own body, we must follow him as our true Moses, as he that
draws us after him out of our land of bondage, out of our selves, and leads
us toward the good land of peace, and all the precious Promises of God, even
through the red sea of his sufferings by an actual and personal entering into
the same, passing through the same after him as our Leader and Forerunner;
then shall we see Pharaoh and all his host, Satan, and all his Temptations,
with our lusts, and all together drowned and swallowed up therein. And thus
being justified by (this obedient and conforming) Faith, we have peace with
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom 5.1. Wherefore let us not stay any
longer in Egypt, in our fleshly nature, where we cannot sacrifice unto the Lord
our God, seeing the first born, the strength of our sins is broken and s^ain;
Psalm. 73.9, 57.
Neither let us turn our backs or start aside like a broken bow in the day of
Battle, seeing we have the arm of the Lord to trust unto, and lay hold upon for
our help in obtaining our peace, Isa. 27. The Creation groaneth under the
bondage of corruption, and would fain get into the manifestation and glorious
freedom of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19,21. Let the Israel of God go, seek not to
bring and keep it under the bondage of Corruption; Let not our lusts prevail
and bear sway any longer: they will separate and make a breach between God and
our souls, Isa. 59.2.

40. As our peace with God is hereby procured and preserved, so is it also with
men. Our Lord and Savior tells us, ( Mat. 5.22.) Genesis 4.6. Tit. 1.13.
That whosoever is angry with his brother (...), rashly, inconfiderately,
without a reason, shall be in danger of Judgment: Why art thou wrath? and why
is thy countenance fallen? Indeed such may be the case, that we ought to be
highly displeased with our Brother, and rebuke him (...), sharply, bitterly; as
when he does that which does any ways hinder the Glory of God, or the good of
man. Thus Christ was sorely displeased, (...), he was wroth, or had indignation
against his own Disciples, Mar. 10.14 Get thee behind me Satan, said he to
Peter, (a sharp rebuke) when he did but unwittingly, and out of his respect to
his Master too, speak that which savoured not of God, but tended to hinder the
salvation of Mankind, Mat. 16.23. But there is a causless anger proceeding from
the flesh, causing divisions and War, 1 Cor. 3.3. Jam 4.1. This cannot be
quenched but by crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.
When the Apostle had exhorted to be kind and tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, he proposes a Pattern, the following whereof will lead unto the end
to which we are exhorted, viz. Forgiving one another, as God in Christ has
freely forgiven us: This he would have us imitate in God as dear Children. This
forgiveness is by walking in love; this love must be conformable to that of
Christ to us, Ephesians. 4 32. and 5.1,2. There is a gracious Promise, (Isa. 2.4.)
concerning the coming of Christ, that men shall beat their swords into
Plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and the Na^ions shall learn
War no more. When Christ is formed in the hearts of men, and they conformed to
the heart of Christ, we shall see Halcyon days; then shall men live in
Quietness, Love and Peace. When the root of Jesse shall stand up for an Ensign,
then Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim, Isaiah
11.10,13.

41. Lastly, In this knowledge of, and conformity unto the death of Christ,
there is Cornucopia, abundance of all things, fullness of satisfaction, and
plenty of all good. No good thing will be wanting, Psalm 84.11. and 34.10. Si
Christum discis, sati; est si caetera nescis; Si Christum nescis, nihil est si
caetera discis.
They that enter into Gods house through this door shall be abundantly
satissied with the fatness and goodness thereof, Psalm 36.8. and 65.4. Luke
15.17. John 10.9. All things come with this knowledge of Christ, Romans 8.32.
Here is the fatted Calf, the paschal Lamb, the feast of fat things which the
Lord makes unto all people in his holy mountain, Isa. 25.6. Which mountain may
well have respect unto Mount Calvary where our Lord was crucified, as the 7th.
8th. 9th. verses of that Chapter seem to intimate; for there the Lord feasted
all mankind with the riches and sweetness of his love. David says, Psalm
17.15. That he should be satisfied when he did awake with Gods likeness. God,
likeness or image is Holiness and Righteousness. We must first sleep in Jesus,
1 These. 4.14. by dying with him, and then awake unto Righteousness, and sin
not, 1 Cor. 15.34. The Apostle seems to affirm, that they have but little
knowledge of God who continue in sin. Its a great shame, and a sign that men
are grossly ignorant of the Grace of God and the death of Christ, when they
shall so audaciously affirm, that there is no living without sin so long as we
are in the body: They deny the first Resurrection in Deed, though not in Word.
They err concerning the Truth, and seek to overthrow the faith of some, who
say, that the Resurrection is past already, 2 Timothy 2.18. For though Christ be
risen as the first fruits from the dead, yet the Resurrection is not complete
in the body, although it be in the head: There Is much of the Harvest to come in
when the first fruits are gathered. As there are sufferings of Christ behind, (
Col. 1.24) so is there also a Resurrection behind: We must suffer too, if we
will reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Great is the Glory that does follow the
sufferings of Christ, Luke 24.26. 1 Pet. 1.11. When Ruth lay dewn at the feet
of Booz, it was at an heap of corn, and when she arose, she was laden
therewith, Ruth 3.6,7,15. If we humble our selves in conformity to the death of
Christ, we shall have more then six measures of Barely; we shall have an
hundred fold here, and inherit everlasting life, Mat. 19.29. Unto which blessed
state of Rest and Glory, God of his infinite Mercy bring us all through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

WHat I have more to say to you in particular, my ancient Friends and
Acquaintance of And elsewhere.
Brinkworth, may not seem so pertinent and agreeable to the Subject in hand;
yet I shall here insert it, because I know not whether ever I shall make use of
the Press any more hereafter. My endeavor is to give you satisfaction
concerning those things about which there has been some disagreement in our
Judgments; of which I shall give you my understanding and present apprehension
very briefly.
42. That there is a Prescience and Prevision in the most Holy and only wise
God, whereby he did and does foreknow and foresee from all Eternity all
things that are, or shall be unto Eternity, this I deny not. But that there is
such an absolute and peremptory Decree in God (either according to the
Supralapsarian or Sublapsarian opinion) reprobating some men irrecoverably and
unavoidably to Eternal damnation, hating them before they were, and
necesstating them by virtue of such a Decree to sin after they had a Being,
unto this I cannot consent.

43. For if God had hated any thing before it was, be would never have given it
a Being, as the wise man says, Thou have Mercy upon all, for thou can do all
things, and winkest at the sins of men, because they should amend: for thou
love all the things that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have made; for
never would thou have made any thing, if thou have hated it, Wisd 11.23,24.
Nor can I believe that there is any impulsion (as some say) in the Decree of
God as a cause or an occasion for man to sin: For we must not say, that it is
through the Lord that we fall away, or that he has caused us to err, for he
has no need of the sinful man, Eccl. 15.11,12.

44. These two Texts of those Wise men (though Apocryphal) prevail more with me
then the contrary assertions of all others whatsoever. And the Apostle James is
positive and clear in this Truth: Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evils, neither tempts he any
man, Jam. 1.13. So that to affirm there is an inherent coercion in the Decree
of God necessitating men unto or toward their final Ruin, is to impute a
greater and more inevitable cause of man's destruction to God irresistibly
subjecting him thereunto, then to the Devil who can but tempt and entice him to
sin, having no power (at first) to force him to commit it. Again,

45. Some of you suspect me to be an Arminian, that I hold Free Will, and a
power in man to do good. And this ye think is a departing from the Faith, a
denying of Principles, a contradiction to what I wrote against Baker, a
forsaking my first Love, which has made you decline my Ministry. I have waited
now about two years to give you satisfaction, and have solicited a private
Discourse, but could never yet obtain it. Surely that opinion is much to be
suspected that is unwilling to come to trial, John 3.20. But I shall not now
insist much on these things; The Points in question have been and are in debate
already between godly and learned men, from whom you may expect further
satisfaction. All that I have to say if only this, i. e.

46. Josh. 22.
When Joshua had sent the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half Tribe of
Manasseh unto their possession which Moses had appointed them in the promised
Land, their lot fell on the other side of Jordan, and thither they go: The rest
of Israel stay on this side Jordan. Shortly after the devout Reubenites, etc.
build an Altar, of which the Israelites have quick intelligence, and grow
jealous: They conclude them Rebels without further examination; they arm
themselves against their brethren, and resolves to deal with them as with
Idolaters. How easy is it for good men of the same Religion to mistake one
another intention? But when the Reubenites had given an account to the
Ambassadors of Israel wherefore they erected that Altar, and that tho reason
and end thereof was not to divide from their brethren, but to preserve a Union
with them: not to separate to other Gods, but to preserve an interest with
their brethren on this side the River in the worship of the true God unto
posterity: when their intention was cleared, all thoughts of Hostility were
laid aside, and a brotherly league and amity joyfully confirmed. So (my
friends) I hope it shall be between us.

47. I know ye are zealous for God, and the glory of his Truth, ye are jealous
of the Blood of Christ, and the Grace of the Gospel, lest it should be
undervalued; ye suspect every notion that seems to detract from the Honor of
it. It Is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. Concerning the
things for which ye have me in suspicion, I was always ready and often offered
to give you a reason of my Faith according to the Scriptures.

48. And whereas ye impute a contradiction in my present judgment to what I
formerly declared in my book against Baker, in reference to the state of man
both before and after his fall: I suppose ye will not find my faith or opinion
in that point to be changed, but improved. For I still affirm it as my belief,
That Adam even in his innocence (and much less any man since his Delinquency)
had no wisdom, power, righteousness, ability, holiness, or any manner of good
whatsoever of or from himself, Iam. 1.17.
but what he received originally from God, and 1 Cor. 15.
that he was of the earth earthy from the beginning. Nor is there any now 2
Cor. 3.5.
sufficient to think so much as a good thought as of himself, but by that
sufficiency which is of God.

49. Yet I say not that the first Adam was at first made a corrupt or sinful
earthy man: but rather that he was of so pure a mould, that although he was not
constituted in or of an Heavenly Nature, yet be was created in such a capacity,
that he might have improved that earthy state unto an Heavenly, if he had taken
of the Tree of Life, which he might have done with free leave and license, and
not tasted of the Tree of Knowledge, of which he was strictly commanded not to
eat, Genesis 2.16,17. This Adam in his primitive state was a pure, clean,
unpolluted earth; and the Law of God, which is of an undefiled Nature, circled
it about like the incorruptible Heavens. To this innocent state we hope to be
reduced (and confirmed in, with an addition of Heavenly glory) by Christ, (1
Cor. 15.22.) who will change (...), the body of our Humility, or our humble
body, Phil. 3.21. For in and by Christare all things renewed, Isa. 43.19. Rev.
21.5. God will give a new heart, Eze. 36.26. there is the new earth; I will put
my Law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Ier. 31.33. there
is the new Heaven; this was promised, Isa. 65.17. and chap. 66.22. So that
according to his promise, we look for New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet, 3.13.

50. And therefore also do I not deny, but that man, even after his fall, had
sufficient succor and supply sent him from God, in the incorporate, inspoken,
or (as I may so say) the incarnate Word, whereby he might, and still may, if he
will, convert and turn himself to God. Genesis 3.15. Verse 8.
Nor was God slack concerning the promise of the Seed, but hastily pursued man
with it, and overtook him in the cool of the day, not suffering the Sun to go
down upon his wrath.

51. It Is true, God first examined the matter of fact, and showed his justice,
displeasure and indignation against sin, in sentencing Adam to death, and
casting him under the curse; thus he was a God that forgave him, yet he took
vengeance of his inventions, Psalm 99.8. And as Adam was to pass under the
curse and death before he received the Promise: and as our Fathers died
according to the Faith, ( Heb. 11.13.) before they saw the personal appearance
of Christ: so must we first die unto sin, and live unto Righteousness before we
can see or enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. Romans 6. If we live after the
flesh we shall die, but if we through the Spirit of God do mortify the flesh,
we shall live, Romans 8.13. Heb. 4.1.
Let us therefare fear, lest a promise being left of entering into his Rest, any
of us should seem to come short of it.

52. In wrath he remembers mercy, Hab. 3.2.
Now (I say) when God had thus strictly and narrowly sifted out the business,
and had executed his Justice according to the man's demerit, he presently runs
after him with a Promise in his hand to comfort and recover his creature which
he had cast down, as if he thought it long before he showed himself a God of
mercy, pardoning iniquity, Exodus 34.6,7. His bowels seemed to be troubled ever
since he spoke against him. Thus he that had torn did heal, he that had smitten
did bind up again: Jer. 31.20. Hos. 6.1,2.
This is He that will revive us after we have lain one day dead in sin, and
another day dead unto sin, for sin or from sin, and the third day we shall live
in his sight. God would not put off, withhold or defer his Mercy and Favor,
his goodness, Grace, love and compassion toward man too long, but hastened
with all speed to discover his thoughts of peace to him; First, that he might
make it known that he was a God that did not delight in the death of him that
died, but that rather he would have all men come to the Knowledge of the Truth
that they might be saved, Ezekiel. 18.32, and chap. 33.11. Wisd. 1.13. 1 Timothy 2.4.
2 Pet. 3.9. Secondly, God sought after and found man out so suddenly before he
had any thought in his heart to seek after, or return to God, Isa. 65.1.
to teach us that he is found of them that sought him not: and that man has no
will or power to turn to God, till God first bestow his Grace, and give him
wherewith he may so do: that he cannot, as of himself, think a good thought,
that he cannot so much as believe in God, but by the gift of his Grace, Ephesians. 2
8. Psalm 49.
That no man can quicken his own soul, that none should glory in the sight of
God, as if he had not received what he has, 1 Cor. 1.29. and 4.7.

53. As God does first prevent man with his Grace to hide pride from him, and
keep him from boasting, that he may have all the glory and praise unto himself;
so does he bestow sufficient grace upon all, that every mouth may be stopped,
and all left without excuse. And this will plainly appear if we look back to
the beginning: For God came to Adam with the tender of the Seed before he knew
his Wife, or had begoteen either Son or Daughter, and made the promise to him
generally, in terms at large, indefinitly and indeterminatively without
limitation or restriction, not confining it to one, nor denying it to another.
God did not say, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent,
for Abel or Seth when they are born, but not for Cain.

54. And if that Doctrine must he received as true and Orthodox, viz. That all
men are guilty of original sin quatenus considered in Adams loins,
Representing them in himself as a public person; (which Doctrine may yet be
questioned) then it will as well follow on the other hand, that the Promise
made by God unto Adam should extend and reach unto all his posterity, he then
having them all Representatively in himself when the promise was made to him;
which promise was made without any personal limitation, but to Adam
indefinitely, and consequently to all mankind in general. 1 Cor. 15.^2.
And thus the Apostle seems to make the Plaster as large as the Sore; As in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, See also Romans
5.15,16,17,18,19. Where sin abounds, Grace did superabound, Romans 5.20.
where the love of God in the gift of his Son Jesus Christ is fully vindicated
from the diminishing aspersions which some cast on it by limiting and
curtailing of it. My endeavor and design is, to acquit and clear the most
Righteous and Holy God from being active or impulsive, consenting unto,
approving of, or having any hand in the sin of man. Let the soul that sins
bear his own iniquity, and let the sin and guilt be laid at his door that does
the evil; let not God be charged with it: but let every one of us humble our
selves under his Mighty Hand that must lift us up, and deliver us in his due
time, 1 Pet. 5.6.

55. Again, The evidence of this Truth will be yet further cleared up, if we
consider how God expostulated the matter with Cain: He does not fall upon him
with any hard speeches, calling him Reprobate, Castaway, etc. but meekly
reasons it out with him, Where is thy brother? If thou dest well, shall thou
not be accepted? Whence we may conclude, that Cains murder did not proceed from
any predestinate or impulsive Act of Reprobation, but from his own voluntary
Inclination to the suggestion of Satan, by whom he was begotten a son of
murder, in resigning his Will to the Will of the wicked one, John 8.44.
who was a Murderer from the beginning, and begat Children of his own nature,
like himself.

56. Now if God had so irrecoverably reprobated Cain from all Eternity, (as
some say he did, and all other unrepenting wicked men as well as he) then there
had been no place for acceptance of Cain, let him have done never so well; or
else God should make a show of one thing, and intend the clean contrary, of
which blasphemous Imputation God forbid that any should be guilty. But whereas
God told Cain plainly, that if he had done well, he might have been accepted,
it is manifest, that there was Grace enough given in the Promise as a public
stock, and laid up in Adam as a common person, in whom all Mankind then was, so
that one as well as another might freely take of it, (for there is no Respect
of persons with God) to enrich, supply and enable himself sufficiently to do
the Will of God. And to this the Scriptures bear witness, Isa. 55. Ho, every
one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he that has no money, come ye,
buy, and eat; yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price,
John 7.37. Jesus stood, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me, and drink. Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say Come, and let him that
hears, say, Come; and let him that is athirst come; And whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely, John 3.14,15,16,17. and chap. 12.47. I came
not to judge (or condemn) the world, but to save the world. Mar. 16.15. Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, etc. Every
Creature, whosoever will: What more plain?

57. Nay Cain himself, when he was reproved by God, had not the impudence to
answer or reply, that it was not so much his fault that he killed his brother,
nor could he help or avoid what he did, for he was reprobated and rejected,
left to himself, and denied grace to withstand the temptation, and resist the
Devil; No, he had no such plea: for doubtless his Father and Mother did conceal
the Promise no more from him (being the first born, and a man from the Lord, as
his mother thought) then from Abel. And therefore he takes shame to himself,
lays his hand upon his mouth, bewails his condition, confesses that his felly
and sin, (not Gods reprobating Act) had brought this misery upon him; he does
not, he durst not so much as once offer to open his mouth against God. Yea, The
worst of men have acknowledged their destruction to be of themselves, and in
their very torments have justified God, and condemned themselves, as Solomon
sets forth, and describes their woeful complaint, They repenting and groaning
for anguish of spirit, shall say, We fools accounted the righteous man's life
madness: but we have erred from the way of Truth, we have wearied our selves in
wickedness; what has pride profited us? Wisd. 5.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8. Nor do we
anywhere read, that the Devils themselves do charge their Lapse and Ruin upon
God, or his impulsive Decree: And the Apostle Jude, verse 6. tells us, that they
kept not their original state; be does not say God thrust them from it, but
they left and forsook it,

58. Wherefore, my Friends, let me discharge the Office and Duty of afriend to
you: suffer ye the word of Exhortation, and seriously consider of it. Shall we
impute unto God, or charge him with that which the worst of men, no, nor the
very Devils themselves ever did? Shall we say that men do sin because God has
reprobated and resolved to deny them his Grace? What is this else but to make
God the first cause of man's transgression? Let us rather magnify the riches of
Gods Grace, extol the bounteousness of his gift, the liberality of love, as
well in the largeness and extent, as the freeness and undeservedness of it. Let
us (as is said of them) Mat. 9.8. glorify God which has given such power,
such gifts unto men, Or in the man.
such gifts whereby the Lord God might dwell even among the rebellious. Psalm.
68.18. Let us give the Gospel its free passage; let us not stop or hinder the
current and flowings of Christ blood from the utmost parts of the earth; Let us
not lay a stumbling block or discouragement in the way of Gods people. God has
been merciful unto man in his Son; let his way of Mercy and love be made
known, and not hid from the children of Adam upon earth, nor his saving health
from any Nation, Psalm 67.1,2.

59. Does not the river of Gods Eden, his Paradise, his Pleasure, Delight, and
Joy, ( Genesis 2.10. Psalm 147.11. Luke 15.7.) distribute it self unto the four
ends of the earth? Psalm 104.10,11.
And do not the Well springs of salvation, which run out of the hills of Gods
divine Nature and Attributes, descend and flow into the lowest valley, and
meanest condition of humanity? May not all the wild Asses of the mountains, and
all the beasts of the field drink thereof? May not the fouls of Heaven make
their habitation by them? May not unruly fools, trusting in their own mountain
of folly and strength, be tamed: the brutish and beastly luxurious men in the
field of this worldly nature have the heat of their fierce passions quenched,
the high-soaring proud men in aerie notions be brought down, and made to dwell
with the meek and lowly Spirit of Christ? Let us not become Atheists, or rather
Polytheists, making more Gods than one; which is done by dividing (and so
destroying) the Unity in the Will of the one only God. The doing of which we
cannot avoid if we place two Wills in God, viz. One secret, determining some
men to destruction; and the other open, professing, protesting, swearing that
he would net that any should die.

60. Let none now conclude from what I have said, that I deny Election and
Reprobation in any sense: For I know and verily believe that there are Things
which God foresaw would displease him, and thereupon did Reprobate them from
all Eternity, and resolve that they should never have communion or fellowship
with him; such as are Ambition, Tyranny, Cruelty, Persecution Lying, Pride,
Hypocrisy, Malice, Uncleanness, Theft, Murder, Drunkenuess, and all manner of
sin and unrighteousness. Of which things there have been persons (that may be
saved) which have born the Type and Figure; As there have been Persons that (in
all likelihood) were Rejected, who have stood in the Figure of Things most
excellent. Thus Ishmael and Esau, who were more than probably saved, as might
easily be demonstrated out of their History in the Scripture, did bear the Type
of Things that were rejected: For of one of them the Apostle speaks punctually
that he was an Allegory, Gal. 4.24, etc. Can. 5.10. 1 Samuel 9.2.
So on the other hand, Saul who is said to rejected, did Represent the glorious
person of our Savior Christ, in the beauty and comeliness of his person, who is
the fairest among ten thousand, and excels all others by the head and
shoulders, in wisdom and strength.

These things, dear Friends, I have written and made public in love to the
Truth and to your souls: Consider what I have said, and the Lord give us all a
right understanding of the Holy Mystery of Life. So be it.

Yours in the Labor and Lov^ of our blessed Mediator, H. P.
BRINKVVORTH, December. 30. 1657.
If any desire to be further satisfied and informed in the glorious Mystery of
our Lord Jesus Christ and his Cross, let them seriously peruse that accurate
Discourse, entitled, PHILOSOPHY REFORMED, sold by Ll. Lloyd at the sign of the
Castle in Cornhill London: wherein they may find that heavenly Mystery
Chymically extracted out of the works of God in the Creation, very pleasant and
profitable to all those who delight to search out the Wonders of the most High.
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.

Scriptures insisted upon in this TREATISE.
MAT. 26.
Verse. Page 2 3 3, 4 5 5 8 6 9 8, 9 15 10 19 15 24 15, 16 28 17 30 18 32 20 41
22, 24 22 26, 27 45 28, 29 41 35 131 36 137 37 139 40, etc 147 47 155 49 183 50
169 52, 54 173 56 181 58 194 59 215 63 220 67 226 71, 74 209 75 210 MAT. 27.
Verse. Page 1, 2 232 3 237 11 250 12 271 15, 17 274 19, 24 26 304 28, 30 281 31
304 32 314 34 326 36 341 37 337 38 326 40 344 MAR. 14.
Verse. Page 1 1 5 15 7 21 8 22 9 23 11 28 18 41 18, 19 21 92 26, 27 28, 29 30,
31 130 210 33 139 37, etc 147 41, 42 154 43 155 45 168 50 188 56 215 60, 62 64
220 65 226 70, 71 210 MAR. 15.
Verse. Page 1 232 3 250 7 274 15 304 16, 19 281 20, 21 314 22, 23 28 326 26 337
29 344 LUKE 22.
Verse. Page 1 1 3, 4 24 7 30 10, 11 32 13 35 15, 16 17, 18 41 19 45 23 92 24,
25 26, 27 28, 29 30 105 31, 32 33, 34 35, 36 117 37, 38 124 40 139 41, etc 147
43 151 45 154 47 155 48 168 49, 51 173 52 181 56 194 58, 59 210 63, 65 226 66
232 LUKE 23.
Verse. Page 1 232 2, 5 250 6 264 13 271 18 275 24, 25 304 26, 27 314 32 326 35
344 38 337 JOH. 12.
Verse. Page 4 15 6 16 7 19 JOH. 13.
Verse. Page 1 36 2, 3 4, 5 63 6, 7 8, 9 10, 11 70 12, 13 14, 15 16, 17 18, 19
20 79 21, 22 92 23, 24 25, 26 27, 28 29, 30 98 31, 32 33, 34 108 35, 36 37, 38
117 JOH. 14.
Verse. Page 1 126 31 129 JOH. 18.
Verse. Page 1, 2, etc 137 10, 11 173 12 183 13 190 15 194 19 200 18, 24 25, 26
210 28 232 33 250 JOH. 19.
Verse. Page 1, 3, etc 281 13 304 17 314 18 326 19 337 23 341

The seven last words of Christ, page 351.
The First Word. Page 354 The Second Word. Page 360 The Third Word. Page 368
The Fourth Word. Page 376 The Fifth Word. Page 386 The Sixth Word. Page 390 The
Seventh Word. Page 392
The History of the Passion of our Lord, gathered out of the four Evangelists,
and digested into four Parts.
The first Part.
Luke 22.1.
NOw the Feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover.

Whereas Luke says here, it drew nigh, etc. Mark expresses it thus, Mar. 14.1.
After two days, says he, was the Passover and unleavened bread. Which Feast
was honored with a double name. It was called the Passover, because of the
offering of the Lamb, which in Exodus is called the Lords Passover, Exodus 12.11.
because the destroying Angel that smote the first born of the Egyptians did
pass over the Israelites houses which were sprinkled with the blood of the
Lamb, and that same night brought them out of Egypt. And it was also called
the feast or days of unleavened bread, Exodus 12. and 13. Lev. 23.6. Number. 28.17.
because all the time of that feast (which lasted seven days) the Jews were
forbidden to eat leavened bread, or to have it in their houses: and were
commanded that they should eat none but sweet or unleavened bread. Now this
Jewish solemnity began from the evening of the fourteenth day of the first
month, and continued until the evening of the one and twentieth day. When the
first month begins.
But the Jews did not begin the first month from the Calends of January, as the
Romans do, but from the first new moon after the Spring-Equinox, which with us
is in April. So that the feast of the Passover began at the evening of the
fourteenth day of that month, which was the fifth day of the week that year
that Christ suffered. The next day, which we rightly call Good Friday, Christ
was Crucified. And on that very day was a feast of the Jews, after which the
Sabbath immediately followed, even another feast, yea a double feast. Whence
John says of it, Joh. 19.31.
That day was an high day. Every Sabbath was very solemn of it self: yea
greater then all other feasts. For the Jews might not so much as dress their
meat on the Sabbath, which was lawful for them to do in other feasts, though
never so great, unless it fell on the Sabbath. Thus the Sabbath only had its
preparation, that is, a day to make ready victuals. And besides this, that
Sabbath of which we now speak was the more famous, in that it fell among the
days of unleavened bread, (perhaps from some Pharisaical tradition, by reason
of the rich booty they had from the multitude of people that then flocked
thither from all parts.) From whence also it was called the Sabbath of the
Passover, not that the feast of the Passover was on that day, but because it
fell out in the Passover-week: as we use to say now, the third, fourth, fifth
day of Easter. Briefly; the Jews called every sixth day the preparation, though
some feast fell thereon. So the Paschal feast or solemnity happened on this
sixth day, which very day was also the preparation of the following Sabbath. It
is certain therefore that Christ was crucified on the very feast day. Nor does
it prove the contrary, in that they said, Mat. 26.5.
Not on the feast day, etc. For they regarded not the feast, but were rather
afraid left the multitude should hinder their wicked design. Therefore they did
not say, Not on the feast day, because it is not lawful; but, lest there be an
uproar among the people; nay they had not forborne their purpose the Sabbath
following, though it was a great one, if there had not been some other
occasion: such was their rage. They might, as doubtless they did pretend, that
God could not be better served, or have a greater sacrifice, then to crucify
so notorious a transgressor of his Law; And that in other offenses they might
and ought to defer or remit the punishment: but Gods wrong they were to avenge
on the very Sabbath it self. To this was added the occasion given by Judas, who
blinded with malice, resolved to betray Christ to them, to be bound in the
evening of the solemnity then beginning.

What should they now do? They might well fear an uproar of the people if they
should keep him bound till the end of the feast. There is no way but to put
their cursed plot in execution out of hand, without any respect to God, or the
time. This was the counsel of an hateful heart. Yet not without the wonderful
providence of God so ordering it, that Christ should suffer at that feast: Not
only that the truth might answer the figure, but also that many might be
present when the High Priest offered his blood to God without Jerusalem, for
the redemption of Jew and Gentile. Thus much I thought good to premise
concerning the day and feast of unleavened bread. Let us now return to the
story.

The appointed time was come when the Lord Jesus was both willing and ought to
depart out of the world to go to his Father by suffering death, after he had
prerched the Gospel. And this was the very time when the Jews kept the
Passover, and did offer and eat the Lamb in remembrance of their former
deliverance. The time of the general redemption of mankind being now at hand,
not from an Egyptian, but devilish bondage, there was another Lamb to be
slain, even be which takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29.
and of whom Paul says, 1 Cor. 5.7.
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Of this Christ says;

Mat. 26.2.
Ye know that after two days is the feast of the Passover, and the Son of man
is betrayed to be crucified.

As if he should have said, Seeing ye are born and bred Jews and Hebrews, ye
know what kind of feast draws nigh, even the feast of the Passover, and there
is not a man in all the Country of Judea but makes preparation for it. But to
ye that are my Disciples, I will reveal something that others know not; that
is, that I the Son of man must be betrayed and crucified at this very feast; to
wit, to be slain and offered as a Lamb on the Altar of the Cross, for the
welfare of the world. I say it must be at this feast of the Jews, as I have
often told you long since. The time is at hand, my hour is now come, and I am
so far from refusing it, that I willingly embrace it: for therefore came I into
the world, that I might show my obedience to my Father, even to the death of
the Cross. This shall now be done at this feast. I would not hide this from ye:
Nor is there any cause for ye to be afraid. No man will, or can hurt you,
though they be never so mad against me. For it is not your hour, but mine that
is come. The Son of man shall be delivered.

In these words Christ foretold both the day and manner of his death, that his
Disciples, when they saw it, might not fear and faint in their mind, as if some
unexpected thing had come upon them.

Observe, he does not name the person: The Son of man shall be delivered; he
does not express who should deliver him, and that not without cause. For it was
not one only that delivered him.

1. Joh. 3.16. Romans 8.32.
Our heavenly Father, moved with mercy and love, delivered him for us.

2. The Son out of his abundant charity delivered himself: He delivered
himself, says Peter, 1 Epist. chapter 2. v. 23. to him that judged unjustly. So
the Vulg. Lat. has it, and then it must be understood of Pilate.


3. Judas out of covetousness delivered him.

4. The chief Priests full of envy delivered him to Pilate.

5. Pilate out of humane fear delivered him to those that crucified him.

6. We also have delivered Christ to death, yea we most of all.

For neither had the Father delivered him for us: Nor could his adversaries
have done any thing against him, if he had not taken our sins upon him.
Therefore he does justly say to us: Es. 43.24.
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities. Again, 53.6.
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. And Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.21.
He has made him sin for us, who knew no sin. And Jeremy; Lam. 4.20.
The breath of our mouth, the Lord Christ was taken in our sins, Vulg. Lat. And
in the Psalm he says, Psalm 69.9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee, have fallen on me: ver. 4.
I restored that which I took not away. Christ puts us in mind of all these
when he says, The Son of man shall be delivered, etc.

It is also to be noted that this word Passover is not taken from passion or
suffering, as some think, but from the Hebrew word Phase, which signifies a
passing over, for the reason before mentioned. And the same word Pascha or
Passover, is not always taken in the same sense. For sometime it signifies
the Lamb to be offered, as when it is said, Mar. 14.12
Where will thou that we go and prepare, that thou may eat the Passover.
Sometime it signifies the feast day, as, Joh. 2.23.
When he was in Jerusalem at the Passover. Sometime it signifies all the
Paschal week, as, Act. 12.4.
Intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people. Sometime it
signifies the unleavened bread, as where it is said, Joh. 18.28.
They themselves went not into the Judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled:
but that they might eat the Passover.

Mat. 26.3,4.
Then assembled together the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders of
the people, unto the Palace of the high Priest, who was called Caiaphas, and
consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him.

Here the Evangelist discovers what kind of men they were, who for envy could
not endure to see or suffer the Lord Christ to live. He calls them Priests,
Scribes, and Elders of the people, as also Princes and principal men, from whom
nothing less should have been expected. For they were they that had the
knowledge of the Law. To them the predictions of the Prophets were known. They,
I say, were they whom one of them, Nicodemus by name, personated, and said,
Joh. 3.2.
Master we know that thou art a Teacher come from God: for no man can do these
Miracles that thou do, except God be with him. Yet their envy so quelled all
these things in them, that they chiefly, yea they alone were they that hunted
Christ to the Cross. Who can but wonder at such gross blindness of so many wise
men? Yea who can but tremble at that terrible judgment of God, whereby he
blinded them? Esa. 6.10.
that seeing, they might not see, and hearing they might not hear; yea that
they should both shut their eyes and stop their ears against a most clear
truth? Observat.
Whence we may learn, that the free gifts of God do more hurt then good to them
that believe not. Thus knowledge without faith puffs up: 1 Cor. 8.1.
power without faith gives liberty to all wickedness. It is not enough then to
have knowledge or power, unless there be also those justifying gifts, Faith,
Hope and Charity.

Observat.
Hence also we see that the wise and great men of this world are for the most
part nothing but vessels of Gods anger. Thus Paul says of the wise ones, God
gave them over to a reprobate sense. Pharaoh was therefore blinded, that God
might show his power in him. Boast not therefore of wisdom or power, but fear.
It is one of Gods greatest works to Luke 1.51,52.
scatter the proud in the imagination of their hearts, and to put down the
mighty from their seat. The Evangelist does neatly pile up their sin, malice
and blindness, even in every word.

Then
He begins first with an Emphasis, when he says, Then were gathered together.
Then, I say, when Christ had omitted nothing that might make them happy. Then,
when they had often seen the excellent doctrine and wonderful miracles of
Christ: Then, I say, when he came with godly works to be prepared worthily to
celebrate the feast of the Paschal solemnity. Thus wicked men have no regard of
any Thing or Time, but only how to fulfill their own lusts.

Assembled together.
But what did they? They assembled together. This had been no new or strange
thing, if this had not been added, that they gathered themselves against Jesus:
nor simply so, but that they might take him by subtilty and kill him. They are
truly evil that gather together againist Jesus. Happy had they been if they had
met together for Jesus, to search the Scriptures, Whether he were indeed the
Messiah, as the first believers did. Acts 17.


And for what cause did they desire to take and kill Jesus, the true Savior,
who saved so many miserable men in body and soul? Nothing is here expressed. But
it may be plainly collected out of John, where when they consulted, they said,
John 11.47,48.
What do we? for this man does many miracles. If we let him alone, etc. But
more fully out of the Book of Wisdom, where it is said, Wisd. 2.12.
The wicked assembled against the righteous, saying, Let us lie in wait for
him, because he is clean contrary to our doings; he upbraideth us with our
offending the Law, he was made to reprove our thoughts, he is grievous unto us,
even to behold, etc. You see what they hated in him, even the Light and Truth.
John 3.20.
Every one that does evil hates the Light. The Pharisees could not endure that
their righteousness should be condemned, and they counted for sinners. The
Scribes could not bear it to be thought ignorant of the Law. As Abel and Joseph
were hated of their own brethren for no other cause, but because one was
righteous, and accepted of God; and the other better beloved of his Father than
the rest; so happened it also unto Christ.

No doubt but they made a fair pretense for this their hatred and malice, even
a zeal for Gods Law, upon which ground Moses commanded that the false Prophets
should be killed. Deuteronomy. 13.5.
This they often charged Christ with before, but they neither did, nor could
they prove it: yet, as if he had been already convicted of that crime, they
resolve to put him to death, because they would be taken for such as sought
Gods glory more then others. But O wicked Princes, seed of Canaan, and not of
Juda, What spirit taught ye to seek the glory of God by killing his only Son?
For your consultation is not against the Son of Ieseph, but against the Son of
the great God. Your design was to take Jesus of Nazareth by craft and to slay
him: and it prospered. But whom else have you taken and slain, but your own
Messiah, that true and great Prophet, the Savior of Israel, the King of glory,
the Prince of life, and the best Shepherd whom God of his infinite mercy sent
to ye lost sheep? Jacob foresaw this your counsel long ago, and hated it.
Simeon, says he, Genesis 49.5.
and Levi have warlike weapons of wickedness. O my soul, enter not thou into
their secret; cursed be their anger, for it was fierce. Since that, ye have had
the like consultations more then once against the Apostles of Christ, Acts
4.5,6.
until the righteous God, able to endure you no longer, gave you to be
destroyed by the Romans. But you will say, What moved those wretched men to
such horrid counsels?

1.
It was the very Judgment of God, by which (as they well deserved) they were
long since given up to a reprobate sense to do those things against Christ
which the hand and counsel of the Lord had determined. For they were vessels of
dishonor. 2 Timothy 2.20.


2.
The Devil himself put them on, who from their first taking the business in
hand, did so much the more rage, by how much he saw the glory of God shine
forth more brightly.

3.
There were besides these, two other of the worst Counselors of all, Ambition
and Covetousness. They were afraid they should lose their glory and their gain.
There are no evils that these mischiefs will not hurry men into: as may be seen
in Chorah, Dathan and Abiron, in Absolon, in Nebuehodonoser, Cyrus, Judas the
traitor, and in all tyrants and wicked men.

Thus the sons of men naturally desire great things, as glory and riches: but
herein they are mistaken, in that they seek neither true glory nor the true
riches: nay they seek not those temporal things so as they ought. For they that
eagerly hunt after honor and wealth do not find them, but they that despise
them. If thou cover true glory, seek not the glory of men: if thou covet the
true riches, distribute and spend the false riches upon the poor.

Mat. 26.5.
But they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people.

By the feast day, they meant that great Sabbath which fell out in the feast of
the Passover: of this they would have great regard; not for the feast sake it
self, but lest there should be an uproar among the people. They did not fear
God, but the rude rabble. And they that durst not eat leavened bread, although
there was no cause why they should abstain from it, yet were not afraid to
pollute the feast day, by committing murder on it. As were the Priests, such
was the people. But here is set down the nature of hypocrites, who indeed do
many good things, but it is only that they may be seen of men: and they forbear
to do evil, but no further then they are afraid to be punished by men. They
have no respect at all to God: Psalm 14.
there is no fear of God before their eyes, says the Psalmist. Whence we may
see,

Observat. 1.
That those wicked men were truly the vessels of Gods wrath. For as when God
will outwardly punish any Nation, he gives them wicked Princes and
Magistrates; for the peoples sins, God sets up an hypocrite to rule over
them: So when he will blind a Nation for their ingratitude, he suffers and
sends evil Pastors; such as these were, who did spiritually and temporally,
yea eternally destroy the people.

Observat. 2.
Here we may also see, that the counsel of God is not hindered, but furthered
rather, by contrary designs. For God had determined to glorify Christ, and to
exalt him above-every creature: Contrarily, the Pharisees did endeavor to
deprive Christ of his Kingdom, and to root his Doctrine out of the hearts of
Believers. But by how much the more they strove against the counsel of God with
their wicked endeavors, by so much the more they promoted it: for by death
Christ entered into his Kingdom and Glory. The same was heretofore in Jacobs
sons toward their brother Joseph. Briefly; (...). 37. ^v. 21.30. (...). 14.27.
there is no strength, nor wisdom, nor counsel against the Lord. What God has
decreed, no man can disanull. Hitherto we have heard what the wicked Jews
thought on their part. In the next place let us hear what good was done on the
other part.

Mat. 26.6.
Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the Leper, there came
unto him a woman having an Alabaster box of very precious Ointment, and poured
it on his head as he sat at meat.

How happy are we Christians, who have the benefit of the whole passion of
Christ! For as that very bloody Council of the Pharisees fell out for our good,
so is it for our advantage that that precious Ointment was poured on the head
of Christ. In the Council of the Jews there Christ had his enemies: on the
contrary here are his friends and those that minister unto him. Those did
dishonor and intend evil against him: This woman does honor and do him good.
Thus, even thus does the Divine Wisdom ever order it, that where we have
enemies, there also shall we find some friends, as Paul says. 2 Cor. 6.


Now concerning this History, there has always been a great dispute among the
Ancients, whether this anointing be the same with that which John speaks of,
John 12.
or with that whereof Luke writes. Luke 7.
The general opinion is, that it is but one woman of which Matthew in chap. 26.
and Mark in chap. 14. and Luke chap. 7. and John in his twelfth chapter do
write. Origin is of another mind in Hom 35. upon Matthew, where he alleges
many differences of the Evangelists. Whence he concludes, that it is very
likely that it was not one, but three women. One of whom Matthew and Mark
speak: Matthew. 26. Mar. 14.
Another of whom Luke writes, Luke 7.
whom also he calls a sinner; A third mentioned by John, John 12.
whom also he calls Mary the sister of Lazarus. Faber, Stapulensis would have
them to be three, but does otherwise distinguish them. The first he calls
that sinner in Luke. The second, Mary the sister of Martha, of whom mention is
made in the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark and John. The third he says was
Mary Magdalen, who would have anointed the Lord in his Sepulcher. So that
according to his opinion, the sinner anointed Christ a great while before his
death: but Mary the sister of Martha and Lazarus anointed him but a little
before his Passion. And he will needs have Mary Magdalen to be that woman of
Galilee out of whom Christ had before cast out seven Devils, as it is Mar. 16.9.

Chrysostom and Theophilact suppose the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark and
Luke do speak of one woman, and John of another. Ambrose is doubtful, and can
hardly resolve the matter, and at last says: Perhaps it was not one, lest the
Evangelists should seem to clash, etc. lib. 6. super. Lucam. Nor can it be
easily determined by any unto this day. But certain it is, that Matthew and
Mark spoke of one and the same woman. And because the anointing which John
speaks of, was also at Bethany, and in those very days before the Passover,
and immediately before Christ's Passion, it is most like that he means the
same woman that the other two Evangelists write of, whom also he calls by her
proper Name, which the other two do not.

Whether this Mary of Bethany anointed Christ twice within a few days; First,
his feet, as John faith, and then his head, as Matthew and Mark report; and
that there Judas only, but here all the Apostles murmured together, let others
judge. This is clear, that three of the Evangelists mean one and the same
woman, whatever may be thought of that woman that was a sinner. Certain also it
is, that this Unction of Christ before his passion was at Bethany. For Matthew
and Mark name the house of Simon the Leper, but John seems to intimate that it
was in the house of Lazarus or Martha. To which we may answer, that either that
Simon the Leper was the father of Lazarus and his sisters, or that Mary did
anoint Christ twice, both in her own house, and in the house of Simon the
Leper: who was so called, not that he was a Leper at that time, but that he had
been so, and was cleansed by Christ.

There is yet one scruple behind, in that Luke also says, Luke 7.
that Christ was anointed by a sinner in Simons house, whence some may suppose
that it was but one woman in all the Evangelists, though one may write more of
her, and another less, as they do of other things. It is not so credible that
there were two Simons, in whose houses Christ was twice anointed. To this may
be added, that Luke as well as John says, that the woman wiped the feet of
Jesus with her hair, which argues that it was one and the same woman. Nor does
that make against it, because of the two Simons, one is called a Pharisee, and
the other a Leper; for the same man may be so called.

Thus nothing can yet be here certainly determined: wherefore passing by these
things, let us come to the History it self.

This woman is said to bring an Alabaster box of precious ointment, or
according to Mark, of Spikenard very precious, or (as John has it) of
Spikenard very costly. For it was, by conjecture, of Spikenard and Balsam,
which sort of Oil is accounted most precious, if it be not adulterated. But
John says expressly, that this ointment was ex nardo pistico, that is certain,
and true, and not adulterated, so that the Disciples valued it at 300. pence.

Such kind of precious Ointments were common among the richer sort: The most
precious was called the Royal Ointment, which was made up of many precious
things, as Spikenard, Gum of the Balm tree, Myrrh Cassia, Cinnamon, etc. And
it is probable that this oynment of Mary was not much inferior to it in value.

Pliny agrees hereto, Lib. 13. cap. 1.
Lib. 12. cap. 12.
who writes almost the same of the ointment of Spikenard, and adds that the
Spikenard of Syriae is the best; and elsewhere he says that such kind of
Ointments are best kept in Alabasters: Now Alabasters are Glass-vessels which
Apothecaries commonly use.

Let us now view the beauteous mind of this woman.

1.
When all were busy in the house to wait on Christ a little before his Passion,
(for they had provided him a Supper, at which Martha served) Mary was not idle.
John 12.
So ought it to be in the Church; none should be idle, but every one strive
according to his strength to serve Christ, and contend who should do most for
him. Those that are backward should imitate those that are forward. The strong
should so much the more earnestly press further, by how much the more eagerly
others follow after them. O, happy house where things are so carried.

2.
See also with what boldness this woman comes to Christ, whom even that holy
man John was afraid to touch in Jordan: Mat. 3.
which confidence she could no otherwise attain to, but from the goodness of
Christ, which she had so often seen and tried. It was not therefore rashness in
this woman, but strong love, and exceeding great charity. Mat. 6.
Thus Believers, though they be not yet quite free from sin, dare boldly say to
God: Our Father which are in Heaven.

3.
Again, This woman does a good office to Christ, nothing terrified with the
threats and cursed execrations of the Pharisees, nothing at all troubled at the
jeers and grumblings of others, only contented that Christ accepted her
service. Faith regards not the world, so it can but please God.

4.
Besides, She does not bring any manner of Ointment, but the best, that which
was dear, and a great deal of it, even a whole pound, as John says. John 12.
Charity is of that condition, it knows no bounds: but the best whatsoever it
has, that it liberally bestows on Christ. Nor does it so much take notice
what or how much it pours out, but to whom, and for whom.

5.
Moreover, She does not anoint the feet of Christ only, according to John, but
his head too, as Matthew and Mark report, even ready to serve him in all
things; and what she commendably at first undertook, (if it were but one only
woman every where) now she does more commendably accomplish. At first she
anointed only his feet, now she does at once anoint both feet and head. So
should we ascend from the feet of Christ to his head, that is, from his
Humanity to his Divinity.

But whereas it is said, that she anointed the head also of Christ, it is plain
that it was no common Ointment, (for such would rather have besmeared him) but
some pleasant and sweet-scented Liquor, or rich water, as has been said.

6.
Lastly, She wiped the feet of Christ with her hair, as if she had been drunk
with love, not knowing which way to do him more service, but willing to do
more, if she could. It was therefore justly said, she has done what she could.
Mar. 14.8.
Thus this woman indeed does fill the whole house of God with the good smell of
her pious work, whereby the Elect are yet refreshed and stirred up to do the
like.

1.
Christ yet holds his peace and lets her alone: yea he takes it in good part;
not that he was taken with such kind of pleasures, nor that the thing was so
much worth in it self, but because it proceeded from so great faith and
devotion: for that is it which Christ most regards in our works.

2.
Also Christ therefore suffered himself to be anointed, because that Unction
prefigured his death and burial, as shall more largely appear hereafter.

Although Christ behaved himself most lowly all his life time, yet would he
honor death too, which he did not suffer by any necessity, but of his own
accord, for the health of the whole world, and by which he would conquer the
Devil. Hence it is that when he drew near his death, he was carried with
triumphant pomp into Jerusalem; and hence also it was that he would be anointed
with costly ointment before his death: and when he was dead would be buried in
a new Tomb cut out of a Rock, and be wrapped in clean linen by a Noble man.

And therefore would he give more honor to his death than to his life, viz.
for the comfort of his people, that they might know the death of the Saints is
precious, even when their life is in glory: and that then they do most truly
approach unto glory, when they draw nearest unto death.

But this Unction of Christ does in some sort represent the Unction of his
Father, wherewith he was anointed to be a King and a Priest with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7.
viz. with the holy Spirit, and the fullness of all grace, as it is Isay 11.

The hairs of Gods head (that is, the Elect) do wipe the drops of his Unction.
Of the fullness of Christ do all receive. John 1.
The Saints are truly called the hairs of Gods Head. For as the hair in it self
is dead, yet sticks fast to the head, and adorneth it: So the Saints in
themselves are dead. They mortify their members upon earth, and die daily:
Col. 3. 1 Cor. 15.
that is, they are always ready to dye for Christ, yet they cleave close to
God as to their head; and in him they. This their Head they do also beautify;
for they glorify God in word and work, and God is glorified in them.

1.
And from hence arises a twofold comfort unto us, in that we know assuredly
that this same Christ who was so much despised of the Jews, was anointed by God
the Father, and that with the most precious Ointment of all, the very smell
whereof refreshes the whole world. Again, because we know that the drops of
his Ointment did, and yet do fall upon us.

2.
Furthermore, This History does also shadow out the whole state of the Church.
The Allegory.
Simon the Leper in whose house these things were done, who also signifies
hearing or obeying, does represent the people of the Jews, who first heard the
Word of God. Unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Romans 3.2.
This people, while they remained pure, had a most spacious house, wherein God
was pleased to dwell, Psalm. 76.
viz. the Assembly of Believers: for then was God known only in Jury. But this
people of the Jews became leprous through their unbelief, and so were rejected
out of that house, but the house remained, yea became greater. For out of the
Synagogue of the Jews sprang the universal Church of Believers.

In this house are three sorts of men. Some are converted and risen from the
death of sin: These are set forth by Lazarus. Others are fain to work hard for
a livelihood, who thereby also do glorify God: These are held out by Martha.
Some give themselves only to God and spiritual things: These signified by Mary.

The Morality.
Indeed every Christian should have in himself, and bear about these three
persons. First Lazarus, by rising out of, and flying from sin. Secondly Martha,
always exercised in good works. Thirdly Mary, anointing Christ. The Ointment
wherewith Christ should and would be anointed is faith: yet not any kind of
faith, but the best sort, viz. the Christian faith. This faith must be made up
of Spikenard: that is, it must be fervent, that so it may work by love: it must
not be adulterate by mixture of Errors. It must be complete, even a full
pound, lest it doubt in any one Article. We must anoint both the head and feet
of Christ, believing his Divinity and Humanity. These things we ought to
perform to Christ in his own Person; but yet we have not honored whole Christ.
For he has a mystical Body, the Church, in which he is Head; and all that
Believe in him, are the feet.

The Ointment wherewith this body must be anointed is charity, out of a pure
heart and faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.5.
Anoint then both head and feet, viz. love God, and thy neighbor. For charity
from the heart is not enough, unless there be the hairs also, by which are
signified outward riches, not only because they do outwardly adorn, but because
they neither live, nor give life, nor deliver from death: Again, most commonly
they are superfluous, as the hair is; and as the hair may be cut off without
pain, so should we not be troubled to part with our worldly goods for the good
of our Neighbor, seeing Christ bestowed himself on us. Or thus, the hair is a
kind of dead thing: so if thou have any dead thing in thee, as sin, do as
Daniel bids thee, Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor. Dan. 4.27.
In short; this Ointment signifies that good savor of good works, which we
that believe ought to bestow on the Body of Christ, the holy Church, and
members of Christ, after the example of that woman, from faith unfeigned,
according to that, In as much as ye have done it to one of these little ones,
ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25.

Thus not only Origin but Augustine, refer that Unction to the good works of
Believers, and it does well agree. For as that house in Bethany was filled with
the smell of the Ointment, John 12. 2 Cor. 2.
so the good works of the Church, which is the true Bethany, send forth the
savor of a good report among all Nations. Nor does Christ himself interpret
this unction otherwise; he calls it a good work.

A Christian then ought to do good works, and not spare for any cost, so long
as he may do any good to the members of Christ. He must not begrudge the Gold
or Silver that is laid out on the Body of Christ. It is not lost, but laid up
more safe, and Christ is very well pleased with what thou do for his members.

Mat. 26.8,9.
But when his Disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose
is this wast? for this Ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the
poor.

Mar. 14.5.
And they murmured against her.

John 12.4.
What John faith of Judas only, that Matthew and Mark speak of the Apostles in
general. And so it might be, that as well the other Apostles as Judas did
murmur, but in a far different manner. The Disciples might do it either out of
ignorance or simplicity, supposing it was displeasing to Christ, but know that
he never used such Delicacies. Nor did they doubt but that he would have been
better pleased, if it had been all given to the poor. Therefore when they heard
Christ's answer, they were silent and well satisfied: But Judas was discontented
upon another account, which yet he covers with a very fair show. For,

1.
He pretended as though he had been very zealous of his Masters honor: as if he
should have said, Why do we trouble our good Lord with these trifles, seeing we
know that he cares not for such things?

2.
He pretended a great deal of zeal for the Reputation of the whole College: as
if he had said, Such state does not become our Table: we profess poverty,
following a poor Christ; poverty befits us more. What if men should know of it?
would it not be a scandal to them?

3.
But above all he made a show, as if he had been very mindful of the poor; as
if he had said, if they were resolved to bestow so rich a Present, the Present
might have been sold, and the price given to the poor, this had been a more
religious act, and more honorable for our Master.

O notorious hypocrite! how does he cloak his covetousness with a color of
conscience for the poor? who would not have taken him for a very good and holy
man? But John plucks off his mask, and shows his malice openly.

John 12.6.
This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and
had the bag, and bare what was put therein.

Here you have the reason why Judas had rather the Ointment should have been
sold for three hundred pence, even because he would, and then could play the
thief with them; for doubtless he might have done it very handsomely, because he
bare the bag. etc.

Most truly was it said of him, that he cared not for the poor; how should he
provide for the poor, who durst deliver unto death the very mercies of the
poor? His mind exceeded all bounds of humane pity; such a stranger was he to
godliness, that he destroyed godliness it self.

Again, Most truly and with much modesty also is he called a thief. For John
might have set him forth in worse colors. He was not simply a thief, but a
sacrilegious one.

Now if secular Courts inflict more punishment on him that steals the public
Treasure, than on him that robs but a private person, how much more
abominable is sacrilegious theft?

And if he shall be sorely punished that steals but from his own master, how
much more he that robs God?

But Judas was unfaithful to his own Lord, and stole those things which did
belong to Christ and the poor; great sacrilege.

Thus in the entrance to the Passion, we see both the mercy and justice of God;
his mercy in Mary that anointed him, and his Judgment in Judas. That woman
doubtless was a vessel of mercy and grace for the comfort of Believers: but
Judas was a vessel of wrath for the terror of all ungodly persons.

1.
And what you here see of the woman and Judas in the beginning of the Passion,
Ezekiel. 1.
the same may be seen in the end of the Passion concerning the two thieves. So
that it is true which Ezekiel says of the four living Creatures, that they had
eyes before and behind. For what are the eyes of this living Creature with four
faces, but the respect of mercy and judgment? for both may be seen both before
and behind, to wit, as well in the beginning as in the end of the Passion. Both
these Christ would show in his Passion: to let us know that it should be to
ruin, and resurrection of many: to the ruin and condemnation of the wicked,
but to the Resurrection of the Godly.

2.
In Judas may be seen an example of such as do only personate Christians, who
have indeed a form of godliness, and do many good works: but their heart is
hardened with envy, strife and covetousness; as Judas kept company with the
Apostles, and pretended himself a Disciple of Christ, when in his heart he
hated him.

3.
In Judas is discovered the base nature of Hypocrites, who use to cloak their
lusts with the name of God, as the Pharisees hid their envy against Christ
under the safety of the Commonwealth, pretending the general good of the whole
Nation. So Judas veiled his covetousness under his care of the poor, whom he
nothing at all regarded.

1.
As then there was a wicked Judas among the Apostles, so will there ever be some
like Judas amongst Christians, viz. Hypocrites, of whom we have spoken already.

2.
Such as clamor against the expenses of others, crying, why was not this given
to the poor? when they themselves wickedly waste their estates without doing
the poor any good at all.

They very much resemble Judas who will needs provide for the poor; but for
them only will they make provision, censuring any thing else that is otherwise
laid out for the service of God. These condemn all men, conditions and works
whatsoever that are not outwardly beneficial to their neighbor, and
altogether affirm that those only are good works which are bestowed on our
neighbors. But this zeal is not according to knowledge. For we should so love
our neighbor, that we still love God above him. These are guilty of a double
Error.

1. Because they would have us serve our Neighbor only, as though the three
first Commandments stood for nothing. We know that Christ commanded us to love
our neighbor, but we know also that the same Christ said, This is the first
and greatest command, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
So he did not only say, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, but he
adds, and to God the things that are Gods, Matthew. 22.21.

2. They are mistaken, in that they think our Neighbors do stand in need of
outward help only; hence it is that they slight all spiritual good, wherewith
their Neighbor should be profited. Not only the hand, which gets our
living, is necessary to our Body, but the eye also, which though it does not
work, is otherwise profitable for the body. So they only that maintaining wife
and children, do not serve their Neighbor, but they also, and they chiefly,
which instruct them, pray for them, etc. Let no man therefore like Judas,
condemn the practice or works of another, unless they be openly wicked, but let
every man according to his calling study the welfare of the Church.

4.
Above all, they are most like Judas, who even now cheat the Lord of his estate,
and pick Gods pockets, such as embezle the goods of the Church, which were
given to maintain the Ministers and the poor: they that encroach those goods,
and right or wrong keep them to themselves: heaping all they can possibly
together, and spending it only in pomp and luxury, or to enrich their kindred;
but God, the Church, or poor are never the better for it.

5.
When profane Princes see the sacrilegious covetousness of these men, Psalm 50.
they presently make havoc of all. So that of the Psalmist is fulfilled: When
thou saw a thief thou wentest with him: none considering what follows in the
same Psalm, These things have thou done, and I was silent. But I will reprove
thee, and set them against thy face, etc.

6.
There be more such cut-purses, who refuse to pay their dues to the Church, as
well as scrape the Church-goods basely to themselves.

7.
They also are faulty that are Executors or Trustees to dispose the goods of the
dead, which they bequeathed by Will, either to pay Debts, or restore that which
was ill gotten, or to relieve the poor, yet do not according to their trust,
but convert all to their private gain. What else do these, but as Judas did?
This is so common now, that men make but a jest of it, and think it no sin so
to do.

Hence we see, that there are very few that do not sin in distributing their
worldly goods. He that touches pitch shall be defiled therewith. Eccl. 13. 1 Timothy 6.
And they that will be rich fall into many temptations, and the snares of the
Devil.

We see also that no man is a fit Minister of the Gospel, whose mind is set on
covetousness. Lastly, we see that covetousness is the root of all evil: It made
an Apostle become both a Thief and a Traitor.

But leaving Judas and his companions, let us return to the History. Ye have
heard the pious deed of the woman: ye have heard also the discontent of the
Disciples. What does the woman do now? She does not go about to excuse her
self, but is satisfied with the testimony of her own conscience, which she was
sure was well known to Christ. Our boasting and excuse should be the testimony
of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1.

But on the contrary Christ defends her. For he is not only the Judge, but
the Advocate also of his people, and defends them not only against the
reproach of the world and the Devil, but before the Judgment of God too. 1
John 2.
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Romans 8.
Hence it is that Paul speaks so confidently: it is Christ that dyed, who also
rose again, he intercedeth for us; Who shall accuse Gods Elect? The Accuser can
do thee no hurt, if thou and thy works be approved of God.

Now Christ answers partly in the singular number, because of Judas, and
partly in the plural number, because of the rest of the Apostles, to these he
speaks mildly and gently, but to Judas he replyeth very roughly.

John 12.7.
Let her alone, against the day of my burying has she kept this.

This was spoken to Judas, as if Christ had said: I know I am an eyesore to
thee, and that thou can not endure me; stay a little, and not only my
presence, but my grace too, shall be removed out of thy sight. She has not
lost her labor in pouring out her Ointment upon me, nor did I suffer it
without a cause: it foresheweth and signifies a great thing, to wit, that I
must shortly die and be buried for a sweet savor of all the Elect. For the
bodies of the dead are wont to be anointed: What therefore she cannot do to me
when I am dead, that she does now beforehand, though she does not know it:
therefore let her alone. Hitherto he spoke to Judas only. It follows in Matthew.

Mat. 26.10.
Why trouble ye the woman, for she has wrought a good work upon me.

These words are spoken to the Disciples in general: and the meaning is, why
are ye so troublesome? Yea, I say, not to every body, but to this woman: and
not for every fact, but for that which in my opinion is good. Ye should not
hinder good works, but further them. Isa. 42.
Your office is to strengthen a bruised reed, not to break it; to cherish the
smoking flax, not to quench it, as it is written of me, and as ye see me do.
By this word Christ teaches us,

1.
That we should not hinder the intention of any unto good. Withhold not any from
doing good, Prove. 3.27. And if thou will not do good, yet suffer others to do
it, otherwise thou are doubly guilty: both because thou art a dry unfruitful
tree, and because thou hindrest others.

2.
To bear with, and receive the weak, and not to find fault with what they do,
because it is not done as it should be, lest they should be discouraged and
quite give over, but encourage them with our respects to do better. Why trouble
ye this woman? says he; she is but a woman, not a man; stay till she is
stronger, and she will do more.

3.
Not rashly to censure what others do, before we know to what end they do it, or
with what intention. Who art thou that judge another man's secret? Romans 14.
Why do thou trouble others? It does not belong to thee, but to me, to judge
the heart and thoughts of men.

4.
To judge well of the liberality and bounty of our Forefathers in their
building and benevolence, and their enriching Churches; whatsoever those
outward things are, doubtless they show a thankful and devout mind in them,
ready to spend all for the service of God.

5.
That those only are not good works which are done to our Neighbor and the
poor, but such also that are done out of devotion to God, as I have said
before. And Christ openly pronounces that this Unction was a good work.

6.
That God would not have us serve him with the heart and spirit only, but with
our body and worldly goods too: that so at least we may acknowledge we have all
these things from him.

7.
Lastly, We see by this word of Christ, that our works, be they never so small,
are pleasing to God, if they proceed from faith and love. And though we have
nothing to give him, for all things are his: yet he accepts a thankful mind,
when we freely part with what is his for his honor. Whatever thy hand can do,
Eccles. 9. Jer. 31.16.
do it presently. It is wages for thy work. Let not Judas hinder thee, etc.

Mar. 14.7.
For ye have the poor with you always, and whenever ye will ye may do them
good: But me ye have not always.

As if he had said, I commend your care of the poor: But do not therefore wrong
me of this honor for them. The reason is, because ere long ye shall see me no
more, but ye shall always have plenty of poor, for whom you now seem to be so
thoughtfull. Then give what you will to them, and persuade others to give what
ye can. But now thus it must be. Which expression may be taken two ways: Thus,

1.
Ye have the poor with you, and ye have too. Ye are bound to help them as
Brethren of the same Nature and Faith; but ye are bound to serve me as the
Creator and Redeemer. Ye shall never want occasion to relieve your Neighbors;
But ye cannot always serve me in the body: for I shall not ever be with you in
that visible form. Be not therefore angry with the woman, because she has
expressed a bodily service, while I am yet in the Body. Luke 17.22.
The hour shall come when ye also will wish to do the like, but shall not be
able. Ye shall desire to see one day of the Son of man.

Whereby we are again put in mind not to give over well doing, whenever and
as long as we have opportunity; for we cannot be always so doing. The night
comes when no man can work; John 9.
therefore while we have time let us do good, Gal. 6.

2.
Again, It may be taken thus; ye have the poor always, etc. q.d. I do not
forbid you to do good to the poor, for it is the Lords command that ye should
so do. But it is not enough to do the poor good, for Hypocrites may do so; at
present there is somewhat more required, whilst I am with you. The Jews now
persecute me, and banish all that believe in me. He therefore that believes in
me must testify his faith openly. But he that does at this time do good to the
poor, does not thereby openly confess me: but he that does to me as this woman
does: for by this deed she openly witnesses her faith in me, and that without
any fear at all.

Here then we learn how to confess Christ. For in times of persecution it is
not enough to show pity to the poor, but we ought also to make open confession
of the faith of Christ; otherwise we deny Christ, Luke 9.
according to that, He that is ashamed of me before men, of him will I be
ashamed before God. So in times of heresy and schism, it is not sufficient to
keep the true Faith in our heart, but we ought to make confession of it too.

But whereas Christ says, me ye shall not have always, it is not so to be
understood, as if Christ were not now in the world, or as though he were with
us in spirit, and according to his Divinity, and not also present with his
Body, especially at the Sacrament. But he says, he would not be always in the
world, so as he was then with Mary, viz. visible and tangible, passible and
mortal. Ye shall not always, says he, have me as I am now with this woman, or
as the poor are with ye, who may be the better for your worldly goods. Thus are
we to understand that which he said after his Resurrection. These are the words
which I spoke when I was with you, Luke 24.
etc. Yet then when he was with them bodily, it was not as formerly, to wit,
mortal and passible.

Thus the Body of Christ is not visibly, sensibly, and passibly in the
Sacrament, yet we acknowledge that the body of Christ is there; Matthew. 26.
as it is written, Take and eat, this is my Body. Nor is it a good consequence
to say, the Body of Christ is not some way, that is, visibly in the Sacrament,
therefore it is not there at all. As it does not follow to say, The King does
not sit at Table Crowned, therefore he does not sit at Table. There is a
fallacy in it, concluding simply from that which is spoken but after a sort.

Mar. 14.8.
She has done what she could, she is come aforehand to anoint my Body to the
burying.

As if he had said, ye might have guessed from the very anointing that I must
shortly be buried; and if I must be buried, I must first die. Therefore Christ
does again commend this deed of the woman, because thereby he would thoroughly
instruct all to be zealous to maintain good works. This fact has a fourfold
commendation.

1.
Because it proceeded from great Devotion and Love.

2.
It was a manifest confession of that woman's faith which she had in Christ, and
therefore was greater than if she had given all her goods to the poor. He that
gives to the poor, does indeed a good work, and thereby acknowledges God, but
without any hazard; either by private, or public, and general confession. So
to confess is praise worthy, but it is without any danger. But this woman by this
her deed exposed both her self and hers to greatest danger. This indeed is true
and free confession. This is to forsake and hazard all things for Christ.

3.
It was therefore a commendable act, because it did foreshew Christ's burial; as
the Ceremonies of the Old Testament were pleasing to God, not as they were
works, nor as they were costly works, but because they shadowed forth Christ,
and became good works as they were done by faith in Christ.

4.
Lastly, If for nothing else, yet for this one thing did this woman's work
deserve to be commended, in that it did show beforehand how that the whole
Church was to be filled with the fragrancy of Christ's death, and the odor of
the Gospel. As also in that it foreshewed what manner of persons all Believers
should be toward Christ to the worlds end.

Mar. 14.9.
Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout
the whole world, this also that she has done, shall be spoken of for a
memorial of her.

Christ says his Passion is the Gospel, and it is truly the Gospel; that is,
it is a good Message. For what better news can we hear of, than that the Son of
God has taken away our sins by his own death. Therefore (says Christ)
wheresover my suffering shall be preached, this woman and her faith also shall
be admired. For from them all Believers shall have a President of faith and
charity. Of faith, that they may know how to anoint both the head and feet of
Christ, i. e. to acknowledge him both God and man, not daunted with death or
danger. Of Charity, that they may learn to anoint Christ's feet with Ointment,
viz. to succor their Neighbor with works of mercy, and to wipe their feet
with their hair, that is, so to supply the wants of the needy with the
abundance of their riches, without impoverishing themselves, as they pole
themselves without pain.

Here we see how an immortal name may be gotten, to wit, by godliness and good
works. For as wicked men die with a noise only, and leave nothing but a nasty
name behind them; so the Righteous are in everlasting Remembrance. Some there
be (says the wise man) which have no memorial, Eccl. 44.9.
who are perished as though they had never been, and are become as though they
had never been born. But the name of merciful men abides from generation to
generation. Thus this woman by one good deed got her both a perpetual and
precious name, which shall never be blotted out. For as long as the Gospel
lasts, so long the praise and memory of this woman shall endure.

If thou therefore would have a perpetual name and memory, strive to imitate
this Mary in good works, who as she is commended in Luke for hearing the word
of God, Luke 10.39.
so here she is praised for her care of good works. Do thou therefore join both
together, a love of Gods Word, and a zeal of good works. Thus much of this
History: it follows in the Text:

Luke 22.3,4.
Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the
twelve: and he went his way, and communed with the chief Priests and Captains.

Mat. 26.15.
And said unto them, what will ye give me? and I will deliver him unto you.

When the Evangelist would describe the person of the Traitor, he does fitly
premise, that Satan entered into him; otherwise it had been most strange that
any man could be so wicked, and act so villanously and cruelly against his
Lord. But because we hear that Satan entered into this man, it is the less to be
admired that he should dare do so horrid a thing: for where that most
abominable guest is, there no good can be expected. As the Holy Spirit stirs
them up, in whom he dwells, to all good: so that wicked spirit spurs them on
to all evil. Where we see,

1.
That the Devil was the cause of Christ's death and suffering: first by this
Traitor: then by the hands of sinners, as the Jews and Gentiles. Whence he is
rightly called Satan, or Christ's Adversary.

2.
We see how dangerous it is once to give place to the Devil, for he will never
leave haunting us, when once he finds that our faith is feeble, and that our
unstable heart is entangled with strange cares: as we see here in Judas, who
because he first yielded to the Devil when he tempted him to covetousness, he
is now wholly possessed by him.

But the Evangelists do exactly describe the person of this Traitor, as well by
his name as his office, that the greatness of his sin may the more appear. His
proper name was Judas, his furname was Iscariot; which the Evangelist did
carefully add, to distinguish him from Judas the brother of James, who is
called both Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus.

He was called Iscariot, either from the Tribe whence he came, viz. Isachar: or
as some think, from a little Village where he was born. Some are of opinion,
that the Evangelists did therefore add this surname of his, to show that he was
born for this villainy. For Isachar, whence Iscariot seems to be derived,
signifies Reward or Wages. Others think, that Iscariot is derived from Ish,
which signifies a Man; (...)
and Carath, which signifies to beat down, to destroy, to root out, etc. So
that Iscariot is as much as to to say, a slaughter-man: which name does too
well suit to this man, for indeed he showed himself to be such a one. He had
also another name, to wit, Simon, as appears by John; for says he, he gave the
sop to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. John 13.26.
These three names fully set forth the condition of this man, aggravating also
his sin, and are a Picture of all false Christians. 1.
For first he was Simon, in that he heard the Gospel of Christ: (for Simon
signifies Hearing.) 2.
He was also Judas, in that he professed himself a Disciple of Christ; (for Judas
signifies Confessing) 3.
but indeed, and in truth, he was Iscariot, i. e. a Murderer. Thus false
Christians hear the Gospel, and profess Christ, but in their practice deny him:
Tit. 1.
and so are like the Traitor Judas. It will not serve the turn, to hear and
make Confession, if thou play Judas in thy practice.

So much for the Traitors name: now consider his office. It is said, that he
was one of the twelve Apostles, whom Christ had chosen out of all the world for
his intimate friends, to whom he showed all his Secrets. 1.
This by others was counted a great honor, to be one of Christ's Apostles. But
'twas little praise to this man, it was rather his utter tisgrace: for his
malice appeared so much the more abominable, in that he was an Apostle of
Christ. Who can but tremble to hear that the Devil entered into an Apostle? If
that wicked one durst set upon the Apostles, nay if he could hurry one of them
into horrid baseness, which of us can be safe? Wherefore Paul's admonition is
not in vain, 1 Cor. 10. 1 Pet. 5.
That he that stands should take heed lest he fall. And Peter exhorts, Be
sober and watch, knowing that your Adversary the Devil goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he way devour.

2.
Again, Who can but tremble to think, that in so small and so holy a company, so
vile a wretch should be found? Let none therefore trust in man, or in the
sanctity of place office, or robe. If the Apostleship did not sanctify Judas,
neither will a place, office, or garment make thee holy. If thou ha^ not first
sought and receive Holiness from God, thou maye^ be the worse for thy Calling.
And if Judas was not good, though he dwelt among good men, and had a good
office; so neither art thou the better for a holy Calling or Clothing.

3.
Besides, If there were so bad a fellow in that little College, which Christ
himself founded: no marvail if there be many unworthy men in the great
Colleges of men's building. Let every man beware that he be not in his
Fellowship or Congregation, as Judas was among the Apostles.

4.
Lastly, Is it not strange, that Christ should be betrayed by one of those that
came with him, and was honorably entertained at Bethany, and sat at Table with
him? This is that which the Psalmist complains of: Psalm 55.
It was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. We took sweet
council together, and walked unto the house of God in company, etc. Though it
sound somewhat harsh, that wicked men should be in Christ's company: yet it is
more pleasant to hear that there was but one bad man there. And the praise of
the other Apostles is so much the more, in that they had so naughty a fellow
among them, yet none of them was seduced by him. For no doubt, but he attempted
to set them against Christ. On the other side, the condemnation of Judas was so
much the heavier, in that he lived among godly men, and was never the better.
That odor of the Ointment which refreshed the rest, was the savor of death
unto death unto him; yea, because he was already dead and buried in his sins,
he could not endure the savor of life. Well then, what does he? He takes his
course, and wholly forsakes the Apostles. He departs from God, and sideth with
the Devil, quits the Apostleship, Acts 1. Psalm 1.
and leaves his Bishopric to another. He went over to the council of the
ungodly, he stood in the way of sinners, and sat down in the seat of scorners.
He went to the chief Priests, whom he knew certainly that they had resolvedly
conspired the death of Christ Jesus, and that nothing would hinder the
execution, if they could but apprehend him without disturbance. Which to do,
none was more sit than one of Christ's familiar companions, who well knew where
Christ was wont to retire himself. And one there was among them, who loved base
lucre above a bountiful Lord. So pernicious a thing is covetousness, if it
once get into the heart.

Thus this base fellow runs from the Apostles to the Priests, those enemies of
Christ, and back again from them to the Apostles; this notorious Hypocrite
thereby endeavoring to cover his wickedness, conversing all the while with the
Apostles under pretense of Piety. Those that would be accounted Christians,
counterfeit their form and porofession, though they still be in league with the
enemies of Christ, these are dissembling Hypocrites. This wretch was not
content to cast off his Master, and curry favor with his enemies, but he must
treacherously betray him into their hands; What will ye give me, says he, and
I will deliver him unto you? This he said of his own accord, without enticing
Promises, but spitefully and maliciously against Christ. As if he had said, I
understand you have a design to put Jesus to death, I shall be ready to assist
you therein; I am one of his privy Council, I know his secrets and retirings; I
can closely convey him to you without any stir or tumult, etc.

Where observe the malice of this wicked man, and his notorious contempt of
Christ; First, In that he came before he was sent for. Secondly, In that he
disdains to call Christ Master, but only says, I will dever him unto you.
Thirdly, In that he left the price to their pleasures as one ready to betray
Christ for a small matter. See what covetousness will do! Surely it is the root
of all evil. 1 Timothy 6.
Well may we cry out upon this wretched man that was so careless of his own
happiness: O miserable wretch, what have thou said? What is thy plot? Do thou
so love and hunt after money? What Doctrine did thou preach to others when
Christ sent thee forth? Do thou love Gold better then Jesus? If all
Jerusalem, and the wealth therein had been offered thee, ought thou to have
done this villainy against Christ, against thy Lord and Savior? But envy and
covetousness will so blind a man, that for a little revenge or gain, he cares
not to sin against God himself. It follows.

Mar. 14.11.
And when they heard it, they were glad.

Mat. 26.15,16.
And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.

Luke 23.6.
And he promised, and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him unto
them in the absence of the multitude.

Behold this Tratour; so small a reward as thirty pieces of silver tempts him
to commit this cursed fact: so basely did he esteem of that precious blood, for
which a Believer will part with all that he has, and himself too. Yet wicked
men make no acconnt of it.

A figure of this sale we have before in Joseph, Genesis 37.
who was also sold by his own brethren. But divine Providence so ordered it,
that Joseph, who had only a body and a soul, should be sold for twenty pieces
of silver: But Christ, who besides a body and a soul, had also a divine Nature,
was valued at, and sold for thirty pieces of silver.

Note 1.
Where note, what kind of Judges those Priests were. It was their part to have
checked that Traitor with a just Rebuke, and made him an example to all to
beware of so doing. But they gladly received him, encouraged him on, enticed
him with reward and bribes, to make him more bold. Such are Magistrates and
Princes for the most part, who do what in them lies to cherish, animate,
allure and reward evil men for their wicked service. But the words have an
Emphasis in them; They rejoiced.

They rejoiced indeed, not so much that Christ was delivered into their hands,
as that he was betrayed by his own Disciple. For now they thought at once to
suppress Christ, and with him all his followers.

2.
Note also, That the Seller and the Buyers were such, as of all men were least
to be suspected to do any such thing. He that sold him was an Apostle. They
that bought him, were even the chief Priests, who by their office were a figure
of Christ. And we shall hear anon, that the Elders of the people, who were to
administer Justice, did not condemn him to death. No other Nation denied and
blasphemed him, but that which received the Promises of him, and were the
people of God. Whereby is plainly intimated, that Christ suffers more by
those that seem to be his friends, than by any other; as was long since
complained of, and foretold by David, I was a reproach among all mine enemies,
but specially among my Neighbors, etc. Psalm. 31.11.
which did now plainly appear to be true. For none did more basely account of
Christ, and more vilify him to others, than those that represented him on
earth. None more corrupt, than those that should do justice. None more pervert
the Word of God and the Gospel, then those that most glory of it; who boast
that they are Judas, that is, true confessors of the name of God, but are
indeed Iscariots, that is, such as will do any thing for gain. In a word, None
more blaspheme Christ, than ticular Christians. Let us not then be so angry
with Judas and the Jews, seeing we do the same our selves, and worse. They tore
his body, but kept his coat whole. But we rend and tear every member of Christ,
and break the unity of the faith and of the Church with cross peevishness.
Briefly, We who do now so vilely esteem the Word of God, the name of Christ,
Righteousness, and the members of Christ, even we would have killed Christ, as
well as the Jews. This was the Evangelists opinion when they so exactly
described Judas, who sold him, and the Jews that bought him.

Observe this too; Never any of the Saints was so sold and so bought as Christ
was, viz. bought and sold to be slain. Joseph indeed was bought and sold, but
not unto death, but bondage. Christ only was sold and bought to die, and that
at a low rate: which by the righteous Judgment of God fell out to the great
loss both of seller and buyers. For instead of those thirty pieces of silver,
Psalm. 109.
they got thirty most terrible maledictions, which David foresaw would come
upon them: As 1. Set thou a wicked man over him. 2. Let Satan stand at his
right hand. 3. When he shall be judged, let him be condemned. 4. Let his prayer
become sin. 5. Let his days be few. 6. Let another take his office. 7. Let his
Children be fatherless. 8. And his wife a Widow. 9. Let his Children be
continually Vagabonds, and beg. 10. Let them seek their bread out of their
desolate places. 11. Let the Extortioner catch all that he has. 12. Let
strangers spoil his labor. 13. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him. 14.
Let there be none to favor his fatherless children. 15. Let his posterity be
cut off. 16. In the generation following, let their name be blotted out. 17.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord. 18. Let not the sin
of his mother be blotted out. 19 Let them be before the Lord continually. 20.
That he may cut off the memory of them from the earth. 21. He loved cursing, so
let it come unto him. 22. As he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far
from him. 23. He clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment. 24.
Let it come into his bowels like water. 25. And like oil into his bones. 26.
Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him. 27. And for a girdle,
wherewith he is girded continually. 28. When they arise, let them be ashamed.
29. Let mine Adversaries be clothed with shame. 30. Let them cover themselves
with their own confusion, as with a Mantle.

These are the thirty pieces of silver for which Judas sold Christ. See now how
wickedly, how damnably he recovered the loss of the ointment. The wretched man
thought that he should have had the thirty pieces of silver, but he got nothing
but thirty curses, which stuck close to him, after he had thrown the money from
him in the Temple. He did not as yet feel the weight of those curses, but not
long after he was sensible thereof; when he hanged himself in despair. Mat. 26.
Nor did he go away alone with these Maledictions, but the Jews also had their
share with him; and so shall all they, who for gain shed blood, or commit any
other sin against God, or their Neighbor. They think to make themselves rich,
but it will be in nothing, but endless curses, which they, their Children and
Heirs commonly find by woeful experience. It follows.

Mat. 26.17. Luke 22.7.
Now the first day of the Feast of unleavened bread, when the Passover must be
killed, the Disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where will thou that we prepare
for thee to eat the Passover?

Enough has been said of the damned Traitor already. Now the Evangelists are
about to describe that most sacred Supper, which was the last at which Christ
was with his Disciples.

There is scarce any thing that the Evangelists do more exactly set down: and
that justly too. For there was nothing said or done at that Supper, but was
worth the noting.

Now there must be some reason, as also time and place for that Supper. Of all
which the Evangelists omit nothing. The days of unleavened bread were the time
of this Supper. The place was a large upper room, well furnished. The occasion,
was the Paschal Lamb, which the Jews did then eat according to the custom.

Why those were called the days of unleavened bread, I have told you in the
entrance of this discourse. It Is needless to repeat it now, seeing the word it
self explains it. For Azymus is derived from A, which signifies without; and
Zyma which signifies Leaven: as much as to say, without leaven, unleavened
bread. Levit. 7.
For in those days the Jews might not eat leavened bread, nor offer such bread,
no, nor so much as have it in their houses: Luke 13.
A figure, that no Hypocrisy, or any Pharisaical thing should be found in the
Church. Thus Christ expounds Leaven, Beware says he of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. 1 Cor. 5.
Let us keep the feast says Paul, not with old leaven, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.

The feast of the Passover drawing nigh, the Disciples took care about the
Paschal Lamb; for they were Jews, Exodus 12.
and knew the custom of the Nation, and the Command of the Law. Therefore they
did not delay till the time was come to eat it, or till Christ put them in mind
of it, but thought on it before hand of their own accord. So that it is evident,
they had a great care that the Command of God should not be neglected, lest it
should be imputed to them as a great sin, if they kept not the Passover.
Therefore all business laid aside, they mind this only. Where will thou, say
they, that we prepare for thee? etc.

Thus Christians should be careful to observe all good old and godly customs,
and by no means slight them. For there will some good fruit come of it, when
the Church of Believers do unaminously go on in that which is good.

See here the Disciples willingness: like devout men they are mindful of the
legal institution, and like humble servants, they tender their duty and service
unto Christ: The meaning.
Where shall we make ready? etc. as if they had said, It becomes us to know
thy pleasure; it is our duty to serve and make all ready for thee our Master.
We know thou will not omit or neglect this legal Ceremony: but where thou
intendest to celebrate it, we know not. Thou have no house of thine own at
Jerusalem, otherwise we need not ask this question.

John 1. Luke 9.
Observe here O Christians, the extreme poverty of Christ Jesus, who though he
were Lord of the whole world, yet had he not a house of his own to lay his head
in. So that he was fain to sup at another man's house; and when he was dead, he
was buried in another man's grave. He showed himself truly a stranger on earth
for our Example.

2.
Let the rich men of the world consider this well, who cease not to join house
to house, Es. 5.8.
and land to land, till there be no more place, as though they only were born
to live on the earth.

3.
But specially, let the Ministers of the Churches consider themselves, who by
the greatest contempt of worldly things ought to follow a poor Christ. Let them
consider, I say, how far they come short of the example of Christ and the
Apostles? and withal think of what Isay says of such men: Woe to them that
join house to house, etc. and as it is in Habakkuk, Hab. 2.
Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his
nest on high, etc. Is it not an unseemly thing for a Christian to build stately
houses, when his Lord had not where to hide his head in all the earth? But let
us hear what place Christ chose to sup in; for though worldlings strive to
scrape all to themselves, yet Christ and those that are his find some place of
Reception, for so it follows.

Luke 22.8,10.
And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover, that we
may eat. Behold, when ye are entered into the City, there shall a man meet you
bearing a pitcher of water, follow him into the house where he enters in.

verse 11. Mat. 26.18. Luke 22.11.
And ye shall say unto the good man of the house, The Master says unto thee,
my time is at hand; I will keep the Passover at thy house with my Disciples.
Where is the Guest-chamber, where I shall eat the Passover with my Disciples?

1.
Here is first the place of the Passion, to wit, the City Jerusalem, which
Christ chose for his suffering, as he did Bethlem for his Nativity, M^c. 5.
that the Scripture in all things might be fulfilled. Micha prophesied that
Christ should be born in Bethlem: and Moses commanded to sacrifice nowhere but
in the place which the Lord had chosen, which was the Temple at Jerusalem.
Christ therefore in obedience to the Law would not offer his sacrifice anywhere
but at Jerusalem. Deuteronomy 12.


2.
Again, Christ would rather suffer in that City, because there it was where the
old Prophets did suffer; as it is said in Luke, Luke 13. Matthew. 23.
It cannot be that a Prophet should perish without Jerusalem. Now this City had
an ill report for this long since, in that it killed the Prophets, and stoned
them that were sent unto it. Let us now see in what order things were carried
on.

1.
He sends two of his Disciples, but specially Peter and John, Luke 22.
as Luke says; that is, the chiefest of all the Disciples, which is not
without a Mystery. John 21. John 20. Acts 3. John 13.
We often find these two Disciples coupled together. Peter was a very great
lover of Christ: and John was more beloved of Christ than any other: these two
ran together to the Sepulcher after the Resurrection. When the Holy Ghost was
given, they went up together into the Temple. At the Supper it was Peter, not the
other Dsciples, that beckoned to John to ask who should betray their Lord?
These two also left most excellent Epistles behind them, viz. 1 Pet. and 1
John: in which they did, and still do teach great Mysteries; Peter shows that
Christ is the Rock. John teaches that he is the Grace of God: both of them
according to their Name. Peter signifying a Rock; John the Grace of God.

These two then are sent to make ready the Passover: but for whom? even for
Christ; yet not for him only, but for his Church too. Which they did with all
industry. For who but the Apostles framed and prepared for us the
Communion Table and Altar of the Church? viz. by their preaching and writings?

2.
But observe: they do not this without command from their Lord. For unless the
Lord call and send forth Teachers, Jer. 16. and 23.
they run in vain and do no good. Nor can we of our selves partake of the Lords
Supper, except God send us Apostles. How shall they hear without a Preacher?
Romans 10.

3.
Whereas Christ so undoubtedly foretold all things that should happen concerning
the Water-bearer, and the readiness of the master of the house, it was more
than from his humane nature. It was a sure sign of the Divinity of Christ,
before whose eyes all things past, present and to come, are naked and bare.
Heb. 4.
Otherwise when he was at Bethany, he could not have so well known that not a
maid, but manservant should meet his Disciples with a pitcher of water; much
less could he know whether he was going, etc. By this therefore he would show
his Godhead, as he did another time when he said to his Disciples, Matthew
ye shall find an Ass tied: Chap. 17. John 1.
And to Peter, when thou have opened the mouth of the fish, thou shall find a
piece of money. So to Nathaniel, I saw thee under the fig tree. Every Christian
should diligently observe all such things in Christ which surpassed the humane
Nature: for thereby he will come to think more highly of Christ;
notwithstanding he was like a servant and crucified.

4.
The Disciples are not commanded to say any thing to the Water-bearer, but only
to follow him, and deliver their charge to the Master of the House. A servant
cannot deny or grant any thing that belongs to the Master only. Let all things
be done decently and in order.

5.
Christ tells them in express words what they should say to the Master of the
House. A Gospel Minister must not preach any thing but what his Lord commands
him, nor must add to, or diminish from the words of his Lord: else he does not
his Masters business, but his own.

6.
He commands them to make him known by the title of Master; and that he would
come after, who was then so called. For the world had then no higher thoughts
of him, but as one who preached the Truth, as Nicodemus and others said of him.
John 3.


7.
Whereas he says, that his time was at hand, it is to be understood of his
death, and the Redemption of Mankind, as formerly he had often spoken: John 2.
and 9.
saying, his hour or time was not yet come. Whereby he does again declare his
Deity, in that he foreknew and foretold what was to come. For no man can of
himself tell the hour of his death. The times and the seasons God the Father
has put in his own power: Acts 1.
it is not for man to know these things.

8.
Again, He does not send word to the good man of the house by way of entreaty,
but as it were commandingly, that he would keep the Passover at his House: as
when he sent his Disciples for the Ass, Matthew. 21.
they were not to pray or ask leave to take him, but as if they had authority,
to say, the Lord has need of him.

Whereby he would show that he was Lord of all, and could if he pleased command
all.

No doubt but he to whom he sent his Disciples was a very godly man, and
perhaps a Disciple of Jesus, as Nicedemus and Joseph were.

That Christ foreknew all things to come, may be seen, in that after he had
commanded his Disciples, he assured them of the good man's readiness; He shall
show you, says he, a large upper room, etc. By all which we may see that
nothing was spoken in vain. It follows.

Luke 22.13.
And they went and found as had said unto them, and they made ready the
Passover.

Here the obedience of the Disciples is first to be observed, and then the
certainty of Christ's words. The godliness also of this householder may be here
seen, who set open his doors, and tendered the best furniture of (...) house to
poor Christ and his Disciples, and supplied them with all things necessary
without asking. For whom else had he built this fair chamber but for Christ?
and to Christ did he devote his whole house.

But for whom do thou build thy stately houses and large Palaces, O thou rich
Mamm^? For Christ, or for his Disciples? or for the brethren the members of
Christ? or for poor Pilgrims? Again, for what use do thou build them? to read
the Scriptures there? to pray in them, to praise God, to refresh the poor? No
such matter. It is to revel, bouze, sport, dance, and for all voluptuousness of
this world. So cruel and hard-hearted art thou, that no poor man durst step
over thy threshold. Woe to thee wretch, woe be to thy soul: Luke 16.
for thou must look for no better end than he came to, who let Lazarus lie at
his gate hungry and gave him no comfort.

A good Christians house is a kind of Church and Hospital for the poor. For
there he reads: Matthew. 6.
there he prays the Father in secret: there he teaches his children and
family the things pertaining to godliness: there also be receives and
refreshes the poor. Did not this Housekeeper do thus? His house was truly a
Church, wherein Christ instituted the Sacrament of the Altar, and where he both
did and taught such Heavenly things. Lastly, where the Disciples afterward
received the Holy Ghost. And was not his house an Hospital, where Christ and
his poor school were so charitably refreshed? To such like uses, that man
whosoever he was, set apart his house. A notable example indeed, but very rare.
Our houses do not entertain the poor, but drabs and bawds, etc.

Thus the Disciples found as Jesus had told them before; he failed them in
nothing. Who then would not believe Christ in every thing else? Who can now
doubt of his Divinity? Shall we look for stronger arguments? The mystical
meaning.
The mystical sense may be this; When the Disciples were sent into the world to
prepare the true Passover, first there met them a man bearing a pitcher of
water, that is, the Jewish people too much oppressed under the burden of the Law,
which in comparison of the Gospel has no more taste or relish than water,
which does rather oppress than comfort the stomach. Now when this water, to
wit, the Law of Moses was set aside, the Apostles made ready the true Passover
by the preaching of the Gospel; not among the Jews who rejected it, but with
the Gentiles, whose houses that were formerly profane, are now become
Churches. This is that which Paul says to the Jews, It was necessary that the
Word of God should first have been spoken unto you: Acts 13.
but seeing ye put it from you, etc.

What things were requisite to the preparation and eating of the Passover, may
be found at large in Exodus. First, there must be a Lamb. Exodus 12.
Then the posts were to be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb. Thirdly, the
Lamb must be roasted. Also it was to be eaten with bitter herbs and unleavened
bread: besides they were to have shoes and staves. When you hear that the
Disciples made ready the Passover, suppose that they prepared all these things.
Surely that honest householder supplied them with all these things, and that
most cheerfully too, to the great hazard of his life. A great shame to all them
that in other things are very prodigal, but to Christ and his people they are
miserably penurious.

John 13.1.
Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come
that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own
which were in this world, he loved them unto the end.

Concerning Christ's foreknowledge of the time and hour of his death, we have
spoken already. This the Evangelists do very often and carefully inculcate,
lest any Heretic or Unbeliever should say, that he was not able to deliver
himself, and that he did not suffer willingly, but being ensnared by the Jews,
he could not avoid it. And whereas he often said that his hour or time was not
yet come, but here says that it was come: we must not so conceive of it, as
though some malignant planet to Christ but favorable to the Jews, did then
predominate: but that Christ himself made choice to dye and suffer at this day,
this hour, and at this very time, and that upon good ground.

1.
First, Because it is he who by his blood delivers us from that plague
wherewith the whole world was smitten: therefore he would shed his blood on
that day, in which the Israelites heretofore were delivered from the destroyer
in Egypt by the blood of the Lamb.

2.
Christ was now about to deliver us from the thraldom of the Devil. Therefore he
would dye the same day wherein the Israelites heretofore were delivered from
the tyranny of Pharaoh.

3.
Christ was now by his Passion going to purge us from the leaven of sin:
therefore he would suffer at that time, when the Jews were forbidden to have
any leaven.

4.
Now Christ by his suffering was to fulfill the Scriptures of the Prophets:
therefore he would suffer when the Moon was at full.

5.
It was the desire of Christ to expel the night of sin and Errors, and to
bring in the day of Grace; therefore he suffered after the vernal Equinox, when
the day began to be longer than the night.

See now with what an Elegant circumlocution John does set forth the death of
Christ. He does not say, that his time to die was at hand (for the Evangelist
was not willing to name his death) but that he should depart out of this world
unto the Father, so cheerful and merry as if there had been no interpo^ition
of Death, though this passage of Christ to the Father could not be but by a
most bitter death. And what else does John mean by this Periphrasis of words,
but the explication of a Christians death? For if the Platonists call death a
Metabasis, or a passing into life, how much more should we Christians so think
and believe of it? Be glad then O Christians at this Evangelicall Definition:
for such as Christ's death was, such shall ours be. Now his death was a passing
to the Father: therefore so shall ours be also, even as Christ himself said;
John 20.
I ascend to my Father, and to your Father.

Note 1.
He does not say that his time, but his hour was come; to teach us that there is
a certain hour appointed to every man, as it is said, Job 14.
The number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds, that
he cannot pass.

Note 2.
Secondly, To show that his suffering would not last long So he says to the
Jews, Matthew. 26.
this is your hour, q.d. I have but one hour to suffer, and you but one to
spend your rage.

Thus the Scripture calls the whole time of this life but an hour. If thou
do well, know that thou have but an hours time here; that is, but a very
little while: do not therefore begrudge thy labor. And even thy effliction
lasts but an hour; let it not then be tedious. Psalm 37.
So the prosperity of the wicked continues but an hour: Fret not thy self
because of the evil doers, for yet a little, and he shall be no more.

But as the feast of the Passover was Christ's hour, when he would suffer and
dye: so forty years after at the same feast was his hour, when he inflicted
vengeance on the Jews. For when they were assembled at the Passover, the Romans
besieged them, and shortly after ransacked their City.

We also have two hours, one of Mercy, another of Judgment; as certainly as
there is a time of mercy, so certainly may we expect the hour of Judgment.
Briefly, the Evangelist John calls the death of Christ a going away.

1.
That he might show his power and might. For he could pass over all those things
which yet hindered his approach to the Father: Psalm. 107.16.
as it is said of him, He has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of
iron in sunder. Before his death there was no clear passage out of this world
unto Heaven. And this therefore is the fruit of his death, he opened thereby,
and prepared for us a passage to the Father. It is significantly said, not to
God, but to the Father, that we should not be afraid to draw nigh unto God, who
by Christ is now become our Father.

2.
Again, This going away may thus be understood, viz. that John would hereby give
an account of the Passover it self, which signifies a passing over: as if he
had said, This feast has hitherto been celebrated in remembrance of those
things that were done in the passing or going out of Egypt. Now there is
another passing out at hand, even out of the world unto the Father. In the
former going out, Moses was Leader, in this second Christ Jesus is the Captain.
As they followed Moses, so let us follow Christ. The Jewish Passover is to go
out of Egypt; the Christian Passover is to go out of the world to the Father.

But what did Christ when he knew that the hour of his going away was at hand?
surely he did not forget his friends. He did not leave loving them, for whose
sake he was going to suffer such a bitter death. And why should he withdraw his
love from them who are so hated and contemned by and in the world? What then
does Christ do? When he had loved his, he loved them unto the end. He did truly
love them; and he continued this his love to them indeed unto the end.

In the first clause Christ shows the reason why he was made man, and came
into the world. It was not our worthiness that was any motive thereof; Psalm.
143.2.
for we were not worthy to receive so much as corporal blessings from him,
much less were we worthy of eternal. Nor had we any merit to move him: for we
were altogether born in sin. Neither was it our righteousness that availed any
thing; for who shall be justified in the sight of God? But it was his boundless
love, his infinite charity wherewith he embraced us that allured and invited
him thereto. For as the Father out of his great and abundant love sent his Son,
so the Son out of his abundant charity undertook and performed that Embassy of
the Father. So says John, herein his love, 1 John 4.
not that we loved him, but that he loved us first,. Most significantly does
John say, having loved his own which were in the world. All creatures were his
by creation. John 1.
It is said of the wicked; He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
But by his own is here meant, those whom he chose to be his from Eternity, of
whom it is said, Thine they were, John 17.
and thou gave them me.

He says further, which were in the world, lest any should think he spoke here
of the Angels, who also are Christ's. But he took not the Nature of Angels, but
the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2. Phil. 2.
He did not appear in the likeness of an Angel, but was found in fashion as a
man. And it is said in general, having loved his own which were in the world,
lest any should think that he loved none but his Apostles. How he loved his
own, may be seen by this one thing, in that he came down from Heaven for their
sake; to say nothing of the great tokens of his love which he showed to them
when he was in earth. But what means that, He loved them to the end? It was
to show why Christ took the Cross in his way as he went back again to the
Father, when he might have returned without danger. His love constrained him.
He saw that his coming down from Heaven was not sufficient, unless also he made
satisfaction for the sins of men. So that he loved them to the end, i. e. he
persevered in his love.

1.
First, in that he left not loving them even to the death: the ungodliness of
the Jews did not hinder him, he was not disheartened when his own fled from him
and denied him, leaving him all alone to suffer by himself.

2.
He continued his love to them, in that death it self did not put an end to it.
Many waters could not quench it, Cant 8.

3.
His love to them lasted to the end; that is, he shows signs of it to them in
the very last day.

4.
He loved them to the end, that is, with the highest and most perfect love, than
which none could be greater. Greater love has none, than that a man lay down
his life for his friends, which Christ did do, John 13. Or,

5.
He loved them to the end, that is, he gave not over till be had perfectly saved
them, sully overcome sin, death, and all the curses of the Law.

Now then John does so singularly commend the love of Christ, and set it forth
in the beginning or entrance of his Passion, and his last Supper.

1.
To show that all things which followed after, proceeded from nothing but the
love of Christ, as the Institution of the Sacrament, the washing of their feet,
his most loving instructions, and the very Passion it self.

2.
On the other hand to stir us up to love Christ, and be thankful to him.

3.
For our Confolation, that we should not think Gods love to us comes to an end.
For he does not love once only, or only our Fathers, but he loves to the end,
for ever and ever. He abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.

Dearest friends, let this love of Christ satisfy us. It matters not whether
the world does love or hate us, so long as we are sure that Christ loves us,
that we are in his heart, that he regards us much, that he cares for us,
etc. What hurt can the hatred of the world now do us? If God be for us, who can
be against us? Romans 8. It follows,

Mat. 26.20. Mark 14,18. Luke 22.15,16,17,18.
Now when the even was come, he came and sat down with the twelve Apostles, and
says unto them:

With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. For
I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the
Kingdom of God. And he took the cup and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and
divide it among your selves. For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit
of the Vine, Mat. 26.29.
till the Kingdom of God shall come, when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom.

Here begins the Supper. Exodus 12.
In the evening of the fourteenth day of the first month, the paschal Lamb was
to be slain and eaten. Christ therefore does well begin at the figure, and
proceed unto the Truth. First, He eats the Legal Lamb, then he instituteth
his new Supper, and offers himself to be eaten by those that are his. And
whereas the Law required to eat the Paschal Lamb standing, no doubt but Christ
observed it: and though it be said, he sat, that is meant after he had eaten
the legal Lamb.

First then he stood with his Disciples and did eat the paschall Lamb, that he
might wholly fulfill the Law, and bring it to an honorable end; for he came
not to destroy but to fulfill it. When he had so done, he sat down, and
happily then began the true Supper. He had finished the former already, that
old one; but his own, which he principally intended, he had not yet begun. To
the other a roasted Lamb was required, but to this nothing but bread and wine.
Therefore between both Suppers he does interpose a few words, whereby he gave
them to understand, that he meant to abolish the Old Testament, and to make a
new one.

He expressed the great affection of his heart to them at the beginning. With
desire have I desired, etc. as if he had said, My dearest Babes, ye know very
well that I have observed the Passover every year; but never with so great a
desire as I do now. For now the time is come that I will give you such meat and
drink as ye never yet tasted at this Jewish Festival. And I am glad that the
time is come, for I desire nothing more. To morrow I must suffer a most bitter
death: therefore I must dispatch the Supper this night. This is the last time I
shall sup with you, I shall never more eat with you on earth as now we do.
Hence he presently adds, Hereafter I will no more eat of it, etc. And,
henceforth I will no more drink of the fruit of the Vine: in which words he
plainly shows that he was about to suffer. And a dead man does neither eat
nor drink.

Now lest his Disciples should be too much grieved at this uncouth speech, he
says further for their comfort, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God;
And, till I drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father. Both speeches
have the same sense: for they have respect to the joyful Resurrection of
Christ. When Christ rose from the dead the Passover was fulfilled. All was
imperfect till then. Every one of the former Feasts were defective. For till
that time there was but only the shadow and Figure of the Passover, as also all
other things under Moses. When Christ rose, the true Passover began; for then
all things were fulfilled which belonged to the Passover.

And this says he, Matthew. 3.
shall be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. For then the Kingdom of God shall
come in all Respects, of which it was said before, that it drew nigh. As if he
had said, till I am dead and risen again, the kingdom of God is not come. But
then my heavenly and spiritual Kingdom shall mightily be begun in all the
world, when I shall die for the sins of men, and rise again for their
justification: Romans 4.
then I say, the whole world shall plainly see and know by the Word and Spirit,
that the Son of God is King, and reigns over the soul and conscience, which
Kingdom of his is now covered with the Cross.

What then did he promise should be after all things were fulfilled, and the
Kingdom of God made manifest? He promised that he would eat the Passover again
with them, and drink wine, but new wine, and after another manner than before;
which may be understood two ways:

1.
First, Of his corporal eating, when he did eat of a broiled fish, and Honey
comb with his Disciples after his Resurrection. Then he did eat with them again
corporally, but not as formerly. It was not for any bodily necessity (for a
glorious body needs not meat) but fully to prove and evidence the truth of
his Resurrection. Christ then promised that he would eat bodily again with them
after his Resurrection, though (as I said) after another manner: of which Peter
speaks, we did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. Acts 10.41.


2.
But the better sense of the words, is of the spiritual eating and drinking. For
after the solemnity of this Jewish Feast, Christ did never more eat of the
paschal Lamb. But he eats the new Passover or Lamb with us, and drinks the
new wine with us in the Kingdom of God, in the Church, when we with him, and he
with us, are incorporated by Faith, and receiving the Sacrament; which is not
for once, but ever, as long as the kingdom of Christ lasts in the Church.

Hereby then he intimates, that the corporal eating of the Lamb should cease,
and that we should spiritually eat of the true Lamb. The first Lamb was not
therefore commanded to be offered and eaten because it should always be so
done. Indeed Moses said, Exodus 12.
this should be kept as an Ordinance for ever, but he says also, throughout
your Generations, viz, as long as this generation continues: so long as this
state of things, this Testament, this old Testament lasts, and as long as ye
continue the people of God, so long this Ceremony shall endure. But after
Christ there is another generation, another Testament: nor are the Jews any
longer the people of God; so that the offering of that Paschal Lamb ceased.
This the Prophet Jeremy foretold: Behold the days come, when it shall be no
more said, the Lord lives that brought the children of Israel out of Egypt,
etc. Jer. 16.

In short, we now eat the true and new Passover in the kingdom of God, in the
Church, wherein God truly reigns, and is acknowledged as King. Christ, says
Paul, is our Passover. 1 Cor. 5.7. John 1.
And John Baptist seeing Christ, says, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the world. Whatsoever was done and commanded concerning that
Lamb heretofore, is now fulfilled, and still will be fulfilled in this true
Lamb, viz.

1.
Though Moses was present with the Israelites when they were bondmen in Egypt,
Exodus 12.
and did terrify that Tyrant of Egypt with many plagues; yet he could not
deliver them till the Lamb was slain: Pharaoh was overthrown by the blood of
the Lamb; even so neither the Judaicall Law, nor the Leviticall Priesthood
could save mankind, till CHRIST came who was the true Lamb.

2.
When the Lamb of God was there slain, the Promises of God concerning the
deliverance of Abraham's seed, and the bringing them into the Land of Canaan,
began presently then to be fulfilled: So when Christ is slain, all the Promises
of God are now Yea and Amen., 1 Cor. 1.

3.
As that Lamb was to be taken out of the flock, but to be without blemish, a
male of a year old: so he that was to be our Savior must be a man, yet without
spot of sin; a Male, for the strength of his spirit: but a year old, a man
acquainted with poverty and weakness.

4.
As the Lamb was to be taken and separated from the flock on the tenth day of
the first month, and offered the fourteenth day: so on the tenth day of the
month Christ entered Jerusalem, the place of his Passion. He came to Bethany
six days before the Passover, the next day he went to Jerusalem, where the
multitude received him as the Lamb to be offered the fourteenth day.

5.
That Lamb was to be offered at the full Moon; so Christ was crucified in the
fullness of time, Gal. 4. at full Moon according to the letter.

6.
Nor was that Lamb to be offered at any full Moon, but only at that which next
followed the Spring Equinox, when the day waxes longer than the night: Thus
when Christ suffered, the light of Righteousness began to overcome the darkness
of sin. There was before a long and deep night of sin, and the light of legal
Righteousness was very short and cloudy. But now all things are otherwise. Romans
13.
The night, says Paul, is past, and the day is at hand. Again, ye were
sometimes darknesss, but now are ye light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.

7.
That Lamb was to be offered by all the Assembly of the children of Israel: so
Christ died for all; And all whosoever either before or since, did then and now
do hope for Salvation by his sacrifice only.

8.
As the Israelites were once freed from the Destroyer only by the blood of the
Lamb, yet were to offer a Lamb every year in memory of that Deliverance: so
Christ suffered but once, Heb. 9. yet will he have us remember that his
sacrifice every year, yea every day, and celebrate it publicly. This do, says
he, in remembrance of me.

9.
Lastly, That Lamb was offered that it might be eaten; for the meat is
incorporated to a man being eaten: so Christ is set forth unto us for no other
use, but that we might be incorporated with him, and he with us. Thus you see
that this Lamb was nothing but a figure of Christ: when the Truth is come,
there is no need of type or shadow. The Jews then are mistaken, who think
themselves yet bound to legal observations. So do the Ebionites err too, who
say, that because Christ did eat the Lamb after the Jews manner when he
instituted the Sacrament, therefore we also should do the like: it is very
false. For certain it is that Christ is the true Lamb, and the true Passover.
Therefore the Ceremony of that former lamb is abolished, and with it the whole
Law. Old things are passed away; 2 Cor. 5.
behold all things are become new. Therefore letting pass the legal lamb, let
us consider the true Lamb, which follows;

And as they did eat, Jesus took bread: Mat. 26.26.
and when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and
said, Take, eat, this is my Body,

Which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me. Luke 22.19. Mat. 26.27.


And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it.

For this is my blood of the New Testament, Mat. 26.28.
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.

This do in remembrance of me. [Added by the Author.]

A premonition of the Translator concerning the Exposition following.
Reader,
BE not surpised with prejudice. It may be thou may meet with some passages
and expressions in the explication of these words (This is my body) which do
not concur with thy opinion. And likewise what he says concerning the coercive
power of the Magistrate.
Consider the time and place in which the Author lived, and thou will find him
ingeniously sober and modest; not given to vain jangling or railing bitterness;
but conscientiously serious, diligently trading with his Talent. The world is
full of divisions, and diversity of opinions in matters of Religion and says:
every one pleads for the pre-eminence of his own. Give some allowance to this
man, who was but a man, yet doubless a godly man. If thou see any chaff in his
heap of good grain, do not blow and puff away the weighty Wheat with the light
and empty dust. Hear what he says.

This is the most sacred Supper of Jesus Christ which he made, and most
religiously observed with his Disciples, near about the time, or a little after
the Jews Passover. The words of the Evangelist are here to be observed with all
diligence, pondered seriously in the heart, held fast with a steadfast and
unshaken memory, specially in these dangerous days now there are so many
dissentions and contests about these words, when every person almost fancieth
to himself a particular Mass and Sacrament. It is much to be lamented, that
since there was a Church, no Doctrine or Article of Faith ever raised so much
strife and mischief, notwithstadding there is not any thing more comfortable to
the Church. Good God! what has not Satan attempted to do against this
Sacrament? What horrid errors, what differences and dissentions has he
stirred up against it? none can express the misery and calamity thereof. The
Devil has and does try all ways to render this Sacrament ineffectuall to us.
And, woe, and alas, he has prevailed on too many. But I shall not now repeat
those manifold Errors which Satan has set on foot about this Sacrament. It
would require much time, nor can any tongue easily utter them. It were to be
wished, that no Christian would seek to know or think any more of them. Would
to God they were all buried, and that we might all of us embrace the pure Text
of the Evangelists, and so be edified in the true Christian life. O that the
Lord God would give such an heart unto all Monarchs, Princes, etc. as to
suppress this upstart, scandalous and most abominable discord about this
Sacrament. For things are come to that pass now, that this Sacrament is become
the greatest occasion of all secret grudges, strifes and variance in
Christianity. O unfpeakable grief! The Church is now rent and torn by that
which should unite and soder it: that which should serve ut chiefly for peace
and Unity, that we abuse and turn into war, strife, sects and factions. The
Lord look down from Heaven, and visit his Vineyard which is now so miserably
laid waste. The good and most gracious God grant that the Church may so
believe, think, and teach concerning the holy Eucharist, even as the
Evangelists, and Paul, and the Ancient Orthodox men have taught and written of
it. Where this is not, no peace can be expected, although Councils should be
called every day. The Gospel and Orthodox Fathers agree well enough: They think
and teach alike, are all one in their Judgment. I wish our young Divines and
Sectarian Novelists could accord among themselves. But there can never be any
agreement hoped for till we lay aside our passions and confidence of our own
Reason, and stick to the words of the Evangelists, and unanimous consent of the
Fathers. And why should we be so averse and backward to this? Who art thou O
man, that doubtest the words of God, nay that opposest the very words of God?
How will thou answer at the day of Judgment, or what excuse will thou have
then to escape the wrath of God?

To ye, O Princes, Bishops and Doctors do I speak these things. The neglect
will light heavy on ye. Ye see, know and plainly perceive what course should be
taken, yet ye forbear. Ye see, I say, how many abominable, horrid, and
altogether insufferable errors are crept into the Church concerning this
Sacrament: ye see how ridiculously, how scornfully, how wantonly, yea how
immodestly this Sacrament is observed. But why speak I to them that have ears
but will not hear, and eyes but see not? Their heart is blinded by the
righteous Judgment. We entreat thee, O Christ, have mercy upon thy Church: if
thou will, thou only art able, and thou art most concerned in it. It is thy
Supper, thy Example, thy Command, thy Church that is in distress. And for its
sake are we straightened, seeing and beholding those great discords and
destructive damages. This sacrifice of praise is more trampled under foot than
any; thy Body is disowned, thy words are wrested, thy Precept neglected: New
Doctrines are coined, a New custom of the Sacrament gets ground. In short, the
loss is greater than any tongue can express. And to whom shall we complain of
these things, but unto thee? for none else will vouchsafe an ear to us. We
beseech thee by thy most holy and most bitter Passion, of which we have begun
here to treat, stir up the hearts of our Bishops, and so effectually touch
their consciences, that they may take better heed in observing and distributing
thy Supper than heretofore they have done, etc.

I have therefore made this complaint before, that ye might the more
attentively consider the Institution. Let us examine the words.

Consider first who spoke these words, even Christ. Whence it is plain, this
Sacrament was not invented by man, but is of Divine Institution, and therefore
to contemn, scoff, or under value it, is ^o blaspheme the wisdom of God, yea
God himself. Look to it then, that ye esteem more highly and honorably of this
Sacrament, then ye have done.

2.
Again, If it be Gods institution, see thou pry not too curiously into every
particular. For these Mysteries are not to be found out by reason, but by Faith
Observe how Christ begineth it: when he had ended the legal Supper, he said,
that he would eat and drink with them no more. There was nothing more to be
done but to give thanks, and so rise from table. Which when it was done, ^o
then he takes bread again, he blesses it again, he breaks it by it self, he
sets it before them, and divides it among his Dsciples, bidding them eat it,
none of which things he did in the legal Supper that we read of.

3.
Lastly, To all this he adds, This is my Body. Who would not wonder at such
unaccustomed behavior which he here used? For what else did he intend by all
this, but that all men should diligently attend unto those things which follow,
even that we should know that this bread, and this wine was not now common
bread and wine, such as they had in eating the Lamb: but another thing far more
singular and excellent, even his body and blood. Therefore when the Disciples
saw these unusual gestures of Christ, they did not gainsay or enquire about it,
but simply believed, nothing doubting but that there was some great matter in
hand. Consider therefore what Christ says.

Take and eat, in which word, he promises to bestow some great thing upon
them. And indeed what else should a man look for from a Savior, a Christ, a
God, but some great, excellent and most advantageous things? Es. 32.8. Luke 11.
It becomes a great man to be magnificently bountiful. If ye that are evil
know how to give good things to your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the good Spirit to them that ask him? Take then, and make
your selves to receive whatsoever such a Lord shall bestow upon you. For it
cannot be that a Savior should offer any evil, burtfull, or vain thing. But
whereas he says, EAT, he shows to what purpose the Sacrament was instituted,
to wit, that it should be received. Bread does no good, except being eaten, it
be incorporated.

So then by this word is signified, that this is not simply to be taken as a
gift, but so as that it might be united to us: nor simply, but so as that it
might become one body with us, even as the bread which we eat is turned into
our nature, who are nourished by it.

But that this Metaphor of eating may be the better understood, remember that
there is nothing in us but sin, death, curse and hell: there is no
righteousness, life, salvation, or Grace; we are indeed destitute of all that
is good. But Christ has all these good things in himself; yet not for himself
only, but for us also, and for that reason he calls himself the bread of
Life. For as bread is not made for it self, but to strengthen them that eat it:
so Christ has not these good things for himself alone, but imparteth them to
us also. But after what manner? How can we partake of the life and
righteousness of Christ, seeing we have no righteousness or life in us? Answ.
By feeding upon him. Then we find the virtue of bread when it is incorporated
in us. Then thou perceivest what virtue and good there is in Christ, when thou
receivest Christ into thy self.

1.
Now Christ is offered two manner of ways unto us: in the Word, and in the
Sacrament. So also do we eat his body two ways: Spiritually, and
Sacramentally. Of the spiritual eating he says thus, he that comes to me
shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall not thirst. From which
words it is clear, that to eat Christ's body spiritually, is to believe with the
heart, that Christ was made man, and took our sins upon himself, that he shed
his blood for us and conquered hell, and that he reconciled us unto God. He
that believes this, does as is it were snatch Christ by faith, and throw him
into himself, and is become one body with him; whereby it comes to pass, that
he does not hunger in sin, for he has the righteousness of Christ: he does not
hunger in death, for he has the life of Christ; nor in malediction, for he
has the benediction of Christ; nor in afflictions, because he sees his
deliverance by Christ. This spiritual eating is necessary to all, for none can
be saved without it. If we partake not of the Righteousness and Life of Christ,
what do we but abide in our sins and death? Therefore Christ himself says,
John 6.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. He does not speak here of the Sacrament; for all are not damned
that do not receive the Sacrament: but he speaks of the spiritual eating by
faith, Heb 11.
without which no man can please God.

After this manner the Fathers of the old Testament also did eat the body of
Christ; for Christ was offered to them too by Word and Promises. Without this
spiritual eating, the Sacrament is nothing available, nay it does hurt and
condemn, because it is received unworthily.

2.
Here then you see, that Christ is not offered unto us only in the Word, but
also in the Sacrament; to this end, even to put us in mind of the Promises by
this outward sign, and that we should be assured by this corporal eating, that
Christ with all that he has was truly given to us. For he that gave his very
body, what else will he deny? We may now see that this exte^nal eating was not
instituted in vain, as some ungodly and unthankful men prate. What need was
there, say they, of an outward sign, when it is faith that takes all the good
things of Christ to it self? And who art thou, wretched man, that dare
reprove God in his what he does, as if he had not ordained all things wisely? I
might also reason after that manner, what need was there for Christ to take our
flesh and suffer? And what need is there of preaching the Gospel? God could
have restored man by his Word only, as he did create him only by his Word. Is
therefore the Incarnation, Passion and Gospel of Christ to no purpose? See how
unthankful we are. But God was willing to communicate his good things to us
many ways: yea his own Son, to wit, by his Incarnation, by the Word and
Sacrament. And who art thou unthankful man, that durst question why he would do
so, and what need there was of it? Thou should rather exceedingly rejoice,
that God would be pleased to impart his good things to thee, which way soever
he did bestow them.

This is one of Satan's old tricks, Genesis 3.
whereby he cheated Eve; Why, says he, did God command that you should not eat
of this tree? Genesis 12.
To what purpose? what need was there for it? And this way he seeks to deceive
us. Gen 22.
Abraham did not reason so: what need have I to leave my own Country? Thou
may do me good where I am. Again, To what end should I offer my Son? He said
no such thing, but presently obeyed. The Nature of faith is to shut the eyes of
reason, and to go blindfold after the naked Word of God. So should we do in
this case. But hear what Christ says further.

This, says he, is my Body. Here you have the other and more principal part of
the Sacrament, to wit, the Word of God. The visible Bread is one part; the Word
of Christ is the other. Every Sacrament is made up of these two, that is, the
outward Sign, and the Word of God, which must not be separated one from the
other. The Word was added to the Element, and so became a Sacrament. The bread
is seen, the Word of Christ is heard. Which of these is of most credit? the
sight, The Truth of Christ's Body.
or hearing? surely the hearing; for he that speaks is God. Therefore all the
virtue of the Sacraments is from the Word of God. When the Word comes to the
Bread, it is no more what it was before, but somewhat else far more excellent,
by reason of the Word of God added to it. For the Word of God is of that
efficacy that it can do all things; which is most clearly manifest, both from
the first creation of all things, as also from those Miracles which wrought by
the Word of God. For concerning both, Psalm. 148.5.
he spoke the word and they were made: yea the Word of God, is God; It is the
Wisdom and Power of God, Romans 1. John 1. 1 Cor. 1. When God therefore by his
Word joyneth his Virtue, Power and Name to the outward thing, who doubts but
that some new and great thing is thereby wrought? How then durst any be so bold
to say that there is nothing but bare bread in this Sacrament after the words
(of Consecration) are uttered? Is the Word of God, which is so powerful in
every thing else, of no force in this Sacrament?

1.
These words then (This is my Body) do prove the truth of Christ's body in the
Sacrament. So that we are most highly to esteem the words of God. Nor can there
be any trope or figure in them. For first, nothing can more absolutely be
spoken, if all the tongues in the world should speak together.

2.
Besides, there is not one of the Evangelists, no nor Paul himself, who was a
most sincere Preacher of the Gospel, that ever hinted the least letter of a
trope in these words.

3.
Lastly, There is no just reason can be alleged why these words should be
otherwise understood. We must therefore keep to these words, as to the most
undoubted and safe sayings of God himself which do not deceive, nor suffer to
be deceived. He that adds to these words, God shall add to him the plagues,
etc. Apoc. 21.


The Benefit.
So then if (as has been proved) the Body of Christ be truly, according to the
tenor of the words, in the Sacrament, it is certain that the Sacrament it self
cannot be an unprofitable thing. For it is evident, that the flesh of Christ
was filled with the Godhead. If therefore God be nothing worth, then also is
the flesh of Christ of no value. When that flesh of Christ walked on the earth,
it did good to all that it did but touch never so little, by reason of the
Godhead that dwelt in it. How can it be then that it should do no good in the
Sacrament, since it is the same flesh of Christ, in Union with the same
Divinity? it is also the same word of God, of the same Nature and force now as
ever it was.

But take notice, that Christ in this Sacrament gave us not his Body alone, but
his Blood too. As in the Law of Moses there was a sacrifice to be slain, and
moreover a cleansing by blood: so the Body of Christ was the sacrifice, and his
Blood the cleansing away of sins; the sacrifice of his body makes
satisfaction, his blood purifieth: the offering is made to God for
Reconciliation, the blood is poured out to make us clean.

Now in the distribution of his blood he observes the same gestures as he did
in the distribution of his body. He took it, he gave thanks, he gave it to
them, etc. In the words he added, at least altered something. For he does not
say simply (Hic est sanguis meus) This is my blood: as he said, (Hoc est corpus
meum) This is my body: But he adds, This is the blood of the New Testament:
Or as Paul has it, This cup is the New Testament in my blood: by which word he
plainly alludeth to the confirmation of the old Testament; as when Moses had
read all the Law, he took the blood of the Calf, and therewith sprinkled the
people, saying, Exodus 24.
Behold the blood of the Covenant, which God has made with you, etc. In like
manner Christ here speaks. By how much the blood of Christ is more excellent
than the blood of a Bull, so much the new Testament is more worthy than the old.

What a Testament (...).
A Testament is the disposing and bequeathing of goods, whether it be by writing
or word of mouth: And it is confirmed by the death of the Testator. God made a
Will to the Israelites, Ex. ibid.
that he would give them the promised Land: but because God could not die, he
commanded a Bullock to be slain, and ratified this his Testament with the blood
thereof. So now Christ has bequeathed to us his goods, even the forgiveness of
sins, and so all other his good things come along therewith. That the Testament
may be sure, Christ himself the Testator died: and that we might remember his
death, he did affix as it were two seals unto it, the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood. The sense of the words.
Therefore when he says, Take, eat: Take, drink etc. his meaning is this: Lo,
I promise you all my goods, and do freely bestow them on you: and to make this
firm and sure to you, I am about to die, and, in witness whereof I set to my
Seal, I leave you my body and blood. He makes mention of a Testament when he
speaks, not of his body, but of his blood. The shedding of blood is a sign of
death, by which death the Testament is ratified.

Whereas he adds at last, speaking of his body, Which shall be given for you:
but concerning his blood, says he, Which shall be shed for you: he plainly
shows, that the same body which was crucified and slain, and the same blood
which was shed upon the Cross, is received in the Sacrament. These words also
show the fruit of the Eucharist, which is to partake of the merit of Christ's
Passion; Whereunto Faith is requisite, not only to believe that the body and
blood of Christ is here present, but withal to believe that it is the same
body which was offered for us, and the same blood which was shed for us, and
that it is given to us, which Christ merited by his death.

Take notice also of what is said concerning his blood, which is shed (not for
all, but) for many. Indeed the blood of Christ was sufficient for all, but all
do not believe. It is fitly said, not for all, but for many: which is a word of
terror to the slothful, and those that are too secure, who flatter themselves
that they cannot be damned.

Christ adds in the close, Do this in remembrance of me. Where we see, that
the Evangelists do not only describe the thing as it was once done, but they
set it down so as a thing ever hereafter to be observed and continued. Whence
Christ commanded his Apostles that they should do as he had done: thereby
signifying that he would always be present at his Sacrament, and that what he
by himself did at the Supper, the same should be done by the Apostles and their
Successors. So that they are much mistaken who say, I believe that Christ and
the Apostles did consecrate it; but I do not believe that every Priest can do
it. I believe that the Saints do receive the body of Christ, but I do not think
sinners do. Hear me Brother: the Sacraments of the Church are not founded on
our worthiness or unworthiness, but upon the Word of God: whatever the Minister
or the Communicant be, Gods Ordinance is the same. As neither Angel nor man
could of themselves turn bread into the body of Christ, so neither of them can
hinder it. Therefore he does not say, if thou receive it worthily, thou shall
take my body: but, This is my Body: so the Creed the Lords Prayer, and the
Commandments of God, etc. remain good and valid, though thou never believe,
if thou do not pray, work, etc. as Gods outward works always continue though
we abuse them.

But it is most to be observed that Christ here commands and speaks
imperatively, and charge us to take and eat, and to do as he did: whereby it is
plain, that we are not left at our liberty to observe or neglect this
Sacrament. If thou art a Christian, thou must sometimes obey this Command.
Christ has commanded it, though he appointed no set time. It is not in our
choice wholly to omit it. When he says, in remembrance of me, his will is that
this Sacrament should be,

1.
A Monument of his Charity toward us, whereby he gave himself to us in every
respect, as a companion, a brother, a sacrifice, meat, etc. Who is so hard as
not to melt into a mutual love by all these signs of love?

2.
A remembrance of that sacrifice which Christ offered up for us at his death
upon the Cross, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.
As often as ye eat, etc. ye show the Lords death ill he come.

Thus ye see after what manner, at what time, and with what words Christ
instituted the Sacrament, all which are of such concernment, that it is strange
if they kindle not in us a desire of so great good, inflame our love to God,
and encourage us to give praise and thanks unto him. We commend and thank him
that gives us an estate at his death to make us rich. Why should we not do so
here? But sometimes we may find ungrateful heirs in the world; so (alas for it)
does Christ find by experience that we are too unthankful unto him. Now the
sleighting what is set before us, is no small cause of this our ingratitude.
And so that is too often fulfilled in us which Elisha once said to the
incredulous Noble man, 2 King. 7.2.
Thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not eat thereof. Are not
these things fulfilled in us? We see, and have these great things before our
eyes, and in our hands, yet we perceive them not, we taste them not. What
greater evil can befall a man than to have riches and not enjoy them? Two
things yet remain to be considered about this Sacrament, viz. to what end it
was ordained, and how it ought to be received. It was ordained.

1.
That our heart should more closely cleave to the words and Promises of God. The
Prophets promised that the time should come when God would dwell in us, and
that Christ by his death would take away our sins, etc. All which and the like
Promises are confirmed by this Sacrament: He instituted this Sacrament that we
should not doubt of these things.

2.
It is a standing Monument of his Charity, that so we might never doubt of his
good will to us. Whenever then our consciences are ready to flag and fail,
which often happens, specially at death, they should be strengthened by this
Sacrament.

3.
It is a perpetual Remembrance and Representation of that only sacrifice, which
was offered for us upon the Cross. The benefit of this Sacrament may be taken
out of the words of Paul, when he says,

1.
The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? etc.
1 Cor. 10. Whereby he shows, that by this Sacrament we partake of all the
good things of Christ.

2.
Another fruit of it is, that we also are made one bread, and one body, even all
that partake of one bread, and of one cup: that is, This Sacrament does put us
in mind, that we are made one meat and one drink; and that we should wholly
devote our selves to the good of our Neighbors; that we should make the
poverty of others our own: and account the faults of others as our own, etc.
Therefore in Greek it is called Synaxis, that is, a communication. Whence we
may easily gather, what is requisite to the worthy receiving of it: which is
nowhere more clearly expressed than in the figure of the Paschal Lamb, and the
Manna. The Paschal Lamb.
Both which figures I shall briefly open. Concerning the Lamb consider,

1.
The house must be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb in three places, Exodus
12.7.
on the door, and both the posts. So he that will come to the Sacrament, must
first be sealed with the Seal of the holy Trinity, which is done in Baptism. Or
thus, he must be marked in three places, that is, he should have the three
Sacraments; Baptism, Confirmation and Repentance. Or, the blood of the Lamb
must be on his doors, i. e. he should always have the remembrance of Christ's
Passion before his eyes, when he goes out, and when he comes in, according to
that of Paul, 1 Cor. 11.
As often as ye eat, ye shall show the Lords death, etc. Or, he should have the
Lambs blood on the doors, i. e. he must not be ashamed of the Cross of Christ,
nor blush to keep the Commands of Christ, but openly confess that he does
believe and keep them.

To that which the Author has here observed, The Translators Supplement. Heb.
10.29.
concerning this first circumstance, the Translator further adds, viz. They
were not to strike any of the Lambs blood on the threshold; nor should we tread
the blood of the Son of God under foot; But they were to strike the blood on
the lintel. So should we always have the blood of Christ over our heads, above
our own reason, in higher estimation than the reach of our natural capacity, or
growth and stature of our earthly man, our carnal mind; It should be over our
head, to be seen only by Faith, lifting our heads upward from earthy things,
thoughts, desires, affections, confidence, righteousness, etc. unto heavenly
things: looking on it as a Propitiation, a Reconciliation, a Mediation,
something between Heaven and earth, between God and man; as that which
reconcileth us unto God, Heb. 12.24.
and gives us boldness at his Throne of Grace, speaking better things than
that of Abel. Again, they were to strike both the side posts, one as well as
the other: We should have the blood of Christ on either hand, that we may see
God on the lest hand where he works; and on the right hand where he hides
himself: Job 23.9.
that we may be kept in prosperity and adversity, knowing how to want and how
to abound, both in respect of the outward and inward man, preserved from excess
and all extremes, swallowed up neither with presumption nor despair, but
fighting the good fight of Faith, having the Armor of Righteousness on the
right hand, 2 Cor. 6.7.
and on the left. Now we proceed with the Author.

2.
They must eat the flesh roasted with fire that night. The flesh of Christ must
be eaten by night. It must be by Faith alone, and the eyes of Reason must be
shut. It Is true, our flesh would eat it in the day, that is, it coveteth to see
all things, but all in vain. The flesh of Christ is eaten invisibly, and in a
Mystery. And the flesh of our Lamb may well be said to be roasted; for it is
roasted with the fire of Tribulation, as also with the fire and operation of
the Holy Spirit.

3.
It was to be eaten with unleavened bread. The flesh of the Lamb must not be
eaten alone, that is, we must not only consider what Christ did, but what we
also ought to do; 1 Cor. 5.
we must first of all cast out the leaven of malice and wickedness: the
Sacrament must be received with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
For this food is not provided for dogs, but for Children only; not for filthy
persons, but such as are clean. They sin therefore who come to it not having
first repented of their sins.

4.
With wild Lettice (so the vulg. Lat.) bitter herbs, or as it is in the Hebrew,
with (or upon) bitternesses, i. e. with a bitter remembrance of our sins. Thus
the Disciples did eat this Sacrament with bitter Herbs: for they were very sad
at the words of Christ, and during all those three days of his Passion, they
were together in great heaviness. So we eat it with bitter herbs if we afflict
our body, inasmuch as the bitterness of Repentance purges the humor of an ill
life out of the stomach of the mind.

5.
Ye shall not eat it raw, nor sodden with water. They eat it raw who come to it
without any premeditation. They eat it raw who esteem it only as they see it,
and because they see nothing but bread, they think it to be only bread. They
eat it raw who understand all things carnally, and say with the Capernaites,
John 6
This is a hard saying, who can hear it? They eat it boiled in water, who
strive by their carnal reason to find out how this may be so. The water of our
wisdom cannot boil this Lamb, cannot search out and comprehend these Mysteries.
He faith therefore, ye shall eat it roast with fire, i. e. ye shall attribute
and ascribe all to the working of the Holy Spirit, to whom nothing is hard,
nothing impossible. As therefore we do rightly acknowledge the man that was
born of a Virgin to be God: so truly do we say, that is Christ which we take at
the Altar, and do preach him to be the Lamb of God.

6.
Ye shall eat the head with the feet and the entrails. We must take whole
Christ, and not divide him. Some Heretics have thrown away the Head, denying
the Divinity of Christ: Others have cast away the feet, not acknowledging his
Humanity. Others his entrails, saying, that Christ had no soul. And truly most
men now adays receive Christ by halves only. They have an ear for his
Promises, but not for his Precepts: They take him only as a gift, not as an
Example. The Scriptures require us to take the Head, and Feet, the Divinity and
Humanity, the Promises and Precepts of the true Lamb. And it is expressly said,
ye shall eat, or ye shall devour: in which word our lazy drowsiness is
reproved, who can hardly be driven to this Sacrament, to which we should rather
run with all cheerfulness. But (alas) we neither know our own misery, not the
greatness of that gift.

7.
Nothing must be left till the morning. No broken meat of that corporal Lamb
must be left for dogs, or the Egyptians. And do we so rashly rush unto this
Sacrament more filthy than dogs, much worse than Egyptians! We are here
likewise further instructed to perform all things commanded, and to consider
what Christ teaches us now, before the day of the life to come dawneth: Let us
omit or leave nothing undone; what we may do now, we cannot do always.

8.
If any be left, ye shall burn it with fire. We must not contemn, spurn or leave
any thing out of this Sacrament. And what we cannot comprehend about it, commit
it to the fire, i. e. leave it to the working of the Holy Spirit.

9.
The loins must be girt. He that would come hither, let him tame his wantonness,
and bridle his lusts. For this Sacrament requires that we be clean in body and
soul. The time is short, 1 Cor. 7.
says Paul, It remains that they that have wives, be as if they had none.

10.
Having their shoes on their feet. A worthy Communicant must walk in the word,
and according to the word of God: having the feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of Peace. Ephesians. 6.
Yet must we not go bate-footed neither; our affections must not stick to the
earth, we should rather know and consider that we have here no abiding City.
Besides, let us preserve our feet, our affections and works with the Examples
of holy men, as it were with the hides of some dead creatures. I could wish
some would do so in the business of this Sacrament; for certainly then they
would not so offend with their feet.

11.
With staves in their hands. We use a staff either to prop us or protect us: it
is necessary for both. This staff is the Word of God: if our flesh be weak,
let us be supported with the word of God. If any dissuade us from good, or
persuade us to evil, keep him off with this staff, as Christ did when he was
tempted by the Devil, Mat. 4.

12.
Ye shall eat it in haste. Desire or fear will make us run: we have need of
both. Let us with Paul, desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Let us
also fear, lest if we neglect to day, the time of Grace be past before to
morrow. Thus you see how punctually every thing concerning this Sacrament and
the worthy receiving thereof, was foreshewed in this.

The same thing but after another way, Manna a figure of the Sacrament. John 6.
was prefigured in the Manna. For in the Gospel of John it plainly appears
that the Manna did prefigure Christ. For Moses, says he, gave you not the true
bread from Heaven, but my Father gives it, etc. And a little after, I am the
living bread etc. Again, My flesh is meat indeed. Whatsoever then is written in
that History, does refer either to the Humanity of Christ, or to the Word, or
to the Sacrament. For these three ways is Christ given to us: in the Humanity,
in the Word, and in the Sacrament.

There are four things mentioned of the Manna: first, the cause; secondly, the
form and nature of it; thirdly, the manner of gathering it; fourthly, its use.

The reason why God gave the Children of Israel Manna from Heaven, was, first
the peoples hunger. And Christ says, The Cause
for the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, etc. Psam 12 5.

2.
God gave the Israelites Manna, to show his Truth, Power, Righteousness,
Goodness. He gave his own Son also to declare the same.

3.
He did it also to prove them. To that end also did Christ come poor and humble.
Wherefore he did not preach the Gospel himself among the Gentiles, but by his
Apostles. And therefore he does not exhibit himself visibly, but invisibly in
the Sacrament, to try whether we will believe though we do not see him. Indeed
he does truly try us in the Sacrament. For as the first man did believe the
Devil more than God, concerning the forbidden food: so Christ in this Sacrament
would have us (for expiating the former fault) believe his words rather than
our selves, our own sense or reason.

Concerning the Fashion and Properties of this Mavna, The fashion and condition
of it.
the Scripture says:

1. It was very small, little in show, and but a despicable thing, but it was
of great virtue: so is Christ, the Word of God, and so is this Sacrament, etc.
1 Pet. 2.4.

2. The Manna was white and clear. Christ is clean from all sin.

3. The Manna was beaten in a Mortar. Christ was bruised with the pestle of his
Passion, and in the press of the Cross, that his precious blood might flow
forth every way.

4. The Manna tasted like Honey. Christ is sweet to all that are afflicted:
having the same smack in the Word and Sacrament.

5. Manna pleased every ones palate, and relished according to his desire that
did taste it. In Christ and in the Sacrament every man's desire is answered. The
sick find health, the sinner pardon, the Righteous sweetness, the afflicted
find comfort therein.

6. Manna came down from Heaven. Christ and this Sacrament are given to us from
Heaven. That descended with a dew, Christ came down with Grace and Truth.

7. Manna made all men wonder and admire. So this Sacrament is truly most
worthy of all admiration.

8. The Manna was common to all: so is the Sacrament, it suffices all as the
Manna did.

9. The Manna fell every day. Christ is always with us in the Sacrament, even
to the end of the world, Mat. 28.

10. He that gathered much of the Manna had nothing over, and so on the
contrary. The poorest Believer has as much as the richest in the Sacrament,
etc.

11. When the Israelites came into the Promised Land, the Manna ceased. There
will be no Sacraments in the world to come, We shall have no need of them then;
For we shall have and see Christ before us; when that which is perfect is come,
that which is imperfect shall be done away.

12. Lastly, The Manna was said up in the Temple for a Memorial to Posterity.
The Sacrament continues for ever in the Church for a memorial of Christ.

Now concerning the gathering of the Manna, the Scripture says:

1. They were commanded to seek it very early in the morning: and we are bid to
seek the Kingdom of God before all things, which is by hearing the Word of God,
and receiving the Sacraments.

2, They gathered it every day: so we should never neglect the Sacrament.

3. They were to go forth of their tents: so we are commanded to go out of the
old life, and out of all curiosity of sense, lest we judge by our sight, taste,
or touch, whether the Body of Christ be there or no; but we are simply to
believe the Word of God.

4. They were commanded to gather it, not for curiosity, but sufficiency; so
should we do in this Sacrament.

5. Lastly, They gathered a double proportion on the sixth day, because of the
Sabbath following. Romans 13.
We are commanded not to sleep in this last hour, but to provide for the future
by the Example of that Steward in the Gospel, Luke 16,

1. The way to use this Manna was to beat it in a Mortar, The use of Manna.
or to grind it in a Mill, and so boil it. We should consider the Mysteries of
this Sacrament, in every piece and fragment of it, and receive them with a
contrite heart, seething them with the fire of divine Love, and so rest
satisfied with their sweetness.

2. As all were not alike affected with the old Manna, yea some indeed loathed
it: so is it now in the Sacrament, etc.

3. Good and bad did eat of the old Manna, but to a different end, for many
perished in the Wilderness. So good and bad receive the Sacrament, but some to
life, others to death, etc. Christ is set for the fall, and rising of many in
Israel, Luke 2.

4. Lastly. The Manna stank and became nothing worth to some. This Sacrament
does little good to some; nay, it is the condemnation of those that receive it
unworthily.

See now how our Manna answers in all things to that of old, and how much
more excellent it is then that was; for it has the Fountain of all good
essentially in it self, nor does it feed the body only, but specially it
nourishes the soul. It gives Eternal Life; the old Manna had no such thing.
Let us then be thankful, and take heed we abuse not this Heavenly bread.

Hitherto I suppose I have made it clear, how expressly the mysteries of this
Sacrament were foreshewn in those two figures, the Paschal Lamb and Manna. Let
us here add a third figure, the Oblation of Melchisedeck, Genesis 17. Heb. 7.
of which we read in Genesis, for he did most exactly typifie Christ in Name
and Office.

It is said he was without Father, without Mother, without beginning, without
end, also King of Zedek, i. e. of Righteousness, and Prince of Salem, i. e. of
Peace, and Priest of the most high God: Christ truly and most absolutely had
all these Titles. And as Melchisedeck brought bread and wine to Abraham when he
came from the battle, so Christ in his last Supper gave the Sacrament of bread
and wine to his Disciples: he ordained and instituted it especially for the
comfort and refreshment of those who bicker and fight with the Devil. And as
Melchisedeck first of all offered bread and wine unto God, and afterward fed
Abraham and his company therewith: So this our Sacrament is not only a
refreshing of the weak and weary, but also a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving to be continued to the end of the world. This do says he, in
remembrance of me.

1.
Most properly is it called a Sacrifice; because the true use of this Sacrament
is to offer thanks and praise to God when we receive it.

2.
Secondly, Because here that only sacrifice is represented, and as it were set
before our eyes, even that sacrifice which Christ offered on the Cross, whereby
the wrath of God was stayed by his crucified Son, who puts him still in mind
that he would vouchsafe to be propitious unto us for his death and Passionsake.

3.
To say nothing that we by this Sacrament are also put in mind to offer our
selves to God, as Christ gave himself for us. Thus it may fitly be called a
sacrifice. So then this figure does every way answer to our Sacrament. All this
I have spoken the rather to affect us with the greater Faith and Devotion
toward that most sacred Supper of our Lord. But enough of that. To the Text
again.

And supper being ended (the Devil having now put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, Simons son, John 13.2.
to betray him)

Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands: and that he
was come from God, and went to God: verse 3.


He rises from supper, and laid aside his garments, verse 4.
and took a towel, and girded himself.

After that, he pours water into a Basin, verse 5.
and began to wash the Disciples feet, and to wipe them with the Towel
wherewith he was girded.

Here Jesus shows his love to his Disciples. Surely he could not hate them
whose feet he washed. Now we may suppose that this thing was not done quite
after Supper, but as they were yet at supper, as may seem; first, in that it is
said, He rose from supper. Secondly, it is said, after the washing he sat down
again. Thirdly, it is not said, coena finita, supper being ended, but coena
facta, supper being made, or made ready; when it was set before them on the
table.

Whence it is that almost all are of opinion, he washed their feet before the
institution of the Eucharist; and it is very probable it was so: for it
becomes us to come neat and clean unto the Sacrament. But by John it seems
this washing was after the institution of the Sacrament. For he continues the
History after the washing of their feet, which should not be interrupted till
Judas was cast out of fellowship. If then the Sacrament was instituted
afterward, it would follow from the History that Judas did not take the body
and blood of Christ with the rest of the Apostles, which some affirm. Luke 22
But the History of Luke does not admit this: where it is plainly said, that
Judas his admonition followed the institution of the Sacrament.

I list not to contend about this. It is sufficient we know that Christ did
wash his Disciples feet, whether it was before, or after the receiving of the
Sacrament, it matters not. Let us give heed to the History, it is worth our
taking notice; and it requires a diligent Auditour, and a desirous Spectator.
For,

1, That which Christ did here, is very beautiful and to be admired.

2. The words of the Evangelist himself are most prudent; for he does not
simply show what was done, but he sets it out with words of weight and gravity
to make the more impression. And

1. Before he proceeds to what Christ did, he first names the Traitor, that
thereby we might either prize the greatness of Christ's love and humility, who
showed those things even to an enemy and traitor, which another man would
scarce disclose to a brother or a friend. It is the greatest love that can be,
to love our enemies, and do good to them that hate us.

2. Or else he names the traitor, that thereby we may see how that wretched
man fell from one sin to another, as being now the very real and proper slave
of Satan: yea he still went on to greater sins, till at last he fell into the
bottomless pit. John had before called him a thief, who did use to pick his
Masters purse; And a little after the other Evangelists show that he had taken
money of the Jews to betray Christ. But here is an aggravation of his sin, in
that he obstinately resolved with himself to accomplish this wickedness, and
not hearken to any courtesies or Counsel: which indeed was a most devilish
thing. Therefore it is remarkably said, that the Devil had cast it into his
heart. The ungodly wretch presently listened to this Charmer. He scorned to
hear the admonition of Christ, as all wicked men do. I am come in my Fathers
Name, says Christ, and ye receive me not; John 5.
if any come in his own name, him ye will receive.

1. Here we see that the design and purpose of the Devil is to destroy not only
men, but Christ himself too, if he could.

2. We see also who it was principally that did shed the blood of Christ, even
the Devil himself: he could not endure to see him on the earth where his
Kingdom is. He was afraid he should be thrust out of his Kingdom. He first made
use of the Council of the Pharisees to bring about this murder and theft: then
the malice of the traitor: lastly, the hands of sinful men. But this not
without Gods permission, who had decreed from Eternity to redeem mankind by the
blood of his innocent son.

3. Observe here, that the nature and work of the Devil is to inspire and
suggest evil; as God by his Spirit does inspire good things into the hearts of
Believers. An example of the Devils suggestion we have in Ananias and Sapphira.
Acts 5.
That wicked one is accustomed to it, and knows how to hinder, as much as may
be all good, 1 Thessalonians. 2. and to further all evil, Genesis 3. Know therefore that
all offenses and sin come from the Devil, and not from God, as Heretics teach.
The Devil I say, inspired all sinners from the beginning of the world to
disobey God. What the Devil can do is notoriously seen in Judas and the Jews.
Him he instigated and drew on to betray his own Master; them he enticed to
destroy their own Messiah and King.

Let us pray then that God by his Grace would shut and keep all such diabolical
insinuations out of our hearts. For that wicked one will persuade us to nothing
that is good.

After this the Evangelist mentions the Power and Knowledge of Christ. 1.
First, lest any should think that Christ was not God, because Judas could
betray him. As he was God in the beginning, so he continued, even when he was
betrayed and crucified. 2.
Again, He speaks of Christ's power, that from the commendation of so great
power and sublimity, the work of his deep humility might become the more
admirable and praiseworthy. Thus Paul when he was about to extol the humility
and obedience of Christ, he begins with his sublimity, Phil. 2.
Who being in the form of God, etc. We can never rightly prize the humiliation
of Christ, unless withal we consider his high estate. Neither can any man so
well esteem of his love, till he consider upon whom, and to what unworthy
persons he did bestow it.

Now the infinite height of Christ is set forth in three words. 1.
The first is this, Knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands:
or, that he was Lord of all, even of the Devil and wicked men, and yet would as
it were lay by this his power for the love he bare to men, or rather would hide
it, and so become weak and low; so weak as not to help the godly, yea so low as
to suffer the wicked to vent their rage upon him without restraint: great
humiliation indeed, and great love, and all this that he might succor poor
helpiess man.

Or thus, knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hands, i.
e. he knew that the salvation of mankind depended upon him. It was at his
pleasure whether man should be saved or perish. He did know, and indeed
acknowledge, that to save men was a gift given him of the Father; therefore he
does manfully and courageously set about that work. And we have great
consolation from these two words, that the Father has given all things to
Christ, and that into his hands, to wit, Justification, forgiveness of sins,
Life, Salvation, Redemption, Judgment, Resurrection, Kingdom, etc. Whereby we
also are put in mind to know, and give good heed to what God has given us,
what he has committed or commanded to us.

2.
The second word that expresses Christ's Highness, is, that he came out from
God. All creatures are from God by creation; but Christ came from God by
Eternal generation. So that it is all one as if he had said, knowing that he was
the natural Son of God, yet for all that he so humbled himself, etc. Or thus,
knowing that he came out from God, that he was the Son of God, and that he was
God, therefore he did like a God, and that which did become the Son of God to
do, viz. take compassion, show mercy, do good, wash, cleanse, save, etc. these
are proper to God.

3.
The third word showing Christ's sublimity, is, that he goes to the Father. Here
I shall use the words of Augustine: He came out from God, says he, but left
not God: He goes unto God, but he left not us men. The meaning is, he goes
unto God; that is, he was sure of his glory: however he seemed to be cast off,
yet he knew that he should sit at the right hand of his Father, and there be
heard. Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool. Psalm
110.
But in the mean while he submits himself both to his friends and foes. Let
not us be backward to do good to all by this Example, inasmuch as certain glory
is therefore promised unto us.

Hitherto the Evangelist has proposed the person of Christ to our
consideration. Next he describes the work it self, and sets it as it were
before our eyes, to the end we should do as doubtless the Apostles did when
they beheld these things, to wit, diligently attend, admire every passage, and
expect what the end will be. Surely it is a great and wonderful spectacle,
such as never was since the world began. For,

1.
Masters use not to rise from Table before their servants. But here Christ
rises and leaves them sitting, and so that is verified which says a little
after, Luke 22. Matthew. 20.
I am among you as one that serves. Again, the son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister.

2.
By laying aside his garments, girding himself, and fetching water, he plainly
shows that he was ready to serve, help, and do good: a matter of greatest
consolation to us.

3.
He is indeed, and that a most humble servant too: he kneels down, and begins to
wash not their hands, which had been a neater service, but their feet, which is
so low and mean an office, that none but the worst in the house does it. Yet
all this he does himself, he only puts forth water, he only washes, and only
he wipeth.

Who will not here cry out with the Prophet, Hab. 3.
I heard of thy works, and trembled? Consider with your selves in good earnest
who Christ was, and whose feet he washed. We have heard something already of the
worth of Christ. But what was more vile than the Apostles? They were all poor
contemptible men, and one of them was a Traitor, another (afterward) abjured
him, yet for all that he serves them most affectionately. What can he refuse to
do, who humbled himself so low for us? Here we see indeed that he was
novissimui virorum, rejected of men. Is. 53.3.
Now he does rather wash the feet than the hands or head, because he would
thereby express more humility and love, wherewith he washes us in his blood.

All which are Examples and Precepts to persuade us to serve one another with a
ready mind. The Lord of Heaven does not scorn nor blush to do that which even
Ecclesiastical persons as well as Secular, and worldly Pontentates are ashamed
to do, whose duty principally is to imitate the meekness and humility of Christ.

The Primitive Christians were not ashamed of this service to their brethren,
but did it with much cheerfulness. Did not that great Patriarch Abraham cause
the feet of his guests to be washed? So did his cosen Let, Genesis 19. Genesis 18.
In the New Testament this was a work of great account. 1 Timothy 5.
Therefore Paul does not admit a widow unless she had washed the Saints feet.
But now one may sooner find, especially among the Prelates of the Church, such
as wash their own feet in wine, rather then give a cup of cold water to a poor
body. It is taken for an hypocritical thing now to wash others feet. Nothing
inveighed against now more than good works. None reprove sin: The times are
such, that few regard whether they do good or evil. What Augustine reports
that some Heretics called the Predestinarians, Augustine sup. Epist. Johannis.
should say, is now true among us: Let us sin, yea let us do what we will,
there is no danger, Christ cleanses all, etc.

1.
Wherefore this Act of Christ condemns our pride, by reason whereof it is,
that although we be men, though we be but mortal men, yet we disdain to submit
or give place to others in the smallest matters: so far are we from yielding or
doing good to our enemies. This is the pride of man's heart, which Christ here
utterly condemns. Let men be ashamed of their pride, as well they may, when
they see the Son of God with so great humility become a servant. Why is earth
and ashes proud? Miserable worm, Eccl. 10.
do thou yet walk with a stretched out neck? look through the spectacle of
humility. Thy Savior was ready to serve, do thou seek the pre-eminence?
Christ washed the feet of a very Traitor: do thou scorn to be friends with thy
brother?

2.
Hereby Christ would root all arrogance out of the hearts of the Apostles: which
is a peculiar vice to eminent men, and such as are endowed with much Grace, or
are in high place and office. Therefore he would stir them up to modesty and
meekness, not only by his words, but with deeds, and his Example too, and that
when he was going to die, that it might take the deeper impression.

3.
Moreover, Christ by this his abasement offered the remedy against the first sin
of man, which was pride. Whereas the first man sinned by pride, Christ by his
humility discharged that Debt.

4.
Further, Christ hereby taught that none shall be exalted, except first humbled:
none lifted up, unless first cast down.

5.
Lastly, In these words John shadoweth out the whole business of Christ, viz.

1. Christ did indeed rise from supper, The Mystery.
that is, from his repose, from out of his Fathers bosom, from the Throne of
boundless Majesty. And for no other end but for the oppression of the poor and
deep sighing of the needy, Psalm 12.15.

2. He laid aside the garments of glory, and stripped himself naked of all
righteousnesses, and whatever he had of worth; a Glory, Phil. 2.
Fame, Name, Power, he emptied himself of that brightness which he had before
the world was, John 17. So that he seemed naked, i. e. in all things like unto
us. Hence it is, that as wicked Cham heretofore mocked his naked Father, so not
only the Jews, but most false Christians too, have jeered this humiliation of
Christ, and always denied that he was God begotten of God, and affirmed that
he was only man, and had his being from Mary.

3. He girded himself with a white Towel, i. e. with an immaculate body, and
incorrupt humane nature, which like a white Towel, was not only clean in it
self, but also wiped away our spots, and made us clean also. Or thus, he girded
himself with a Towel, i. e. with the anguish of his Passion and Death: and so
as he had begun magnificently to show his charity, he did more magnificently
finish it.

4. Then he pours water into a Basin, i.e. he poured out the Holy Spirit upon
the Believers, Ezekiel. 36.
which by his Passion he merited for them; which Spirit in Ezekiel is called
clean water, I will pour clean water upon you, says he, etc. Or,

He poured water into a Basin, i. e. he opened our wits to understand the
Scriptures. That water was in a pot before: the Scripture was shut up, the Book
was sealed, the Mysteries of God were hidden, the face of Moses was veiled. But
now Christ has poured forth the water into a Basin, i. e. he has revealed the
hid things of the Scriptures for the Salvation of believers. From that time
Christ began to wash us. I say, he began: for he has not made an end yet; but
does daily wash, and wipe us with his Towel, i. e. the merit of his Passion. So
that from hence we may understand not only the love of Christ, but our own
misery also. For it must be great filthiness which none but the Son of God
could wipe away, and that not without his death and blood. By this it is plain
that man had deeply fallen, because we see the Son of God descend and humble
himself so low.

Pastors of the Church should follow this Example of Christ, Let them watch and
arise, and make ready to Minister. Throw all away that hinders the work,
whatever it be. Let them expound the dark Mysteries of the Scriptures to
others. Let them wash others, but so, as they themseves be girt with a Towel;
lest while they make others clean, themselves be defiled.

John 13.6.
Then comes he to Simon Peter: and Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou wash
my feet?

Jesus answered and said unto him, verse 7.
What I do, thou know not now: but thou shall know hereafter.

Perer (...) un^ him, verse 8.
thou shall never wash my feet: Jesu: answered him, if I wash thee not, thou
have no part with me.

Simon Peter says unto him, verse 9.
Lord, not my seet only, but also my hands and my head.

Jesus says unto him, verse 10.
He that is washed, needs not, save to wash his feet, but is clean every
whit: and ye are clean, but not all.

For he knew who should betray him, verse 11.
therefore said he, ye are not all clean.

There are some that think Christ began with Judas, and so went upward till at
last he came to Peter. But others reject this opinion upon this ground, that
although Judas had patience, and with a brazen face held out till Christ had
done this to him, yet the other Disciples could not hold their peace.

It is most probable that he began at Peter, who was first among the Apostles,
not by Vocation (for Andrew followed Christ before him) but by Election unto
the Apostleship, for there Peter is put in the first place. Matthew. 10.
And it was very proper in this washing to begin with the chiefest. For where the
Pastor or Prelate is unclean in Doctrine or life, those that are under their
charge will quickly be defiled: and how shall such a man make others clean who
is so filthy himself? If the salt has lost its saltness, how shall it season
other things?

Nor is it without a Mystery that the Evangelist does not call Peter only by
that name which Christ gave, but by that also which he had before. He comes,
says he, to Simon Peter, seting down his old name first. Peter, as we shall
see anon, did express in himself the nature both of flesh and faith: and
therefore he is called by diverse names. In the discourse of Christ Peter
speaks three times, but all differently. First, out of ignorance. Secondly,
out of obstinacy. Thirdly, in Faith. And Christ does thrice answer him. First,
he instructs his ignorance. Secondly, he reproves and repelleth his
stubbornness. Thirdly, he commends his Faith. And so we speak to God, and he
to us, etc.

But whereas Peter first says by way of question, First word.
Lord, do thou wash my feet? It Is plain that he stood amazed at so great a
condescension of his Lord. And no marvel; for the rest would have done so too,
if he had begun with them. Yea, who could but admire to see the Lord of Majesty
became so humble a servant unto men? Exodus 3.
Its a sign of a godly soul to admire and wonder at the works of God. Thus
Moses, although he pressed to see why the bush was not burnt: yet when he heard
God speak out of the bush, he durst not approach. Genesis 28
So Jacob when he had seen a Ladder in his dream, etc. he awaked as one in a
trance, and so great a vouchsafement of God: How terrible says he, is this
place!

If we consider this word of Peter, we shall see that he had several respects,
partly good, partly imperfect.

1.
First, He had respect to that excellent dignity of his Lord, when he said, do
thou Lord? I say, he considered what a base employment it was to wash feet,
because the feet are the lowest, and so the meanest members, not named without
saving your presence. He thought it a great disparagement, that those hands
which had wrought so many Miracles among the people should now wash his feet:
and this was good in him.

2.
On the other hand he considered his own unworthiness, when he said, for Me, or
my feet? and that also was commendable. From both which he inferred, that 'twas
more fit for him to serve Christ, than for Christ to serve him, which also is
praiseworthy. We must needs acknowledge that God is nothing indebted to us,
but we much to him. Lord, do thou wash my feet? thou Lord of Majesty, for me
the vilest of creatures? a wretched sinner? But Peter was mistaken to think it
a dishonorable thing for Christ to serve us; as some now adays think it a
dishonor and disgrace to Christ to give us his body to eat, whereas it is his
greatest glory. For hereby his infinite love and mercy does perfectly shine
upon us.

But the nature of our flesh is such, that it has no fear of God at all when
it sins; but when it should pray for pardon, it would seem to have such
reverence, that it confesses it self to be so unworthy, that it dare not come
nigh him. So Peter seems here to have great reverence of Christ, but by and by
denies him in a fearless manner: and so do we. Again, herein also Peter erred,
that under pretense of reverence to Christ, he puts off and refuses his
Ministry, as another time upon the same ground he thrust Christ from him, when
he said. Depart from me, Luke 5.
for I am a sinful man, O Lord. Nay, rather if thou art a sinner, thou
should desire that the Lord would not depart from thee. It has indeed a
show of reverence, but it is very preposterous, arising only from the carnal
mind, as most think, that by reason of their unworthiness they should dishonor
God if they pray to him or receive the Sacrament. But faith is of another mind,
and thinks that he dishonors God that sins, not he that begs pardon,
and uses such remedies against sin as God has appointed. He that submits
to the work and Ministry of God, does not dishonor him, but he that resists
the same, and prefers his own wit before the will of God.

It is surely a great part of Piety to acknowledge our unworthiness, and so we
ought to do. It is also a pious part to reverence Gods Majesty. But this piety
will run into superstition, if we reject Christ's Ministry, because of our
unworthiness. Therefore there is no cause why we should be afraid to draw near
unto God, inasmuch as he himself commands us to come unto him and call upon
him. Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. Caell upon me in the day of
trouble, Matthew. 11.
etc. Psalm 50. Thou can not honor God more then to pray unto him
faithfully: and thou castest the greatest scorn and contempt upon him that may
be, if thou slightest him by not coming when he calls and promises his
assistance. Thou can not attribute more honor to Christ than by bearing and
suffering his work to be done in thee. Hence Mary who sat still at the feet of
Jesus, and hearkened to Christ's Ministry when he preached, had a much more
honorable commendation than busy Martha. Luke 10.
In short, if thou desire thy health, thou must not drive the Physician from
thee. Rather come with the more boldness, the more frail and unworthy thou art;
as in outward necessities, we do not regard our own unworthiness, or the
worthiness of others so long as they help us and do us good. As a
hunger-starved man is not ashamed or afraid to beg of the most noble Personage,
his necessity compels him: Go thou and do likewise.

Second word.
The second time Peter speaks more sawsily, with a show of zeal indeed, but not
according to knowledge. Thou, says he, shall never wash my feet. And here
again is the nature of flesh discovered, which is always obstinate in its own
(as it thinks) good purpose, and under a fair pretense stiffly maintains its
conceited opinion, whether in jest or earnest, whereof Christ most holily
instructed Peter, but all in vain.

The like obstinacy we see in David, 1 Chronicles 21.
when he was dissuaded from numbering the people. And in Josia when he was
forbidden to war against the King of Egypt. 2 Chronicles. 35.
Therefore the Wise man says, There is a way which seems right unto a man:
Prove. 14.
but the end thereof are the ways of death.

Thus Peter is a figure of those who please themselves only with what seems to
be good to them, and which they do with their good meanings, as they call them.
But it is not enough to do what seems good to us, unless God also approve of it.
For most commonly so it falls out, that what we think to be good, is nothing
so: 1 Samuel 23 1 Samuel 15.
as when Saul in sacrificing would needs usurp the office of the Priest. So
when he reserved the cattle taken from the Amalechites for sacrifice. So that
it is not enough to have a good meaning, but chiefly to consider what the will of
God is: else they that persecute Christians may be excused, John 16.
for they did it with a good meaning, thinking they did God service thereby.

But here Christ first reproves Peter's ignorance, saying, What I do thou
know not now; but thou shall know hereafter. As much as to say, why do
thou withstand me, seeing thou know not why or wherefore I do this? What I
do is no trifle, though thou do not understand. Matthew. 3.
So he said to John when he was afraid to baptize him: Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Indeed Peter knew not
what Christ did then. For,

1. He thought his Lord did that service for some bodily Recreation, as others
used to do.

2. He did not yet fully understand the Discipline of this his Master, that he
that would be greatest in his School, must be as the least: and specially that
the great Lord of all would reign in the highest Tower of Humility: of which we
shall have occasion to speak hereafter, Luke 22.
concerning the strife among the Apostles for Precedence, etc.

Again, Peter knew not whereto this his pertinacy and disorderly respect would
come in the end, he little thought the issue of it would be his
self-justification. He that will not let Christ wash him, what else does he
pretend, but that he is righteous enough, and has no need of the Grace of God?
Peter did not consider this, that his words tended to such a thing; otherwise
he would not have refused.

Christ yet does not presently tell him the reason of this washing. Eccl. 3.
For there is a time to work, and a time to speak: we should observe God in
both. But tells him he shall know hereafter: for by and by after he sat down
again, he explained this Mystery to them. And then this humility of Christ
took such impression in Peter, that he afterward exhorts others thereunto.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.
etc.

Hence we also my learn, not rashly to require a reason of Gods works, but
humbly to obey his will. What is here said to Peter, is spoken to us all. For
certainly we are ignorant, and know not that God now works in us, with us,
for us. He washes us sometimes with prosperity, sometimes with adversity; but
we understand it not. But we shall know hereafter, when we are enlightened by
the Spirit of God, but specially in the world to come.

Thus of the answer to Peter's first word. To his pertinacy he has a sharper
answer:

If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. As if he had said, if thou
strivest for the pre-eminence, and wilt not submit thy self to me, thou can
not be my Disciple. Christ's school will have such scholars who resign their
own will, mortify their own reason, 2 Cor. 10.
and lead all their understanding captive into the obedience of Christ.

Thus he that would not be pacified with a promise, is quieted with a
threatening. It is indeed a great commination to say, Thou shall have no part
with me. Not to have part with Christ, is to have our part with the Devil and
all wicked men. As there is nothing better can befall a man than to have his
part with Christ, so not to partake with him is unavoidable damnation.

Beloved, let us do and suffer whatever is required of us to do and suffer, lest
we lose this our share with Christ. To have part with Christ, is to partake of
his Grace, Spirit, and Word here; and of his Glory and Kingdom hereafter. This
part Peter afterward denied to Simon Magus; Acts 8.
Thou have no part nor lot in this word.

But this word of Christ may have another meaning: If I wash thee not, etc.
q.d. Why art thou afraid at my meek manner of behavior, and startlest at this
kind of Ministry? wilt not thou that I wash thee with water, when thou must of
necessity be washed with my blood? except I gird my self harder yet, and wash
thee with greater labor and pains, thou will have no part with me. Truly if
Christ had not washed his Elect with his blood, neither Peter nor any man else
could have had any part with him.

So is it still, whom Christ purges not, he is yet unclean: as it was
heretofore, no man was clean till he was washed with the water of Purification.
Numb. 19. Apoc. 21.
And no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of Christ: therefore it is
rightly said, if I wash thee not, thou have no part with me.

By all this Christ shows what is meant by the washing of feet, and why he
did wash his Disciples feet before his Passion. Teaching us hereby, that it is
his office only to purge and wash away the filth of sin: which he does by the
sprinkling of his blood.

This washing then of the feet signifies the whole Passion of Christ, who
ministered to us, and washed us. Where note, that none is purged from sin but by
Christ. Also see here our laziness, who hear that we shall have no part with
Christ except he wash us, yet we run not to him, though he be present with us.

Doubtless Peter wholly submitted himself to Christ, being terrified with this
his threatening word: Lord, says he, not only my feet, but also my hands and my
head. As if he had said, if it be so, there is an end, I have done; not my will,
but thine be done; I will no longer hinder thee from washing me. Only let me
never be separated from thee. Lo, I present my hands, feet, head, my whole
body: wash me, wipe me, do as thou will, I have nothing to say against it. At
first I did not know what it meant, therefore I crave pardon, I cry thee mercy,
etc. This is that Chrysostom says of him: Peter was earnest in denying, more
earnest in yielding, both proceeded from love.

1.
Here we see the nature of Faith, which fully and wholly resigneth it self unto
the will of God, to do with us whatsoever he pleases. Come life, come death,
all as he will. So David, 2 Samuel 15.26.
if he say, I have no delight in thee: behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seems good to him. Genesis 12.
And so Abraham, he fully committed himself to God, following him whithersoever
he led him. This Resignation of self unto the will of God is a most acceptable
service to him: As Christ says, he that will come after me, let him deny
himself and follow me. Matthew. 16.


2.
Note, that besides his feet, Peter offers his hands and his head to be washed.
Not only our affections, but our works; yea our very intention and purpose many
times had need be cleansed. David acknowledges himself to be filthy all over.
Psalm 51.
Behold, I was conceived in iniquities, sprinkle me with Hysop, etc. To be
short, This word of Peter shows that we are wholly polluted in body and soul,
in affections, works, intention, will and understanding. So that we have very
great need of Christ.

3.
Hence we learn what we have most need to ask of Christ, even that he would
cleanse us every whit, who created us all that we are. If we be not first
purified, we can never partake of the good things of Christ.

4.
Lastly, He shows what we should principally offer to God for his innumerable
benefits, even an universal Resignation, not only of our temporal goods, but of
our own will and reason too: that with David we might say twice, Psalm 108.
O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready. Ready to deny the world for thy
sake: Again, ready to deny my self for thee. Thus Abraham not only left his
Country at Gods call; Genesis 12.22.
but was ready to slay his son too at his command. But there are too few now
that imitate him. Perhaps there be some that will part with a little trash; but
very rarely shall we find one that will strangle his own will.

Although Peter presented his hands and his head to be washed, yet Christ
washes only his feet, with which he began at first. For he that is washed,
says he, needs not save to wash his feet. As if he had said, Peter, I need
not wash thy hands and head; these are clean enough already, but thy feet can
never be washed too much: for they will presently be foul again. See how fitly
Christ turns his speech from outward things to spiritual. From washing the
members of the body, he passes on to the washing of the inward parts of the
soul it self, which are the affections, here meant by the feet.

As in every employment the feet tread on the ground, so this our mortal life
cannot continue without our affections. The affections interpose themselves in
all businesses; so that if any shall say, they need not washing and cleansing,
he is altogether mistaken. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, 1 John 1.
and the truth is not in us. He washes our feet daily, who makes intercession
for us in Heaven continually. That we have need of this daily washing we
acknowledge when we pray, Matthew 6.
forgive us our trespasses, etc. Now Christ in saying [ He that is washed etc.]
plainly shows that we need a twofold washing.

1. The first is when the whole body is washed, the inbred pollution: the other
when the feet are cleansed from that dust and dirt which daily cleaves to
them. Christ by his blood has washed us both these ways. First at the Font,
where the whole man is washed from his inbred uncleanness, his original sin.
This is done, and that but once, at the Font. Wherefore he says, He that is
washed, needs not So to be washed again in Baptism. Once Baptized is
sufficient: Only we must have a care to wash our feet often. And,

2. This second Baptism is not in the Font, but in Podoniptro, in true
Repentance, which purges our daily sins. There is a second Table in which they
may escape by swimming, who have made Shipwreck after the first washing. This
is the washing of which Isaiah speaks: Wash ye, make ye clean, etc. Is. 1.
This washing of the feet by Repentance should never be omitted. For the way we
go (as the vulg. Lat. has it) is polluted, says David. 1 Samuel 2^5.
The filthiness of Jerusalem is in her skirts, in her feet, says the vulgar
Latin, Lam. 1.9. Therefore says Paul, 2 Timothy 2.21.
if a man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor.

That which Christ adds is enough to melt and move any man: But is clean
every whit. How is he every whit clean that must yet wash his feet? Yea how can
one baptized be said to be clean all over, when the Scripture often says,
there is none without sin? Is. 64. 1 John ^.


It is most true that there is no man without sin: yet withal it is as true,
that whosoever is purified by Faith is clean every whit. He that is planted
into the body of Christ does partake of and possess by faith the holiness and
purity of Christ. Thus Paul says to Believers: Ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6. Romans 8.
ye are sanctified by the Name of the Lord Jesus. Again, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Those that be planted into
Christ are called holy by Faith, the Name and Blood of Christ. But yet in
themselves they are nothing but sinners, and have yet many sins, but no
condemnation: for God accounts of them as clean by Faith in Christ. So Paul
says of himself, With my mind I serve the Law of God, Romans 7.
but with my flesh the law of sin.

1. Hence we conclude, that the Apostles were baptized: otherwise he would not
have said to them, he needs not save to wash his feet.

2. Baptism is not sufficient, except also we wash our feet.

3. Grace is of more force than sin. Where Grace is, a man is accounted just
and pure before God, notwithstanding he be not yet altogether without sin and
imperfections in himself.

4. Repentance is necessary to backsliders.

5. That common cleanness by baptism, and the profession of the Faith of the
Gospel is not sufficient for a Gospel-Minister, except his feet, the affections
of his soul also be purged from all the filth of this world, from which a man
shall find it a hard matter to keep himself pure, unless he be still careful
to wash off the pollution contracted by converse with men, with the blood of
Christ.

Hitherto Christ spoke in general, He that is washed, etc. But presently he
directs his speech to the Apostles in special: And ye, says he, are clean,
but not all. The Apostles were clean because baptized, and cleaving close to
Christ, because they loved and followed him with unwearied desire. But above
all they were clean from the impiety and covetousness of the traitor Judas. It
sounds sweetly when the Judge himself shall pronounce us guiltless.

But that which follows, is full of terror; But not all: whereby Christ does
not only smite Judas, but also all such that live wickedly in the profession of
Christianity. For all is not Gold that glisters. Judas had his feet outwardly
washed, and kept company with the Apostles: he was with them in the body, but
not in the Faith. Therefore he was cast with his filthy hands and feet into
utter darkness.

It is also Emphatically added by John: For he knew who it was that should
betray him: to let us know that Christ said this for Judas sake only, ye are
not all clean.

1. Hereby he gives us an Example of true charity and humility. Christ saw the
very heart of this wicked man: he knew his bloody design, yet he gave him like
respect with others, and washed his feet as well as the rest. Hence learn to
love your enemies, and do good to them that hate you. This wonderful and
absolute clemency is proper only to the nature of our Lord. Although he knows
our sins, yet does he not presently punish us: but many ways recalleth us in
his long-suffering patience. Oft-times does he good to his rebellious Traitors,
to make that good which he says by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18.
I will not the death of a sinner, etc.

2. He sets forth the greatness of Judas his sin, which Christ could not
wash away, because that wicked man resisted and withstood the same. We admire
at some men's sins, and begin to examine their weight and heinous nature, in
that the Prophets could not cure them, though they applied never so many
Medicines, as one of them complains: Jer. 51.
We would have healed Babylon, and she is not healed. How great then was Judas
his sin, who had so great remedies for it, Christ the greatest Physician of
all, and yet was never the better?

So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, John 13.12.
and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?

Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well: for so I am. verse 13.


If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, verse 14.
ye also ought to wash one another feet.

For I have given you an Example, verse 15.
that ye should do as I have done to you.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, verse 16.
the servant is not greater then his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater
then he that sent him.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. verse 17.


I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: verse 18.
but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me, has
lift up his heel against me.

Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass, verse 19.
ye may believe that I am he.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, verse 20.
he that receives whomsoever I send, receives me: and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me.

Here Christ performed what he had before promise, to Peter when he washed his
feet. Thou shall know it afterward. Now he shows him what this washing of the
feet did signify. Thus every thing is to be done in its season. Let the work
be first done in it self, then let the exposition and interpretation of it
follow what is meant by it. Christ did not presently tell them the
signification of this washing, that the Disciples might the more diligently
attend, and the more admire it before they knew it, or the reason of it. Now be
lays by the Basin and Towel, and sits down again, and setleth himself to
preach to them.

1.
And first he prepares their attention by an interrogation: for when we are asked
what we know not, we are as it were jogged to listen more attentively. So
Christ here: Know ye what I have done to you? Doubtless they did not know. They
knew their feet were washed, but why, or wherefore, they were altogether
ignorant. This then they had need to be instructed in.

2.
Let us all in general suppose that it is said to us: Know ye what I have done
for ye? Whereby we should be stirred up to meditate on what the Lord has
bestowed upon us. As Paul says, We have received the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.
that we may know the things which God has freely given unto us. Thus Christ
says to every Believer; know thou what I have done for thee by Creation, by
Redemption, by calling thee in particular? This is that great and highest
Knowledge of all, which keeps us from being pufft up, and alone commends us
to God. It is the most necessary of all: for we may be ignorant of all other
knowledge without any danger, but not of this. If any be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. 1 Cor. 14.38.
But let us return to the words of Christ.

Before he expresses his meaning by washing their feet, he first premiseth his
own Dignity and Honor, the more forcibly to draw them to his imitation, seeing
his Dignity on one hand, and their own confusion on the other, if they did not
imitate him. The actions of great persons most move to imitation, and make mean
men ashamed if they do not so too. Ye call me Master and Lord, says he. Christ
might have spoken more and greater things of his worth and dignity, but he
contented himself with those Titles which the Apostles gave him: Nor need he
mention more. For if it be an honor for a Scholar to follow his Master, who
is but a man: what great shame is it for a Christian to be proud when he sees
God humble himself?

He says Emphatically, Ye call me Master and Lord. For the Pharisees also
called him Master very often, with the mouth only, but not from the heart.
Matthew. 22. Luke 10.
So some of them called him Master only, but not Lord: for they never intended
to yield obedience to him. Yet there were of them called him Lord too, but they
heard him reply, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
It was then no small commendation to the Apostles that he says to them, Ye
call me Master and Lord; Luke 6.46. 1 Cor. 12.
for as Paul says, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost. The Apostles called Christ Master, because they desired to learn of him;
and Lord, because they were willing to obey him. Therefore he says,

Ye say well. They only do truly call God Father who love and reverence him:
And they only rightly call him Lord who fear him, as it is said, if I be your
Father, where is mine honor? Mal. 1.
if I be a Master, where is my fear? And that men should not think that Christ
had these two Titles of Master and Lord from men only, and not of his proper
right, he adds, And ye say well, for so I am. There are many called of men
Masters and Lords, who know little, and lack much. But Christ is most truly a
Master and a Lord. He received those titles from no man, but had them naturally
of himself.

1. He is truly Lord of All, he has dominion over all men, whose right it is
for all to serve him.

2. He is truly a Master. He teaches outwardly, and not only so, but
spiritually and inwardly enlighteneth, because he is the wisdom of the Father.

And even as he being the Life, quickens all things that are capable of life,
so being the wisdom of the Father, infuseth wisdom into all that will receive
him; which no man or Angel can do. Therefore it is well said, One is your
Master, even Christ.

Mark the strength of the Argument, If I the Lord and Master, says he, have
washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet. The meaning is, if I
am a Lord, you by consequence must be servants. Whence it might further be
inferred, that I ought not to wash your feet, but you rather should wash my
feet. But it is not without cause that I have inverted this custom. My intent
hereby is to teach you charity and humility, which I could not sufficiently
inculcate with words, nor so effectually fasten on you, I have chosen to work
upon by my own Example. Now if I have not disdained to serve you in so mean a
way, no more should you scorn to do the like to others.

There is surely a great difference between me and you. I am God, you are but
men. There Is little difference between you and other men, but a titular
difference only. One is called Master, another servant, but by nature they are
equal, and both alike miserable. I therefore who am so much greater than any
man, have given you an Example, that it should not be irksome to you to do the
like to your equals, which I a Master and a Lord have done to you that are but
Disciples and servants. Let the brother blush to overtop the brother, and the
servant be ashamed to domineer over his fellow servants, when I who might justly
claim the height of this dignity to my self, do yet abase my self even to wash
your feet.

See how modestly Christ speaks these things. As in the Antecedent part he
mentioned his own Properties, to wit, I your Lord and Master: so in the
Consequent clause he might have cast them in the teeth with their former state
and condition, Ye men, servants and sinners. But he says no more but this, Ye
also ought, etc. Hereby teaching us, so to commend our selves (where the case
so requires) that we detract not from others, nor swell with pride against
others though we be greater than they.

This is that which Christ requires of his Apostles, and of all others who
acknowledge him a Master and a Lord, even to wash one another feet. None is
exempted from it, of what state or condition soever he be. But we must not
understand it of washing the bodily feet only, as though that were still
necessary in every respect; for so they that follow not Christ at all may wash
the feet of others, though they Lord it over them with never so much pride. Now
therefore,

1. If we refer the washing of feet to the Apostles, it enjoins them so to
exercise their Ministry, that they know and really set forth to the view of
all, that they are not Lords over others, but servants and Ministers to them,
and that they exercise their office for the benefit and good of men, not with
haughtiness and contempt: that they prove it with pains and diligence, and not
maintain their authority by violence and force, but with modesty and
edification, as Christ teaches, Matthew. 20.
He that is greatest among you, let him be your Minister.

2. But if we refer this word of Christ to all Christians in general, then to
wash the feet is nothing else but to prefer others before himself, to serve
others, or as Paul says, to bear their burdens, and please others rather than
himself. Here then all our ambition, which is wonderful great, is condemned.

Before Christ teaches them peace and charity, he first endeavors to root
ambition and the thirst of glory out of their minds. Where ambition is, Prove.
13.
there even brethren fall together by the ears. Proud men are ever quarrelling.
Never any thing so rent Christian unity in pieces like ambition, when one will
not yield to another.

The Words of Christ carry an Emphasis in them: And ye ought, etc. to let us
know that it is not so much his Counsel, as his Command, which must not be
slighted: and that we shall incur great punishment if we obey it not.
Therefore he adds, I have given you an Example, etc. And truly a very
excellent one, worthy of all diligence. Christ was Lord not only of men, but
Angels too, Matthew. 11. and 28.
to whom the Father had given to share with him in all things, who had all
Power in Heaven and in Earth, who was one with the Father, yet so he humbled
himself, John 14.
even to the feet of fishers. Who ever heard the like of any of the Kings and
Princes of this world? So great a price did the Son of God set upon us. Let us
then do the same. Let us walk humbly toward one another. Let us love one
another. If this Pattern of Christ will not work upon us, nothing will do us
good. He must needs be obstinate and obdurate, nay both blinded and desperate
that is not softened with this Example of Christ.

Here let thy disdain, proud man, be confounded, who art so proud thou can
not tell whether thou go on thy head or feet; thou know not what clothes
to wear, or how to jett it out in thy gesture. Do thou not see Christ girt,
and going up and down among them serving with a Basin and water? And who or
what art thou to him? Blush for shame, wretched man; says he, I have given you
an Example; I mean you Christians. These things were not done and written for
Turks, but for us.

Whence comes so much pride, so much loftiness, so much pomp and state, not
only among Lay-Christians, but even among the Bishops themselves, the
successors of the Apostles? Is this to imitate Christ? What Christ by all means
endeavored to prevent, to wit, ambition, pride, pomp, especially in the
Ministers of the Church, this very thing is now grown to the height, to the
great prejudice and scandal of the Church, etc. Let us take heed then to this
word of Christ, I have given you an Example, etc. In this speech Christ is to
be considered two ways.

1. As our Minister, and as a gift given us of God. For he did not only give
him for us, but he gave him also to us.

2. 1 Pet. 2. Matthew. 11.
As our Example. Thus Peter, Christ has suffered, leaving us an Example. And
Christ himself says, Learn of me, for I am meek, etc. So also are all Christ's
works and sufferings.

1. They are the Ministries wherewith Christ ministered unto us, they are the
very gifts which he gave us. For whatsoever he did and suffered, he did it and
suffered it for us: and so he ministered unto us, yea he has given, and by
Faith still does give all his works and merits to us.

2. What he did and suffered are our Examples, to which we ought to conform, as
here you expressly hear it. They see but with one eye, who respect Christ but
only as a gift, or only as an Example, when his will is that we should consider
him both ways.

Whereas he adds, As I have done, so do ye, we must understand it according
to our ability. For there is no man that can do every way as Christ did: nor
does Christ require it at our hands. As a Master sets his scholar a fair Copy
that he should imitate his hand to the utmost; yet does he not require or
expect that he should at first essay write as well as he; for he knows it
cannot be.

This Word [ As I have done] may be referred especially to those things which we
have heard, that Christ did when he washed their feet. For herein, if we
diligently mark it, is the office of the Apostles clearly expressed.

1. They ought by Christ's example to rise from the supper of Moses to the
supper of Christ, from knowledge to practice, from meat to labor, from letter
to Spirit.

2. They should lay by their garments, cast aside whatever hinders godliness,
and not be slothful but serious in business.

3. Gird themselves with a white Towel, with a pure Life, according to that,
Let your loins be girt, Luke 12.

4. Gird themselves, lest while they cleanse others, they pollute themselves.

5. They must pour water out of the pitcher into the Basin, draw and pour forth
the water of saving Knowledge out of the Bark of Scripture.

6. Then presently wash, but specially the feet, first mend the heart and
affections.

7. Wipe with Linen, build them up whom they have washed with their own
wholesome and clean conversation: and what they cannot do by words, let them
effect with works and an exemplary Life.

8. When they have so done, let them retire to a private silence, and look to
their own salvation, 1 Cor. 9.
lest when they have preached to others, they themselves become cast-awayes.
The like let other Christians do for themselves and those committed to them.

Now to make this his Example of more force to persuade, Christ uses another
Argument; The servant, says he, is not greater then his Lord, q.d. There Is no
reason why ye should be ashamed to follow my Example; For what are ye but my
Apostles and servants, whose Lord and Master I am? You are not above me: And if
hereafter, either you, or your Successors shall rise to any preferment, yet ye
will not then be greater, or know and do more than I have done and known. There
is no cause therefore why you should blush at humility and charity who are but
servants, whereof I your Lord have not been ashamed.

So then Christ does here beat down all proud and ambitious Churchmen, let
them be either Popes, or Bishops, or Cardinals, or Doctors; etc. What are they,
but servants? And if they are servants, as all will easily confess, they should
so do, as not to climb above their Lord. How this may be, let them well
consider, etc. But I have not time now to pluck up this stinking weed. Their
own conscience will tell them wherein they are unlike Christ: yea wherein they
strive to be above Christ, etc. Christ does often inculcate this saying, Mat.
10. and Luke 6.
The servant is not greater, etc. But here he rehearses it with great weight
of words: Verily, verily, I say unto you, etc. Every body knows that the
servant is not greater than his Lord.

But every word of Christ, though he does not swear it, is more steadfast than
Heaven and earth, Luke 21.
as himself says, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not
pass away; yet here he binds it with an oath; First to make the deeper
impression. Secondly, to show that it is easy to know, but hard to believe,
and hardest of all to observe and hold it fast, that the servant is not greater
than his Lord, neither should be.

In outward none will presume to go before his Lord, or fare better than he.
But in spiritual things we see it far otherwise; Every man coveteth and
desires to be in a better condition than Christ. For though Christ was in the
form of God, yet he humbled himself: we that are but wretched creatures run
away from humility. Christ served us servants, we scorn to serve any man or
minister to him. Christ did good to his enemies, we will not to our brethren:
Christ was obedient and took pains, we love our ease: Christ patiently bare the
reproaches of men, though he was the brightness of the Fathers Glory; we behave
our selves far otherwise. Christ the Judge of all men suffered himself to be
judged, we disdain that any should judge or reprove us. Christ entered into his
Glory by the Cross and death, we think to get thither by luxury and
lasciviousness. What else do we but prefer our selves before our Lord, and
covet better things then he enjoyed? It Is not without cause, you see, that he
does so often and so earnestly press this word upon us. For,

First, He would have us take our selves for servants. And secondly, to
consider and think upon what he has done and suffered for us. He that does
seriously mind these things will be most forward to all good, and most patient
under all evil. Therefore Christ says,

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. See how earnestly he
urges the work, as if all knowledge were nothing without it; Lest the
Disciples should say, we knew this long ago that we must be humbled; why do
thou teach us that now, as if we had not known it before? Well, says Christ,
if ye do know these things, it is the better for you, but this Knowledge is not
attained without obedience. I pronounce no man blessed for his knowledge, but
for his work. If ye that have knowledge desire to be happy, then do what ye
know. Ye have seen the very Work in me, I also desire to see it in you.

From this of Christ you see that we have ground according to the Faith, to
teach and preach good works in the Church against them that are enemies to
works. For what else can we do but what Christ himself did? No Christian that
will keep to the words of Christ can condemn us. Thou therefore whosoever thou
art, hold fast the sure Word of God, and stir not a jot from it. Read Mat. 5.
Luke 6. Jam. 1. etc. and thou shall see most plainly that Christ and the
Apostles taught good works. What have we then to do with the vain boasting of
false Gospellers, though they have learnt much out of the Gospel, and know all
the Scriptures, when they will not do the least good work?

Know therefore that the perfection of a Christian does not consist in
knowledge, but practice. Not the forgetful hearer, but the doer of the work,
he is blessed in his deed. Again, Jam. 1. and 4. Matthew. 7. Psalm 103.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. So Christ,
he that hearech my words and does them, is like a wise man, etc. His
righteousness is unto childrens children; to them that keep his Covenant, and
to those that remember his Commandments to do them. As Christ had separated and
exempted Judas before from those that were clean; Ye are clean, says he, but
not all; so here he excepteth and separateth him from those that are blessed.

I speak not of you all, says he, q.d. I told ye that you should be happy if
ye would follow and imitate me. But all of ye shall not partake of this
happiness. There is one of you that has no part in this word. He is so far
from helping his fellow servants, that he becomes cruel to me his Lord. He will
be no Minister, but a Thief: no imitator, but a Traitor: not an Apostle, but a
Devil; and this in a word is that most miserable Judas: who neither has Lot
here among the pure, nor shall have there among the perfect.

1. By this word Christ pricks him again, if happily he might amend.

2. He speaks in general, and does name no man, to terrify them all; for at
that time they contended for supremacy, as we shall see anon.

Quest.
But why did Christ say, I know whom I have chosen?

Answ.
I answer, Lest any should think Christ had mistaken in receiving such a one as
Judas into the number of the Apostles. A twofold Election.
The Election of God is twofold. First, to present Grace. Secondly, to final
Grace; To the first Judas was elected, to wit, to be an Apostle, but not to the
second; he was not elected to happiness.

If you ask why he was not chosen to blessedness also? I answer with Paul, Romans
9.
Who art thou, O man, that answerest God? Rom, 9. Let it suffice us that we
know God is just, and disposes all things wisely.

Object.
But some will say, why did Christ suffer this wicked man whom he knew to be
such a one, to tarry so long among the Disciples?

Solut.
Christ answers, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, He that eats bread
with me, has lift up his heel against me, q.d. Therefore have I with much
patience forborne this vessel of wrath fitted for destruction, that now that
which was determined from the beginning concerning me, might be fulfilled,
without any new purpose intervening, but in a direct course as it was foreknown
and determined of old. This must not be so understood, as if Judas were
compelled to betray Christ, lest the Scriptures should be found false: for then
he had not been to be blamed, but commended, and his sin must have lighted on
God. But because he would do this of his own accord, therefore the Holy Spirit
foretold it, knowing it beforehand.

The place here quoted is taken out of Psalm. 41.9. He has lift up his heel
against me. It Is a proverbial speech. For so we use to say when we would show
how greatly we scorn a man. The meaning then of the word is, He that was most
friendly to me, who lodged long with me, who walked, stayed, eat, drank, slept,
watched with me, as a near and dear friend, whom I thought I might well trust,
yea whom I had laden with many courtesies, he, he has thus requited me, as
now to become my worst enemy; And not content therewith, he uses all means to
supplant and ruin me.

This complaint might well be made of Judas, for he indeed sought to undermine
Christ, so that his name might be clean put out. Yet Christ expresses this sin
of Judas more favorably than the Psalmist does: for there it is not simply
said, he has lift up his heel against me, but, he has magnified a
supplantation against me, i. e. he has greatly supplanted me. It was a great
supplantation indeed, when this one fellow, basely trampling upon him, should
presume to sell him that bought and Redeemed all men; surely he did lift up his
heel too high, who would not buy Christ, but rather sell him.

Christ would not only be slain, but first be sold too, because man for whose
salvation he came to die, was not only dead by his transgression, but was also
sold under that transgression. For our first Parents could not be persuaded to
transgress the Commandment but with hopes of some advantage: Your eyes, Genesis 3.
says he, shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods. So that the hope of being
as gods was proposed, though falsely, as the price of their transgression.
Whence the Prophet says, Es. 52.3.
Ye have sold your selves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without money.
This order is necessary in our salvation, that our Savior should be sold and
die for us, who were dead and sold under sin.

What Judas did so wickedly against Christ, hat Heretics and Sectaries do
against their Mother the Church. For those that have been nursed at her
breasts, and nourished with her bread, do now spurn her with their feet: so
that she may well say, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
despised me. Es. 1.
No wonder if the Church so suffer from her false children, when Christ
suffered the same from a false Disciple. That word of the Psalmist may not a
little afright us.

1. Because it shows us the hainousness of our sins, which we make light
account of. Who would not abominate that man who should kick Christ at his
feet? Who should not dread himself that has offered such contempt and reproach
to the Son of God? But the Psalmist says, he that sins against Christ, does
trample him under foot. So Paul affirms, that there were some who did tread
under foot the Son of God, Heb. 10.
over whose heads the great Judgment of God did hang for so doing.

2. Because we are they who now eat the bread of Christ in the Word and
Saerament, and in those things which are offered to Christ, as goods dedicated
to the Church. Let us also take heed, lest we who eat Christ's bread, trample
him with our feet: especially seeing that from the beginning they always have
proved the worst enemies of God, who have been taken for his best friends. Thus
Satan the best of creatures, is become the greatest adversary of God. The
Israelites were Gods chosen people, yet they committed more Idolatry than the
Gentiles. Jer. 5. Deuteronomy. 32.
So that it is said of them, I fed them to the full, and they committed adultery.
Again, Jesuron waxed fat, and kicked; he forsook the God that made him, etc. So
the Pharisees and Priests, whose office typified Christ, were most forward to
crucify him. So Judas, none of the least of the Apostles, lift up his heel
against Christ. And so now he is most of all trampled upon by Christians, and
such as live wholly of his loaves. Hence the Psalmist, I was a reproach among
all mine enemies, Psalm 31.
but especially among my Neighbors.

They trample on Christ, whosoever they be that oppose and fight against the
Gospel under the name of Christ and profession of the Gospel, and defame the
Scriptures under a fair color of the Scriptures, wresting them to their own
lusts: but especially they that blaspheme Christ, etc.

Hence we learn, not to be wroth with them that wrong us, but rather do them
good, as Christ here speaking of the Traitor, is so far from beiny angry or
speaking evil of him, that he does him good, and seeks to reclaim him.

1. Christ foretold these things, lest his Disciples should be afrighted when
they saw them come to pass.

2. To strengthen their faith. But now, says he, I have told you before, John
16.
that when it is come ye may believe; i. e. that by the fulfilling of this word
ye may know that I am true in all my other sayings. So afterward he foretold to
the other Disciples what should befall them, which did not a little confirm
them in the Faith, that Christ should tell them beforehand what they should
suffer.

3. These things I have told you before, that you may believe, to wit, that I
can see into the very secrets of the heart. Or that ye may believe that I am,
and do remain the same, though for a while I seem to die. Or that ye may
believe, that I am that poor destitute one, whom whosoever considers shall be
blessed, as it is in the same Psalm. Or that ye may believe, that I am that
very man that spoke in the same place, Psalm 41.1,2.
Shall not he that sleeps awake and rise again? (So the vulg. Lat.) But thou,
O Lord, verse 8. verse 10.
be merciful unto me, raise me up, that I may requite them.

Lastly, He adds, Verily I say unto you, he that receives whomsover I send,
receives me, etc. By which Word,

1. He calls back the Traitor to his duty and office, and allureth him to
continue in it perseveringly.

2. He terrifieth him; for if he did not persevere, he shows him that he would
not sin only against him, but against God also. Or thus,

He had before comforted his Disciples, and told them that they should
patiently endure adversity and bear the cross, if they would but consider what
he himself had suffered, and that the servant neither is, nor ought to be above
his Lord, etc. Now he does comfort them another way, telling them that they
should find friends as well as foes in the world, who should use them civilly
and receive them kindly. q.d. This shall be your happiness in the world.
Behold, I send a Cryers voice before you, which shall sound through all the
world, that they which receive me, may then be truly confident that they have
received me indeed, if they shall receive you as my very self.

And that ye may not think it a small reward to receive me because I am now
despised in the world, lo I say unto you, He that receives me, receives my
Father also. When the children that are scattered abroad in the world shall
hear this, they will entertain and honor you very highly. Thus before he sent
out the Apostles, he provided meat and lodging for them, and with large
Promises encouraged men to receive them: as in the first creation, before he
made man he prepared all necessaries for him, as a place to dwell in, food to
live on, and light to walk by.

It is a good and comfortable gradation from the Disciples to Christ, and from
Christ to the Father, beyond or above whom there is no going, or ascending
farther. Christ here speaks according to his humanity, lest any Arrian should
hence infer that Christ was inferior to the Father according to his Divinity.

The same gradation you have in receiving the Apostles, Mat. 10. and Luke 9.
And this is much more excellent than what is said of Abraham and Lot, who
received but Angels instead of men, Genesis 18. and 19. Heb. 13.

This Reception of the Apostles does not consist only in civi usage and
entertainment, but chiefly in receiving and embracing their preaching of the
Gospel. In which sense we are to understand that, He came unto his own, and his
own received him not, John 1. Christ therefore comfort his Apostles with
these words, to assure them that their authority should be had in great
reverence among men, notwithstanding Judas was so wicked.

Christ also here intimates by what steps we ascend to God. We cannot come to
the Father but by Christ; John 14.
for he is the Way. We cannot come to Christ, but we must first receive the
Apostles, their word I mean. We must begin at hearing the word. He that
receives this, receives Christ. He that has Christ, has the Father. He that
has the Father, has all good. This place may also be understood of the poor,
whom we may then suppose to be sent to us of God when they meet us, beg of us,
and make known their necessities to us. He that receives such, receives
Christ and God, and in the day of Judgment they shall hear this, Matthew. 25.
What ye have done unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
to me.

Ye see then what great things are promised to those that receive the Apostles
and the poor. As it is said in Matthew, He that shall give unto one of the
least of these a cup of cold water to drink, he shall not lose his reward.
Whereby Christ does stir us up diligently to hear the Apostles Doctrine, and
readily supply the poors necessity.

John 13.21. Mar. 14.18. Mat. 26.22. John 13.22. Luke 22.23. Mar. 14.19.
When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said
to them, as they sat and did eat; Verily, verily I say unto you, that one of
you which eats with me shall betray me. And they were exceeding sorrowful.
Then the Disciples looked one on another doubting of whom he spoke.

And they beg an to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should
do this thing. And they say to him one by one, Lord, is it I? (Mat 26.22.) And
he answered, and said unto them, one of the twelve, (Mar. 14.20.) that dippeth
his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me, Mat. 26.23.

Mat. 26.24. Mar. 14.21.
The Son of man goes as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom the
Son of man is betrayed: good were it for that man, if he had not been born.

Mat. 26.25.
Then Judas which betrayed him, answered, and said, Master, is it I? He said
unto him, Thou have said.

When the Passion of Christ drew nigh, the worst and most miserable case of
that wicked Judas is first set down. And let none wonder that there is so much
said; villainous varlet, his vile fact required many words to set it forth for a
warning and caution to all others.

Being then about to speak of the Traitors sin, he is first troubled in spirit,
i. e. inwardly, as elsewhere it is said, Now is my soul troubled! For the word
(Spirit) is here taken like that, John 11.33.
where it is said, He groaned in the Spirit, and was troubled: which also is
not to be understood of the Holy Spirit, but of the inward man. For certainly
Christ took into, or upon him, those natural affections, and showed that he had
them, yet without sin. Whence it is plain, against the Valentinians, that Christ
had a true humane nature, as elsewhere, when we read, that he wept, and was
weary, Luke 19. John 4.

Therefore as Christ was troubled when he raised Lazarus, John 11.
and groaned against the power and tyranny of sin and death, wherewith all men
were oppressed: so here he is troubled at the execration and hardening of
Judas, who still went in his wicked resolution after so many warnings, and such
great kindness showed to him. This trouble then of Christ was,

1. His hatred of Judas his sin, as will easily appear, if we consider the
desire and care of Christ to save him, yea and all the people of the Jews, of
whom Judas was a type and figure. Well therefore might Christ take it ill at
Judas his hands, who was one much honored among the other Apostles, yet by a
little pelse was enticed to reject Christ's love, nothing at all mindful of his
glory, or the bonds of his fellowship, or the devotion and reverence due to him
as God, or of any his Miracles, but only looking at the odious and paltry pelf
of the Jews, for which he sold even his own soul, and betrayed the most
innocent and righteous blood into the hands of sinful men.

2. Christ was troubled at the greatness of the scandal, that one of his chief
Apostles should revolt and prove treacherous to him: By reason whereof he
foreknew that many weak ones would after this be estranged from him, and have
an ill opinion of him, inasmuch as his familiar acquaintance and intimate
friends revolt from him. How near these things struck to the heart of Christ,
no tongue can express.

We learn hence, what a Christian should be troubled at: Not from any outward
misery, but out of a mercifulness toward his Neighbor, whom he sees obstinate
in sin. By this trouble of Christ it is evident enough, that God hates sin,
but most of all ingratitude and impenitency, both which were notoriously in
Judas.

Again, This trouble of Christ shows that he had a most godly soul, because men
are punished and do perish sore against his will, Is. 1.
as he says in Isa. Heu, consolabor super hostibus meis, Ah, I will ease me of
mine enemies. Which is no small comfort to us to hear that God is not willing
to punish us, nor will he if we sin not obstinately. He had rather show us
mercy, and do us good.

3. This trouble of Christ shows us, how we should overcome all those envious
passions of our enemies, when they strive to do the worst they can against us
without a cause, to wit, not by cursing and banning, but by blessing and
benefiting them, as Christ here did, and as Paul teaches, Overcome evil with
good, Romans 12. What did Christ do? Did he curse and revile Judas? We need not
curse wicked men: Prove. 24.
they are cursed long since, and their destruction makes haste. But what does
he? Does he accuse and traduce him? No such matter. What then? He does piously
warn him, showing him that his naughty will was well enough known. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. O the wonderful
goodness of Christ! For we may here see how fitly he compared himself to a Hen;
Matthew. 23.
How often, says he, would I have gathered thy children as a Hen, and thou
would not? This he does here really show, for he had gathered the other
Disciples under his wings. Now,

1. He labors to recall the wanderer and him that was ready to be destroyed.
And although he had hitherto admonished him in vain, yet he does not give him
over: to teach us that we should not too suddenly despair of our amendment.

2. A wicked man is not presently to be cast off before all ways and means are
used for his recovery. Gal. 6.
So says Paul, If any be overtaken with a fault, Matthew. 18.
etc. instruct or restore him in the spirit of meekness. So Christ, If thy
brother offend thee, go and reprove him between him and thee alone.

As Christ here does not forbear to prick Judas, and set his sin before him,
although he knew that he would not amend: so is it still by the righteous
Judgment of God; many that will not amend must feel the worm of conscience
whether they will or no, to make that of the Prophet true, Is. 48.
There is no peace to the wicked. Here he does double his word, Verily, verily,
as well to stir up their attention, as to show the certainty of his word.

It is to be Noted, that although Christ does disclose the sin of Judas, yet he
does conceal his person, lest he should either break out into a rage against
Christ being confounded by his, or impudently presume to deny it. Teaching us
thereby what we should do to our brethren in the case of close sins, even do as
we would be done unto.

But he speaks to all, that all might fear, Romans 11.
And blessed is the man that fears always. Be not high minded, but fear. Now
in that he does so clearly convince them that he knew all their sins, never so
secret, he does thereby deter both them and us, not only from sinful acts, but
also from evil thoughts and purposes. Hence Boethius says well, There is great
necessity for us to live godlily, because he that beholds all things does see
all that we do.

What effect this word took in the hearts of the Disciples, does appear by what
is there said: They were sad, they looked one on another. And no marvel; every
one knew-himself guiltless, and none thought any evil of the other. Yet,

1. They did not doubt but that Christ spoke the truth. They only wondered how
the Devil could so far prevail as to be able to get away one of them, and
snatch him from the fellowship of Christ.

2. Every one feared his own heart, and though they knew no such thing by
themselves, yet they all suspected the frailty of their flesh They might say
with Paul, I know nothing by my self, 1 Cor. 4.
yet am I not thereby justified. It is a sign of a good and godly heart to
tremble at the Judgments and Word of God. On the contrary, it is the sign of an
obstinate mind, to be nothing moved thereat, as here Judas, he only is
fearless, and persists in the same impudence; he dares sit with his brazen face
at the holy Banquet. But could he there endure the piercing eyes of his Lord,
which he knew saw all things and the secret machinations of his heart at that
time?

3. They were not a little troubled to think that so holy a consortship should
be so much defamed by so vile and heinous a crime.

Here then it is plain that Judas durst not disclose what he plotted against
Christ to any of his fellow-Disciples, which made for their commendation, but
turned to his condemnation, who could be so wicked among so many godly men. Now
the Disciples nothing doubting but that all that Christ said was true, and yet
could not suspect which of them should be so base to do so, they look one on
another to see if any would discover the same by his blushing. And every one of
them says to Christ, Lord, is it I? Their Faith thought better of Christ's
words than of their own consciences. Therefore they do not say, Lord, I am not
the man, excusing themselves, saying, it is not I, but Lord, is it I, or no? by
way of Quere, q.d. God forbid that ever we should commit such a horrid fact
against our good Lord and Master, with whom we have gone through fire and water,
suffered good and evil, whom we have followed rather than any man, and for whom
we have forsaken all things.

Surely there was little worldly mirth and jollity at this Supper, where both
Lord and servants were so sadly sorrowful. Here could be no laughter or
lightness, when those godly men heard what a horrible thing should break out
from among them: but could not tell who should act or contrive it, in which
uncertainty they were held in suspense for a time, the Lord so ballancing what
he before had spoken for their comfort.

And that which made them yet more sorrowful, was, that Christ would not
answer when they asked the question, but leaves them still in suspense,
repeating the same word again with greater vehemence; One of the twelve, I say,
which dippeth his hand with me in the dish, he shall betray me, q.d. It is one
of the twelve who is so familiar with me, that he puts his hand into the same
dish with me: and for this freedom and respect which I show him he does thus
requite me. Mark it, he does give no other description of the Traitor, Psalm 41.
but what David gave long since, when he spoke in the person of Christ, Vir
pacis, mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
he has lift up his heel against me.

But the words following are very heavenly; The Son of man indeed goes as it
is written of him, q.d. there is nothing concerning me happened contrary to my
expectation, but as it was long since foretold by the Prophets, so it comes to
pass; I must die indeed that I may mercifully redeem mankind according to the
counsel and fore-purpose of Gods Divine Majesty; And it is expedient for
many, that I, should be betrayed, but woe be to the man for all that, by whom I
am betrayed. He will thereby procure salvation for others, but he will bring
perpetual destruction upon himself. The day of other men's Nativity is commonly
solemnized with great joy, but this man's birthday deserves to be noted with a
black coal: Nay it had been better for him if he had never been born. For it is
better not to be at all, than to be in perpetual torments; which is all one as
to have a death without death.

Christ would hereby afright Judas to terrify him from his evil purpose with
threats of eternal damnation, whom he could not recall by so many courtesies.
But all the while for bearing to name him, to teach us that we should admonish
sinners, but not traduce them. And if there be any good in them, it is better
hinted by a Periphrasis or circumlocution, than to particularise them.

But Judas was past repentance, yet Christ's goodness is exceedingly commended
who omitted nothing that might tend to his conversion and reformation.

Now Christ by this word; The Son of man goes indeed, etc. but woe to that man,
etc. and teaches us not to hurt or persecute Christ in his members. It is
decreed that the righteous shall be afflicted: all that will live godly shall
suffer persecution. But woe to them that do afflict them: 1 Timothy 3. Matthew. 18.
Take heed that ye offend not one of the least of these. Yet see the obstinate
malice of Judas. As he was nothing moved by that eminent Pattern of Charity
which Christ gave him at and after Supper: so is he as little moved by this
hard and horrible commination. And lest his silence should bewray him after all
the rest had asked concerning themselves, he throws out a malepert and snappish
answer, Is it I, Master? q.d. Thou can suspect no such thing of me. God
forbid that I, whom thou have so far entrusted, should prove so base and
unworthy. See here,

1. The impiety of man's heart, how it strives (if possible) to deceive God, yea
to make God a liar.

2. Notorious hypocrisy; he durst call him Master whom he had resolved
immediately to deliver to death.

3. Obstinacy and impudence added to his malice, which are most infallible
signs of a most fearful judgment. Christ warns Judas, but does no good on
him: he foretells his judgment, but he turns the deaf ear. Who would not here
be afraid? yea who would not pray with all his heart, that he may never fall
under such a judgment, and into such hardness of heart?

Nor does Christ yet discover him openly, but only says, Thou have said, q, d.
thou have plainly bewrayed thy self. Ask thy own conscience: That will accuse
thee, if I say nothing. Indeed thou art that famous Apostle and faithful
Minister, upon whom I have so well bestowed all my kindnesses, and who do so
excellently answer thy name and office! Hold thy peace vile Traitor, bear thy
badge and pack hence to thy old confederates. These things Christ spoke to the
Traitors conscience: but did not point him out with the finger; a Pattern to
us, not to disclose the close sins of others. As it is a sin to charge a false
crime on an innocent person; so is it a sin to blazon a secret slip indeed,
because it is a breach of charity to our Neighbor.

Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his Disciples whom Jesus loved.
John 13.23. verse 24. verse 25.
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it was of whom
he spoke. He then lying on Jesus breast, says unto him, verse 26.
Lord, who is it? Jesus answered, he it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I
have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop, verse 27.
he gave it to Judas Iscariot the son of Simon. And after the sop, Satan
entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou do, verse 28. verse 29.
do quickly. Now no man at the Table knew for what intent he spoke this unto
him. For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said
unto him. Buy those things that we have need of against the feast: or that he
should give something to the poor. verse 30.
He then having received the sop, went immediately out, and it was night.

The nameless Disciple so honorably here mentioned, was John, who was more
eminent then the rest for these two things, viz. that Christ loved him, and
that he leaned on his breast, and lay in his bosom. And though he writes this
of himself, yet he does it without boasting. but as it were compelled to it,
that his Gospel might be confirmed by his own authority. For if all the
Evangelists be such competent witnesses, that it is gross unbelief to question
their testimony in the least, This of all other witnesses deserves to be
credited, who was so conversant with, and so near unto the Truth which he
relates, that he lay in the very bosom of it; he above all mortal men was
admitted so nigh unto that word which boiled out of the heart of the Father,
and was made flesh, that he resolved to make his tongue and pen trumpet it out
louder than the rest. As Paul being in a sort compelled by the baseness of the
false Apostles to commend himself among the Corinthians, I am a fool, says he,
2 Cor. 11.
but ye have compelled me: So does John here by reason of some perverse
Heretics: yet out of humility concealeth his own name. Now whereas he leaned
on his Lords breast, that was either,

1. By reason of over much sorrow and fear because of the word which Christ had
spoken. Or,

2. Because of the sweetness which he tasted in the former words and works of
Christ. Or,

3. From the abundance or muchness of his love, which does not so much mind
what it is about, so it may embrace its beloved. Or,

4. Lastly, Out of extraordinary contemplation. For it is possible that the
extreme intensness of his mind might cast him into a trance. John 1.
And questionless in that Rapture he might learn those sublime high things
which afterward he wrote concerning the Divinity of the Word.

O how happy was this Disciple, who lay so familiarly on his breast, whom
others thought it a great happiness but to see at a distance, and to lie but at
his feet, Show us thy face, Psalm 80.
and we shall be saved.

See the mildness of Christ: He does not thrust back this Disciple that leaned
on him, though it were at a feast, where 'twas little good manners so to do,
but accepted of this his respect and love, and took it in good part. Now that
sweet and quiet repose on his Lords breast was a presage that he only of all
the Apostles should die in peace, and not suffer a violent death as the rest
did; as the event made it good. And here we see also how truly Christ said,
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matthew. 5. John 1.
For these draw nearest to God, and see him most clearly, as this John did: We
saw, says he, his glory, etc.

From this leaning of John upon his Lords breast, Peter took occasion to sift
out who the Traitor was. As we find him every where more eager and hot, so now
he is streightened, solicitous, and more inquisitive than the rest of the
Apostles. He would fain know the Traitor, that he might prevent and hinder him,
lest the whole College should be disgraced by so great a villainy. For this
wicked lewdness of Judas was often cast in the teeth of the Apostles and other
Martyrs.

Peter himself does not ask the question: for he never yet sped so well for his
boldness, though his love to his Master put him forward. Matthew. 16. John 13.
It was said to him before, Get thee behind me, Satan. And but now at Supper:
If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me; therefore he gets a spokesman.
Nor does Christ refuse to answer when John whispered him in the ear, lest it
should seem that what he had spoken of Judas before, was out of a doubtful
suspicion rather than from any certain knowledge beforehand. Therefore he does
by a plain sign point out the person of the Traitor Judas, saying, He it is to
whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it.

1. He does not point him out with the finger, or by name, lest it should cause
a disturbance at the feast, and the other Disciples should fall upon him. But,

2. He does discover him by a piece of bread: either that the Prophecy might
appear most true, He that eats bread with me, Psalm 41. Romans 12.
etc. Or that he first might do that which afterward he taught Paul to do, If
thy enemy hunger, feed him: for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on
his head. Thus Christ patiently fed his enemy like a harmless child: but like
the Ancient of days he poured coals of fire upon his head. Although Judas was
not touched with the coals of Repentance (with which we should desire all our
enemies to be burnt, yea though they are the worse for our kindness and
courtesy) yet he was burnt with scorching wrath, as will appear anon.

Now whereas the Disciples eat of the same dish with Christ, Mystical sense.
the mystical meaning is, that Believers do partake in the sufferings of
Christ. 1.
But Judas who also took out of the same dish, but with a wicked mind,
signifies Heretics and Hypocrites, for even they sometimes suffer, but not
for Christ. 2.
He likewise signifies all wicked men, to whom Christ carveth out of his own
dish, i. e. he lays his Cross upon them, but to their perdition.

Judas takes this bread too with the same impudence, as before he had the
Sacrament of Christ's body, and afterward kissed him. But he took this bread to
his great prejudice: for presently after the sop Satan entered into him. A
horrible word indeed, but the thing it self was much more horrid, that a man
should come to such misery and misfortune, that the Devil should possess him as
his own. And yet it is no wonder that the Devil should there get entrance,
where Christ is altogether shut out. Judas indeed had Satan before. For by his
instinct he picked his Masters purse, murmured at the woman that anointed him,
and consented with Christ's enemies to betray him. But as yet Satan was not
discovered in him. None but Christ saw him. Now he is revealed and shows
himself openly, when Judas went forth and led the Van of that wicked Army.
There are sins in us always: anger, envy, luxury, etc. but they lie lurking in
us till there be occasion given for them to break out.

Satan then entered into Judas, because he whom hitherto he had only outwardly
enticed to sin, now he does fully and wholly take possession of him. Whom he
first made wicked, now he makes incurable: so that he who first sold Christ for
the only hope of gain, his rancour now increasing, his hatred mixed with
covetousness, he belcheth out all his cruelty and breathes forth greater hatred
against him who plucked off his vizard and made him known.

The sum of all is, that Judas had now altogether hardened himself to sin, and
set his mind wholly to it, and became so like the Devil that he refused to
return, yea he was the worse for all Christ's kindnesses. And this is that curse
which the Holy Spirit long since by the mouth of David prayed might fall upon
him, Set thou a sinner over him, Psalm 109.
and let the Devil stand at his right hand.

Which must not be so understood, as though that sop was any evil thing, or the
cause of his hardening. The sop did not force him within the reach, nor thrust
him under the power of the Devil, but his own ingratitude and impenitence,
because he persisted in his wicked counsel, and was not touched with any
remorse, nor moved with any admonition of Christ, but altogether shameless,
when he saw that Christ knew all things; yea he was more and more on fire with
a burning desire to perpetrate his horrid act, and so cast away and scorned the
benediction of Christ. No marvel then if he run into cursing which he so much
loved: so that the Devil entered into his soul, which he found then utterly
forsaken of God. Although the Devil does never give over to tempt men, yet he
does especially drive us whether he sees us most inclined to go of our own
accord.

Let us then give diligent heed and watch continually that we give him not his
first, nor open the gates of our heart to him: for if he once get in adores, he
will quickly run over all the house till he has totally destroyed a man. Let
that miserable Judas be our Example, whom the Devil so invaded and possessed his
soul and senses, that he could do nothing but what the Devil enjoined him,
after he was deserted of Christ and cut off from the fellowship of the Saints.
Eccl. 10.4.
Hence the Wise man warns, If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee,
leave not thy place, Indeed we cannot deny him, that he tempt not at all, but
let us not give place to him.

Now because Judas was in a manner made manifest, and could not with safety
stay there any longer, and because he was sufficiently warned, but was never
the better, Christ puts him in mind, What thou do, do quickly; which sounds
as if Christ would kindle and spur him forward who was incensed before, and
whose rage was rather to be restrained, yet indeed he was rather threatened
thereby than exhorted.

1.
Nor does Christ speak this to Judas only, but especially to the Devil, who had
already entered into him, q.d. Do thy work, O thou Devil, which thou have
always delighted to do; do it quickly. Thou gottest into the souls of the
Jews, and killedst the Prophets: Thou stonedst them that brought the Doctrine
of Salvation; thou sparedst none that were sent from God. I am come after them,
and I well know that thou can not be quiet and let me alone: wherefore now
take thy course, do as thou were wont, and as thou would have gladly done
long since, if I had not restrained thee. Take thy swing, I Will hinder thee no
longer. It Is all one as if a strong man should threaten his enemy and speak
scoffingly to him, knowing him to be but a punie fellow and to be conquered
with a filip, should yet say, Do what thou do quickly, that thou may
presently try how strong I am, and know it by experience. So Christ bids the
Devil run faster and make more haste to do what he was ready to do, that being
overcome and bound by his tryanny, he might sooner release the world.

2.
If we refer this word to Judas, then it is not a Precept, but a permission, as
in Job it is said to the Devil, Job 1.
Behold, he is in thy hand. So here, Judas is not commanded to do the evil he
intended, but is permitted to do it sooner. It Is one thing to say to a man that
is about a thing, make haste and do it quickly: and another thing to say to one
that is at leisure, or command an idle person to do this or that.

3.
But this word is nothing but for the judgment and condemnation of Judas who
was now obstinately malicious. It is such an expression as Parents use to their
stubborn and incorrigible children: as if Christ had said, Well, now I see all
my kindnesses will not invite thee to amendment, go on, make an end of what
thou have begun: I will not let or stop thee any more; Thou would not hearken
to me, therefore get thee after the Devil and follow him another while: But I
tell thee this beforehand, never look to go to Heaven. From this time forward I
leave thee to thy own will, sink or swim, shift as thou can, I Will take no
more care of thee. A horrible Judgment indeed, so to be forsaken of God.
Wherefore David had cause to say, Psalm 51.
Cast me not away from thy presence.

4.
By this word Christ shows his hearts great desire to redeem man. Therefore he
bids the Traitor not be too slow, but make haste, q.d. Have a mind to be^ay me,
and do long for my death? I am as willing as thou to be betrayed and to die.
It was my business into the world, and I long till it be done. Christ was in
such haste, because he knew there would much fruit spring from his Passion, the
Devil would be conquered, Idolatry destroyed, death perish, heaven be opened,
man redeemed, etc. therefore he hastened.

5.
Lastly, In this word he fully resigneth both his own life, and his desire of
saving Judas to the will of his Father, nor his desire of Judas his salvation
only, but of that people whom he represented too, and the false Church also
which he prefigured. The grief also which he conceived from the greatness of
the scandal. All these were a great torture to Christ. Now he resigneth them to
the Fathers will, teaching us to do so to, when it cannot be otherwise.

And lest any should think it strange how the other Disciples could bear this
impiety of Judas against Christ, No man, says he, at the table knew, etc. This
was an infallible sign of the Apostles goodness, in that they had no evil
surmisings of Judas: Charity thinks no evil. 1 Cor. 13.


Whereas they thought that he was commanded either to get things ready against
the feast, or to give something to the poor, he intimates that Christ did
carefully give this in charge to him, especially at the Feast. Thereby teaching
us to provide for the poor at our Feasts, a thing most acceptable to Christ.

But here the Disciples were much mistaken in their Judgment. For that wicked
man did not so much seek to grace the Feast as to disgrace it: he was not so
much for the poor, as against the Father of the poor. Wherefore he was not fit
to be any longer in so holy a fellowship. And now the Devil who had been his
master all this while, instigateth him afresh, and presently he went forth
after he had taken the sop. But,

1. He went out judged and condemned, leaving his Bishopprick to another.

2. He went out; he was not thrust out, he did voluntarily of his own accord
separate himself from Christ and the Saints: than which there is no separation
more miserable. Again,

1. He went forth presently. So that it is plain he had a list to be gone sooner,
but he had not leave, or a fit opportunity; but as soon as it was granted him,
he forthwith departed.

2. He presently went forth; for now the Devil had got stronger hold of him,
and ruled him by force, haling him whether he pleased.

3. The Devil hastened him for fear of delay and the power of Christ's words,
lest any spark of Grace should be kindled again in the soul of Judas, and so he
escape out of his snares. For the Devil is exceeding wary, lest any slip from
him when he has once caught them. Exodus 1.
A figure whereof we have in Pharaoh, who oppressed the children of Israel with
burdens, and followed them so close that he would not allow them time to
worship God, or confer among themselves about their liberty, lest one time or
other they should make an escape. So the Devil will give no respit or breathing
time to those he has ensnared, that having once overcome them, he may still
keep them under his Yoke. Learn we hence to acknowledge and confess his
malignant cogitations.

In the close of this sad story of Judas, John says, And it was night. Surely
a dark night was fallen on this miserable man; the Sun of Righteousness was
set, so that he ran hastily to the depth of hell, as an Heart to the dart, or as
a dog to the chain, Prove. 7.22.23.
not knowing that he was running to the ruin of his soul, This is that night of
which the Wise man speaks; Wisd. 17.5.
No power of the fire might give them light: neither could the bright flames of
the stars endure to lighten that horrible night. Besides, It was really night
indeed, a time that wicked workers seek and love, John 3.20. This miserable man
did run so violently into sin, that the night could not stay him: therefore he
got an Eternal night for his labor. For it is the just Judgment of God, that
they who refuse the light, should rush into perpetual darkness.

This much concerning Judas and his many warnings, as also his final Ejection.
Let every godly man pray continually, that he be never left and given over to
fall into such blindness and hardness of heart. And let him use all means to
avoid this heavy Judgment of blindness in heart. (...) follows:

Luke 22.24.
And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the
greatest.

verse 25.
And he said unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them,
and they that exercise authority upon them, are called Benefactors.

verse 26.
But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
younger: and he that it thief, at he that does serve.

verse 27.
But whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that serves? is not he
that sits at meat? But I am among you as he that serves.

verse 28.
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations.

verse 29.
And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me.

verse 30.
That ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Although this History makes nothing to the suffering of Christ, yet because
Luke has inserted it in the Passion of our Lord, we will not pass it by. For
it does fairly picture out the humane nature and disposition that was in the
Apostles, who contended for primacy at that time, when they saw such great
Patterns of Humility and Modesty; and when the greatest tribulation was at
hand. But what our Translation renders strife or contention, that Luke calls
Philoniciam, i. e. Love of Victory.

We read more then once how the Apostles contended about Primacy. Matthew. 18.
and 20.
After the payment of tribute they asked Christ's opinion, and desired him to
decide the matter which of them should be the greatest. So when the sons of
Zebedee sought the uppermost seat in Christ's Kingdom, then they strove about
this thing. And here in this place.

1. Perhaps Judas his going from them gave the occasion. For till his hatred
was discovered they suspected one another, and so from hence quickly fell to
quarrelling, every one disdaining to be inferior to other, and to be, or but
thought to be less faithful to Christ.

2. Their Lords own withdrawing, which he spoke of before to them, might
happily give them occasion to enquire what they should do, and who should have
the chief management of things when their Master was gone from them. Here now,
as commonly it is, none could well bear to submit to another; and so (as he
thought) be undervalued: which is no strange thing that it should be so with
the Apostles who were men, and not yet confirmed by the Holy Spirit, nor fully
understanding the Kingdom of Christ. Now Christ neither will nor can he endure
by any means this Philotimie or greedy desire of Glory, which is the root of
Philonicie or love of Victory, whence all contention arises. For where one
will rule, and none submit; where all will be Lords, and none subjects, there
Christ has no more to do. What then?

My Disciples and Children, says he, do not do thus, it is very unseemly, and
does not at all become you. I would not have it so among you. Consider I pray,
what think ye? Do you not desire to Lord it like the world? but do you see any
such thing in me? where got ye this thought? whence came this great desire? ye
that are servants, would ye once more be greater than me your Lord? Indeed the
Romans and other Gentiles go about to compass to themselves worldly glory and
greatness, and above all things desire to domineer and rule over others. They
hunt after great Titles, not only to be called Kings, Princes, Euergetae, Pater
patriae.
and Rulers, but also Benefactors and Fathers of their Country, as if they did
help, do good and provide for all, and were more like Fathers than exactors and
oppressors, when indeed they do generally behave themselves otherwise. And ye
fishermen of Galiles, will you be like these, and do as the Heathen do? Indeed
ye are very fit for that glory; such honor would well become you which the
Gentiles have, and so much aspire unto. But if the name and profession of a Jew
will not beat you off from following the Gentiles, yet at least let my Example
take ye off. Ye see what I do. For I am your Lord and Master; I might command,
I might Lord it, I might call every creature to serve me, yet I forbear; I
abase my self so far as to serve, and let you sit still, I wait on you as your
hired servant. John 6.
The Kingdom was mine, and 'twas offered to me: but I would none of it; I
refused it. What? I might have had Angels as well as men to serve me, but you
see, I do not so. See, I say, and consider well how low and how abased I am. I
have put off the form of God, wherein I was, and have taken upon me the form of
a servant. Phil. 2. Psalm 8.
I have made my self a little less than the Angels. What a shame then would it
be to you to grow proud under so humble a Master? After this manner Christ
checks the ambition of the Apostles, and elsewhere also he uses almost the same
expressions. But every where he does smartly nip them, knowing what a Tyrant
Ambition would be, and what mischiefs it would bring in, if it were not
restrained and kept under.

If ever any King or Prince might be called Euergeta, a Benefactor, surely
never any better deserved the name then our Lord Jesus the King of Israel.
Pliny writing of Traj^n, says, Thou of all men do least esteem thy own
courtesies, whereas thou live in the City as a Parent with his Children. But
what was that Paternal love which Trajan showed to his Citizens, in comparison
of Christ's charity to the Apostles, and to us all? But what follows?

Ye are they which have continued with me in my Temptations: And I appoint you
a Kingdom, etc. There is a good coherence between these and the foregoing
words. As he had sharply reproved them before, so now he does smooth them with
Promises, and stroke them with Praises, yet so directs his speech, that the
Apostles might well desist from their ambition, q.d. Why do ye so hunt after
worldly power and domination? Stay a little, I will promote you to Heavenly
Power. John 6.
There are better and greater-things laid up for you than ye are aware of. For
ye are they that have stood it out with me, when many others turned their backs
upon me, being offended at my approaching Passion: but Judas especially, Acts 1.
he went to his own place; but ye have not flincht at any of my Temptations,
those many which Satan has raised against me these three years. For this your
doing be assured that I will prepare a Heavenly Kingdom for you by my Passion:
where ye shall reign with all power and glory as true Kings and Princes. And
because earthly Kings abound with all delicacies of meat, but specially of
drink: Lo, I provide so for you too, that there ye may eat and drink with me at
my Table as my fellow-heirs. Romans 8.
Which we must not so understand, as if there were eating and drinking in
Heaven: but Christ speaks anagogically; or as Theophylact says,
Metaphorically, because there is most of that in Kings Courts.

Lastly, says Christ, lest ye should want any thing to complete your
Government; whereas worldly Kings use to sit upon stately Thrones, 1 King. 10.
and Judge others, as we read of Solomon Behold, I prepare this also, that ye
my Apostles may sit hereafter with me upon Royal Thrones, and Judge all the
Tribes of Israel, which believe not in me. If ye seek to rule over Israelites,
lo they shall be subjected to you. What look ye for more? Can ye wish or desire
more? Is there the like again in all the world? What Is the glory of the world,
the kingdom of the world, the delights of the world, to the Glory, Kingdom, and
delights of heaven? Who then would not willingly despise the glory of the
world? Who would not gladly be lowly with Christ, that he might also reign with
him? Brethren, let us not be proud, the Devil's pride threw him down from his
greatest honor. But let us embrace humility, which exalted Christ to his
highest glory, and thus much for this text which Luke inserted. Let us now
return to John, and hear what Christ said after Judas was gone forth.

Now is the Son of man glorified, John 13.31.
and God is glorified in him.

I God be glorified in him, verse 32.
God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.

Little children, verse 33.
yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the
Jews, whither I go, ye cannot come: so now I say to you.

A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, verse 34,
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.

By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, verse 35,
if ye have love one to another.

When Judas was gone Christ begins to preach a most joyful Sermon, full of
admirable consolation: wherein first he forewarneth his Disciples not to be
offended at the Cross which now hung over his head; and with them admonishes
all the godly not to deny him because of the Cross. And he deferred this Sermon
till Judas was gone forth, because what he said afterward belonged to the Elect
only. As also to make good his own Doctrine, Give not that which is holy unto
dogs. Matthew. 7.


The Ancient of Days and the Son of Righteousness, from the season of the
night which then was, does fitly make a comparison per contrarium, by the
contrary, to show that his glorification was at hand, whereby all the world
afterward should be enlightened, when the Traitor and all wicked men should be
left in a perpetual night of sin. Hereby instructing us, that the godly should
never want Light, however the wicked might be wrapped up in a night of Errors;
Exodus 10.
as the Israelites heretofore had light in Egypt, when all else were covered
with gross darkness.

Now we may understand this word four ways. 1.
First of the Son of man, as to his Mystical body, so that the meaning may be:
Now is the Son of man glorified, i. e. by the withdrawing of Judas that son of
perdition from my society, my Mystical Body is purged, my small company and
Church is cleansed from the mixture of that pestiferous member. For the
graceful part and spotlesness of the Scholars is the Misters commendation;
when arrant rake-hels be cashiered, the Master is glorified. Therefore,

2.
Again, Now is the Son of man etc. i. e. he is discovered to be true and
Righteous by this, that he removes a vicious Disciple from his fellowship.

3.
Now is he glorified, i. e. by this separation of Judas from the Elect Apostles,
was fore-shewn the glorification of Christ, which he shall have at the day of
Judgment, when he shall separate the godly from the wicked, whereby his truth
and righteousness will appear.

4.
But lastly, by glorifying is understood the brightness of Christ's Passion
glistering and flashing in among the damned, the Glory of his Resurrection and
Ascension, and the gift of pouring out the Holy Ghost. Now, says he, is the
son of man glorified, John 12.
to wit, with that Glory which he spoke of: And I, when I am lifted up from the
earth, will draw all unto me; if a grain of wheat die in the earth, it brings
forth much fruit.

But mark with what Majesty Christ speaks of his death. Another man would have
spoken of it after the worlds sense: Now is the Son of man betrayed, made an
abject, condemned, and there is an end of him, etc. But Christ says, Now is the
son of man glorified: whereby he shows,

1. That he was exceeding glad to Redeem mankind by his death upon the Cross;
it was as much joy to him, as for others to go to a Banquet or Feast.

2. That his Cross was nothing but an entrance to his Crown; so that Judas and
the Jews did nothing but promote his glorifying; q.d. Let Judas go whither he
will, let him betray me, let him stir up all the world against me, let him do
his worst: It shall be to my Glory, and his utter disgrace. If he had gone
sooner, I should have been sooner glorified: I am troubled at nothing but his
malice, which only will wound me.

3. Although treachery, reproach, the cross and death be such bug-bears to the
world, yet to a godly man they are most desirable, because there is no other
way to Glory.

4. Lastly, He shows that by his death and Passion he was about to turn all
the curses of the Law into blessings. The Law says, Deuteronomy. 21.
Cursed is he that hangs on a tree. So likewise all outward evils, as hunger,
thirst, persecution, etc. which the Law says are curses: But Christ tells us
that they are the Instruments and means of our glorification and blessing: for
so it is that by his death these things can no more hurt us at all. By him all
things are sanctified.

Now although Christ was glorified before by his Miracles, (for he that allayed
the waves of the sea and the force of wind, Matthew. 14.
was worshipped as the Son of God; So when he fed five thousand men with five
loaves of bread, the people saw such glory in him, that they would presently
have made him King. John 6.
When he raised Lazarus to life, his Glory was so great, that they publicly
received him in Jerusalem with songs and shouts. Matthew. 21.
He was truly glorified by the greatness of Miracles:) yet because the
consummation of his Glory was in the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension,
therefore he says, Now is he glorified, etc. Teaching us, that we should choose
rather to be despised of men, than be praised by them, because by the one we
become proud, in the other there is no such danger.

He speaks it Emphatically, Now is the Son glorified, Clarificatus est.
by a verb of the preterperfect tense: for though it was not yet perfected, it
was in agitation, and to be perfected without all doubt. So he speaks
afterward; I am non sum in mundo, John 17.
how I am no more in the world: There is an Emphasis too, when he says the son
of man is glorified. For the Son of God ever was, and still is glorious. What
therefore the Son of God had by Nature, that the son of man had by Grace and
Union with the Divine Nature.

But questionless this glorifying of the son of man is the glorifying of God.
Therefore he added, And God is glorified by him; as the Father and the Son have
one nature, so have they one glory. Whence it is that Christ says, he sought
not his own glory, but the glory of the Father. 1.
And yet the Father is not so glorified, as if he had now essentially some glory
which he had not before: but because it was now cleared up by the Passion and
Resurrection of Christ, of which Son God was the Father. 2.
As also because by the Passion and Resurrection God got him Glory among men,
whom the world knew not before, but now by Christ they knew that he was their
Father and Helper, etc.

And lest any should question how Christ came to know so clearly and certainly
beforehand, that God would glorify him: He answers, If God, says he, be
glorified by him, God also shall glorify him in himself. He cannot doubt of
Glory hereafter, who glorifieth God now in this life. 1 Samuel 2.
For that word stands steadfast: He that glorifieth me, him I will glorify: but
they that despise me shall be dishonorable. Christ did glorify God by his
Doctrine, setting him forth by most worthy and magnificent Titles. For
Believers now call God Father by Christ, whom before they looked on as a Judge
under the Law which condemned sin. By Christ he is called our Savior, who
before was a condemning Judge. On the other hand God also glorifieth Christ,
bestowing great Titles on him, as a Conqueror triumphing over the Law, Curse,
Cross, Sin, Death, Hell and Satan. This is that Name above every name, Phil. 2.
which God the Father has given to Christ, at which every knee should bow, etc.

In the close of this clause Christ says, And shall straightway glorify him:
for presently, even at the Passion he began to glorify him with Miracles, when
the Sun was darkened, etc. whereby the Centurion and many others knew that he
was the Son of God. So while he yet hung upon the Cross, God heard his prayer
for us, which is the greatest Glory of Christ. See now all along how wisely the
Wisdom of God did speak Before he would speak of his suffering and death, he
premiseth his glorifying, 1.
lest the Disciples should be too much sadned; 2.
And lest they should think him utterly lost in his Passion; 3.
That they also in times of adversity might learn to look at the glory to come,
and not so much on the present misery.

Hitherto he spoke of his future glory. Now consequently he begins to speak of
his death, but very sweetly for the comfort of his Disciples, whom he knew
would be exceeding sorrowful at his death. For as a good son does not so much
delight himself in the succession of a great Inheritance, as not to mourn for
his Fathers death: So although the Disciples were sure that the death of Christ
would be of great advantage, and give a large Inheritance, yet they could not
but be much grieved for his death. Therefore he speaks of his death with as
sweet words as possibly he could: 1.
And first he calls them Children, to show his Fatherly grace of Love toward
them. 2.
And withal to show the fruit of his Passion; By his Passion and Death we have
right to be called, 1 John 3.
and to be the sons of God. Therefore we never read before that he called them
children, but now when he was about to suffer and die.

Nor does he simply call them children, but little children, which is a sign of
greater affection, because of the tenderness of love, and because as yet they
were but weak and tender Babes. They were children when they were grown strong
and armed with the Holy Spirit. But now because they were fearful, and not
able to follow their Father, they are called little Children or Babes. Gal. 4.
So Paul calls the Galatians little children, because they were weak in the
Faith, and had yet need of milk.

But what is it then that Christ would say to these his so much beloved little
ones? Yet a little, says he, and I am with you. And 'twas but a little while
indeed, but till he who went forth but just now was gone to the Jews, and came
again with a band of Soldiers and the Priests servants. He was then presently
apprehended, condemned to die, and executed, from which time he might say, now
I shall be no longer with you, unless I come to see you again, and stay an hour
with you. This he thus said, 1.
That they might more enjoy him whilst they had him: 2.
And that what he spoke at his going away might take the deeper impression in
their hearts. But it must not be so understood, that Christ went away for good
and all, and is now no more in the world, when elsewhere he says expressly: Lo,
Matthew. 28.
I am with you all the days, even to the consummation of the Age. The meaning
then is, yet a little while I am with you, in this visible and mortal body, as
hitherto I have been. Henceforth indeed I shall be with you, but not as
formerly, not visibly, not mortal, not as a stranger in this world, but as a
Prince and a Father of that which is to come. And would ye know what shall
become of you?

Ye shall seek me, q.d. ye shall be sadly grieved for my departure, and with
great anguish and thought of heart ye shall earnestly desire my presence,
because both Jews and Gentiles will most furiously abuse you. At that time ye
shall seek me and desire my assistance. This he says not to affright them,
but to prepare their minds for the trouble they should meet with. As a cruel
beast, if he should suddenly rush upon a man, would not only terrify, but tear
him, being unarmed and unprovided: but if a man see him, and be aware of his
coming, he will arm and fit himself, so that he shall do him little or no hurt
at all. So when temptations and trials are foreshewn and foreseen, they do less
disturb and trouble us. Hence says David, I made have, etc. Psalm 119.60.
Paratus sum, and non sum turbatus, says the vulgar reading. I was ready, and
not troubled.

By this we see that the whole life of a Believer in this world is nothing but
sighings, groanings, and a longing desire after Christ. The godly mourn like
Doves in this world, and say, Cant. 5.6.
My soul melted when my beloved spoke, I sought him, and found him not, etc.

And lest any should say, if we shall speed no better, why do not take us
along with thee? It were better for us to go with thee, than be left here
behind all alone. Whither I go, says he, ye cannot yet come, q.d. I am going
to suffer, and ye cannot follow me thither, because of your infirmity. You had
need be first endowed with power from the High One. Again, I go to the Father,
but as yet you cannot follow me thither: for the door is shut, I must first
open it for you with the Key of my Death.

But what shall become of us the while, how shall we bear or escape the present
hatred and envy of the world, and be able when the time does come to follow
thee? A New Commandment, says he, I give you, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you, q.d. Nothing will more safely defend ye from the envy of the
world, nor more surely keep you in my favor, than to love one another. Much
might be said concerning this loving each other. 1.
And first the error of our present times might hereby be suppressed, which
flattering it self with Faith alone, does altogether flee and fight against
obedience to any Command, Charity, and good works. 2.
Again, true Christian charity should hence be revived and restored, which did
heretofore so much abound in the Church, etc. But let it suffice us now that we
go along with the meaning of Christ's words.

1.
And first some will be ready to startle, and be affrighted to hear Christ speak
of, or so much as mention a Command, as if he meant to impose the Yoke of the
Law upon them again. But he allayeth his speech with this, that he does not
enjoin many, as Moses did, but gives only one Command. And in that he calls
it a New Commandment; it is a sign that he would free us from the Yoke of the
Law, Acts. 15. Isa. 9.4.
which none was able to bear, and which condemned every man: And therefore in
Isaiah it is called The Scepter of the Exactor.

2.
Hereby he shows that the Law was not sufficient to salvation: if it were,
there had been no need of adding any more. Although the Law commanded us to
love our Neighbor, Matthew. 22.
(for Christ also says, that it is one of the first P^ecepts of the Law)
nevertheless here he calls it a New Commandment. Because;

1. Matthew. 5.
It was renewed by him. For the Pharisees had much obscured it by their
Tradition. For this, Thou shall hate thy enemy, was foisted in by them: whereas
the Law says no such thing, therefore Christ rejects it.

2. It is commanded more frequently and more excellently in the New Testament.
The Sabbath, Sacrifices and Ceremonies are often mentioned in the Law, but Love
is every where commanded in the New Testament.

3. In the New Testament it is otherwise laid down than in the Law or old
Testament. To them it was said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: But
to us, As I have loved you; which is somewhat more, for Christ loved us more
than himself. He spared not himself that he might spare us. Therefore it is a
New Command, because we are bid love our Neighbor more than our selves; so
that we should prefer nothing before him; neither Honor, nor Riches, no nor
our bodily Life; as we see in Christ that he did not.

4. Because it is now confirmed by greater Examples, viz. of God and Christ.
Hence says John, Herein is Love, 1 John 4.19. and 3.16.
because he first loved us, and laid down his life for us.

5. It is a New Commandment, because he Commands it from the heart, and not
from the Ceremonies of the Law: and teaches that the Law is not fulfilled by
outward works, but by the inward love of the heart.

6. Because though all the other Precepts both ceremonial and judicial are
abolished: this only continued and was renewed, not from the nature of the law,
which indeed did require it, but gave no power to fulfill it: but from the
nature of the Gospel, which gives strength by the Spirit to fulfill all the
Commandments.

7. It Is never worn out, it abides new still, and never waxes old: for let us
love never so much, and never so long, yet we are still debtors so to do.

8. It is New, because as that which is new is nearest to its principle or
beginning; so Charity uniteth and makes us nigh unto God, who is the beginning
of all things.

9. Because it cannot be fulfilled but by a New Spirit, or in newness of
Spirit: not by the spirit of Bondage, but by the Spirit of Liberty and
Adoption: which who so has not, Romans 5.
shall never fulfill this Command: for by the Spirit alone is Chatity shed
abroad into our hearts.

But mark: Christ does not speak of any kind of love. There is a carnal love.
There is an inordinate love, when we do not only love the persons and favor
them, but their Vices too. Christ speaks not of this love, nor of that which
consists only in word and in tongue; but of that which is in deed and in truth.
Therefore he says, As I have loved you. Now Christ loved us,

1. Ordinately, because he loved our persons; yet so as not to flatter our
faults, but sharply reproves them, even in those whom he loves best.

2. Effectually, not in word only, but in deed. He loved us freely without any
merit of ours.

3. Yea when we were yet enemies: when we were yet sinners, we were reconciled
to God, by the death of his Son, Romans 5.8,10.

4. Lastly, Perseveringly: to the end, as was said before, Joh. 13. Let us
learn from hence how we ought to love our neighbor.

But when he says, As I have loved you: we must not think that he requires a
measure every way proportionable to his Love. For who can so love? But he would
have us do our utmost, and strive might and main with all our strength to
imitate his Love. If we cannot keep pace with him, let us at least follow hard
after him, Psalm 63.8.
and keep as close as may be. As elsewhere he says not, Learn of me to work
Miracles, etc. but Learn of me, because I am meek and lowly in heart: So here,
he would not have them known to be his Disciples by any other Badge, but Love;
Hereby shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
Christians have other Duties to perform, as to Fast, Pray, give Alms, etc. But
though these things be good, yet a hypocrite may do them, as you read, Mat. 6.
Christ therefore will have none owned as his Disciples by any other mark but
mutual Love. Matthew. 6.
For Love is,

1. A general Note and Sign which every one may have. In the other, as Fasting,
Prayer, Alms-deeds, etc. A man may sometime find an excuse, but in this none
can excuse himself, and find any shift to put it by.

2. It is an infallible mark of a godly heart. All other signs may fail, but
this will never: For where Charity is, there also are all other Virtues; and so
it is the perfect keeping of Gods Commands: Romans 13.
He that loves fulfilleth the Law.

3. It is a convertible Sign. As it is true that every true Christian loves
his Neighbor: so it is true on the contrary, that whosoever truly loves his
Neighbor is a Christian.

4. Christ would have all his known by Charity, and has given them this for
their Livery, that others might be allured and won by the good Odor of the
Faithful, and say, Behold, Psalm 133.
how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell in unity. Whence we see,

1. That Christ does not simply require Love of those that are his, but so, as
without it he will own none for his Disciple: And if it be so, or rather
because it is so, truly there are but few true Christians to be found in these
days: for Charity almost among all men waxes cold, and faith and mercifulness
fails every where, and is withered: instead of which, hatred, envy, discord,
deceit, treachery is sprung up.

2. We see how much they are out of the way, who would fain be taken for
Christians by I know not what Tokens, when Charity toward God and their
Neighbor is nothing regarded.

3. Here we find the difference between Faith and Charity. Faith makes a
Disciple of Christ, Charity makes him known to be a Disciple. It follows:

Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither go thou? John 13.36.
Jesus answered him, whither I go, thou can not follow me now: but thou shall
follow me afterward.

Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? verse 37.
I will lay down my life for thy sake.

Jesus answered him, will thou lay down thy life for my sake? verse 38.


Simon, Simon, Satan has desired you, Luke 22.31.
that he may sift you as wheat.

But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; verse 32.
and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

And he said unto him, Lord, verse 33.
I am ready to go with thee both into prison, and to death.

And he said, I tell thee Peter, the Cock shall not crow this day, verse 34.
before that thou shall thrice deny that thou know me.

It was a sign of great fervency in Peter, that he only should interrupt
Christ, and ask his Lord whither he was going, when all the rest held their
peace: sure he was astonished at the word which Christ spoke: whither I go, ye
cannot come; and fearing that he should be separated from Christ, he could hold
no longer, but must needs ask the question. To whom Christ very sweetly
answered: Whither I go, thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me
afterward; which may be understood two ways:

1. He could not follow Christ to Heaven who was now going thither, but he
should follow him afterward, when he was made a Citizen of the City above, he
with the rest of the Saints should reign with Christ.

2. He was not yet endued with power from on high, neither had he that
strengthening Spirit to reform him and his Nature, therefore he could not scorn
the dangers of death, nor wholly overcome the terror thereof. 1.
The power to break the force of death was only in Christ. Therefore thou can
not follow me now, because that to go by the Cross is yet very hard and
difficult. Psalm. 77.19.
As it is said, Thy Ways are in the sea, and thy Path in the great waters: and
thy Footsteps are not known. 2.
Again secondly, Thou can not follow me yet, because of the imperfection of
thy love. Romans 5.
There had need be a great fire of Love, which so many waters of afflictions
cannot quench; but hereafter when the Spirit shall shed forth more Love into
thy heart, then shall thou follow me. 3.
Lastly, Thou can not follow me yet. It is not in the power of thy carnal will
to conquer Death: this it the work of Gods Grace, his Grace alone must do it. I
must first set upon it by my death, and overcome it. I will grapple with it in
my Passion, and conquer it by my Resurrection: Till this be done thou can not
follow me; thou can not but tremble at death. It Is too strong for thee to
conquer and contemn. Inded our nature shrinks at death, croucheth under it. Our
Saviors Passion was the first dissolution of Death. 1.
To this end the Son of God did take upon him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.
that by the death of his flesh he might make Death of none effect, and might
deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to bondage. 2.
Again, the contempt of Death had its first original from the Resurrection of
Christ. 1 Cor. 15.
From that very time we may say with Paul, O Death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be to God who has given us the Victory by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

And that Peter might not think that he should for ever be separated from
Christ, he says, But thou shall follow me afterward, alluding to Peter's
death, and tells him in a Riddle what death he should die, q.d. as I will go by
the Cross to the Father, so thou shall follow me by the Cross. Very truly did
Christ say, Thou can not follow me now, which thee vent of the matter showed
not long after; When poor feeble Peter could not follow his Lord, but denied
him the third time, for fear he should be forced to follow him with the loss of
his own life. But afterward he did follow him, when he stretched forth his
hands, and was crucified like a worthy Disciple of his Master.

But Peter not well weighing what Christ said, and too much trusting to his own
strength, does reply again: Why, says he, can I not follow thee now? q.d. Do
thou think that I will prove so ungrateful for all thy kindnesses, as to
desert thee? Thou have chosen me for one of thy Apostles, I had a taste of the
joys of heaven upon Mount Tabor, I have wrought miracles in thy name: indeed
what favor have thou denied me? how then can I forsake thee at the greatest
pinch of death, when my own life shall be never so much in danger? Nay, I will
engage my self, and this I promise, I love thee so dearly that I will lay down
my life for thee, I esteem so much of thy love, that I value not my own life.

Indeed Peter, thou do make large promises, but thou do not well understand
what thou say: thou have a good conceit of thy own abilities, but art
altogether ignorant of thy weakness, thou have not yet tried nor tasted the
force of death; if thou had, thou would not have spoken as thou do, nor
wondered why Christ said thou could not follow him now. I know there are
examples enough of such as hazarded their lives for their country or kindred,
but this proceeded from their carnal affection: But, if God may be Judge, it is
not a work of the flesh but of the Spirit to dye for a stranger, or to lay down
ones life for his enemies. Yet such is the property of humane reason, that it
will not acknowledge its own weakness. Peter should have believed what Christ
said, and not so boldly contradicted him. Let it be granted that be did it out
of his great affection; yet he ought to have believed Christ before himself,
and have thought with himself thus: Surely he knows all things, and understands
better then I what he says: but what does Christ reply to this presumptuous
confidence of Peter?

Will thou lay down thy life for me? q.d. What do thou mean Peter? why do
thou thus presume? what think thou of thy self? what do take thy self to
be? will thou lay down thy life for me, before I have done so for thee? will thou undertake to conquer death? will thou die for me, who came to die first
for thee? it is my work to overcome death, and not thine. O how ignorant art
thou of things to come! how little do thou think what will shortly come to
pass? this one thing I tell thee before hand, which I would have thee beware
of: Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired you, that he may sift you as wheat:
know this, I say, that the Devil does lay more traps for you then for all men
besides. His main drift is to tumble and cast you down headlong, as he did
Judas: fain would he hurl you also to hell: he does not so much care for
others, he is most afraid of you; and if he could once get but you into his
clutches, he would not doubt to hold you fast enough for ever: wherefore speak
no more so exceeding proudly. He has Judas already, and made him his
bond-slave long since, who but a little while ago was himself my disciple as
well as any of you: But he cannot content himself to hurry one only Judas to
destruction: he does greedily covet ye all, and uses all his wit and wiles by
force or fraud to entangle you in his snares, and therefore he will tempt you
with the scandal or offense of my Cross, to make you abjure and renounce both
me and my doctrine. And he is very confident that he shall catch you all,
having caught one of you already. But through my protection, his wicked devices
shall be made frustrate and come to naught. He shall not get so much as one of
ye into his power, except the Son of perdition, against whom he has lately
prevailed. But he will lay wait for thee Simon, especially; and as I have
preferred thee to an higher place, so he will the more furiously assault thee.
Yea, so subtly will he lurk for thee, that I had need make a special prayer
to the Father for thee by thy self. For above all other he will set upon thee,
if happily he may bring thee into the same condition with Judas, because thou art
more eminent then the rest. And it is not a little mischief that he will do
thee, but he shall not wholly prevail. I have prayed the Father; which if I had
not, thou had certainly perished and been lost for ever. But all that he
shall do now, is to make thee deny my name, he shall be able to go no farther,
he cannot cause thy faith finally to fail. True, thy leaves may fall, but the
root shall abide safe and sound in thee, which in its season shall put forth
good fruit. I have obtained it for thee by my prayer. But remember this, that
when thou shall by my grace be recovered from that thy miserable and woeful
fall, that then thou confirm and strengthen the brethren. This is thy part to
do as thou art a superior, to whom in a special manner I purpose to commit the
care of my sheep, etc.

But Peter did not much regard, nor give good heed to the admonition of Christ:
so confident was he then of his own strength: but after his fall he was most
diligent to do what Christ commanded him. Then be did strengthen all penitent
sinners, that they might not despair of Gods mercy by reason of their sins. But
is it not strange that Christ should confer this honor on him, to make him a
strengthener of others, who before should deny him, and whom the world would
have thought altogether unworthy of any more favor? But Christ judges not as
the world judges; Luke 15.
God does not cast off any that repent: if the prodigal son return, he is
restored to his former dignity.

Learn we hence, 1.
that the devil does project and plot against us. 2.
So on the other hand, Christ does take great care of us, and look well to us;
the devil does fight against us, Christ does defend us, and intercede for us:
Let us beware of one, and run to the other with all our heart. But Peter
considered neither of these at that time: but trusting to himself more then was
meet, he speaks more vehemently: I am ready to go with thee into prison, and
unto death. Thou speak well Peter, thou can give good words, but would
thou endure a prison and death for Christ, who could not bear the least word
of his? It should be so indeed, that every Christian ought to be always ready,
if the case so require, to die for Christ, as it is written: He that takes not
his Cross daily and follows me, he is not worthy of me. Mat. 10.
But neither Peter, nor any man else could do this at that time. Afterward when
he had received the holy Spirit, he was not able to do this; but really did it,
and suffered bonds and death for Christ and with Christ. Now since that Spirit
was given, might Paul truly say, Acts 21.
I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die for the name of Jesus: which
also he did perform. Thus should we now stand affected: Now is the time that we
should go with Christ into prison and unto death. I say, we should do that
indeed which Peter promised, but did not do.

Now that this confidence and vain boasting of his own abilities might be kept
under and beaten down in Peter, when he was come to himself again, Christ sets
his infirmity before his eyes, and tells him of his fall before hand, and
that with a great asseveration and oath: Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
before the cock crow this night, thou shall thrice deny me. See here what man's
glorying comes to, even confusion. Peter resolved with himself, that he would
discharge the office of faith, and constantly follow, etc. Neither did he find
that he had any other purpose in his heart: but afterward he found it otherwise
with him, and that he was not now the man he was before. This is the glory of
flesh, which is but as the flower of the field, and the blossom of grass. Isa.
40.


Two things we are to take notice of in Peter.

1.
First, His carnal rashness and confidence, with which whosoever is pricked and
puffed up, not considering the judgments of God, will easily miscarry.

2.
Secondly, The frailty of the flesh upon consideration of Gods judgment. Who
was more confident then Peter, before his Lord discovered him? Again, who more
weak and frail when his Lord condemned him, judged him, and gave sentence
against him? 1.
Learn therefore, from Peter's fall, to fear God: 2.
And from his repentance, learn to believe and hope, by which only thou will be
able to stand in the evil day. 3.
But by all means, if thou desire to be saved, look to it, and take heed thou
neither say nor think: If Peter were not damned for this, no more shall I. If
his denial did him no hurt, I shall be never the worse for it. We must not make
the Saints failings our examples to sin.

1.
Christ in this place does here check the overgreat talkativeness of Peter,
though his big words proceeded from the greatness of his Love: warning also the
rest, that in times of difficulty or danger, they trust not too much to their
own strength, but know rather, that if any thing be done, it is of Divine Grace
and gift.

He does also admonish us not to do or promise any thing rashly, but with this
condition or limitation, if the Lord will, Jam. 4.
as James says: Else we are guilty of arrogance, as though we were or would be
Lords over times and things: not to say that most commonly we are found liars,
being not able to perform what we promise.

Here also see the wonder full Counsel of God, although he suffered Peter to
fall, yet he set bounds, and limited how far he should slide: not any bounds
neither, but the Cock crowing: for all which there was good reason.

1. So it was by the unsearchable counsel of God, that Peter especially, the
chief among them, should be left for a time to his own infirmity, thrice to
fall in denying his Lord that troublesome Night, when all the Apostles were
offended, that he might believe by experience, and that we might know that our
feet will quickly slip if God uphold us not; and if he slumber or sleep, who
alone knows how, and is able to preserve us, the Sun will burn us by day, and
the Moon by night, i. e. in temptation we shall suffer shipwreck of our Faith
concerning the Divinity and Humanity of Christ.

2. He did not let Peter utterly fall away. At the rebuke of the Lord the
waters of temptation flee away, though they swelled as high as Mountains. He
has set them their bounds which they cannot pass.

3. The joyful news of Christ's Resurrection was figured by the Cock-crowing,
which was the bound and limit of Peter's denial: For our Lord rising again about
midnight, awakened the Angels to publish his praise, and by them sent the good
tidings of his Life and Victory to his sad Apostles. But the stumbling-stone
lay in the Apostles way three nights together, before the report of so great
happiness came to them. When Christ was thrice denied the Cock crew: when the
third night of scandal was over, then that sweet sound was heard of Christ's
Resurrection. No question but Christ would still have the Cock crowing to be a
perpetual remembrance to us, to make us walk warily and humbly, lest we also
fall.

4. Note lastly, that Peter held his peace and made no reply to this word of
his Lord: the thoughtfulness of Treason was not yet quite out of his mind, of
which Christ had so lately spoken. We should always stand in aw of Gods Word
and Judgments. For that is a certain truth: My words shall not pass away, but
shall be fulfilled in whomsoever it be. Thus much of Peter's admonition. It
follows:

And he said unto them, Luke 22.35.
when I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and
they said, Nothing.

Then said he unto them, verse 36.
but now he that has a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he
that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.

For I say unto you, verse 37.
that this that is written, must yet be accomplished in me, And he was reckoned
among the Transgressors: for the things concerning me have an end.

And they said, verse 38.
Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, it is enough.

These words are inserted by Luke only, and they are partly Aenigmatical,
whereby Christ would make his Disciples, and us too, confident and bold against
imminent persecutions and temptations that compass us about. His will is, that
they who before had their livelihood without any care of their own when they
preached the Gospel among strangers, should now be without fear in present
tribulations. For God who at first took care of them, that they should not want
maintenance: he will now take care that none hurt them in the Passion of Jesus,
if they have but the sword of the Spirit about them, Ephesians. 5.
i. e. the Word of God: by which sword they did afterward break through those
cruel persecutions of Tyrants. He that is girt with this sword of Christ, will
not stand in fear of punishment or death. No creature can hurt him that
trusts in God. Psalm 27.1.
So the Psalmist sings. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I
fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? etc.

Christ had long since sent his Apostles to preach the Gospel in Judea, but he
sent them after a new fashion. Other Messengers use to provide themselves a
Convoy, Pasport, necessary provisions, money and shoos above all things: which
Christ forbad the Apostles to do. Matthew. 10.
They were to go forth without any conduct or supply of victuals or money, as
if they were not to go among strangers in another Country, but only to their
friends and acquaintance. Our Lord thereby teaching both them and us not to
distrust Gods care of us, as long as we be in our calling, and about his work.
If we be about his business we shall not want subsistence: His Gospel and
Altar, at which we serve will maintain us, though we have nothing of our own.
For the Labourer is worthy of his meat. There be those still that will
entertain the Laborers in the Lords Vineyard. Of this new and strange sending
forth of the Apostles we read, Mat. 10. Mar. 6. Luke 9. and 10.

Christ asked the Apostles whither they did lack any thing when they were first
sent forth, to make them more confident and courageous from former experience.
The Disciples ingenuously confess they wanted nothing. Hence Christ concludes
that they would need nothing for time to come, but the sword of Gods Word; and
also tells them how they should get that sword.

But now he that has a purse or a scrip, says he, let him take them, let him
rip them asunder and sell them; and he that has neither of these, let him sell
his coat from his back to get money, but be sure it be to no other end then to
buy a sword. He will want it hereafter, for there will be wars shortly, the
enemy is hard by, and must be withstood. A purse or scrip are not weapons for
this War: you must get a Sword. He does not mean a material sword, (he did
forbid them that: Nor could one Sword do much in so great a hurlyburly,) but a
spiritual Sword, which is the Lively and effectual Word of God. This is the
Sword, that tried Blade that defends the Faithful against the Armies of
Devil and Hell. He that has not this Sword, let him buy it. In the Spiritual
battle none can stand without it. But money will not, it cannot buy it, it is to
be had only by Resignation and Self denial. The spiritual Sword, (says
Ambrose) is to sell our Patrimony and buy the Word. Matthew. 13.
This is hinted in the Parable of buying the Field and Pearl.

The Disciples did not yet understand what Christ said. For soon after Peter
falls upon their enemies with his Sword: and here they bring Christ two Swords.
Now as there Christ rebukes Peter for smiting with the Sword: so here he
says, It is enough, intimating that he did not speak of the material sword:
for what could two swords do against so many enemies? an hundred had not been
sufficient. Alas, silly Soldiers, what can ye do with your rusty Swords? We
must not fight, but suffer: and our sufferings can be conquered by nothing but
the Word of God.

But there is a Mystery in those two Swords which the Apostles brought, and
Christ said they were sufficient. Ambrose expounds those two Swords to be the
two Testaments. But we may understand them otherwise: one Sword may be the Word
of Promise, the other the Word of Precept. The Apostles had both these Swords,
with which they subdued all the world to Christ. To have these two Swords, and
use them well, is enough to obtain everlasting life. If thou would stand it
out against Satan, and save thy soul, steadfastly believe all that a Christian
ought to believe; and constantly practice what a Christian should do, and thou
shall be secure and sure.

But why does he so strictly charge his Apostles to sell their purse, and
scrip, and coat to buy this Sword? Because, says he, that which is written,
must yet be fulfilled in me: And he was reckoned among the Transgressors. There
is, says he, a great temptation not far off: I your Lord and Master shall be
extremely disgraced. For I shall not only be named and numbered among the worst
of men, but shall be hanged too between two notorious and open Thieves. You had
need be armed with the Word of God against this scandal, or else ye will
hardly continue long in my Faith.

Suppose this to be spoken to us also, that we may give all diligence to arm
our selves with the Word of God beforehand. For although we have no temptations
at present, at least very rare and faint ones, yet we must look for greater at
or before our death, which we shall not be able to overcome, except we be armed
with the Word of God. This is that which Paul says, We wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities, the Rulers of darkness, etc. Stand
therefore, having your loins girt about, etc. Ephesians. 6.13,14. Lastly, he
adds, For the things concerning me have an end, i. e. Whatever was written of
me will be presently fulfilled. My suffering will fulfill and put an end to all
Prophesies. What my Body the Church shall suffer will also have an end. I will
suffer first, the Church shall follow me, but not with equal pace or measure.
Many imitate, but few or none equal the sufferings of Christ.

And he said unto them: John 14.1.
Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my
Fathers House are many Mansions. etc. See John the 14, 15, 16, and 17. Chapters.

Here the Heavenly mind begins that Sermon which he preached at Supper, penned
and left written by none but John only, to show that it was not for nothing that
he alone leaned on his Lords breast. 1.
The first thing Christ does handle in this Sermon, is to comfort his Disciples,
who were much cast down under manifold troubles, as the sudden suffering of
Christ, Judas his fall, Peter's danger, and the desolate condition they
themselves were like to be in very shortly.

2.
In this Sermon Christ does manifest and open himself plainly, that we might
know what great good there is to be had in him. If there be never so great a
Treasure, we are nothing the better for it so long as it is concealed and kept
close from us. Christ had done us no good, if he had not discovered himself to
us by his Word. For we cannot see him with our eyes of flesh. Therefore now he
calls himself the Fathers equal; Sometime a Vine; Sometime the Light; Sometime
the Way, Truth and Life, etc. All which Names and Appellations discover the
exceeding great good that is in, and to be had by and from Christ.

3.
Then he concludes his Sermon with Prayer, after he had bequeathed all his goods
to the Faithful. For he prayed that they who believed in him might all be
Sanctified, that they might be one in him, that his Love might abide in them,
etc. In which Prayer he was heard in that he feared, as Paul says. Heb. 5.
And thus much for the Supper of the Lord.

Here ends the first Part of our Lords Passion.
Here begins the second part of our Lords Passion.
Dearest Brethren,
HItherto we have heard some Preludes or Introductions of our Lords Passion:
which were many and various, as the Unction of Jesus, the Passover, washing of
Feet, Institution of the Sacrament, the business of Judas and Peter, the
Contention of the Disciples: together with their manifold and frequent
Admonitions and Consolation. But nothing as yet was actually attempted against
Christ, only he was fairly promised to be betrayed, but nothing perfected and
put in Execution.

Christ at his last Supper had Elegantly expressed that Mystical Attire of the
high Priest, Exodus 28.33.
of which we read in Exodus: And beneath upon the hem of the garment of the
high Priest (says the Lord to Moses) thou shall make Pomegranates and bells of
Gold, etc. So shall Aaron be arrayed in the Office of his Ministry, etc. The
skirts of the Priests Raiment signify the latter times of our Lords Life: The
Pomegranates are his fiery works of Charity, which he showed at his last
Supper: the Bells are his shril-sounding words of Love, with which he
instructed and set them in good order at that Supper, and with which he
entreated the Father for their salvation. The Bells of his Doctrine, and the
Pomegranates of his works thus intermixed, make nothing more beautiful to the
eye, nothing more pleasant to the ear, nothing more desirable or delightful to
be experimented.

Having now seen the beauty of the Pomegranates, and lately heard the sweet
Music of the tinkling Bells: Heb. 9.
Next let us attend and see how that high Priest entered in, and stood in the
presence of God, with the order of his Oblation, how he offered up himself to
God. First then John affirms that he said,

John 14.31.
Arise, let us go hence. By which word,

1. He would fix it in his Disciples hearts, that he was to suffer something
which he knew beforehand, and was willing to suffer it.

2. He showed that he feared not the Devil, though he be the Prince of the
world: nor Death, than which nothing seems more terrible. Let others, says he,
stand in dread of the Devil and Death: but let us undauntedly meet both, and
look them in the face without fear. They shall meet with their match, and find
one that is too strong for them.

3. Christ would have his Apostles to be present Spectators of his Passion, as
long as their humane frailty was able to stay and endure it, that they might
the better be believed. Therefore John says more than once: He that saw it,
bare record, John 19.
and we know that his record, etc.

4. He exhorted them to get thence with him, because he foresaw what danger
they would be in if they tarried there any longer. For if they had staid in the
house till the enemy had come upon them, the Apostles could have had no way of
escape: besides the good man of the house might have been brought into great
trouble for harboring such guests.

5. He shows that the Apostles must pass the same way to the Father, which he
was to go before them.

6. Lastly, He would put them in mind that it was now high time to raise up
their minds from earthly affections to Heavenly, from corporal things to
Spiritual, from worldly and temporary thoughts and matters to Eternal. The
meaning then is; sit up, arise, leave the Legal and typical supper for the
Evangelical. Ye have sat long enough already, and too long serving under
shadows: It Is sufficient that sin has reigned so long as it has: It suffices
to have been so long under the tyranny of the Devil. But now all things shall
be turned topsie turvy, and changed to the clean contrary. Rise therefore, let
us be gone hence: ye have sat still and heard the Word, Now arise and do the
work, come, let us go. Your feet be washed, take heed you foul them not again.
Ye are well refresht with good meat, food of Life: it is time to go to Labor,
to do and fulfill the will of the Father: Let Us go hence, from the unbelieving
Jews to the Gentiles: from earthy Jerusalem to build the Heavenly: from the
City of blood, to the Assembly of Saints: from the material and typical temple,
to raise up a true Temple, wherein the Father may be worshipped in Spirit and
Truth. Let us be gone hence from earth to Heaven. The Father looks for us, the
Angels wait our coming, all the Saints think it long ere we be come. Let not
the roughness of the way dishearten us: our trouble and torment will be over in
a moment, and Eternity so long looked for will come at last. In short, Christ
does here stir up and awaken not only such as lie still and sleep in their
sins, but those also that are lasie, and idle, and make no haste to forsake
sin: True Christianity will endure neither of these.

1. Note here, that Christ does not say, Let Us arise, but arise Ye. For he
never lay in sin, he was never sluggish or idle: but rather stood steadfast and
constant in innocence, and walked in the Ways and all the Commandments of God.
But,

2. In the second word he numbereth himself with the Disciples: saying, Let Us
go hence. For although he was not like us in sin and sloth, yet he was like us
in penance and satisfaction; he made himself so, yea he went foremost here, and
became our Pattern and President. As it follows:

And when they had sung an Hymn (Jesus went forth and passed over the brook
Cedron (John 18.1.) Mat. 14.26.
as he was wont, and his Disciples following him) they went out into the Mount
of Olives.

And Jesus says unto them, verse 27.
All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

But after that I am risen, verse 28.
I will go before you into Galilee.

But Peter said unto him, verse 29.
although all shall be offended, yet will not I.

And Jesus says unto him, Verily I say unto thee, that this day, verse 30.
even in this night, before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

But he spoke the more vehemently, if I should dye with thee, verse 31. Mat.
26.35.
I will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said all the Disciples.

Christ had often said that he would suffer for us: now he makes it good,
voluntarily going to the place well known to the Traitor, and fit for a
surprisal.

But before he went out of the house he first sung an Hymn, that he might both
show forth the goodness of God, and give him thanks after meat: but chiefly for
that Spiritual Food, the Eucharist. In the Mass or Church-liturgy especially,
we are to say and sing thanks and praises unto God. And this our Fathers of old
did diligently observe; and some of them composed many excellent Hymns, with
which I wish we could content our selves, and not so giddily run after every
new fangled and upstart invention, in contempt of the old and ancient service.

Now when Christ had given thanks and sung an Hymn to God the Father, for his
mercies past and to come, (beginning his Passion with Prayer, for our Example)
He the Light of the world went out of that unhappy and miserable City
Jerusalem; in the end of the day he put out the Light of that miserable people,
the setting Sun left them in a perpetual night of Darkness. Thus was fulfilled
that which was foretold by the Prophet Jeremy long since. I have forsaken mine
house, Jer. 12.7. Mat. 23.38.
I have left mine heritage. Also by himself, your house shall be left unto you
desolate. This outgoing of Christ foreshewed the desolation of the Temple and
City. It was now time to abolish that carnal Worship, and to institute the true
Worship of God, which is in Spirit and Truth, John 4.

The wickedness of the Jews deserved that God should have forsaken them long
before. What therefore he had long since threatened, he does now actually
declare by that his egress and departing out of their City. Although they made
little account then of Christ's presence, and suspected little loss by his going
forth from them, but rather heartily wished for his absence, that by any means
he might be taken out of their sight, yet 'twas not long before they were
sensible with a witness, that with him they lost all other good besides. For it
is reported that before Jerusalem was taken, there was a voice heard in the
Temple, Migremus hinc.
saying, Let us be gone hence; as Josephus testifies. So that afterward they
cried, but there was none to hear them. The world still esteems the loss of
Christ the least damage, but they will one day find it otherwise.

Whereas Christ and the Apostles went forth together, it fore showed their loss
of God and the Prophets. Wretched City indeed, that has neither Christ nor his
Apostles left them.

Christ being now about to finish his Sacrifice, does very preperly depart and
go out from among them; teaching us to withdraw from the tumult when we go to
Prayer, as it is said, He sits alone and keeps silence, Lam. 3.28.
because he bears, or lifts himself above himself, (so the vulg. Lat. read
it.) And as it is in Hosea, I will allure her, Hos. 2.14.
and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably to her.

The Evangelists do very significantly set down both the way and place of this
departure. The way was over the brook Cedron. The valley between Jerusalem and
mount Olivet was called Kidron: and the river which runs there was called by
the same name. This swift stream did fitly figure out the trouble of the
passion. For as a brook after much rain runs with great violence, but quickly
cease as the water fails: so temptations assault a man with a furious
onset, as though they would presently swallow him up, Psalm. 69.1.
as David cries out: Save me, O Lord, for the waters are come in unto my soul.
But it lasts not long: 1 Cor. 10. 2 Samuel 15.
For God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able. This torrent David also passed over in sorrow and sadness, when he fled
from his son. And this brook Christ passes over twice. First, In his own
person. Secondly, In his members. This way must we follow Christ. Nor let us
distrust or doubt any thing: For infinite wealth lies in the bottom of this
rough and troublesome river. Genesis 26. Number. 13.23. 1 Kings 15.23. and 2 Kin.
23.6,12.
Here Isaac dug and found living water. Here the Spies cut down a bunch of
grapes and brought them to the tents of Israel. In this brook Ezekias did burn
the Idols of the house of Judah. Thus the living water of comfort, and the
heart-rejoycing food is found in the torrent of tribulation. For tribulation
brings forth most excellent fruit in us. It sets on fire, and burns all
vice in us, as fire purges and purifieth gold.

The place which Christ went unto was mount Olivet. Acts 1.12.
For there he completed his glory by his ascension: in that mount therefore he
prevented, or made way unto that his glory by prayer, and there also he began
his agony. Or thus, he went out to the mount of Olives, because out of great
grace and mere mercy (which the Olive signifies) he subjected himself to
suffer and die. Or, he went to the mount of Olives, to show that the Cross
should become very fruitful, in that man offered himself to God not sadly or by
constraint, but freely and cheerfully. Oil signifies gladness. When thou
fastest, Mat. 6.
anoint with oil.

The Evangelist adds, that Christ oft-times resorted thither. Whence observe,
Observation.
That Christ spent many nights abroad in prayer. By day he taught and took
pains in the Temple; by night he continued praying in mount Olivet, serving us
in both places, leaving us an example in both, though we imitate him in
neither. For we labor not in the Temple, but in the Tavern: welabour indeed by
night, not in prayer, but in chambering and wantonness.

Further, the Evangelists say, that he went not out alone, but with his
Disciples. For (as was said before) he would have them be spectators of his
Passion, that they might testify all things more certainly, and that they
might the better undergo their own sufferings afterward by his example. It is
elegantly expressed in Luke that his Disciples followed him. They followed
indeed, but with a heavy heart, fearing and trembling, knowing those words
could not be recal'd which that Master of all Truth told them before in that
night, when he said, that he should be numbered with Transgressors. They
followed him therefore as being now about to take their last farewell of him,
never more to follow him so again. So that doubtless they went along with much
sorrow, with many tears and sighs, sometimes thinking one thing, sometimes
another, whilst their grief increased for so pious a Pastor, Father and Master.

It is to be observed, Luke 10.
that at other times the Disciples went before Christ, but when he went to
suffer they could not go before, but followed him. Nature trembles at the
Cross, and therefore follows here very heavily. But the Cross could not stay
them when Christ led the way. Do but follow Christ to the Cross, and thou shall
follow him to Glory. As his sufferings abound in us, 2 Cor. 1.
so his consolations abound much more.

But did Christ go along with his Disciples, and say nothing to them? No
doubtless. He often repeated and inculcated that the time of his suffering was
at hand. This was the time to speak to and admonish them, when so great a
temptation was so near.

Verily, (says he) I say unto you, All ye shall be offended, etc. whereby he
shows that they should be so much offended and troubled at his Passion, that
they would forget whatsoever they had heard and seen of him, and now think of
nothing but which way to escape and save themselves. Although he had
endeavored by several ways of comfort at his last Supper to prevent this
offense, yet he knew that he could work nothing upon those simple ignorant men,
and all because the Spirit was not yet given, The sense of the words. John 7.
nor was Jesus yet glorified. The meaning then is: All ye shall be offended,
etc. as if he had said, when ye shall see me taken, bound, dragged, killed, etc.
And that I do no more Miracles, nor defend my self, then ye will doubt: ye
will think my promises were but pretenses; and that my Miracles were but
Magical. A carnal man will but scoff at Christ when he sees all men forsake
him. 1 Cor. 1.
For the Cross of Christ is foolishness to them that believe not. But we are
not to look so much at the appearance of flesh, John 3.
as at the will of the Father, who so loved the world that he gave his Son.

Hence we learn what a hard matter it is not to be offended in times of
temptation. Matthew. 11.
Blessed is he, says Christ, that shall not be offended in me. It Is no wonder
to hear men in prosperity say, and boast that God is their Father; but it is a
rare thing to find this Faith in adversity. When God punishes, afflicts, and
forsakes a man. When the Apostles saw Christ work such Miracles, no marvel to
hear them say, Thou art Christ the Son of God. But to believe that he was the
Son of God when he was thus surpised, jeered, slain, this had been courage
indeed, but here they sunk that seemed to be Pillars.

That the Apostles might know that this word of Christ was agreeable to the
Word of God; he alleges that of the Prophet Zachary, Zach. 13.7. Virum
cohaerentem mihi.
It is written, says he, I will smite the Shepherd, etc. In the Prophet it is
thus: Awake, O sword upon my shepherd, and upon the man that cleaves to me,
says the Lord of Hosts, smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered,
etc. they are the words of God the Father speaking (by a prosopopaeia) to his
Sword, i.e. The wrothfull and mad Troop of the Jews, who were armed with Swords
and weapons of War to assault Christ when his time was come, etc. which is not
spoken by way of command, but Prophecy. Let us distinctly consider the words
of the Prophet.

1. First he speaks to the Sword, and commands it to smite. The Sword cannot
strike Christ nor any Christian, unless God command or permit it. So Christ
says to Pilate, Thou could have no power against me, except it were given
thee from above, John 19.

2. He calls Christ a Shepherd. For he is that one and only Shepherd which
God promised, Ezekiel. 34.

3. God does not call him a Shepherd only, but the man which is his fellow: by
whom his Divine Nature is touched by the Humane. For the Son is next of all to
the Father, he is one with him, and altogether of the same substance; and this
none of the Jews could deny.

4. Lastly, The Prophet foretells the offense of the Apostles: The sheep
shall be scattered: for what can they do when their Shepherd is smitten?

Christ did not a little affright the Apostles with these words, which fear
also was much aggravated by the night; but lest they should be swallowed up of
overmuch sorrow, he does comfort them withal. Thus Christ suffers those that
are his to be tempted, yet will he not let them be wholly overcome. And that he
may solace them with the greater consolation, he foretells his Resurrection:
thereby intending to comfort them again, whom the thoughts of his death before
had made sad; his death being a Token of Gods chastisement for our sins. Rom 4.
But he was raised for our justification. The meaning then is, as if he had
said: It was, as ye hear, long since, even from Eternity concluded in the
counsel of God, that I the Shepherd of Israel should be slain for the
salvation of men: and therefore I do most willingly yield my self to suffer. It
was also concluded in the same counsel of God, that I should rise again. As
soon as ever this shall be accomplished, I will be with you in Galilee: yea
more than that, I will be there sooner than ye, that I may gather my dispersed
sheep together. Take this for a Truth, and believe it, Matthew. 18. Mark 16.
etc. And so indeed it came to pass, as appears in Matthew and Mark.

How great was he that had power to lay down his life, and to take it up again?
John 10.
The first showed his Humanity, the other his Divinity. His humanity in that he
dyed, his Divinity in that he rose from the dead. He could die, and he could
live again: he could be buried, and he could rise again. In the one he was like
unto us, in the other he was not, although as Paul says, We also shall rise
again in our own order; but not of our selves, but of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.

Now when proud Peter heard this, he was again pufft up with the vain
confidence of his own strength, he answers again, and promises great
matters. Shall I, (says he) ever distrust thee, desert thee, be offended at
thee? Shall I be afraid to lay down my life for thee, to die with thee? I
perceive, Lord, that thou do lightly esteem my known and approved Faith. Thou
do not know how highly I value thee. But be thou sure of this; that if all
those my fellow-Brethren, nay if all the world should be offended at thee, yet
will I never be offended. Here is man's great presumption of himself, though man
be nothing but very mere vanity it self. What do mean Peter? art not ashamed
of this thy boasting? why do trust so much to thy own strength? do not hear
Christ contradict thee, who does know thee better than thou do thy self? If
thou do esteem Christ at such a rate, why do not believe him, and hold thy
peace? Did thou ever find him false? But his heat of Faith and ardent
affection made Peter forget both the frailty of his own flesh, and the verity
of Christ's words.

The same affection also emboldened the other Disciples to all constancy of
service by an undaunted resolution of Faith. Nor does the Lord say any thing to
the rest of the Disciples, but accepts their good will, and takes it in good
part. But he tells Peter again of his fall in the same words he did before, that
he might not say he was not warned beforehand, but might become more wary for
the time to come. Verily, I say unto thee, etc. Gods Word does ever tend to the
humbling and beating down our vain boasting in our own strength. Jer. 17.5.
Cursed be the man that makes flesh his arm, etc. There is nothing more
dangerous than this vain kind of confidence, which yet is so rooted in our
Nature, that it can hardly be rooted out. There be but few that with David can
truly say from their heart, I will love thee, O Lord, Psalm 18.
my strength, the Lord is my Rock, etc.

Hence it was that the more Peter was warned of his own weakness, the more
pertinaciously did he persist in his presumption, But he spoke the more
vehemently; Yea though I should die, etc. Peter is here a figure of those who
presume that they can go through all afflictions, and death it self without
assistance of Gods Grace. These surely blaspheme against God, and seek to make
him a liar; nor are they able to stand to their own Resolutions. Thus Peter,

1. He said that he would break through stone walls, and go through fire and
water with Christ, and all in his own strength.

2. When Christ reproved his rashness, he blasphemed, and would have made
Christ a liar. Thus it befalls all those that will undertake to do any thing
without the help of Grace. So true is that of Christ, Without me ye can do
nothing. It is God, John 15. Phil. 2.
says Paul, that works in us to will and to do, etc. These things happened
to the Apostles for our admonition. Christ let his Apostles fall fowly, that if
we have fallen, we might not despair. Peter fell, that afterward he might deal
more gently with the people of God. Therefore it was said to him, when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. It follows:

Then comes Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane. Mat. 26.36. John
18.1. verse 2.
Where was a garden into the which he entered, and his Disciples.

And Judas also which betrayed him knew the place; for Jesus oft-times resorted
thither with his Disciples.

And said unto his Disciples, sit ye here, Matthew. ibid.
while I go and pray jonder.

We heard before the egress of Christ out of Jerusalem; here we have his
progress. He came to the Village Gethsemane; which is by interpretation the
Vale of farness, by reason of the abundance of Olives that grew there. Here was
a garden into which Jesus entered, that he might begin to make satisfaction in a
garden, as sin was first committed in the Garden of Paradise. For when Adam
abused his liberty, or rather the leave which was given him in that garden, be
then delivered us up captives to Satan, and to all manner of evil, (for to what
mischief is not man now exposed?) it was most fit that Christ by his captivity
in the Garden should free us from our captivity.

Compare what was first done in Paradise, with what is here done. 1.
In the garden of Paradise Adam became disobedient: in this garden Christ obeyed
unto bonds. 2.
There Adam merited bondage by his Liberty; here Christ recovered liberty by his
bonds. 3.
There he pronounced the sentence of condemnation against man: here does
compassionately take the same sentence upon himself. That so we may see how
that Mercy exalts it self above Judgment, and that his Mercies are over all
his works, Psalm 145.

But lest any man should think that Christ desired the privacy of a garden,
that so he might the better escape and hide himself, John says, that the
Traitor knew this very place well enough, as that into which Christ often
resorted. It might have been a great advantage of his salvation to this
wretched man, that he knew where Jesus was and might be found: for else why
does the Spouse desire; Cant. 1.
Show me, says she, where thou feedest, and where thou lie down, O thou whom
my soul loves.

But this miserable man most abominably abusing this Knowledge to his own
destruction, became so much more wicked than all other men, as the Serpent was
more subtle than the rest of the creatures: Genesis 3.
and for this cause he became a more convenient catch-pole for the Devil the
destroyer of mankind, as the Serpent was the most proper lurking place for the
same Devil to deceive the first man. For as then the Devil made use of the
Serpent to destroy the earthy man in his soul; so now he employed this Traitor
to kill the new and Heavenly man in his body. And as there the Serpent being
the Devils instrument was cursed above all creatures: so here Judas for the same
reason became obnoxious to most grievous maledictions, as has been showed
before.

Observe further, that Christ with his Disciples often resorted to this garden.
Our Lord was wont to choose solitary and private places, especially when he had
any Mystery to impart. A retired place is most fit for prayer and instruction.
Here we learn that Christ prayed often, Luke 18.
as also he commands us to do likewise. He did not seek privacy for his own
part, (for nothing could disturb him) but for our example, as he says
elsewhere, When thou prayest, enter into thy closet. Matthew 6.


Whereas he with his Disciples frequented no place like the garden; it shows
that he delights in the flourishing growth of Virtue, and the fruit of Grace
and Faith: there he does willingly abide, and may be found. But not so, where
all things wither and are unfruitful, such as was that barren Synagogue, which
he cursed under the Type of the fruitless fig tree. Matthew. 21.
Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever.

When he came to the garden he commanded his Disciples to sit still, i. e. to
be quiet and not troubled in mind, not to be disquieted at those things which
should befall him. He bids them stay till he had prayed alone for them all, and
for all others; for his prayer is our Redemption. It follows,

And he took with him Peter, and James, and John, Mat. 26.37. Mar. 14.33. Luke
22.40.
the two sons of Zebedee, and he began to be amazed, sorrowful, and very heavy.

And says unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye
here and watch with me, and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

And he went forward a little, and was withdrawn from them about a stones cast,
and he kneeled down, fell on his face upon the ground, and prayed, that if it
were possible, the hour might pass from him.

And he said, Abba Father, All things are possible unto thee, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.

From these words we way plainly perceive, that this was not a garden of solace
to Christ, but of greatest sorrow. Here Christ began to give up himself to
sufferings; here he opened the door to terrors and horrors. Now the Godhead
withdrew its shining Rays, and the meek and most innocent humanity was left to
it self. For there were two things in Christ most different one from the other,
to wit, the Divine Majesty, than which nothing is more Sublime; and the humane
weakness, than which nothing is more low and abject. Now because he had given
some taste of his Sublimity to these three Apostles in his Transfiguration,
Matthew. 17.
he would have them also to be witnesses of his exceeding great abasement, that
thereby they might learn what they were to follow after, and what they might
expect. They had seen his glory in the Mount, now they see his sorrow in the
garden; from that they had proof of his Divinity, by this they were fully
assured of his humanity, that afterward they might give clear Testimony of
both. The Lord knew that there would Heretics arise, who out of their wanton
brain would affirm, that he did not suffer really and indeed, but only held out
an image or figure of sorrow and suffering, as Manichaeus that wicked man
forged of him. Wherefore that he might clear it to all Ages that he did not
fantastically, but truly grieve for us, and endured a most bitter Passion for
us, he makes it appear by most evident signs; to wit, sorrow, fear, long
prayer, Angelical Consolation, and sweat of blood. To this agrees that of
Isaiah, Surely he has born our griefs, Isa. 53. Psalm 88.3.
and carried our so rows. So in the Psalms, Repleta est malis anima mea, my
soul is full of troubles: He does not say of Vice and Sin, but of humane evils,
i. e. my soul is full of grief and anguish. For in that he took upon him the
whole man with his natural conditions, he must needs have natural sadness and
vexation. Christus minus nobis contulerat, si non nostrum suscepisset. affectum.
Hence says Ambrose, Christ had not done us so much good, if he had not taken
our affections upon him. Nor was he delusively incarnate, but truly and
properly so. How else could we follow him, if not as a man, if we believe not
that he dyed, if we had not seen his Wounds? Or how should the very Disciples
themselves have believed that he dyed indeed, if they had not seen his sorrows
before his Death, and that by plain and manifest Tokens.

Yet did he not show this his sorrow to all the Disciples, lest his weakness
should offend them more then they could bear. Therefore he lets these three
only see it, who had before beheld his Divinity. These could not be so much
troubled at it, at least they ought not, but should rather remember the glory
they had seen before.

Concerning this extraordinary sorrow of the Lord Christ, so exactly set down,
many men have written many things, and have variously contended about it, but
for our part we shall give credit only to the bare words of the Evangelists.
For no man can affirm that it was more than a humane and natural sorrow, which
may also befall us in greatest streights and misery. For the Humanity which
Christ assumed could neither be without such affections, nor be believed by the
world. He had not been a true man, if his nature had not trembled at death.

This sorrow of Christ is by Matthew and Mark expressed by three words: The first
is sorrow, which the Greek calls Lipe, whereby the sadness and trouble of the
mind is expressed. The second is Fear, which in the Greek is Thambos. The third
is most sore Amazement, which in Greek is Ademonia. To these Luke adds a
fourth, viz. Agony, of which anon. Thus those three Disciples saw here a far
other thing than what they saw on Mount Tabor. For here the Father is not heard
to speak: Matthew. 17.
The Light does not shine from Heaven: His Face does not glitter like the Sun:
His Raiment is not whiter than snow: Moses and Elias talk not with him. But as
a man altogether destitute of any help, he begins to fear, to be weary of his
life, and to be sore troubled, greatly bemoaning himself, as they who are but
mere men use to do when such a dismal storm of trouble hangs over them.

And this is that which Christ himself foretold: Luke 12.
I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I streightened till it be
accomplished? Therefore now he says, My soul is sorrowful even unto death. A
most Heavenly word, worthy of all observation. For here we see what it is that
Paul says, Who being in the form, Phil. 2.
that is, in the Wisdom, Power, Majesty, glory of God, he made himself of no
reputation. How could he more deeply a base and humble himself than to be made
like unto us in all things, Gal. 3.
yea to be made a curse for us? The fear of death is the fruit of infidelity
and sin, and a part of the first malediction. For although Christ was
altogether without sin, yet he transferred the wages of sin upon him, not that
we should never have a sense thereof, but that he might overcome and triumph
over the same, and that he might teach us how to be able in him to overcome all
evil by Faith. He was tempted like us, yet without sin, Heb. 4.
that he might be able to have compassion on us. So that as often as we are
beset with the fear of Death, or any other affliction, we may safely say,
Behold, God is our salvation: we will trust, Isa. 12.3.
and not be afraid: for the Lord Jehovah is our strength and song, he is our
salvation.

In that he says, my soul is sorrowful unto death: this may be understood two
ways: 1.
First extensively, in that this sorrow and anxiety continued even till the
separation of the soul from the body. 2.
Secondly, Intensively; because it was as great as was possible to be in a
living man, or than which never any man had greater in this life. And no wonder
that his sorrow was so great, seeing there were more than one, and they very
great causes of this his sorrow. For,

1.
He was sorrowful and sore troubled (yet according to humane nature, or rather
sensibility) because he saw his near approaching Passion as it were before his
eyes, with all the shame and bitterness thereof.

2.
He was sore troubled and sorrowful for the sins of all men, past, present, and
to come, all which he took upon himself. The Lord laid upon him the iniquity of
us all, Isa. 53.

3.
He was sad for the sins and unthankfulness of Judas and the Jews, whose life,
glory, and salvation was in danger.

4.
He was troubled for the fall and scattering of his Disciples and other friends,
and most for the desolate state of his holy Mother.

5.
Lastly, He was sorrowful for the ingratitude that would be found in Christians
in time to come. He saw that his Passion would be unprofitable to many men. He
saw also that many Christians would forget him, as one dead in their hearts,
and quite out of mind, and that very few would be thankful to him for so great
a benefit, Psalm. 109.
but rather with a base requital would render him evil for his good. See what
great cause he had to be sorrowful. Well then might he say, My soul is
sorrowful unto death. This is that which he foretold by David long since: My
bones are vexed: Psalm 6. Psalm 55.
my soul also is sore vexed. Again, Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me,
and horror has overwhelmed me, my heart is sore pained within me: and the
terrors of death are fallen upon me. See what fit Plasters Christ does apply
to our wounds. Sin is born in the heart, (lust brings forth sin) and brought
up in act, James 1.
and so finished: So Christ was first inwardly sorrowful, and then outwardly,
that he might totally take away all sin, and make full satisfaction for us.

What then does Christ do in this his straight? Why, just like those that are
suddenly surpised with some great amazement, he desires those three Disciples
to tarry with him, and watch and pray: in which words he does variously express
our infirmities. Those that are in misery, think it no small comfort to have a
friend to whom they may be bold to complain of their misery.

Again, It is a comfort to those that are astonished and afflicted, if others
will but stay and stand by them. It is the greatest trouble to be left alone in
trouble. This affection Christ here expresses. Heb. 2.
See into what a low condition the Son of God humbled himself, and how he would
be like unto us his brethren in all things.

Nevertheless although he charge them to watch and stand by him, yet he does
not neglect to pray for aid also from Heaven, to show that vain is the wisdom
of the flesh, and that all carnal assistance is nothing worth, if God be
absent. Therefore he went from them to pray, and commanded them to pray also:
who doubtless could not but hear the doleful and affectionate cry of his
Prayers, though they were at some distance from him. So that here he taught us
both by his Word and Example what to do in times of Temptation, even to have
recourse to God: And not only so, but he shows also the best way of praying.
For, 1.
first he withdrew from the Apostles. He that will pray, must go into his
Chamber, Mat. 6. 2.
Secondly, He kneeleth down, yea, falls on his face. Prayer ought to be made
in humility. So much the more humble, so much the sooner it peirceth Heaven,
and is heard. 3.
Thirdly, He does not pray once only, but often: nor did he give over, till the
Angel comforted him. Teaching us thereby to persevere in prayer. 4.
Fourthly, He prayed in assurance: therefore he did so sweetly repeat the name
of Father. He that believes not, let him not think to receive any thing, James
1. 5.
Fifthly, He commits all to God. We must not prescribe time or manner unto
God. 6.
Lastly, Peter, James and John were not far from him, by whom those three
virtues are signified, which are necessary for every one that prays; to wit,
Faith by Peter, Courage by James, and the Grace of God by John.

As often then, O Christian, as Satan tempts thee, remember this Garden, and
this prayer of Christ in the Garden. Avoid the tumults of men, go a little
aside, kneel down, fall on thy face, (for by these gestures the faithful
express the servency of their mind, and that they have no hope, counsel or
help in the world, but only in God,) open thy mouth, and utter words from thy
heart, lay open thy anguish and pain before God with sighs and supplications
against the violence and wrongs of Satan. Here thy sorrow and anguish of heart
will do thee no harm. Yea, though it afflict thy body a little, it will do thy
soul good. But remember to temper thy prayer so, even as Christ here did, who
in all humility threw himself upon the ground, and as man, he resigned and
offered himself wholly to the Will of God, that the Father should do with him
as he pleased. Thou also pray for what thou will; cry, entreat, make known thy
wants: but conclude always, as here: Not mine, but thy will be done; for thou
know best what is good and profitable for me.

Believe me, our prayer is well accepted, if it be granted to us according to
the will of God. The Evangelists do not without cause so diligently set down
this, that Christ put the whole event of his Prayer in the will of God. If
Christ did thus, whose will yet was not divided from the will of his Father;
nor could he will any thing but what the Father willed: how much more ought we
to do so, whose will most commonly is against, and resists the will of God?
To say nothing how pernicious and destructive for the most part it would be to
us, if God should always grant us what we desire. The will of our flesh is not
good: but that which the Spirit wills in us cannot be evil, because the
Spirit is not evil. Briefly, Let the Prayer of Jesus be the Form and Pattern of
our Prayer. Let him teach us how to pray, as he showed us how to suffer. Let us
now weigh the words.

First he says in the Chalde Tongue, Abba, which in Latin is as much as
Pater, Father, and this name he doubleth: It is a great comfort in affliction
to believe that God is our Father, and that our troubles come upon us by his
good pleasure. 1 Cor. 11.
So Paul, when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with this world. Heb. 12.
Again, Ye have not yet resisted unto blood: and ye have forgotten the
exhortation which speaks unto you as children; Prove. 3.
my son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, etc.

Secondly, He says, If it be possible, and all things are possible unto thee.
Here none doubts, but that God (to speak absolutely) could have restored man
some other way, than by the death of his Son: but this was the way which from
Eternity was resolved on; and therefore it must be that Christ should dye. And
it was not without reason why God should be best pleased with that way. For,

1.
Divine Justice must be satisfied. We deserved to be punished, but God the Father
set his Son in our stead; who could owe nothing upon his own score, and
therefore might make the fuller satisfaction. As the person of Christ was more
pleasing to God than all other men: so his Passion merited more than all ours
can do.

2.
God therefore made choice of this way to redeem mankind, that he might make his
power known. For he did not defend Christ against his strong enemy, yet he
overcame him.

3.
That he might make his love so much the more manifest to us, to provoke our
love: 1 John 4.
In this was his love manifest, that he sent his Son, etc. Wicked men prate
that God took no pains to create them. But here let them consider that they
were not easily Redeemed. Christ took a great deal of care and pains to make
man a great debtor to him in much love, and that he might become more thankful
by the difficulty of his Redemption, who was grown so cold in his devotion,
because of the easiness of his creation. God made all things, and man among the
rest, in six days: but he was full three and thirty years working out our
Salvation in the midst of the earth. See how justly we may be complained of,
who lightly esteem this greatest Token of Love; whereby we exceedingly provoke
his wrathful indignation against us.

Whereas Christ prays that the Cup might pass from him: by the Cup he means
his Passion: 1.
For as much drinking makes men drowsy, so Christ's Passion made him sleep in
Death. 2.
Or as free drinking makes men jocund, so the sufferings of Christ make us above
all things most cheerful, in that it brought everlasting Salvation to us. In
this sense the Cup is taken elsewhere, I will take the Cup of salvation, etc.
Again, Psalm 116.
Can ye drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? Mat. 20.

But thou will say, was not Christ willing to suffer? Or did he suffer against
his will, in that he prays here against the Cup of his Passion? Far be it from
us so to think. How could he be unwilling to suffer, who at his last Supper
said, that the blood of his Body was to be shed for the Remission of sins? Mat.
26. Who also said, I lay down my life for my sheep, John 10. And replied to
Peter when he dissuaded him from suffering; Get thee behind me Satan, for thou
savourest not the things of God, Matthew. 16.

We say that Christ did not suffer unwillingly, but freely of his own voluntary
consent, as his Prayer concludes: Thy will be done. He prayed that if it were
possible the Cup might pass from him: 1.
First to show that he was a true man, who by Nature is afraid of Death. As
there are diverse affections in man, to wit, of the flesh, and of the Spirit: so
Christ has here diverse prayers. The flesh prays, and the Spirit prays.
Christ took upon him the prayer of flesh, as also the fear of Death. He did not
pray against Death, as if he had been afraid to dye: (for how could the Son of
God be afraid of Death?) but he prayed according to the desire of flesh, that
by the prayer of the Spirit he might overcome the prayer of flesh. The flesh
with a brazen face prays against the Cross, nor can it indeed desire and love
it: but the Spirit does correct and overcome it. ^ohn 12.
So when he says in another place: Father, save me from this hour: presently
he adds, but therefore came I unto this hour: Father, glorify thy Name: that
is, Do that which makes for thy glory, by which word he corrects the former
prayer.

2.
Or according to the opinion of some others, Christ therefore prayed, that if it
were possible the Cup might pass from him; lest the condemnation of wicked men
should be the greater by reason of his Passion. Origin says, that Jesus saw
that Judas one of the twelve would become a son of perdition by reason of the
Cup of his Passion. On the contrary, he knew that by his Passion he should
triumph over the gates of Hell: for their sake therefore whom he would not that
they should perish because of his suffering, he says Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me. But for the salvation of mankind, which
was to be Redeemed by his Passion, he says by way of correcting his former
Prayer: Nevertheless not mine, but thy will be done. The meaning then of the
whole prayer is, The sense of the Prayer.
as if he had said, O my Father, according to my humane nature I have
compassion upon the miserable Synagogue, because these chiefly will crucify
me, who daily read the Law and the Prophets. O miserable! that these must kill
me, to whom principally I came from Heaven, and that they should do it to their
own Eternal ruin. O my Father, my Father, if there may be any other way found
out, whereby man may otherwise be relieved, I could wish it might be made use
of: only that this people should not so miserably perish. But I know the Decree
of thy will. Therefore not this my will, but thine be done. I am ready to halt;
Psalm. 38.17. Psalm. 108.1. Psalm. 54.6. Psalm. 40.8.
(Ego in flagella paratus sum, I am ready for the lash, says the Vulg. Lat.)
my heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready: I will freely sacrifice to thee:
In the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O God,
etc. Some think that Christ thus prayed, if it were possible, to the end his
Disciples and all the godly might obtain the inheritance without the Cross. For
says Hilary: He prays, that they might get the glory of his Inheritance
without undergoing the hardship of the sufferings. Or if indeed they must
suffer, yet it might be without despair, without sense of pain, without fear of
Death. It follows in the Text.

And he comes unto the Disciples, and finds them asleep, Mat. 26.40. Mar.
14.37. Luke 22.46.
and says unto Peter, Simon, sleep thou? What, could ye not watch with me
one hour? why sleep ye?

Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak.

And he went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if
this Cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy: neither
wist they what to answer him.

And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the
same words, Father, if thou will, take away this Cup from me; Nevertheless not
my will, but thine be done.

Christ prayed, and that in an humble posture, and with most affectionate
words: yet he does not perceive that he is heard. Do not thou therefore take it
amiss, if thou art not presently heard, especially when thou prayest after the
flesh. Now when Christ came to his Disciples, whom he commanded to pray, he
finds them asleep: And because they had rather sleep than pray, the Tempter
fell so close upon them, that he prevailed, and so Christ's word proved true.
Christ here might have taken up that of the Psalmist: Psalm. 38.10.
My heart pants, my strength fails me, (i. e. the Divinity) as for the
light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me, my lovers and my friends (i. e.
Judas and the Jews) stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen (i. e. my
Disciples) stand afar off, they also that seek after my life (i. e. the Devils)
lay snares for me. But although all the Disciples slept, yet he does specially
reprove Peter, because he promised more than the rest: and because drowsiness
does worst of all become those that should excel others. Therefore he does not
call him Peter, but Simon, which was his name formerly: because he that
sleeps when he is appointed to watch over others, is unworthy the name of
Peter. He is then called Peter, when he confesses Christ. Simon, sleep
thou? Where is now thy constancy? Where is thy promise and engagement? Would
thou follow me unto Death, and can thou not watch with me one hour? Art thou
at last sensible that the sons of men are vain, and but a lie? Psalm 62.
But God only is true. This he said to Peter. Afterward he rebukes the other
Disciples too. Sloth and Laziness deserve to be blamed in all Christians: Why
sleep ye, says he, This is not a time to sleep when danger is so near us.
Your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion goes about, 2 Pet. 5.
seeking whom he may devour. Here is no security for you. The pit is dug for
you, which ye cannot avoid or escape, except ye take my counsel. Watch
therefore and be always ready, lest Temptation surprise ye unawares, But this
is not all, for no man is able to secure himself, but by the help of God.
Therefore he further adds: And pray, that ye enter not into temptation, i. e.
lest the Temptation overcome ye. It is impossible that man's heart should be
free from Temptation: but we are to pray that we be not overcome by Temptations.

See how gently Christ deals with his Disciples: he might have handled them
more roughly: but he alayeth his Rebuke, and as though he were willing to
excuse their sleepiness, he says, The spirit truly is willing, but the flesh
is weak. q.d. I know ye have a willing mind, but the frailty of the flesh
hinders that willingness. The spirit is forward to do what it ought to do, but
the flesh is slow; it is affected only with those things that are suitable to
it: it will not willingly watch or pray; it is afraid to suffer, it avoideth,
is offended at, and denies the Cross. In short, it does nothing that is good.
But contrariwise, the spirit is confident and valiant, it does pray, watch,
bear up in adversity, make a free confession, etc. Whenever the spirit is
compared with flesh, it signifies the Holy Spirit, and his workings in us. But
the flesh signifies the humane nature, even with its best motions, but without
the assistance of the Holy Spirit. The spirit then is willing, because it
affects those things that are his own, and cheerfully carries on to all that
is good. But the flesh is weak, for it will not always endure the yoke of the
spirit, as it is written, The good that I would, that do I not; Romans 7. Gal. 5.
but the evil that I would not, that do I. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, that ye cannot do those things that
ye would. What need I multiply more? If we have a spirit ready to do good, yet
the weakness of our flesh hinders, and overcomes it. But if our spirit be
backward to evil, yet the flesh will stir, and spur it forward. Hence it is
that Judas and the Jews slept not, but were most vigilant, because they made
have to evil. But the Apostles sleep, because they were exhorted to good. To
conclude, when we are most confident of the forwardness of our mind, let us
suspect then the backwardness of our flesh.

When he had warned his Disciples, for whose sake he brake off his Prayer, he
went away to pray again, praying almost the same words which he did before.
Thereby giving an Example to Preachers: First, so go from Prayer to Preaching
to instruct the people, and from Preaching to return to Prayer. First, Let them
pray, that they may be fruitful and profitable; then let them pray that the
fruit be not blasted. But as Christ returned to Prayer, so the Disciples went
to sleep again, so that all Admonition was to no purpose. Their sleep now
fore-shewed that their faith shortly would be benighted. But the Evangelist
says further, for some kind of excuse for this drowsiness, that sorrow rather
than sloth made them fall asleep; for their eyes, says he, were heavy, a thing
common to those that are in heaviness. When the heart is sad, the eye is
sleepy, so that men had rather go to bed, than go to eat or drink. And because
the Disciples were sleepy and sorrowful, they could not tell what to answer.
And who indeed could excuse such drowsiness in so dangerous a case? Hamans
frailty did strongly put forth it self in the Apostles. Truly, if the Lord with
draw, we fall asleep quickly, although he was with us but little before. Mat.
28.
Let us pray therefore that he would abide with us unto the end of the world.

We do not read that Christ said any thing to his Apostles when he came to them
the second time, but silently passed by their weakness, to teach us that we
should rather admonish our Brethren, and bear with their Infirmities, than
severely punish, or wholly condemn them. This sleepiness did not a little add
to Christ's sadness. For now he saw that he should not only be violently
assaulted by his enemies, but should also be forsaken of his dearest friends.
He saw that Judas did not sleep, but watched to do him a mischief; but his
Disciples were very sluggish in that which was good. Whereby these our
dangerous times were prefigured, which are full of deceit, fraud, and
distracting cares; Mat 24.
when for the getting of this worlds goods, Titles, Honors, etc. Iniquity so
much abounds. But all love to Godliness is key cold. Luke 16.
The Children of this world are wiser and warier in wicked works, than the
Children of God are in the works of Godliness.

When Christ saw that there was little, or no comfort, or assistance to be
expected from the Apostles, he goes back to prayer the third time, and turns
himself wholly to God, to whom only the poor is committed. Psalm. 10.14. 2 Chronicles. 20.
When we know not what to do, yet this is our comfort, that our eyes are toward
Heaven. Here we have an example not to pray once only in Temptation, but
thrice, nay seven times, that is, very often. To pray but once, is not to pray at
all. To pray often, is to pray effectually. Peter denied thrice, Christ prayed
three times; it becomes and behooves us to imitate this, but by all means to
avoid the other.

Whereas Christ prayed so often, it is most manifest that it is a hard matter
for us to struggle with death. Unexperienced men, like Peter, trust too much to
their own strength. But he that has tried these things, betaketh himself to
God; for he sees that the humane nature of it self is too weak. Therefore he
commits all things to God, saying, Thy Will be done, as if he had said, so
long as thy Will is done, and I commit my self to thy Will, I can now in thy
strength break through that which I could not by my own. Thou will not forsake
those whom thou calledst to suffer, while they stand in aw of thee, and rely
upon thee. Thus Christ did all these things, first for our Redemption, then for
our example, how to behave our selves under the fear of death. It follows in
the Text;

And there appeared unto him an Angel from Heaven, Luke 22.43.
strengthening him. And being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his
sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

There are three things most observable in these words. 1.
Is it not a strange, and a new thing, that an Angel, that a servant should
comfort Christ? But here we see that truly fulfilled which David prophesied of
in the Psalms; Psalm 8.
Thou have made him a little lower then the Angels. For as Christ was truly
tempted, and was sorrowful, etc. so he would be comforted by an Angel like
other men, that he might be like his Brethren in all things. Heb. 2. Mat. 4.
In another place we read that the Angels ministered to Christ. 2.
Secondly, We learn that God does not forsake those that hope in him. For
although he does not always remove the evil, yet he does inwardly strengthen,
and give power to undergo it. 3.
Lastly, We are here taught, that the holy Angels stand by us when we pray,
strengthening us in our prayer, and careful of our welfare, which should stir
us up to pray more fervently, lest our sluggishness should offend them, and
cause them to depart from us, and so leave us under that sad complaint, Psalm
88.8.
Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me, thou have made me an
abomination to them. Again, My kins-men stand afar off; Psalm 38.
they also that seek my life, lay snares for me. For certainly, if the blessed
spirits absent themselves from us, we cannot bear the brunt of the evil spirits.

Now lest any should wonder why Christ would stand in need of an Angel to
strengthen him, Luke says, That he was in an Agony, that is, he was as it were
contending with death. What man, what tongue, what understanding is able to
comprehend fully this Agony, I say not to express it? We see with what great
perplexity dying men struggle, in whom their senses are almost dead already;
how much more anguish then was there in the heart of Christ, whose senses were
yet most lively, who clearly perceived all the horror of death, and was
perfectly sensible thereof? O how hard, sharp and bitter was it to the humanity
in Christ? What struggling? what strife? what horror? Lastly, What, and how
full of Anguish was this perruption? If thou doubt it, consider the bloody
sweat on every side flowing from his sacred body. Where did thou ever see the
like? When did thou ever hear the like? This greatest and most violent Agony
squeezed out this sweat. And if thou do mind it well, they were our sins that
pressed out this unusual sweat from the Lord Jesus. All our sins were hanged
about his neck, and laid upon his shoulders. Satan endeavored with all his
might utterly to overthrow both him, and his kingdom. Death would not die, yet
of necessity it must come to it. One only Christ alone was to combat with all
these evils, and as another, yea, the true Hercules, he was to shake off these
most heinous and pestilent mischiefs from our necks. Nor could any other do
this but he. Therefore by how much the greater these evils were, so much the
more pains was there required to overcome them. Yea, seeing they were the
greatest evils, there was need of the greatest labor. This Luke signifies,
when he says, He was in an Agony, and did sweat blood.

Now that Agony of Christ signifies nothing else, Agon, vel Agonia.
but the fear and dread of our Conscience before the face or presence of Gods
Judgment. For indeed when the time of Judgment is at hand, the soul is touched
with the conscience of evil: which being touched, the whole soul begins to
tremble, the whole begins to perish, when it is set single and alone before the
eternal and wrathful Tribunal of God. Of which trembling Job speaks, Job 9.
If he will contend, who shall answer him? This Trembling is also set forth and
described in the Evengelical Banquet, Job 9. Mat. 22.
where he that had not the wedding Garment, was struck speechless, when the
Lord asked him for it. Sometimes the Saints are supprized with this Trembling,
as appears in Job. Hence it is that David says, Psalm. 6. Psalm 38.3.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy anger, etc. for there is no soundness in my flesh
because of thine anger. Thus Hezechiah, I said, In the cutting off of my days,
(in dimidio dierum,) I shall go to the gates of the grave, etc. (ad portas
inferi, vulg. lat.) Therefore that we should not for ever be oppressed with this
Trembling, Christ was cast into an Agony for us. Therefore when this Temptation
seizes upon us, let us pray with Hezechiah, O Lord I am oppressed, undertake
for me. Isa. 38.14. Psalm 17.8.
And with David, Hide me under the shadow of thy wings. But let us return to
the bloody sweat.

We need not here show any further, how it could be that he should sweat blood.
Doubtless he was Supernatural. But let us consider what Christ would show unto
us by this bloody sweat.

1.
First then, that bloody sweat shows the great perplexity that Christ was in,
greater than which cannot be imagined. Great pain will make men sweat. For as
we never read that any, besides Christ, did sweat blood, though they were in
never so great torment: so there was never greater anguish than his. And no
wonder: For although other men have certainly known that their death was at
hand, yet none could distinctly foreknow the sharpness of the pains of Death.
But Christ did distinctly in his inner sense taste beforehand the bitterness of
Death, as if it had been then present.

Consider this thou impudent sinner, who art not afraid to renew thy sin daily,
for which thy Savior was pleased to suffer this kind of punishment: and
consider the nature of the disease by the preciousness of the Remedy. Consider,
I say, the sharpness and bitterness of the Passion, how great it was, when it
made him sweat blood but to think of it.

Consider how hard it was for Christ to make satisfaction for the sins of the
heart, which we lightly pass over without taking any notice of them. Think what
condition thou had been in for ever, if Christ had not Redeemed thee. Think
upon what great anguish thou would have been in at the hour of death:
therefore now while thou art in health, arm thy self against it by the Passion
and Prayer of Christ; otherwise thou will not hold out in that distress. For
it is not for us to contend with death in our own strength, It is too strong for
us. We must therefore flee to Christ, that he may succor us in that straight
which he tasted and conquered also for us. The fear of Death is no other way to
be vanquished but by Faith in Christ, and by long and strong prayer, as Christ
here did when he was in an Agony, (...) he extended his prayer, or he prayed
more largely.

2.
By this bloody sweat Christ would show his great Love to us, which was so great
in him, that he made all the haste possible might be to pour out this medical
blood, even before his persecutors came to him, that so he might the more
speedily relieve lost man. So ready was Christ to shed his blood for us.

3.
Lastly, By this bloody sweat he did as it were foreshew, that his Mystical body
should sweat blood, i. e. it should be exposed tosuch great afflictions, that
if it were possible it should sweat blood: which we see fulfilled even at this
day, when wicked men live in all delights and pleasures, but godly men are cast
into a sweat of blood. But this is their comfort, that their time of suffering
is but short, and then they shall enter into glory.

Luke 22.45. Mat. 24.41,42.
And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his Disciples, he found them
sleeping for sorrow.

And he says (...) them, sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the
hour is come, ( Why sleep ye? Luke 22.46.) Behold, the son of man is betrayrd
into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go, lo, he that betrayeth me is at
hand.

Christ returns again to his Disciples: indeed how could he forget his own? He
was more thoughtfull for them, than they were for themselves, for he found them
asleep again. They might well be sad who lay under such failings. They that
sleep are ready to deny their life. One evil is commonly a forerunner of many
more, Spiritual sleep, what it is.
and one sin is but the beginning of another. Spiritual sleep is, when the
senses are darkened, the understanding strangled, Faith staggereth, the memory
is lost, prayer omitted, godliness cast off, dangers slighted, and no care to
avoid the Judgment to come. This is truly a most pernicious and dangerous
sleep: of which Paul says, Romans 13.
It is now high time to awake out of sleep. Again, Ephesians. 5.
Awake thou that sleep.

Christ therefore does now mock and deride them with a sharp taunt or ironie,
whose drowsiness he had hitherto reprehended in vain. Sleep on now, says he,
and take your rest. As if he had said, ye have chosen a very fit time and
place indeed to sleep and take your rest. Sleep soundly and sweetly, especially
seeing ye are so safe and secure. I could not prevail with ye to watch a
little with me. Go to therefore, satisfy your sense and lust. Sleep on. See
how long ye will lie quiet. What I could not obtain at your hands, the
business it self, or the present danger will force you to, etc. A cutting jeer
indeed; of which the Wisdom of God speaks to those that contemn him: I have
called, but ye refused: I also will mock at your destruction, Prove. 1.
etc. But after this Ironic, Christ comes to speak more seriously to them: It
is enough, says he; ye have slept long enough already, ye have loytered too
long. We have none but enemies about us every where, and do ye yet sleep it
out? Do ye not see or regard what is come upon us? Did not I sufficiently warn
ye of all this before? And now ye see it is fallen out just as I told ye.
The hour is come, I must now suffer. The hands of sinful men are armed against
me. The Traitor of whom I spoke ere now is hard by. Rise therefore, let us go
meet them, lest they should say that we are afraid, or run away from them, etc.

Here we are put in mind not to think of Death as a terrible or fearful thing.
For being all baptized into the death of Christ, Romans 6.
certainly by that death of Christ our death will be unto us but a passage unto
life: and therefore may rather be called life than death. For he that believes
in me, says Christ, John 11.
shall not dye for ever. The Philosophers opinion of death exploded.
Therefore let that opinion of the Philosophers be for ever banished from the
ears and minds of Christians, which affirms that death is the most terrible
of all terrible things. But grant it, that it is true of the wicked, to whom
death is truly terrible, yet to a Christian there is nothing more pleasant and
desirable than death, whereby he is freed from all evil, and inseparably united
to Christ his Lord. Phil 1. Psalm 119.
Hence it is that Paul desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ: Another
holy man complains that his Pilgrimage was too long here, Psalm 120.5.

Thus much for those things which Christ suffered in himself, for before he was
outwardly tortured, Christ endured much sorrow and pain, and that of his own
accord, that so he might apply a full Remedy for those sins which we commit in
our heart and thoughts. For which let us also be grieved with our Lord, and
bewail them, giving thanks to our Redeemer. And withal let us behold and
hearken to these things which yet remain to be spoken, and prepare our selves
with all devotion thereunto. For thus it follows in the History:

And immediately, while he yet spoke, le, Judas one of the twelve, Mat. 26.47.
Mar. 14.43. Luke 22.47. John 18.3.
having received a band of men and Officers from the chief Priests, and
Pharisees, and Elders, and Scribes, going before a great multitude, came
thither with Lanthorns, and Torches, with Swords, and with Staves, and with
Weapons, for Judas knew the place.

And he that betrayed him had given them a common sign, saying, whomsoever I
shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast, and lead him away safely.

Give attention, Brethren: let it not be irksome to you to hear those
wonderful things that were done concerning our Lord and Savior. Prepare your
hearts with all readiness. It will be for your advantage, as in due time ye
shall willingly acknowledge. We have heard of the pro-Passion already, or what
skirmishes Christ met with beforehand; Now we draw nearer to the main Battalia.
While Christ yet spoke to his Disciples,

1.
Behold a company of armed men rusht in upon them, as if they had been going out
to war, when indeed there was no need of such warlike preparations.

2.
A band of men (cohors) is a military word, and contains certain select and
choice Soldiers. This was not a band of Jewish Soldiers, but of Caesar's,
which perhaps were sent from the President to gratify the Jews in this
business, or else were hired for this service by the Jews themselves, who
promised them payment: that so they might do what they intended under color of
the civil or ordinary Power, and so none seeing the Roman Soldiers, might
dare to oppose them.

3.
The Magistrates of the Temple also were among that band of Soldiers, whose
place was to look to the repairing of the Temple, and to get those things that
were necessary thereunto.

4.
That this battel-array might be made more considerable, the Officers of the
Priests and Pharisees join themselves to it, who having nothing else to do,
filled up the number, and served to incense others.

5.
There were some of the high Priests themselves there present, as appears by
Luke, chap. 22.

6.
The Elders also of the people were there. For none of them that hated Christ
would be absent.

7.
They that had not other weapons, took up clubs and staves, as the unruly and
frantic vulgar sort of people use to do in such like seditions, whose fury
will quickly help them to one sort of weapon or other.

8.
They come also with Lanthorns and Torches, both because of the darkness of the
night, and because Christ should not hide himself from them.

9.
When these were thus armed, Judas Iscariot goes before them, not as a Captain
of Soldiers, but as a Traitor of his Lord: who a little while since was one
among the twelve, but now is one out of the twelve, or none of the twelve
Apostles. For he had now got him more Masters than one. In this place let us
consider both, viz. Judas and the Jews.

1.
Many things are to be taken notice of in Judas. But above all, his miserable
Apostasy, as one who of a Disciple became a Traitor: of a companion of Christ,
a Captain of Thieves. And he that even now supt at the same Table with Christ,
who did eat of his hallowed bread with the rest, who heard Christ exhorting to
godliness both by word and work: but now slinking from that Table, he joined
himself with ungodly men for a little pelf, not remembering the Piety of Christ,
and forgetful of all hope, not regarding the Apostolical Dignity at all, but
preferring so base and small a price before all those good things. For so does
covetousness blind a man, and make him forget every thing but money.

2.
Again, The unsearchable Counsel of God is to be observed in Judas, in that he
suffered, or would have it so, that this man should be tainted with Treason,
whom before he had preferred to so honorable an Office. But take heed thou do
not here impute unrighteousness unto God. Hear what the Wise man says, For so
much as thou art righteous thy self, Wisd. 12.15.
thou orderest all things righteously. Moreover, Romans 9. Romans 11.
this Example of Judas does partly set forth the wrath and Power of God; as
Paul says, that Pharaoh was therefore raised up, that in him God might show
forth his Power: And partly it does admonish us, not to be high minded, but
fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed also that he spare
not thee. Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. 1.
Judas therefore having lost the peace of conscience, armeth himself with a
multitude and outward weapons, that he might not seem to be the sole actor.
Thus wicked men think that they sin less, if they sin with a multitude. 2.
Besides, he brings many along with him, and they men of Power too, that whereas
the people durst not condemn them, so they should not dare to blame him. Thus
he resolved to attempt the business by carnal reason, that afterward he might
live secure. For as yet this wretched man did not feel his conscience, it was
not yet awakened. And whereas he could so easily obtain the assistance of both
Powers, Ecclesiastical and Secular, against Christ: it is a sign that both
Magistrates were wicked, and did not rightly discharge their place. When Judas
was thus backed on with this aid, he proceeds, or rather precedeth and goes
foremost against Christ. For among the Adversaries he leads the Van and is first
named, and not without cause. For as Christ is not betrayed but by his Apostle
and prime Disciple, by whom he is betrayed to those of whom he is the substance
or Truth, they being in their Office a Type of him, viz. the Priests: so that
Gods Word is seldom betrayed but by acquaintance and friends: Thus the Gentiles
did not kill the Prophets, but the Jews, who boasted of the knowledge of God:
Thus the Pharisees first of all persecuted the Apostles. So also is it now,
they that should be nearest to Christ are his most perverse enemies and
Traitors: And they that glory in his Name and Office, do most of all oppress
him.

Furthermore let us consider the nature and property of a wicked men in the
rest of Christ's enemies. First, They do not set upon Christ with the word of
God, nor with Truth, nor Scripture, nor Righteousness, nor any rational
Argument, but only with swords and staves; Club Argument, Might and Main. But
if this be to overcome, who would be greater Conquerors than cursed and cruel
Tyrants? If this be to be valiant, who is a stouter man than a thief?

1.
Therefore they flock about Christ in a great multitude, because they thought
the sin would be the less, if many had a hand in it. 2.
Secondly, They laid hold on the sword, who were to perish, and be destroyed by
the sword in due time. They take up clubs also, to show the rage and madness of
their minds the more clearly. But what need was there to show such eagerness
and fury against so mild and meek a Lamb? 3.
Again, They bring forth wood against Christ, but it was dry wood, to show that
they were fit for nothing but to be cast into everlasting burnings. 4.
Lastly, They carry Lanthorns and Torches, by which only act they betrayed their
notorious blindness. First, in that they beg light from a Lanthorn, who might
have had the Sun of Righteousness to shine upon them. And secondly, in that
they were afraid of falling into the Ditches, or of stumbling at the stones in
their way: but they feared not the greater danger of their soul. Thus wicked
men fear where no fear is; but where the greatest danger is, there they are
secure. These then are the weapons with which ungodly men fight against the
Saints. Ephesians. 6.
But holy men use not carnal weapons, but Spiritual, viz. the Breastplate of
Righteousness, etc.

Here we see that truly fulfilled which was spoken of by the Psalmist: The
wicked have drawn out the sword, Psalm. 37.14.
they have bent their bow, etc. but by the righteous Judgment of God it comes
to pass, that their sword has pierced their own heart, and their bow is
broken. For, for one band of Soldiers which they hired against the Lord, God
sent a huge host of the Roman power against them. And because they came forth
with Lanthorns and Torches, and weapons of War to take Christ, by the just
judgment of God the Light of the Law and Prophets fell out of their hands,
wherewith their Fathers were enlightened, as it is written, Let their eyes be
darkened, that they see not, etc. Psalm. 69.23.


See yet the wickedness of the Traitor. He was not satisfied when he had sold
Christ; nor was he contented, when he had conducted the Jews, which were
Christ's enemies, unto him; but he must yet rage with more cruelty against
Christ. 1.
For first, He gives them a common token, lest they should chance to apprehend
another in stead of Christ. For he it was whom he aimed at to destroy. There
were many of that multitude who perhaps never saw Christ, especially the Roman
soldiers. 2.
Nor does he give them any kinds of sign, but a token of Peace: Whomsoever,
says he I shall kiss, etc. This blind man yet thought to hide his malice, and
that he could deceive his Master with a flattering kiss, that he should not
suspect him of any harm. As also, lest he should attempt an escape, or seek to
hide himself, if he saw himself beset with open danger. 3.
And that he might prove himself a prodigious and notorious Traitor indeed, he
does more than he promised to do. For he was not content to betray Christ, but
he exhorted and charged them to hold him fast, and lead him away safely:
whereby he sputs them on, lest they should be too favorable to him; he
incenseth their rage. He uses all means to destroy Christ; lest if he had
escaped, he should afterward have trounced him for his baseness. This the
wretch did, that he might live more secure when Christ was taken out of the
way: for as yet he felt not the worm of Conscience. Whence it is evident, that
he hated his Lord for the same cause as the Jews did, Wisd. 2.
viz. because he did discover and lay open the wicked thoughts of their hearts,
Wis. 2.14.

Hence it is too plain, that Simon and Metius, or any other notorious Traitors
would look like very honest men, if they were but compared with this perfidious
wretched Villain; for what was all their Treasons to this? 1.
Now this Treachery of Judas was figured out in Joab, who also betrayed, and cut
off two famous men, 2 Samuel 3.20.
Abner and Amasa with a kiss. 2.
To conclude, this Treason of Judas did prefigure the crafty devises of
Heretics, who indeed counterfeit themselves to be the friends of Truth, but
are the Betrayers of it. For by flattery and fair speeches they beguil the
hearts of the simple. Jer. 6.
They say, (as in the Prophet,) Peace, Peace, where there is no Peace: They
have Christ much in their mouth, but most of all oppose the faith of him, very
like the Traitor Judas, who are also appointed to the same condemnation.

Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him, John 18.4.
went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye? They answered him, Jesus of
Nazareth. Jesus says unto them, I am he. And Judas also which betrayed him,
stood with them. As Soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went
backward, and fell on the ground. Then asked he them again. Whom seek ye? And
they said, Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus answered, I have told ye that I am he: if
therefore ye seek me, let these go their way. That the saying might be
fulfilled which he spoke. Of them which thou gave me, have I lost none.

All these things were thus done and written, that by most manifest Arguments
we might see that Christ came to the Cross willingly, and of his own accord.
For if he had been compelled to the Cross by humane force, or fraud, the world
would have appeared to be more crafty and stronger than he, and consequently
that Christ had not been God. For what kind of God is he, against whom the
world is able to prevail?

Again, He had not manifested so much love, if he had suffered death
unwillingly, and by constraint. But it is most plain, in that the Evangelists
do every where show that he could not be surprised by fraud, or humane force,
till he himself pleased; I say it is plain, that he was both wiser and stronger
than the world: and so his love did thereby shine forth more clearly. All which
make much for our comfort. For as he said before, John 13.1.
that knowing his hour was now come, that he should now pass out of this world,
etc. having loved his own, etc. So now also, although he truly knew not only
some things, but all that should come upon him; yea, and knew them most
perfectly too, and that they were hard at hand: yet did he not shrink, or flee,
or hide himself, but continued his love to us unto the end. And therefore he
went out to meet his enemies single by himself against many, without any weapon
against those that were armed, that they might all see he did not fear death.

At other times we often read that he made an escape, Joh. 8. and 11.
and hid himself: but now he does voluntarily meet his enemies. The time which
his Father had prefixed was now come. In both he was our example. For by his
flight, and hiding himself, he taught us not to tempt God: but by meeting his
foes, he instructed us readily to resign our selves to the Will of God, and to
obey him with all cheerfulness of mind. Thus Paul sometimes fled without
entreaty; but at last he would not be persuaded when the Brethren earnestly
entreated him with many tears to make his escape. What mean you, says he, to
weep, Acts 9. Acts 21.13.
and to break my heart? here he offered himself to the Will of God; there he
would not tempt God rashly. Doing both in faith. For we can do neither without
the help of God. We cannot avoid an imminent danger, if the hand of God rescue
us not: neither can we resign our selves to the Will of God, except the Spirit
of God assist us.

It is also to be observed, John 6.
that Christ conveyed himself from them that would have made him a King; and
no marvel. For he that exalts himself, shall be brought low. Kingdoms and
Empires for the most part are nothing but steep places for men to fall from,
and break their necks. Contrariwise when they sought to crucify him, he came
out to meet them. For he knew that the Cross was the way to the Father. Let us
also learn, in the hope of future happiness, not to be affrighted at present
and momentany evils; and not so much regard what we suffer, but consider that
by our sufferings we are going toward our Father.

See how forward Christ was to suffer. For he does not only meet his
Adversaries, but first asks them whom they sought? He might have rebuked them
sharply, and cast his former benefits with their ingratitude and impiety in
their Teeth, yea he might have destroyed them all at one beck. However he does
not so, but with fair words he asked them what they sought, as if he knew
nothing of their design. This was not the time of his Judgment, but of his
showing Mercy. He would not be passionate, but patient, and overcome evil with
good. Therefore he speaks to them in a familiar manner: Whom seek ye? 1.
By which word he did warn them that they should take heed what they did. Says
he, Whom seek ye? even an innocent person, and him whom ye know by his Signs
and Miracles which he did, Genesis 4.
that he is more and greater than a man. Consider well, it is no small offense to
seek the death of the innocent. For the blood of the innocent reaches unto
Heaven: But it is much more heinous to sin against God. If one man sin against
another, the Judge shall judge him: 1 Samuel 2.25.
but if a man sin against God, who shall entreat for him?

2.
By this word (Whom seek ye) Christ jeereth their needless preparations, he
mocketh at their fear. Whom, says he, do ye seek? i. e. What need these arms?
Whom do you fear? Is it me who have no Weapon about me? or do ye seek for my
Disciples who also are unarmed men? He does not tell them at first sight, I am
he whom ye look for, though he knew their enterprise: but first asks them,
that he might take occasion from their answer to confute them, and that all the
world might see and know that such a huge multitude went out to take one single
man, as they themselves confess that they did seek but for one.

3.
He first asked his Adversaries whom they sought after, before he let them lay
hands on him, because thereby he might yet extend and offer Grace unto them,
q.d. To this end was I sent, that I might hold forth unto all men, and bestow
it too upon them. And as many as have sought me with a good heart hitherto,
know it full well to be true. Therefore if ye also seek for Grace, lo, here I
am; and ready to bestow it on those that are not worthy of it. Whom therefore
do ye seek? Mark, O Christian: if Christ tendered his Grace to such wicked men,
how much more readily will he tender the same Grace, and himself to boot, to
those that seek for him in Truth?

And whereas those wicked and obstinate men did not reply, we look for thee, as
if they had known him: but answered him as if they had not known him, we seek
Jesus of Nazareth: it is most certain that they knew him not either by face, or
clothes, or voice, although all men knew him not long since. This could not be
by reason of the darkness, for they had Lanthorns and Torches: but it was by a
Divine Power. 1.
That first he might confound them, and so hereby at least teach them that their
rage against him was in vain. 2.
But especially it was for our consolation, to teach us, that although our
enemies know us never so well by our Faces, yet they can attempt no hurt
against us contrary to the good Will of our God. For they can neither discern
us, much less destroy us. 3.
Lastly, to teach us that God can, if he will, many ways deliver those that are
his. Gen 19.
Thus he blinded the Sodomites heretofore, that they could not find the door of
Lots house all the night. And thus also he smote those with such blindness, who
were sent by the king of Syria to take Elisha, 2 King. 2.
that although they saw, and talked, and walked with him, yet they knew him
not, till he prayed that their eyes might be opened.

Now there is no Christian but does know that our Lord at his circumcision was
called Jesus: which Name was first given to him by an Angel from Heaven: Luke
2. Marth. 1
but he was called a Nazarent from Nazareth, which was the country of Mary his
Mother, where he was brought up. Therefore these wicked men here call him by
both Names. But the third Name, which is Christ, they never mention. He is
called and acknowledged to be Christ by the Elect and Believers only, these own
him to be the Christ, Messiah, King, and Savior. But whereas they answered
that they sought Jesus of Nazareth, their answer was not much amiss, if it had
not been with an evil heart, and if they had so sought him as they ought. For
what is Jesus of Nazareth, but a holy Savior? But he is not to be sought after
with weapons of war, but with pious Prayers and a steadfast Faith. Now these did
not seek a Savior, or Salvation by him, but they sought to lay hands on him,
and to satisfy their malice by his death and destruction. What does Christ
therefore do? He answers, I am he; by which one word he shows that he was
willing to suffer: whereas he might have escaped or hid himself as one
altogether unknown to them. But he became an Oblation, because he was willing.
It is to be Noted,

1.
That Christ freely confesses his Name, and is not ashamed of it. I am Jesus of
Nazareth, says he, that is, a Holy Savior: whereby he does again put them in
mind, that he was ready to save them, if they were willing: and that they could
not go unpunished if they sought his death, who was Jesus, and a Savior, and
that a holy one too.

2.
Inasmuch as he had not this Name from the Humane nature, to be a holy Savior,
but by a Divine Power, which with the Godhead it self met together in one
person in him: it does well suit with the proper voice of his Divine Essence,
when he said to them that said they sought Jesus of Nazareth, I am he. Thus he
said of old to Moses, I am, that I am. He would therefore have put them in mind
of this Heavenly Voice, when he said, I am he. But all was to no purpose, for
they did nothing regard what he said. Use.
Let us Christians learn from hence to make a free confession of our Name and
Faith. If a Tyrant ask thee, art thou a Christian? Art thou a Catholic? answer
him boldly, I am. For this word will exceedingly deject the Adversary. But we
make them worse by our denial and diffimulation. Hence it is, that as soon as
Christ said, I am he; all his enemies were driven backward, and made to fall on
the ground. What good did the armed multitude do them now? For by one word, and
that a very mild and gentle one too, that great Rabble, enraged with spite and
hatred, and terribly armed, was beaten back, chased, and thrown flat on the
ground without any weapon at all. Here his Power appeared very notable indeed,
and that three ways. 1.
First, in that they were beat backward, as if they had been opposed with some
great force, as soon as they heard his voice. 2.
Secondly, in that they were made to fall, as not able to withstand it. 3.
Thirdly, in that it threw them on their backs, as if they were compelled to
look up to Heaven and God, who had resolutely cast off all humane pity and
compassion.

This fall of the Jews foreshewed the downfall of the House of Israel.
Whosoever sets himself against Christ, be he never so stout, shall fall in
spite of his teeth. Christ therefore did so powerfully cast down his enemies.

1.
That he might render them inexcusable, who clearly seeing by this sign, that
this Jesus whom they sought to kill was more than a man, and that he would turn
his wrath against them in his own time.

2.
For the consolation of the godly, that they may certainly know wicked men shall
fall at last, though they triumph and Lord it for a time.

3.
To terrify ungodly men, whom he could fell to the earth with one nodd if he
would, did not his patience wait for their amendment. For he that with one word
was able to tumble down so many enemies, could as easily have caused the earth
to open her mouth and have swallowed them up, and all their arms together.

1.
Here we may take notice of Christ's power in general. If he could and did thus
when he was but as a Lamb, what will he do when he comes as a Lion? If he did
this when he was to be judged, what will he do when he comes to judge? If he
could do this when he was about to die, what will he do when he comes to Reign?
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; Psalm 2.
be instructed ye that judge the earth, and all men else that dwell therein.
Receive Discipline, lest this Lord be angry, and ye perish, etc.

2.
We see here the Power of the Word of God in special. For he cast them down with
a Word, and that not an austere or threatening one, but a very meek word. Now if
these wicked men were not able to bear the droppings of his Words, Job 26.
who shall endure when he does Thunder them out? Gods Word seems but light to
some: but you see here that it is the Power of God indeed. As the Jews were
struck to the ground with a word: so neither sin, death, nor the Devil shall be
able to stand before the Word of God. Ephesians. 6.
Whence it is that Paul calls it the sword of the Spirit.

3.
Here also we see that all worldly power can do nothing against God. The Lord
that dwells in Heaven shall have them in derision. The Jews could not take
this Jesus of Nazareth before he himself pleased, although they had brought a
greater Army than ever Alexander, or Xerxes, or Hanniball had. Thus does God to
this day often confound those that trust in their own strength.

4.
Again, Here we see that one and the same Word is consolation to the godly, but
condemnation to the ungodly. Christ in other places did often comfort his
fearful Apostles with this Word, Mat. 14. Luke. 24.
Ego sum; It is I. Indeed the godly can hear nothing more sweet, then when
Christ says, I am he. This Word does make all crosses comfortable to them. But
it is and will be a fearful clap of Thunder to the wicked, when Christ shall
say, I am he; He whom ye have pierced, whom ye have scorned, etc. As Joseph
heretofore was a most sharp Sword to his Brethren, Genesis 45.
when he said, I am Joseph whom ye sold into Egypt, etc.

5.
Lastly, The nature of ungodly men is here lively set forth. 1.
First, That by which they should be made better, by it they become worse, this
is to go backward. To go back, is to depart from God and his Righteousness, 2.
Secondly, They fall, for they are not able to stand before Gods Judgment. 3.
Again, Wicked men fall continually, till they fall into Hell. 4.
They fall backward, for they see not whether they fall, nor where they lie, nor
how to rise again. 5.
They see not what punishment they are liable unto. 6.
Lastly, They never acknowledge their sin, so as to turn from it.

But the godly, though they fall, yet they fall forward, they presently confess
their sin and forsake it. If they fall on the right hand, through prosperity,
or on the left hand by adversity, yet they quickly get up again: neither do
they so fall, as to fall finally away from God.

See how true that saying is, Malice is often confounded, but never conquered.
Psalm. 74.
The tumult of those that rise up against thee increases continually. Their
sudden ruin should have warned those wicked men not to attempt any thing
further against Jesus of Nazareth, for as much as they were once already
confounded by him. He asked them again the second time, Whom seek ye? that the
greatness of their Impiety might be made manifest, who being so remarkably
admonished, did yet persist in their malice. For they answer as malapertly as
at first, that they sought Jesus of Nazareth: as if they would never be quiet
till they had vented their hatred, though it should cost them dearer yet. Romans
2. Eccle. 7.13.
Thus the wicked treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. Who can make that
straight which God has made crooked? Although these ungodly men were sensible
of Christ's divine Power in them, Romans 1.
yet they glorified him not as God, but reproached him the more. Just as most
in the world still do, they are convinced by the Truth of God, but nothing at
all reformed.

But what does Christ answer to this stubborn envy of the Jews? I have told
you, says he, that I am he q.d. I have told you, and you have tried it, that I
am a Prince of Power. Therefore if ye still seek me, and have yet no remorse
since ye were laid level with the earth, lo, here I am, ready to suffer: but ye
must not forget that I told you, I am He. By which saying Christ set himself in
our stead, patiently to bear whatsoever divine Justice should exact for our
sins. Mean while he does put forth his Power again, saying, If ye seek me, let
these go their way; whereby he does powerfully prohibit them to do his
Disciples any wrong, otherwise the Apostles had not escaped harmless, if the
fury of their foes had not been checked by the power of this Precept. Christ by
the same Power might have said, Let me be gone: but it behooved him to suffer.
There was nothing but this word of Christ, (Let these go their way,) that saved
the Disciples harmless in that tumult. So likewise does he choose, and preserve
us, although we regard or mind it not.

He did powerfully preserve his Disciples, which makes for our comfort, knowing
the strength of the Lords hand. He would not have them die with him: First,
John 15.
It was not expedient that they should die at that time, because, if they had
died when they denied him, they had been damned. Secondly, They were chosen to
bring forth fruit, but if they had dyed now, their Calling had been cut off.
Thirdly, He would not have them die with him, for this reason especially, lest
we should think that his death alone had not been sufficient. He would
therefore die by himself alone, that he alone might he acknowledged to be our
Savior. He trod the Wine Press alone, Isa. 63.
and of the Nations there was not a man with him. Hence says Moses, The Lord
alone did lead them, and there was no strange God with him. Deuteronomy. 32.
It was he that redeemed us, and not we our selves.

But above all, the Energie or force of Charity is here set forth unto us,
which, as Paul says, Is patient, 1 Cor. 13.
hears all wrongs of ones Neighbor, seeks not her own, and had rather
endure all things it self, then that its Neighbor should suffer any thing. If
you seek me, says he, let these go their way. This is the true care that we
should have of our Neighbor, to be mindful of him, and as much as in us lies
to seek his good, even with some damage to our selves. This care David had of
his Neighbor, Sam 24.
when he says, These sheep, what have they done? Turn thy hand I pray thee,
against me and my Fathers house, for I am he that have sinned. From this care
of his Neighbors it was that Paul wished himself accursed for his Brethren,
Romans 9.3. And Moses to be blotted out of the Book of God, Exodus 33. Therefore
let that threadbare Proverb be for ever banished from the ears and hearts of
Christians, which says, It is a comfort to have companions in calamity. When
the men of this world are in misery, they could wish that all others were in
the same condition. True charity is not grieved more, than to see its Neighbor
in the like affliction. In the close of this passage John shows another cause
why Christ would not have the Disciples die with him, viz. that the saying
which he spoke might be fulfilled, John 17.
Of them which thou have given me, have I lost none. This he said in that
Prayer which he made after Supper: Father, keep them whom thou have given me.
When I was with them, I kept them; and none is lost but the son of perdition,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled. He speaks there of the Apostles, whom
the Father had added to him, as co-workers with him in preaching the Word of
the Kingdom. None of these Apostles perished as long as Christ lived in the
mortal flesh, but Judas only, who was not destroyed by others, but by himself.
He calls this Judas the son of perdition, because he died most miserably, and
perished in his own sins. The rest of the Disciples were safe enough as long as
they kept close to Christ. Here we have a notable Example set down for all
Preachers to observe and follow, viz. in that Christ gloried that he lost none
of those whom his Father gave him. False Pastors do far other wise, who regard
nothing less then their flock. Here John alleges this word of Christ, to let
us see that that Prayer of Christ was very prevalent, and was heard. For if it
had not been accepted, the Disciples could not have been untouched among so
many enemies. This then is our exceeding great consolation, to know that Christ
in that his Prayer was heard on our behalf, in that he feared, Heb. 5.

And Judas also which betrayed him stood with them. John 18.5. Luke 22.47. Mar.
14.45.


And Judas drew near unto Jesus to kiss him.

And he goes straightway to him, and says, Master, Master, and kissed him.

And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail Master, Matthew. 26.49,50.
and kissed him, And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come?

Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Luke 22.48.


Judas was nothing moved hitherto at all that Christ did and spoke, but rather
went on with his abominable and pernicious work. For John says, that this
wicked man stood yet with the enemies of Christ, yea and was hurld with them to
the ground: yet was he nothing reformed. He stood with them not only in body,
but consent too. For it is no danger to be among evil men in body only, as
appears in L^ and Daniel. Judas stood, or rather thought that he stood, when he
had so great a multitude of men about him, with the Ecclesiastical and civil
Power too: but he leaned on a broken Reed. For the Egyptians are men, Isa. 31.
Jerem. 17.
and not God: and their horses flesh, and not spirit. Cursed is he that
trusts in man. Judas stood with the Jews. For,

1. A rotten-hearted Christian is no better than a Jew, or Gentile, for they
are both alike enemies to Christ. Consider then what grief was in the sacred
breast of our Lord, when he saw himself betrayed by his own Disciple, and that
they sought his death to whom he had done most good? It is a deeper cut to the
heart, when we suffer by one that pretended to be our friend, than by one that
we knew was our enemy. Psalm. 55.12.
Thus Christ complains in the Psalms, If mine enemy had reproached me, I could
have born it. But it was the man that was of one mind with me, etc.

2. To say nothing that Christ hereby also foresaw the ingratitude of men
toward him, that it would never cease, but that with Judas and the Jews it
would perpetually continue. And so truly we see it come to pass: indeed the
outward sufferings of Christ ceased, but men's ingratitude is not yet at an end:
it rather increases and waxes more and more daily; so that never was it
greater than now. Again,

1. Here we may take notice of the blinding of Judas. On the one side he saw
Christ standing with his friends, on the other hand were wicked men, such as
were hateful to God and men. So that there was life and death set before him.
But he like a Runnagate joined himself to be worst party. Thus that of the
Psalmist was fulfilled, He loved cursing, Psalm 109.
and it shall come unto him: he loved not blessing, and it shall be far from
him.

2. His strange blindness was seen in that he durst stand before Christ, and
look him in the face with so bloody a conscience. This is indeed the neck with
an iron sinew, Esaias 48. Jeremy 3.
and the brazen brow of the wicked, and truly the whorish forehead that will
not blush.

3. This wretched caytiffe never thought of that blessed fellowship which once
he had with the Apostles: for he is not yet ashamed to stout it against Christ.

4. Lastly, He stood among wicked men, and yet was not afraid. But what need I
reckon up these things only? Hearken therefore and you shall hear greater
things which this Villain durst to do. It is said, that he drew near unto Jesus
to kiss him. O the wonderful goodness and patience of a long suffering Lord!
who denied not a wicked Traitor to kiss him, though he very well knew his
malice toward him, but courteously received him. And O the strange obstinacy of
this wicked fellow on the contrary, whom the embraces of Christ, nor the kisses
of his Heavenly Lips, did not reclaim from his malicious project: but he must
needs satisfy the Jews. Therefore with a bold face he comes near, kisseth,
betrayeth, delivers to enemies, bids them take him, commands them safely to
lead away the Lord Christ. This is the breviate of this lewd fellows
wickedness. But see what cloak he has for his knavery. If you observe his
words and behavior, none seems more courteous and friendly than he. But if you
examine his heart and intention, you will find that none was a more desperate
enemy than he. His words were, Hail Master, which in English is, God save you,
my Master. His behavior was thus, he fell on his neck, embraced him in his
arms, and kissed him. Do you see what a notorious Hypocrite he was? He does not
say, O thou Samaritan; he does not revile and curse him, he does not fall foul
on him or strike him; this had not been like a Traitor. Traitors use to fain
friendship, under a fair show to deceive. Good God, how full is the world now
of such Traitors? No man is secure from them. They sneak even into our closets.
Such the Pharisees often showed themselves to Christ, Matthew. 22. Such was Joab to
Amasa: Art thou in health, my Brother? says he, (2 Samuel 20.) and with that
word he stabbed him. These are those cheating Kisses of which Solomon bids us
beware, Prove. 27. But Paul teaches us other kisses: Salute one another with an
holy kiss, 2 Cor. 13. Such a kiss Joseph gave to his Brethren, Genesis 49. Such
kisses we read of in the Book of Tobit.

But what does Christ say to Judas when he came and kissed him? Does he thrust
him away? Does he soundly rattle him, as he well deserved? Not so, but he
speaks him fair: he does not call him Traitor, but Friend; that so he might
mollify his mind, and teach us to do the like. The meaning is: Friend,
wherefore art thou come? q.d. I invite thee to be friends. For as I foreknew
what thou would do, so now I am ready to forgive thee, and to receive thee
into former favor and friendship again, though thou have thus sinned against
me: Do not slight my offer, but consider what thou art attempting, how
wickedly thou dealest with me who have deserved no such thing at thy hands.
Friend, wherefore art thou come? Who did bring thee to me, who forced thee
hither? Was it my fault? Have any of mine offended thee? But thou art come
willingly of thy own accord; The rest are commanded and compelled, but thou
come, and therefore thou have the greater sin. O Judas, I pity thee; how
does thy destruction trouble me, for whom I now suffer in vain? Lo, thou art
the first on whom my blood has no effect. Why art thou come? Surely not to my
destruction, but thine own, because thou art come to destroy me, by whom thou
should be saved. For how can he be saved that would destroy the very Truth,
Righteousness, and Salvation it self? And these we may suppose were not spoken
to Judas only, but to all such as intend mischief to their Neighbors. For
truly he that wrongs his Neighbor, does first ruin himself. Therefore Brethren
let us look to it, and give all diligence that we be not found false, but real
friends of God and Christ. As Abraham was called the friend of God, James 2.
and Lazarus the friend of Christ, Joh. 11. And Christ does not call his
Apostles servants, but Friends, Joh. 15.

But Judas was never the better for all Christ's counsel. It may be he thought
that Christ spoke this out of fear. Therefore after he had kissed him, Christ
calls him yet once more the last time, and that with great expression of love
and goodness: Judas, says says he, do thou betray the son of man with a
kiss? Now he does lay open his sin, and touch him to the quick; he aggravateth
the sin it self, that so being terrified therewith, he might forbear. O Judas,
what a horrible sin do thou commit? What man durst ever do the like? Do
thou only strive to outstrip all other men besides in malice and mischief?
Beware what thou do. Thou think to cheat me with thy fawning flattery, and
to hide thy hatred from me. But I knew long ago what thy purpose was, and what
bargain thou drovest with the Jews, and what thou meanest by this thy
treacherous kiss: thou betrayest the Son of Man. But consider what an heinous
crime it is to destroy the innocent. Consider also who and what he is whose
life thou huntest after. Grant it, hitherto I have called my self only the son
of Man: but I will make thee see and know who this son of Man is. Thou do not
destroy the son of man only, but the Son of God too. Thou betrayest them both
at once. Thou betrayest him that is thy Father by creation, thy Lord by
preservation, thy Savior by Redemption, thy Brother by incarnation, thy Master
by instruction, thy Friend by election, and lastly him that will be thy Judge
by a final Retribution. See how many sins thou committest at once, and all by
one kiss. Thus thou woundest him by a show of Love; thou sheddest his blood by
a seeming work of charity; thou seek his death in a way of peace: what can
be more odious then this horrid fact?

We see here how unwilling God is that any man should perish, and how
grievously they sin who are the occasion of others ruin and destruction: As on
the other side, how honorably they deserve, who are the means of others
Salvation, Jam. 5.20. Here Christ instructs by his Example and Word. By this
Example he teaches us,

1. Patiently to bear with wicked men: yea to bear the guil and treachery of
false Friends, as Christ did patiently bear the falsehood of Judas; for we that
are servants, ought not to be greater than our Lord.

2. So to love our Neighbor, that we wink not at their faults, as Christ here
calls Judas Friend, yet withal he rebuked him for his sin.

By those two words which Christ here spoke, be would warn every man not to be
like Judas, lest they suffer as he did. It were to be wished that there were but
one Judas in the Church of Christ. We all indeed cry out against his malice:
but mean while we do the same things which we blame him for. Judas was a
covetous man; and for filthy lucre he sold Christ. He robbed the poor of their
Alms and gifts of charity. He did not make it his business to preach Christ: He
was not converted at the preaching of Christ. He took the Body of Christ in his
sins. He betrayed Christ under a color of peace; He was an hypocrite; He was
obstinate and impenitent, etc. How often do we see these and such like things in
a Church? Is not he a Traitor that confesses Christ with his mouth, but
denies him in his works? Also he that does contrary to righteousness, truth,
charity, etc. for money or any other temporal advantage? Likewise he that makes
a show of Love to his Neighbor, but hates him in his heart? O cursed
generation of Judas, how many and deep roots have thou fastened in the earth?
But the time will come, when all the followers of Judas shall perish together
with their Jewish frowardness. Mean while, let the godly (like Christ) bear and
have patience with wicked men.

Now when Judas had kissed him, no doubt but the rest run upon Jesus to lay
hands upon, lest the traitors sign being observed, they should let him escape.
Therefore it follows in the Text;

When they which were about him saw what would follow, Luke 22.49.
they said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword?

Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, John 18.10.
and smote the high Priests servant, and cut off his right ear: the servants
name was Malchus.

And Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far: Luke 22.51. John 18.11. Mat
26.52.


Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: for all they
that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.

Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give
me more then twelve Legions of Angels? The cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it? John 18.11. Mat. 26.54. Luke 22.51.
But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? And he
touched his ear, and healed him.

The Apostles understood not what Christ said at supper when he spoke of buying
a sword. Christ meant the sword of the Spirit: but they thought that he had
spoken of a material sword. Therefore they presently brought him two swords,
and now when they saw their enemies, they asked whether they should fight in
his defense. But Peter, as one hotter then the rest, and flusht with the late
miracle which he saw, when Christ with a word hurled all his enemies to the
ground, and not thinking of Christ's answer, draws his sword, and falls about
him, as if he would valiantly perform what he promised.

Who would not take Peter for a very stout and valiant man, that durst signly
encounter such a company of armed men? If we consider him carnally, then he did
notably discharge his Engagement, that he would die with Christ. Did he not lay
down his life for Christ, when he hazarded it in charging an army of men? But
his Lord did not so construe it. Peter did this more out of carnal confidence,
than of spiritual faith. Now indeed he was bold so long, as he saw a divine
Power in Christ; but presently after Christ hid his Power, Peter's courage
quickly grew cold. Whence it is plain, that this his valor proceeded not from
faith: if it had, it would have held out in danger. For Faith is most
courageous in difficulties. There was love and zeal in Peter, but not according
to knowledge. Christians are forbid to fight. Mat. 5. If we would overcome the
world, it must be with another kind of weapon; we can do little or nothing with
a corporal sword.

Peter saw that the sons of Zebedee were chid for saying, Master, Will thou
that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume these Samaritans, as
Elias did? Luke 9.54. Know ye not, says he, of what spirit ye are of? The son
of man came not to destroy, but to save men's lives. This Peter heard, and yet
now he lays about him, as if he would kill them all, if he could. The flesh
ever loves fighting; it seeks to revenge it self. Peter did not yet understand
that Christ must suffer. Nay, he did not know that Martial Discipline was never
taught in the school of Christ, but that patient submission was always learned
there. Whereas Peter did that servant no more hurt, no thanks to Peter's good
will, but to Christ's goodness, who uses to do good to unworthy and unthankful
men: otherwise fire from Heaven might more justly have consumed this servant,
or the earth have swallowed him up alive.

But whereas Peter did in special cut off this servants ear, it was not by
chance, but by the Providence of God: and that not without a Mystery too. 1.
For, First, It signified that the Jews should from henceforth lose the true and
right hearing, or obedience of the Law and Prophets, and should interpret all
things in a wrong, and not in a right sense: which also is come to pass. 2.
But secondly, Whereas Christ healed that servant, it showed that in due time
they should be enlightened again by Christ, when the fullness of the Gentiles was
come in, Romans 11. 3.
Thirdly, Whereas he whose ear was cut off, was the servant of the high Priest,
it she weth that this sort of men, viz. the Parasites of great persons, have
for the most part but one ear only, and that the left one: whence it is, that
they only hear, and report to their Masters those things only which are false,
wicked, worldly, etc. but they will neither hearken to, nor tell their Lords
the truth, the Word of God, the Righteousness and good service of others. 4.
But lastly, Whosoever is an enemy to Christ, has but one ear, for he
understands all things in a wrong sense, and never comes to the light of
Truth. The name also of this servant is expressed, because of the miracle that
was wrought on him in curing his ear again.

But let us return again to Peter, who was now fallen under the power of the
sword, because he had taken up the sword. And no doubt but he had felt the
force of other swords, if Christ had not protected him by his divine Power.
What does Christ therefore do? He reproved Peter, and forbids him to use any
such force or violence, and that with many Arguments: for Peter by this fact
was many ways to be reproved. 1.
First, because every private person is forbid to use the sword. 2.
Secondly, Because having been so long in the school of Christ, he should have
learned that the weapons of our warfar are spiritual, mighty through God. 2
Cor. 10. 3.
Thirdly, He was an Apostle, yea, the chief of the Apostles: whose duty is to
save, not to destroy. 4.
Lastly, Peter was most blame worthy, in that he gave the first blow, before any
hurt was done, either to him, or to Christ. Therefore Christ does justly blame
him more than the rest; He speaks but one word to the rest, Suffer ye thus far,
says he, q.d. It is a great work of Charity to preserve the life of our
Neighbor, and to defend him from violence: but there is another business now
in hand. My Father has appointed me to suffer, and to die. Let me alone
therefore that I may suffer, and accomplish those things which the Father has
determined to do by me for the salvation of men. Suffer ye yet, that I may be
apprehended, and perfect the work of your Redemption, this he said to the other
Disciples. But he says more to Peter at first, Put up thy sword into his
place, q.d. Know thou not that I did chide thee before, and called thee
Satan for this very thing? Mat. 16. Do not hinder my death, but rather study to
conform to it. Throw away this thy sword with which thou do kill, and slay
men. My sword which I gave thee, does destroy, and cut down sin, but preserves
men. Put up therefore that outward sword into the sheath, or (as the other
Evangelists say.) into its place. Now the proper place of the material sword,
is the ordinary Power. Therefore hide thy sword here. Let that Power use it,
not thou. If the body be sick, the Physician is to cure it, not the Plowman.
So if any thing be amiss in the Mystical (or rather the Politic,) body, it
concerns the Power to deal with it, not every private person. 1.
Christ then does hereby forbid all revenge to private persons, as it is
written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
Secondly, He teaches us to overcome evil with good, according to that, Mat. 5.
Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. But I say unto you, Do good to them that hate you. Christians ought not
to defend themselves with swords and staves, but with Humility, Patience,
Gentleness, Courtesies. Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly in
heart, Mat. 11. 3.
Again, Christ does hereby condemn our wrath and impatience, who cannot put up,
and pass by a hasty word, nor be content to requite with the like loss, but
must revenge our selves double and trebble, contrary to that of Paul, Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12. 4.
Fourthly, We are here taught, that the Gospel is not to be fought for with
worldly weapons, and humane Power, but the protection thereof is to be
committed to God. So says Paul, The weapons of our war fare are not carnal,
but spiritual, etc. Thus Christ never used any sword, nor do we read that the
Apostles did ever wear any. They taught the Word; the Word fought with its own
force, and the Apostles got the victory: So says Christ in Luke, Luke 21.
I will give a mouth and wisdom, which none of your Adversaries shall be able
to resist 5.
Lastly, Christ does here by this word in special, forbid the Apostles to use
any outward sword. Ephesians. 6.
They have, and should have the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.
Thus Isaiah foretold, that the Apostles fighting should be as in the day of
Midian, that is, Isa. 9.
as Gideon overcame the Med anites, not with weapons, but Trumpets and dashing
of pitchers; so the Apostles should spiritually subject all the world to Christ
by the Trumpet of Gods Word, and the patient enduring of suffering.

These are the reasons why Christ forbids Peter. The chiefest whereof is
this. He that takes the Sword shall perish with the Sword. For he that
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. So was it
commanded in the Law, Levit. 24. Christ plainly here intimates, that it is not
lawful for any but the Magistrate to use the Sword. Hence we may easily gather
how far a zeal of godliness may proceed. It is lawful to relieve the oppressed,
to protect a just cause, but yet no farther then thy calling will bear thee
out; Art thou a Magistrate? know that thou art the Minister of God to execute
Vengeance on him that does evil. But if thou art a private person, then
admonish, rebuke, reprove, yet without reviling. But if thou have not the
authority of the Magistrate, thou must not usurp the Sword for Christ or a good
cause. Christ and a just cause has no need to be defended by thy private
Sword. Christ is strong enough of himself, and so is Righteousness: There
Christ adds: Think thou not that I could pray my Father, and he would send
me more than twelve Legions of Angels? as if he had said, if I had been to
fight, and not to suffer, I would not have called you twelve to my assistance.
I knew where to have had other guess help then ye, even Angels, and
Principalities, and Heavenly Powers: of which I could have gotten a huge
multitude for a words speaking, for they are ready at my beck and pleasure. I
tell ye, I could have at least a whole Legion of Angels instead of every one of
you, and that in the twinkling of an eye. And what could all the Jews have done
against one Legion of Angels? Nay, one Angel could have slew them all, as he
did heretofore, witness the great Host of Senacherib: 2 King. ^. Matthew. 24.
We read also in Daniel ( chap. 10.) of the strength of Angels. With such
Warriers Christ will come to judgment. Whom if he would, he might now have had
ready to serve him. Hereby showing that Righteousness, Truth, or a just cause
have no need to be defended by the Sword of private men. For they have more
then twelve Legions of Angels standing on their side to take their part; yea
they have the whole Heavenly Host, and God also on their part: so that they
cannot be crushed, though for a time they seem to be oppressed: Hence says David,
I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are true, Psalm 119. Again, Thou have loved
Righteousness, and hated iniquity, Psalm 45.

Christ afterward teaches us in what manner we may be able to bear the wrong
and violence which our enemies do to us. We shall never bear the least in jury
with a quiet mind, if we look only on the wrong that is done us, or on our
Adversaries that do it. Therefore Christ directs Peter to consider Gods Will
and Pleasure: Will thou not, says he, that I drink of the cup which my Father
has given me? He calls his Passion, a cup.

1. Because the Scripture is wont so to speak, as was showed before in the
first Prayer of Christ.

2. To show that death was sweet to him, and very desirable for the Salvation
of man; as a thirsty man diesireth beer, and drinks it with delight.

3. To show that the greatest afflictions in this world are nothing, but as it
were one draught, and presently they are gone.

Christ does not only say, wilt not thou that I drink of the cup? but adds
this, which my Father has given me. Nor does he speak this doubtingly; Perhaps
God the Father has given this cup, it may be God would that I should suffer:
but he speaks it positively, my Father has given me this cup. Now if it be
certain that the Father has given it, who shall gainsay it? We must not
struggle or oppose, but readily obey, when we know it to be the Will of God.

He does not say simply, God or a Judge gave it, but the Father; to teach us
that God is a Father, even when he scourges. 1.
Christ therefore here instructs us, that he did not suffer at the pleasure of
men, but by the command of God his Father. 2.
Secondly, He shows, that he was not rebellious against God, but was obedient
to his Father in the greatest sufferings, even to death. 3.
Thirdly, He teaches us, in our adversity not to regard men or Devils, that do
what mischief they can to us, but to look to God who suffers them so to do, as
Christ here did. So said Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, etc.
Job 1. So David, Let him curse me, said he, perhaps God has bid him curse
David, 2 Samuel 16.

But there is an Emphasis in that which Christ says Will thou not that I drink
it? Wilt not thou who art but a man, a creature, a servant, yield to what God,
the Creator, the Lord will have done? The Father has filled this cup for me,
and filled it to the brim: and I am not afraid to drink it off, though it
benever so bitter, I will drink it to the bottom: neither thou nor any other
creature shall hinder me. This cup is provided for me, and for none else, for
no man but I is able to drink it, who then should drink it, if I do not? If I
do not drink this cup, all men will perish with an eternal thirst. But if I
drink this cup, though it be a bitter one, yet it will queach all your thirst.
So that for this reason also he calls his Passion a cup, because all drink of
it, not only in that we suffer with him, and after him, but also because we
have all our comfort from it. As therefore Christ resused not to drink his cup,
but blamed Peter for dissuading him from it, so let us do also. We must not
endure or hearken to him that draws us from our obedience to the commands of
God, though in his words he seem to extol godliness. But if he be a subject,
he is to be rebuked; if an equal, he is not to be born with; if he be a
Superior, he must not be feared. We ought to obey God, rather than men.

Christ yet has another reason to deter Peter from his overhasty and rash
enterprise. How, says he, shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, if thou think
to go this way to work, and chase away the cross with thy sword? Was not my
Passion very often foretold? especially in Psalm 22. and Isa. 53. So the
Passion of the Elect is prophesied of, Zach. 13. How then shall these
Scriptures be fulfilled, if we avoid the cross and passion, and slip our necks
out of this collar? For thus it ought to be done. So has the Father decreed.
Thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his glory, Luke 24. So
ye also through many Tribulations must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Acts
14. Therefore put up thy sword into the sheath. You see here how effectually
Christ instructs Peter, and in him all us, to be patient.

In the close of this passage Luke says, that Christ took the servant, healed
him, and restored his ear again. Christ never forgets his goodness. In his
deepest abasement he would sometimes glance out some beams of the Godhead. For
it was the finger of God that did this and all other Miracles. And this Token,
this Grace, this Favor, this courtesy he did show to him that was his
professed enemy, that sought his death, and who, as Christ well knew, would
persist in his malice after he had this kindness showed to him. Here, O
Christian, see here, that what our Lord Jesus Christ commanded us, he first did
it himself; here I say, thou have an Example to love thine enemy. Love your
enemies, do good to them that hate you, etc. Mat. 5. Who ever fulfilled this
command more perfectly than Christ? For here you see how that he cured their
wounds who sought his death, and did accomplish it. Go, and do thou likewise.

Hitherto we have heard how that Christ ran to meet his Adversaries. And how
those his Adversaries were fenced with a multitude, with Power and with Arms
cap-a pe. But Christ had very few with him, and they indeed instructed in War,
but not with corporal Weapons: he rather disarmed them of those weapons, and
went out harnessed against Judas only with love and patience, and against
Malchus with bounty and courtesy. How unequal were their weapons? which party
shall we close with? Naturally we are inclined to that party that is most
numerous, and best fortified with arms and power, let the quarrel be never so
bad. Contrariwise, let the cause be never so good, we stick not to it, if the
powers be not for it. Which has the better on it, a just cause without arms? or
an unjust cause with all accoutrements of War? Indeed wicked men for the
present seem to have the upper hand. But the time will come when the Saints
shall win the day, however they seem yet to have the worst end of the staff:
although if men could rightly discern it, the Saints at present have the
strongest side. True, the ungodly wear the garland, but it is by the sword,
rustling, and clamor. If this be to bear away the bell, who more stout than
cutters and highway men? But the godly prevail both by their cause, and the
truth of their cause. He is the valiantest man that conquers by his cause, not
by his clashing. The Jews overcome by their sword, but Christ by his cause. So
Cain conquered by his sword, and Abel by his sacrifice, Genesis 4. It matters not
whose sword, but whose cause keeps the field. He that would get the better of
his Adversary, let him be sure his cause be just.

Then Jesus said unto the chief Priests, Luke 22.52.
and Captains of the Temple, and the Elders which were come to him, Be ye come
out as against a Thief, with Swords and Staves to take me? When I was daily
with you in the Temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me: But this is
your hour, and the power of darkness. Mat. 26.56.
That the Scriptures might be fulfilled.

See here the power of Christ in the midst of his abasement. For,

1. Though they did rave and rage never so much after Judas had kissed him,
after he had thrown them on their back, after Christ had confessed himself to
be He whom they looked for, yet they could not lay hands on him: that the saying
of Isaias might be true, Is. 53.7. He was offered, because he was willing;
Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit, says the Vulg. Lat. as if it had been said,
whereas he was to be offered for us, it was not for want of power in him to
resist, or from the power of them that rusht upon him, but it was of his own
accord.

2. Observe here the great blindness of the Jews, who plainly seeing that they
could do nothing but what and when he pleased, yet for all that they continued
as wicked as before. Well therefore did Isaias foretell. The heart of this
people is gross, Isa. 6.

3. See also how they thirsted after Christ's blood, in that they were not
satisfied to send their servants, and that a great many of them, but their
chief men must go out along with them. For the Text plainly affirms, that the
chief Priests and Rulers of the temple, and the Elders, i.e. some of these went
together with Judas, even that very night when they should have eaten the
Paschal Lamb. So forgetful were they of all Religion, that they thought of
nothing but killing of Christ. After the literal sense, they therefore went out
with Judas first, lest the Traitor should deceive them, for they durst not
trust him. Secondly, To back on the Traitor, and make him the more bold, being
propt up by their presence and Authority. Thirdly, That the servants might be
more forward and diligent to that cruelty when their Masters were present.
Lastly, Lest if any of the common people should take part with Christ, they
might desist, when they saw the Magistrates there. See how prudent the children
of this world are to promote their designs. But what does Christ do? He derides
their Enterprise with most pithy words, Are ye come forth as against a thief?
q.d. What famous Warriors are ye? What need had ye to make such a stir? Where
are your enemies? Where are those thieves against whom you make such Warlike
preparations? Were ye afraid lest I should have a great company of Believers
about me? ye need not so much fear it. Truly, I am not your enemy, nor am I a
thief or a robber. Nor have I any of the people, or arms with me, so that one
of you had been enough to have taken me: you see I come to you of my own
accord, and do as it were deliver my self into your hands. If this were your
intention, if this were your purpose, why did ye not take me all this while in
the City, and save all this cost and pains? How often have we been togegether in
the Temple, where ye heard me preach? Why did ye not lay hold on me then? I
know ye had a mind to do it, but ye could not so much as hurt one hair of my
head, as ye have many times tried. But now I willingly tender my self, ye may
fulfill your wicked lust upon me. But your great Array can do nothing to it.
Wretched men, what could all your endeavor, power, wrath, fury do to me, if I
were not willing? But the time is now come.

This is your hour. God, even my God now gives you leave. Do therefore, not
what God has commanded, but what he now permits you to do. Now the power of
hell reigns. Now this power takes place. A man cannot now turn himself any
way, but there is most palpable and thick darkness, so that there is scarce a
man at this time able to see or know what is holy, what is true and just. There
is neither day, nor light, nor reason, nor wisdom among men. Christ compared
that satanical and hellish darkness to the usual darkness of the Night, when
those Tyrants rusht into the Garden to take Jesus. There was darkness without:
but their hearts were much darker. It was night, that one could not see
another. But the hearts of those wicked men were so blinded, that they could
see nothing at noon day, so powerfully had the Devil brought his hellish
darkness over these wicked Jews. For doubtless, it is a most infallible sign of
great blindness and obscurity, of darkness and of the night, to take and bind
the true and only Messiah.

1. Christ then does here teach us, that no harm can happen to the godly, but
when and how much God pleases.

2. That the afflictions of the godly last but for an hour. That which vexes
us here is but momentany and short, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 4.17.

3. He does fully describe the conquests of the wicked, calling them the Power
of darkness. That is properly the Power of darkness when Virtue and
Righteousness is oppressed, and when lies, injustice and iniquity reigns.

4. He does secretly admonish his Adversaries of the Judgment to come. This,
says he, is your hour, but your glass will be out ere long, you have but an
hour, and then my time will quickly come, when all your malice will be required
at your hands. By this Word therefore Christ gave them power to take him. Do ye
ask why he did so? It was that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, that is, that
whatsoever the true God at any time had spoken by the mouth of his Prophets,
might indeed come to pass. Where you see again, that this whole History is
grounded upon the Scripture. The reason of all that was done is referred to the
Scripture, that we might be more firmly established in the Faith.

Thus far Christ spoke to those sons of the Night and Darkness, who answered
him not a word again, but being at length permitted, they poured out all their
wrath and rage against him. Matthew says.

Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus. Mat. 26.50.


This is spoken in general. But John sets it down more at large.

Then the band of Soldiers, John 18.12.
and the Tribune (so it should be read) and the Officers of the Jews, took
Jesus and bound him.

The inward suffering of Christ has hitherto been premised. His out ward now
begins.

When Christ had permitted, rather then given them power over him, these
ravenous Wolves worry this Lamb, cursed Thieves lay hands on the Shepherd,
degenerate children on their Father, sinners on God, the children of darkness
on the true Light, being nothing moved with his meekness, or the Majesty of his
Godhead, or the amazement of his Miracles. They held him who was ready to be
taken hold of, they hale him who was willing to be dragged by them, if he would
have resisted, their wicked hands could have done him no hurt.

Here then was fulfilled what David in the person of Christ foretold long ago:
Trouble is near, and there is none to help, Psalm. 22.11. Many bulls have
compassed me about: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round. They gaped upon
me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring Lion. I am poured out like
water, etc.

Now although the Evangelists recite this captivation of Christ plainly and in
a few words (for they did it only that we might believe the story to be true)
yet they give us occasion to meditate on many things, as appears chiefly out of
John, who hinteth,

1. What was the reason why they could now lay hold on Christ, and not before,
though they had often attempted it, viz. Because the Father had given this cup,
and Christ himself obediently took the same and drank it, and the hour was now
come which was from Eternity determined for this to be done, therefore they
could take him. This was the reason, and not their force or power.

2. The same John reckons up more that laid hold on Christ, and that by name
too. The Band, and the Captain, and the Officers of the Jews, etc. to intimate,
that this first furious assault was exceeding grievous to the Lord Christ. And
no wonder: for how should they be favorable to him on whom they had but now
laid hold on, whom they had no pity on when he hung upon the cross, when they
had vented all their rage upon him? Therefore not one nor another, but
altogether fall foul on him. Besides they were all of them incensed against him
with wrath and hatred, being persuaded by their Ringleaders that this man was
a most mischievous seducer: with this wrath and hatred they go out against him.
Their wrath was increased, in that they could not apprehend him all this while;
as also because he had thrown them flat to the ground. Judas too had not a
little stirred them up, advising them to keep him fast in hold.

They all fell upon him as soon as they had their Commission, every one seeking
to avenge his in jury, and studying how to gratify the chief Priests, for whom
they knew they should do a most acceptable service if they took no compassion
on Christ. It seemed to be just as if some strong hold were stormed, sacked,
plundered, none sparing any, when a breach was once made after a long siege.
For this cause John does particularly name those that took Christ prisoner.

Note also that in taking Christ captive, there were not only the Soldiers and
the Jews, but the Gentile Romans too; nor did they only that were present sin
against Christ, but they also that were absent, the Rulers, by whose command it
was put in execution. So neither one, nor other, but all men, they that have
been, they that are, and they that shall be, of every sex, of every state,
condition, etc. are all guilty of the blood of Christ. He was truly taken in
our sins. Who then should not be afraid? They took Jesus, but they had been
better they had let him alone. That is a good apprehension; when the godly
apprehend him by faith, hope and charity; whereof Paul says, I follow after,
if by any means I may comprehend, Phil. 3. So the Spouse, I held him, and would
not let him go, Cant. 8. But this is not the apprehension spoken of here, but
that which the Wise man speaks of, Let us lie in wait for the Righteous, let
us put him to u shameful death, Wisd. 2.

Thus he that took not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham, is most unworthily
laid hands on by those very men whom he took by the hand. He that stretched not
forth his hand of mercy to the Angels, but to men when they were fallen, is now
taken by their hands. O the wonderful goodness of God! It was much that he
should set men so high at first: but it is much more that he should abase
himself sollow for man at last. So it was a great thing, that commonly he did
miraculously deliver the godly: but it is far greater, that he should now in
love to us yield to be a captive, that he might deliver us from Eternal
slavery. Sin, death and the devil had taken us captive with great Tyranny; but
Christ willingly suffered himself to be taken, when none of these our
catch-poles had any power over him. And because he was stronger than they, he
overcame them, and set us free. Therefore we may well sing, I will extol thee,
O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over
me, Psalm 30.1.

John adds. And they bound him. This was the only power of darkness, to take
to bind, whom they could not take to understand. So they did take him when his
own hour was; for one momentany hour, for afterward there was no power of
darkness could ever any more comprehend the Light. When they had taken him,
they bound him. O the horrid boldness of sinners! They bound, him that they
might lead him away more safely. For so Judas had forewarned them, that they
should look narrowly to him. And now they think themselves safe, as long as
they have Christ prisoner in their own custody. But certainly this taking and
binding of Christ was their utter undoing. A figure whereof was in Sampson, and
in the Ark of God, Judge. 16. and 1 Samuel 5. For as the Philistines took Sampson
to their own bane, he killing many more of them at his death then in his life.
And as the same Philistines, when they took the Ark of God, were many ways
sorely afflicted by it, so none else destroyed the Jews but he that was taken
and bound by them. The Philistines rejoiced when they had taken Sampson; so they
did when they got the Ark of God: but their joy did not last long. The Jews
were glad when they had taken Christ, but their joy was but short: for a little
after the Romans destroyed them. Hence it is that they also now cry and pray,
but there is none to hear or help them. And justly too. For he may say to them,
that they manicled both his arms of Majesty, and therefore he cannot now
relieve them.

Thus the unthankful sons of Adam lay hands on him, by whose hands they were
created. They bind him who came to untye all men. The meek Lamb all this while
holds his peace, and opens not his mouth; but in the bitterness of soul
considers of what continuance our time is, knowing that nothing but our sin
brought him into all this trouble and sorrow, Isa. 53. David spoke of this
taking of Christ long since: Mine enemies compass me about, they are enclosed
in their own fat, i.e. they are incorrigibly resolved to practice their own
wickedness, and not to be withheld by any persuasions, or Miracles. Their mouth
speaks proud things, Psalm 17. We may suppose that they took him with great
shouting, and scoffing, and reviling. They have compassed my steps, they set
their eyes bowing to the earth, that is, they have determined that neither God,
nor his Justice, no nor Heaven it self shall see or find them out. They come
upon me with open mouth, as a Lion greedy of his prey. Behold, what wrath and
rage was here: which cannot be expressed but by the fury of the most stout and
savage Beast. So in another Psalm: They compassed me about like Bees, and are
extinct as the fire among the Thorns: By which words the excessive cruelty of
Christ's enemies is foreshewn, Psalm 118.12. For such is the fiery rage of Bees,
that although they can never get honey when they have lost their sting, yet
they will in a rage stick the same in their enemy, and rather live drones than
not revenge themselves. Thus the Jews spit their venom on Christ, never caring
whether they did ever gather honey more. Therefore afterward they said: His
blood be on us, and on our children. Matthew. 27.
Of which anon.

Note also, that when the binding of Christ is mentioned, it is spoken in the
plural number. It was not only one that bound him. They were the sins of all
men that did bind Christ. So it is said in the Psalms, The bonds of the wicked
have robbed me, Psalm 119.61. Our first Parents begun to twist these cords, and
we have finished them. Startle here, O sinner, when thou hear and see that
thy sins did so cruelly entangle and bind Christ. But be not altogether
dismayed, for by those his bonds Christ brake ours, and restored us unto true
freedom. So that we may merrily sing: Thou have loosed my bonds, I will
sacrifice to thee the sacrifice of praise, Psalm 116. Learn we hence,

1. To be thankful for our deliverance.

2. Let us take heed that we never more so bind Christ with our sins again.

3. We also should learn constantly to suffer bonds for Christ, if the case so
require. For fetters and shackles are now no more a reproach, but an honor.
They are sanctified and ennobled by the sacred Body of Christ; so that it is no
shame, but a credit to bear them for Christ, as we see in the Apostles and
Martyrs; who had no greater badge of honor then to suffer for Christ. And let
not us blush to be bound for Christ, who first was in bonds for us.

4. Lastly, Let us learn to take our selves captives, and to bind our selves
with the cords of Gods Precepts, or rather with the bonds of Charity, lest we
let them take their swinge in those things that are contrary to God. Let our
eyes be held captive from sinful objects, our ear from idle tales, our tongue
from unsavory discourse, our hands from wicked works, our heart from evil
thoughts, our understanding and judgment from erroneous and corrupt opinions,
etc. Let this suffice in brief to be spoken of Christ's surprisal.

And they all forsook him and fled. Mar. 14.50.
And there followed him a certain young man having a linen cloth cast about his
naked body, and the young men laid hold on him. And he left the linen cloth,
and fled from them naked.

Here we see what great cruelty was exercised in the taking of Christ, at which
the very pillars of Heaven shaked when they saw it. For if they had not dealt
so barbarously with him, the Apostles would not have fled so suddenly from him.
Doubtless they were very unwilling to forsake their Lord: but the excessive
cruelty terrified and overcame them. So that Christ is left alone amongst his
enemies, who before was guarded with his Disciples when the people honored him.

Now was fulfilled that which he spoke before concerning smiting the Shepherd,
and scattering the flock: Now that was fulfilled which he spoke elsewhere, The
world shall rejoice, but ye shall be sorrowful. Surely this was a very sad and
doleful parting of the Apostles, when these holy men were forced to forsake
him, for whom they had forsaken all things. No doubt but they did often look
back, and make their moan to Heaven with weeping eyes.

Nor this did flight and scattering of the Disciples, whom he so dearly loved,
a little increase the Passion of Christ, he having as it were born them thus
long in his Bosom. Can a Mother forget her child? says he, Isa. 49. though she
may, yet will not I forget thee. Here then might Christ say, as David long
since in his person wailingly warbled: Lover and Friend have thou put far from
me: and mine acquaintance into darkness, Psalm 88.18. Again, My lovers and
friends stand aloof from my sore: they that seek my life lay snares, Psalm 38.
And again, Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: and I
looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but I
found none, Psalm 69. And in Isa. 63. I have trodden the Winepress alone, and
of the Nations there was not a man with me. So in Job 19. Mine acquaintance are
utterly estranged from me.

1. Here then we see how true David and Paul spoke, when they said all men were
liars, but God only was true, Psalm. 116. Romans 3. The Apostles promised with
great vehemence that they would never be offended at Christ. But Christ on the
contrary had told them before, that they should all be offended because of him.
Who was now the Liar? It is a lively picture of persecution: when any is cast
into bonds by the Magistrate, and none will own him. In a rainy day men sit
alone without company, Tempora si suerint nubula solus eris.
but when the Sun shines we have many visiters.

2. By this flight of the Disciples, we see what man is if God withold his
hand. It is most true what Christ says: Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.
Again, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it,
Psalm. 127.1. So what Christ said to his Disciples at Supper: Whither I go, ye
cannot follow me yet, Joh. 13.33.

3. Let the godly hence learn to call upon God from the bottom of his heart
when they are in imminent danger: Lord save us, we perish. Without his help we
cannot hold out. Again, if we have done any good, let us say: Not unto us O
Lord, not unto us, bnt unto thy name give the praise, Psalm. 115.

4. Learn we also to take it patiently if friends forsake us in our necessity.
What befell Christ may also happen to us. So says the wise man: Some friend is
a companion at the Table, and will not continue in the day of thy affliction,
Eccl. 6.10.

5. Let us not for the fear of man forsake Christ, or righteousness and truth;
but if it chance that we should flee, being overcome with any lust or fear, let
us not despair, but with the Apostles timely return to Christ again by
repentance. Let us return, I say, without delay, lest we out-slip our time.

6. But above all, let us pray that we never be separated from Christ.

Now whereas Mark does here annex the history of the young man on whom the
enemies of Christ laid hold: this was done to show, that there is no age or
time exempted from the Cross so long as the Power of Darkness reigns, but all
must suffer, as was plain enough to be seen in those children of Bethlehem that
were slain for Christ, Mat. 2. as also in Joseph heretofore when he was yet but
young, Genesis 37.

But who that young man was the text does not express, nor can any easily
determine, nor does it much matter. Yet Theophylact is of opinion, that it was
one of that house where Christ supt that night: But two things Mark writes of
this young man, whosoever he was.

1. That the other young men endeavored to lay hold of him. It had been a
shame for the ancient men to pursue and run after children. They signify
therefore such boys as were ill bred, whose Parents were too indulgent to
them, and let them do what they listed, letting loose their reins to all
wickedness, and never correcting or restraining them from their evil and lewd
courses, as here no man checked these saucy fellows from laying hands on this
harmless young lad. Such were those boys who mocked Elisha, 2 King. 2. though
they escaped Scot-free from man, yet God met with them with a witness.

2. It is said of this young man, that he left his linen clothes and fled away
naked, choosing rather to be stripped stark naked than to be apprehended by them.
Thus Joseph fled from his adulteress Mistress, and left his cloak behind him,
Genesis 39. He that would escape the hands of wicked men, must leave the things of
the world to the world, and follow Jesus with all his heart. Christians ought
to leave all for the Kingdom of heaven, much more their linen rags. It
follows in the Text:

And they led him away to Annas first (for he was Father in law of Caiaphas)
which was the High Priest that same year. Joh. 18.13.
Now Caiaphas was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that
one man should die for the people.

We have attentively heard how the Lord Christ was taken by wicked men, whereto
also he willingly yielded himself, as knowing what great good would thence
arise to all men. Those night-warriours could do no more but take, bind, and
lead him away. It was not their work to murder him: for so the Princes had
resolved, that he should be brought to them alive. And this they did.

1. That none should say he was put to death unjustly. Therefore they would
first hear him, under color of judging him justly.

2. They determined to send his whole Answer to the Roman Court. But they had
no purpose to release him, if he had answered never so well: but were fully
resolved to put him to death. For dead men cannot bite. They stood in aw of him
whilst he lived, because he reproved their hatred. The good God keep all
Governors from following this example. They did not presently put Christ to
death at this Counsel: but brought him into the City, that they might put him
to the more disgrace and punishment. What tongue can express what a wretched
convoy this was? they dragged him along with great shoutings, in much have, and
with many flouts, as if he had been the most notorious villain that ever lived,
so fast bound that he could scarce fetch breath. And although he would have
gone to suffer of his own accord, yet no doubt but they justled, and thumpt,
and thrust him from one side to another: for how should they favor when they
first took him, who had no pity on him when he was dying? So truly might he
say: Is it nothing to you, O all ye that pass by? Behold, and see if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow, Lam. 1.12. See, I say, how basely I am dragged,
how cruelly I am buffeted, how patiently I take it. Behold a company of mad
Dogs, merciless murderers, and me a most meek Lamb in the midst of them. See
what a face their fists have made me, how it is besmeared with my bloody sweat
and the Jews spittle, how bedewed it is with tears, my feet galled and torn
with stones, etc. Thus he who alone was able and willing to lead us to heaven,
was here led along in a most reproachful manner on earth. First to Annas, then
to Caiaphas, for these were the chief of the Priests, and bare the sway in the
Temple and spiritual things, in all Ecclesiastical affairs. Now because the
matter concerning Christ was spiritual (for it respected faith and doctrine)
therefore according to law they thought it belonged to that Court. Thus they
deatl afterward with Paul, when they brought him before Annanias the High
Priest, Act. 23. So they did to the other Apostles, when they convented them
before these same men, Annas, and Caiaphas, John and Alexander, Act. 4. And for
this reason Gallio the Deputy of Achaia refused to judge Paul's case, because it
did not seem to be civil, but spiritual.

These two men had an ill report, and were suspected to have given Herod an
yearly sum of money for the Priestly Honor and Office, like true Simonists and
Giezites, yea the Father of all Simon acal men. Nor would they pass this over
in silence, calling Caiaphas the High Priest, not simply, as the law required,
but only says, that he was the High Priest for that year. For these two men
did Farm the Priesthood of the Romans at an yearly rent. Whence we may guess
that they had little godliness, but much arrogance and vain glory. He was first
led to Annas: 1. For honors sake, out of respect to him; for he was the elder
man, and Father in law of Caiaphas. 2. That Christ's condemnation might appear
more just, if he were sentenced by more than one. 3. But chiefly that this
wicked crew might rejoice together over the common enemy whom they had now
taken. Annas perhaps could not be present at the next Common Council, by reason
of his age, therefore would feast his eyes in the mean time with that desired
object. So had Christ foretold: The world shall rejoice, that is, it shall
triumph in my Passion. Thus the wicked rejoice to do evil, and delight in the
frowardness of the wicked, Prove. 2.14. But little do they think how short their
joy will be. Thus they would heap honor one upon another, and secure their
sacrilege by common consent, lest if one should undertake to do it alone, he
might according to the Roman laws be impeached as the Author of that wicked
fact. 4. Therefore was Christ first brought to Annas, that men might not hate
and blame Caiaphas only, if he being the first that gave counsel, should also
be the first that condemned him. O Pharisees ye do all to be seen of men.

But whereas Christ was brought before many Judges, it was not so much the plot
of the Jews, as the providence of God. For in that he was examined by many, his
innocence was the more cleared. Thereby he made even all his Judges to be
witnesses of his innocence and profess it openly, which is the strongest
testimony of all.

And it is not for nothing that John does make mention both of Caiaphas and his
counsel before Christ was brought to Caiaphas his house. For this bare counsel
only of Caiaphas was the chiefest cause why not only the Rulers conspired the
death of Christ, but also why the people fell out of conceit with him.

John therefore first names him, as wondering that so vile a man should be in
so good an Office, and still continue so ungodly.

2. He admireth that this High Priest did so greedily thirst after the blood of
Christ, that when others were at a stand, he should presently proclaim and give
his verdict for his death, whereas nothing does less become a Priest then to be
a bloodthirsty man.

3. John wondered that so true and divine a sentence should proceed out of the
mouth of so wicked a man. For what is more true? What is more comfortable, than
that Christ dyed for the people? And that wicked man was the first that uttered
this sentence, but much against his intention. Therefore John says, that he
spoke not this of himself, but by the holy Ghost, Joh. 11.

4. Lastly, John holds forth Caiaphas and his counsel to us, that we might see
the righteous and strange judgment of God concerning this man. For in him we
truly see the Scripture fulfilled: that which the wicked do fear shall fall
upon them. Again, they that fear the frost shall be covered with the snow, Qui
timent pruinam, irruet super eos nix, so the Vulg. Lat. reads that in Job 6.16.
Caiaphas was afraid that Christ would get his place and Priesthood from him.
And because he endeavored to hold his honor by unlawful means; it was not
long ere he lost his honor, himself too, and the whole Nation besides. He
feared a temporal loss, and fell into an eternal and temporal both at once.
This Caiaphas then is a most notorious president of all impiety, (for he is not
named by way of honor, but infamy.) It was he and his Father in law on whom
that word of Christ was principally fulfilled: ye have made of the house of God
a den of thieves, Matthew. 21. It were these two chiefly against whom Christ did
more than once thunder out that eternal woe, Mat. 23. Therefore they hated
Christ, and desired his death more than any. For he was grievous to them to
behold, because he upbraided them with their offending the Law, Wis. 2.
Wherefore Caiaphas by that his counsel endeavored by all means to estrange the
people from Christ. They did not fear God, but the people only. And they did
not a little prevail therein, for by their means the people were fully
satisfied, that if they suffered Christ to live he would be an occasion of
destruction to that place, and the Nation of the Jews; which when the carnal
people heard, who loved their present temporal in joyments, and had been often
in captivity formerly, they were strangely incensed with rage against Christ.
For generally this is rooted in all men, that by how much the greater kindness
one man does to another, so much the more hatred does he incur, if ever he be
suspected to have done it from a base mind, and to an ill end. So was it
between Haman and Ahasuerus: The like was it also with Christ. The people were
strongly persuaded that all things which Christ did, tended to no other end but
to bring them into bondage again. When they were thus persuaded, it was easy
for them to forget all Christ's miracles and mercies, when they heard that he
would be the occasion of wasting that land which God gave to Abraham and to his
Seed for a possession, and that by his means all the people would be carried
into captivity. To hear of losing Land and Liberty was no jesting matter to
this people. So that now they were most certainly assured that their rage
against him was most righteous, yea that they could not be too woodde angry or
madly incensed against him. This frantic fit of fury that devout and pious
High Priest put the simple people into: John therefore does record this his
counsel to his perpetual shame and infamy.

But let this suffice to be spoken of the impiety of these two High Priests.
God grant never any more such be born as these were. To proceed,

And Simon Peter followed Jesus (afar off, Joh. 18.15.
Mat. 26.58.) and so did another Disciple: (unto the High Priests Palace, Mat.
16.) that Disciple was known to the High Priest, and went in with Jesus into
the Palace of the High Priest. But Peter at the door without. Then went out
that other Disciple, which was known to the High Priest, and spoke unto her
that kept the door, and brought in Peter. Luke 22.56.
Then says the Damosel that kept the door (earnestly looking upon him, and
said) unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's Disciples? But he denied
him, saying; woman, I know him not; I know not what thou say, I am not.

There are some of opinion that there was nothing done in the house of Annas,
either to Christ or Peter, but that Christ was presently carried from Annas to
Caiaphas, and there those things happened which are here spoken of Peter. And
this they labor to prove with no contemptible arguments. Others think that the
first business of Peter fell out in the house of Annas, and that Christ was
there questioned about his Doctrine and Disciples, and there smote on his face.
These ground their opinion on the story as it is written by John. But we will
not here contend about this. It may suffice us, that these things were done and
said, wheresoever it was it matters not much. But for orders-sake, and that we
may more clearly handle every particular, we will imitate those that follow
John, and think that the first business was acted in the house of Annas.
Observe then that here are only two Disciples said to follow Jesus. Christ went
forth with all his Disciples, however it came to pass that before his Passion
was hardly begun, there are but two named to be with him. The rest were already
scattered, every one to his own, as Christ had told them before, John 15. See
how forely this Temptation shook even the Pillars of the Church. The sons of
Zebedee, ( Mat. 20.) promised that they could drink the cup of their Lord: but
lo, they flee from it at first sight, as soon as ever they saw it about to be
poured out. Thomas said, ( John 11.) Let us also go, and dye with him: but here
he is clean of another mind: Likewise all the Disciples said, ( John 16.) Now
we know that thou know all things: Now we believe that thou came out from
God, q.d. We need not any further admonition. Christ had a little before most
importunately exhorted them, and often inculcated it ( John 15.) that they
would abide in him. Abide in me, says he, and I in you. Again, If any abide
not in me, he shall be cast forth as a branch, and whither, etc. He had with as
much earnestness pressed them to love each other. But here they forget all their
promises, and flee away from Christ, and separate from one another. So great is
the power of Temptation.

Now when they were thus fled from Christ, and separated one from another, what
could they expect but fear, and flight, and to find safety no where? For he
that departed from God, forfeiteth his safety, falls into perpetual dread,
becomes a Runnagate, and can never be secure. But two of them, although at
first they fled for fear as all the rest did, yet when they thought of the love
of Christ, they were heartened and encouraged to follow him again.

But, says John, it was afar off. For now they were indeed sensible that what
Christ said to Peter was most true: Whither I go, thou can not follow me yet,
John 13.

And here we see plainly what effect fear and love has in man: Fear turns him
away, love turns him again till the other get the upper hand. Here fear
prevailed in the Apostles. But afterward the love that was shed abroad into
their hearts by the holy Ghost, cast out all fear, so that they could boldly
say, Who shall separate us from the love of God? Romans 8.

But who were these two that durst follow Christ more than the rest, although
but afar off, that they might see what the issue would be? They were Simon
Peter and another Disciple. There is no question to be made concerning Peter.
And all men are of the mind that the other Disciple was John. Therefore he
says, that he went together with Jesus into the Palace of the High Priest,
viz. to confirm his Gospel, that we might know he did not write by hearsay from
others report, but what he saw with his own eyes, being there present himself.
Therefore afterward he says, He that saw it, has born witness. And that none
should think it was his valor that made him dare to enter the High Priests
Palace with Jesus when he was a prisoner; he says, that he was known to the
high Priest: As if he had said, I did not go in from any courage or boldness,
nor was it to defend or excuse Christ before the high Priest, but only because
I was acquainted in his house. Thus he lesseneth himself to avoid pride and
arrogance, that he might not seem to prefer himself before Peter in courage and
constancy. It matters not therefore to enquire the ground of his acquaintance
with the high Priest; It is not much to the business in hand: Nor does any
certainty thereof appear.

When John was gone in, Peter stood without, either for fear, not daring to
enter and come so near in sight, or rather being but a poor man, and a
stranger, he was shut out of doors. Poor men must not press into Palaces,
there is no entrance for such. Great men's gates are open only to the rich, and
such as bring presents with them. Hence Isaiah says, They judge not the
fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them, Isa. 1. So
chap. 59. Truth is fallen in the street, and Equity cannot enter. When Peter
was shut out, John makes way to bring him in, but to his great loss. It had
been better for him he had never come in. His Brother Andrew formerly gave him
a much more happy entrance to Christ, John 1. For here he is in a sort led away
from Christ. In Caiaphas's house there was neither Truth nor Equity to be found.

But what Christ foretold must come to pass. Thou shall deny me thrice. Now was
fulfilled that which Christ showed him long ago in a kind of Figure. When the
Disciples were all in danger together upon the Sea, Mat. 14. Christ came to
them walking on the water. When Peter heard his voice, he offered of his own
accord to go to him, and he also walking on the Sea to go to Christ, when he
saw the wind was rough he was afraid, and when he was almost drowned the Lord
caught him by the hand. In that Miracle was foreshewed what here came to pass.
For here the Lord did truly walk above the waters, while his Disciples were
toyling in the Sea: because when his Apostles were offended, he endured
Tribulation quietly at his pleasure, and suddenly rose up a Conqueror of Death.
So did Peter also walk upon the waters to go to Jesus: for being yet mindful
of his former love he followed Christ, in the confidence of that little Faith
he had left, although it was afar off. But he saw a strong gust of wind coming
against him, and so was afraid, for fear he denied, by denying he had been
drowned, if the Lord had not stretched out his hand to hold him. Hear now who
was that wind? It is said, when she that kept the door saw him. If you consider
the maid her self, she was but a little cloud. But if you look to that Council
of those Malignants, which Peter did so dread, then you will find this maids
word was crabbed, it was indeed a very blustering wind. Thus Satan that sifter
of the Apostles, lays his plot so, as to begin his crafty Temptations with a
woman, which sex did heretofore open the door of deceit to our first Parent in
Paradise, Genesis 3.

But it is possible the maid might take pity on Peter, and speak to him to warn
him, that if he were one of Jesus his Disciples, he should make haste and be
gone out of sight. And her words seem to imply as much. For she did not accuse
him, nor speak positively: Nor did she rail on Christ, calling him a Deceiver,
but only a man. Finally, she did but ask Peter the question, whether he were
not one of that man's Disciples?

What does Peter answer her? Woman, says he, I am not. I know him not, I do
not know what thou say. See how easily that strong Pillar was shaken with the
blast of one breath. Take notice what it was that Peter denied, and before
whom. He denied that he belonged to Christ. He that denies himself to be one of
Christ's, must needs give up himself to the Devil. Peter does not deny before
the Soldiers, or the high Priest, but before the Damosel. What is now become
of his former courage? Is it not plain enough to be seen now, that he took the
Sword before for Christ's Defense out of carnal affection, and not out of a
spiritual discerning? If he were such a stout Champion in a just quarrel, why
does he not now so much as with a word vindicate Christ's innocence? I say not,
fight for him with his Sword? If he denied before a maid, the meanest of women,
what would he have done before Kings and Princes? But we are all the same that
Peter was. Before the Lord comes to Judgment, and while we are yet ignorant of
our own weakness, we are wont to be proud of our Power, and (as it were) all on
fire with zeal for God: but in the Judgment of the Lord, we are as wax before
the fire, and as the dust which the wind scatters from the face of the earth,
so we melt and moulder away, Psalm 1.

Peter then is a Type of those who attempt to do any thing without the Grace of
God: it so falls out, that they both accuse Christ of a lie, and what they
boast they will do, they never perform. They charge Christ with a lie, for he
says, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. And they are never as good as
their word. For Paul says, The good that I would, that do I not; but the evil
that I would not, that I do, Romans 7. Whence we may infer, that the Evangelists
did not so exactly set down this story of Peter out of any desire to inveigh
against, or aggravate the sins of other men, but only for our instruction. And
it is most worthy of our observation. For,

1. We see here that not the least word of Christ was spoken in vain: which is
a great confirmation of our Faith. For otherwise if but one word of Christ had
failed, we might have doubted all the rest.

2. Here we see, that there is as little as comes to nothing placed in man's
power. For as iron which of it self is hard, yet will easily be blunted with
stones, unless it be hardened with liquors or something else: so the mind of
man, although it boast that it can scorn all perils for the love of Truth, yet
will it be overcome with the sharp brunt of opposition, if it be not
strengthened by the Grace of the Holy Spirit. If Peter, a man of so great Faith
and Love, who lived so long with Christ, and was so familiar with him, that he
gave him a taste of the Heavenly Joy in his Transfiguration, did fall so fowly:
what may be expected of us? There is no security any where, so long as we are
in this mortal body. An Angel fell in Heaven, Adam in Paradise, Peter in the
world. Who then should not dread the incomprehensible height of Gods
Judgments? Well therefore does Paul admonish: Be not high minded, but fear,
Romans 11. Again, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. Thou
art righteous in thy own conceit, but thou can not tell whether thou art so
in the sight of God; Nay, thou know not what thou may be to morrow. Look
on holy Peter. Who would have believed that either he, or any man else should
have fallen from so great confidence and love into such fickleness and impiety,
without mighty opposition? On the other hand, who would have thought that that
Thief should have been saved? A man can be in no safer condition, than to
continue with all carefulness in deep humility; to hope in Gods Mercy, not to
boast himself in his own merits, or foolishly to censure and judge others. When
thou see any man sin, be he never so bad, bewail it in thy heart, and say
unto God, O Lord, thou art rich in Mercy, thou can deliver this poor wretched
creature from the dunghill of sin. So on the contrary, if thou see a man live
godlily, glorify God, and say: I beseech thee, O Lord, preserve those gifts
which thou have given to this man. It Is a lovely Treasure of Grace, which thou
have committed to him: but the Vessel frail and brittle, and there are many
Thieves lurking about it. If thou look not to it, twill quickly be all wasted
and lost. Lo, this may we learn from Peter's denial.

3. But specially it warns all those that are Rectors of Churches, not to
presume, nor to be proud. It is very dangerous when a presumptuous man is put
into the Office of a Minister. For he knows not how to take pity and
compassion upon others: He knows nothing, but how to domineer, terrify,
punish, etc, and to hunt feeble souls to despair by his outragiousness: and so
all his Ministry falls to the ground. Hence it is that Paul, by way of special
commendation of Christ, says that he was such an high Priest that was able and
did know how to have compassion on others, Heb. 4. And therefore did he suffer
Peter to fall, that he might learn to show pity to others.

4. This denial of Peter is comfort and instruction to all sinners. Comfort,
not to despair of pardon, see Peter received again into favor after so great a
fall. Instruction, to learn by his Example what course to take to get into
favor again: Of which more at large hereafter.

5. It wanted not a Mystery that Peter should deny his Master at his first
entrance into the house of the high Priest, and that at the provocation of a
little girl. For the first or chiefest profession in Princes Courts is to deny
Christ, that is, to postpone and undervalue God and Christ, Equity and Verity,
yea the salvation of their own souls too: and only to mind and look after the
things of this world. This comes to pass especially when a man is brought in by
a maid, i e. by covetousness. For that is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. But
whom that faithful servant, the fear of the Lord does usher in, he will cleave
close to Christ in the Courts of Princes, and in the midst of his worldly
business, as we see in David, Daniel, Hester, Mordecay, Joseph, etc.

6. To conclude, He that reads the fall and denial of Peter, let him pray to
the Lord that he never fall into the like Temptation, as to deny Christ. Let
this weakness of Peter be our strength; inasmuch as we know of him, that after
he had received the holy Spirit, he would rather suffer himself to be cut in
pieces, than to deny Christ.

The high Priest then asked Jesus of his Disciples, John 18.19.
and of his Doctrine. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world, I ever
taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort,
and in secret have I said nothing. Why ask thou me? ask them which heard me,
what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said. And when he had thus
spoken, one of the Officers which stood by, stroke Jesus with the palm of his
hand, saying, Answerest thou the High Priest so? Jesus answered him, if I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?

They that are of opinion that there was nothing acted in Annas's house, except
for honors sake, they brought Christ first to him, these refer all these
things to Caiaphas, who was the High Priest that year. But whither it was he
that did this, or whither it was Annas that was High Priest the last year, does
not much concern us: we shall only consider the matter it self. That High
Priest then, whoever he was, whether Annas, or Caiaphas, he undertook to
examine Christ by virtue of his Office, and to convince him of his error.
Christ stands bound before him, and bears the pride of that wicked man, as if
he had been the basest and meanest of men. He yields himself to be examined, as
if he had been the veryest Dunce that ever was. Is not here patience even
beyond patience? Be not thou offended if proud silly fellows despise thee.
Christ did here lead the way by his example. Two things principally the High
Priest enquired after:

1. His Disciples. And was this such a crime in Christ? Did that scurvy Priest
know nothing else against him? And does he therefore turn his Accusation into
Interrogatories? Peradventure he would ask where his Disciples were, why he
chose them, what he meant to do with them? This Querie tended to convince him
of raising sedition, and going about to bring in Innovations.

2. His Doctrine, what it was, and whence he had it, whether it agreed with the
Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, q.d. Thou teach far otherwise than Moses
and the Prophets did. Therefore thou art an Heretic and a Seducer, and thou
have got thee Disciples to spread thy Heresy over all Iudaea. Besides, thou
have innovated a Baptism without our Authority. In short, thou do all this,
yea although thou art not of the Tribe of Levi, yet thou usurpest to thy self a
power of preaching. Think thou that we will always wink at it, and never curb
such insolency of manners and doctrine, as we find in thee contrary to the
custom and Rules of the Ancients? Nay, we have born with thee too long already.
Now thou shall pay for altogether.

Note here, that it is not objected to Christ, nor could it be objected against
him, that he was a Murderer, or a Thief, or an Adulterer, or an Extortioner,
but only that he did teach and take Disciples to him. This is that above any
other thing which the world does lay to his charge, that he never lets them
alone, but is still reproving them. The world, says he, hates me, because I
testify of it, that the works thereof are evil, John 7. If Christ would have
held his peace, and not so continually have been finding fault, the world could
have born him. But how can Truth be silent, and not declare against falsehood?
How is it possible that the Sun-should not show what is fair, and what is foul?
See our ingratitude: for even for that very thing which the world hated in him,
was Christ most deserving the greatest honor, and altogether praiseworthy;
for his teaching the Truth, and choosing whom he pleased out of the world, that
they might not perish with the world, was the highest favor he could show.

But whereas this High Priest questioned Christ about his Doctrine and
Disciples, there was no hurt in all that. It is rather the duty of the
Ecclesiastical Power to take care that no false Doctrine be broacht abroad. The
Priest then made a fair pretense, but his mind was quite contrary. For he knew
the things which Christ taught were true. Besides he might have made a true
conjecture from the Signs and Wonders which he wrought, that he was sent of
God, as the blind man did: If this man, says he, were not of God, he could do
nothing, John 9. The High Priest should not have questioned Christ for his
Doctrine, but said as Nicodemus, Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come
from God, John 3. But this profane Priest does not so, but with a proud heart
and stern countenance he charge him, that he did preach and get Disciples to
follow him. For he thought that either Christ would be daunted with his big
words, and so recant and crave pardon for his fault; or if he were stiff in his
way, that then he would defend it and himself, and that in his defense he might
happily speak something to be taken hold of, the better to accuse him. This is
that which this reverend and godly Priest hunted so much after.

Our most meek Lord replies nothing concerning his Disciples, of whom he then
knew but little good. For one had betrayed him, another denied him, all
deserted him. But he would not lay open their faylings, teaching us not
suddenly to disclose the faults of others. Concerning his Doctrine, he
answered, and told them where, and before whom he preached it, but not what it
was that he did teach. For he knew that the High Priest asked it to an ill
intent. A good Judge will enquire out the Truth, not listen to every base
report: but this fellow sought only to defame him.

As to his Doctrine then, Christ is not silent, lest he should seem to repent
what he had taught, but he stands to maintain it, teaching to assert the Truth
constantly. The Truth of his Doctrine he proved by a double Argument.

1. That he did not preach it in hid-lock, or in a corner, but openly in the
public place. He that does evil hates the light: but he that does the truth,
comes to the light, John 3.

2. He is contented to be tried by his hearers. I spoke openly, says he, to
the world, and in secret have I said nothing which I am ashamed of, or would
not have come to light. And he did plainly charge his Apostles: What I tell you
in darkness, that speak ye in light, Matthew. 10. True, he spoke many things to
his Disciples alone; yet for no other reason, but because others could not bear
them. Christ would have all that he taught should be published and made known
to every one, that none might excuse their ignorance. Hence that of Paul; If
our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. Christ indeed
does speak openly to the world; for now also does Wisdom cry in the streets,
Prove. 8. so that none can find any shift for their ignorance. For it is most
certain, that he taught in the Synagogues and Temple of the Jews, where all use
to meet. And not only in the Temple and Synagogues, but in the Ships, and
mountains, and fields too, Luke 6. Matthew. 5. He preached publicly, in the
greatest concourse of men. So that they have no excuse at all left them. If I
had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin, John 15.22.

Thus far Christ shows in his answer, where and to whom he spoke. It remained
only that he should say something of his doctrine; but that wretched Priest
deserved not to hear it. Christ therefore does make no other answer here, but
that he appealed to his auditors, and calls them to witness what he said, a
sure sign that he was clear in the truth of what he said. False Teachers will
not do so, their own conscience would fly in their face, and tell them, that
their doctrine would not endure the light. Heretics appeal not to their books,
or to their hearers, but seek to maintain their errors by their slye and
crafty wiles. They can trust neither to their writings nor auditors. But says
Christ, Why ask thou me? Ask them that heard me, q.d. It is necessary that
he should be examined, whose fact is plain that he has done, but how he did it
does not yet appear. So it was needful that Joshua enquire of Achan what he
had done. That he had sinned was found out by lot, but wherein he sinned was
not yet known, Josh. 7. But I, whose case thou now statest, to refer wholly to
doctrine, did use to speak openly. I taught not heresy, but the truth: I call
my hearers to witness, I did nothing in hugger mugger, I am not ashamed to show
my face. Why do not thou ask them that heard me? or why do thou condemn
before thou hear? and why do thou ask me, whom thou do not think fit to
be believed? If it be an offense to teach, then all that expound the Law are
transgressors. But if I have taught that which is not true, yet thou ought
not to judge thereof according to thine own suspicion and malice, nor receive
information from my false accusers, but from them that use to hear me. I do
therefore appeal to my hearers, because by the Law and custom of Judicature, it
is not allowed in a legal proceeding, that a man should be his own witness.
Ask them that heard me. They can tell what I said. I am not so much afraid or
ashamed of my doctrine, but that I dare refer my self to any that heard it. Yea
I fear it so little, that I know what I have preached will pass for current
among my very adversaries. Mark it, he does not say, ask my Disciples or my
friends, but he appeals in general to his hearers, as if he had said, I except
none, I fear not what any of them can say. Here you see how confident the Truth
is. Truth only can say, I fear no man. No other doctrine is so perfect as to
say so of it self, besides that which God has revealed by his Word.

Christ by this his answer did closely strike the conscience of that lend high
Priest: Why ask thou me, says he? as if he had said, why do thou make
such a fair pretense, when thou do not seek after the truth, but to cavil
with me? But why do thou ask that which thou do already know? I appeal to
thy own conscience. That has answered for me long since.

A terrible word indeed, when God shall produce our own conscience for a
witness against us. So he touched the consciences of the ungodly Priests in the
case of the woman taken in adultery, when he said, He that is without sin, let
him cast a stone first at her, John 8.

How truly and modestly did Christ answer hitherto? But what followed? What
else, but what usually proceeds from disdainful persons? Instead of an answer,
he had a cuff on the ear. But it is better to take a box on the ear from an
open enemy, then a kiss on the lips from a false friend. John says, one of the
officers struck Jesus with the palm of his hand. Let heaven and earth here
tremble and stand amazed at the patience of Christ, and the impudence of this
servant. Who in reading this passage would not curse this fellow bitterly, and
wish that either fire might come down from above and consume him, or that the
earth might open and swallow him up alive? But Christ would hereby teach us
patience. In like manner did they at another time more then once endeavor to
stone him for telling the truth, John 8. These servants of the Priests confessed
long since that never man spoke like Christ, John 7.46. yet now they buffet him
on the face. Thus the stout striker and the fawning flatterer bragged that he
was the strongest of all the Champions, of whom the Spirit of the Lord speaks
in the Prophet: They lie in wait for my soul, the mighty are gathered against
me, Psalm 59. Who are those mighty ones, but they that thus rusht upon the
strength of God? The choycest and chief among them was he that fell so cruelly
fowl upon the wisdom and power of God, and all to please his good master, and
show him how ready and diligent he was to serve him in that business. Here we
see what the Judge, and what the Judgment was. For,

1. That cannot be righteous Judgment, where every one domineereth over the
accused before Judgment is passed upon him.

2. The Judge was unjust, in that he saw the accused party abused before
sentence was pronounced against him, and yet he held his peace and reproved
them not; much more in that he saw the guiltless wronged before his face.

3. But the iniquity of this servant argued the unrighteousness of his Master.
For as the Ruler and Judge of the people is, so are his officers, Eceles. 10.
If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked, Prove. 29.12. Such a
Judge, such a judgment; such accusers had Christ, who would not forbear till
the Judge had given sentence. No marvail then if Christ be cast and condemned
at the bar of man's tribunal. So was it with Paul when he rendered an account
of himself in the Court, the high Priest commanded him to be smote in the face,
contrary to Law and right. Christians when they confess the truth, must
generally expect nothing else from the world, but to be smitten on the face.
Thus Christ who judges all men justly, yea who does mercifully forgive the
wicked upon their repentance, could find no justice when he was judged, much
less mercy.

See likewise the impiety of this servant, who would spitefully misuse the
innocent, to insinuate into the favor of an ungodly Magistrate; and to get the
favor of man, would forfeit the friendship of God. Consider whom he smote and
so hardly handled, even the Lord of Majesty: Him, I say, whose authority over
the creature is such, and to whom the obedience of the creatures is so loyal,
that they had all rather be turned into nothing, then by their natural actions
transgress but the least ordination of their Creator. This is he whom this vile
slave did basely strike, who if he were not saved by him whom he thus abused,
would perpetually be annihilated. And if the Lord himself whom he smote had not
withheld them, every creature would have risen up against this ungodly wretch,
to have avenged the injury of their Maker. For if the creatures have many times
inflicted vengeance upon those who offended the servants of God: (as the earth
swallowed up Dathan and Abiram, the water overwhelmed Pharaoh, the fire burnt
up the Sodomites, etc.) much more would the creatures have exercised vengeance
over this vile vassal, who behaved himself so malapertly toward the Lord of
Majesty himself, had not this Lord forbad them. Consider this thou ungrateful
heart, who can not bear so much as a rugged word, but presently it sets thee
all on fire, that thou scorchest thy self with the fire of hell: thou do
revile, bann, murmr, and can not stay till God avenge thy wrong, but
instantly plottest thy revenge by word and deed. Thou art sorry if thou can
not requite an injury, but thou boastest of thy revenge. But here thou see
the King of all, who took such an injury from so unworthy a fellow, and that in
a public place, and upon his most holy face, which the Angels so much desire
and love to behold. The arm of the Lord could have smote the smiter again; and
not only him, but that whited wall also, I mean that wicked high Priest, whom
so churlish a clown bolstered up: But he received the wrong, put up the
affront, held fast his patience, returned instruction. All for our example.

Note that this servant did aggravate that notorious injury which he did to
Christ with most reproachful language. Do thou answer the high Priest so? As
if he had said, Do not consider what a base fellow thou art, and what a
gorgeous high Priest my Master is? This servant is a figure of all flatterers;
as also of all such who abuse and smite Christ in his poor members, in Princes
Palaces; I mean such as against Law and Equity, grind the poor to gratify
their Lords. Besides, they do and threaten many things to the oppression of the
poor, for which they never had any Warrant or Commission from their Master at
all. But what does the high Priest say to all this, when he saw his own servant
so sawcily behaving himself, before he had past his sentence against him? He is
silent, lets him alone and go on, takes no notice of it, makes as if he had not
seen it, and yet if any body had struck but his dog, he should quickly have
heard of it with a witness. It is the nature of Tyrants to esteem more basely
of the poor then of their dogs. Thus Christ, both then and now too, has none
to avenge his wrong in the world. Our own injuries we quickly revenge, but as
for God, let him be wronged never so much, we regard it not. But mind a little,
with what face will that servant behold Christ at the day of Judgment, whom he
smote so outragiously? how pale will he look with fear then? But it was not
this slave only that struck Christ, we all smote Christ in him. For if it had
not been for our sins, this fellow could not so much as have touched Christ. Our
sins strengthened his hand, and stretched it out to strike Christ. Therefore
how shall we appear before that Judge, whom we have so abused and disgraced? We
see here how great our sins are, and how justly we may tremble to think of the
sufferings of Christ. But let us not therefore despair, but rather seek comfort
of that very same Christ, who endured all these things: For, he did not only
suffer from us, but for us too. He took this reproach upon him, to deliver us
from eternal shame. But what does Christ here do? He does not strike again,
but patiently puts up the wrong. He was more ready to turn the other cheek,
then to return like for like, Matthew. 5. And although he held his hand, yet he
did not hold his tongue, but reproves him that smote him, or rather courteously
admonished him. If I have spoken evil, says he, bear witness of the evil.
Christ might have said; How else should I answer thou base parasite? What
should I say or do more? Would thou have me fall down and kiss the toe of thy
grand Idol, this high Priest, and call him the light of the world? I answered
to what he asked me, what would have more, thou naughty man? Thus I say, and
more sharply might Christ have rounded up this vise varlet. But, for our
pattern, he answers him very mildly, and that with a forked argument, which
might have pinnioned and bound this fellow hand and foot. Christ's meaning is
thus: either I have spoken well or ill: this thou thy self must confess. If
evil, thou ought to show wherein. But if well, thou should not beat me
contrary to Law and Equity. Christ said not this out of anger or passion. Nor
did this contradict what he said at another time, of turning the other cheek,
Matthew. 5. For if you rightly consider that word, you will find that Christ did
fully and perfectly follow his own doctrine. For that great command of patience
is to be observed, not so much in the bodily ostentation, as in a hearty
preparation and readiness to suffer, and is thus to be understood: If any man
injure, reproach, or wrong thee, thou should be so far from rendering evil for
evil, or to revenge thy self, that thou should sooner and more readily suffer
more wrong, and pass by greater injuries. This is to turn the other cheek to
the smiter. In this sense is Christ's word to be taken: Did he revenge himself?
In no wise. Did he revile again? No, by no means. Peter says, When he was
reviled, he reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2. Thou hear his defense, but not his
recrimination; thou hear his advice, but not his reproach. If I have spoken
well, why smitest thou me? I will not strike thee again, I will not avenge my
self on thee, but I warn thee that thou repent, lest worse things befall thee
from God. Thou beatest me on whom thou wast not able to lay thy band. Thou
beatest me now, whom thou did admire before, John 7. Thou beatest me, who art
no Judge: Thou beatest and misusest me, who never wronged thee in all my life.
Thou gettest nothing by this thy misusage of me, but thy own condemnation.
Christ then did here show his gentleness three ways: First, in that he
avengeth not himself when he might easily have done it. Secondly, not being
angry. Thirdly, in that he did admonish, instruct, and repay good for evil to
him.

Here then in the first place our rashness is reproved, who are ever greedy of
revenge, even for the smallest wrongs done to us; Forgetting what is written,
The ways of them that remember injuries, tend to death, Eccl. 10. Again,
Forgive thy Neighbor the hurt that he has done unto thee, so shall thy sins
also be forgiven when thou prayest, Eccl. 28.2. First then let us learn to bear
wrongs patiently, inasmuch as we are not the first, nor they only who have been
sufferers. Secondly, learn we to be silent in sufferings, lest we murmur
against God.

And whereas Christ took all things patiently besides this blow, there is
reason for it. First, he held not his peace now, because that servant should
not think that the Truth was to be smothered by outward persecution. Secondly,
that he might think that it was lawful for him, and such as he was to do what
they list to the poor. Thirdly, That he might not think, that Princes were not
to be reproved by the Word of God; whereas the Word of God spares none: for it
is judge of all alike. By this therefore he would teach us to bear our cross
patiently: yet so as that we conceal not what may tend to the salvation of our
persecutors. As also that we should never approve of an unjust cause, though we
suffer in bearing witness against it: but to be instant in season and out of
season, and rebuke them that offer violence: and be always ready nevertheless
to bear what our enemies shall inflict on us.

What has hitherto been spoken concerning that blow, and Christ's answer, was
plainly foretold by Isaiah: I hid not my face, says he, from shame and
spitting, Isa. 50. Again, I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them
that plucked off the hair. Again, I have set my face like a flint, and I know
that I shall not be ashamed, etc. So Micah, chap. 5.1. They shall smite the
Judge of Israel with a Rod upon the cheek.

Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high Priest, John 18.24. Mat.
26.57. John 18.18.
where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. And the servants and Officers
stood there, who had made a fire of coals (for it was cold) and they warmed
themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself. And another maid saw
him, Mat. 26.71.
and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of
Nazareth. They said therefore unto him, John 18.25.
Art not thou also one of his Disciples? And another said, (Luke. 22.58.) thou
art also of them. And again, he denied with an oath, (Mat. 26.72.) saying,
(Luke 22.58.) Man, I am not. I do not know the man. (Mat. ibid.) And after a
little while (Luke 22 58.) about the space of an hour after (Luke 22.59.) came
unto him they that stood by, saying, Surely thou also art one of them, for thou
art a Galilean, (Mar. 14 70.) John 18.26.
and thy speech bewrays thee. One of the servants of the High Priests (being
his kinsman, whose ear Peter cut off) says, did I not see thee in the garden
with him? Then began he to curse and to swear, (Matthew. 26.74) saying, I know
not this man of whom ye speak: (Mar. 14.71.) And immediately while he yet spoke
the Cock crew, (Luke 22 60.) And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And
Peter remembered the word of the Lord Jesus, how he had said unto him, Before
the Cock crow twice thou shall deny me thrice. (Mar. 14.30.) And he went out
and wept bitterly, (Mat. 26.75.)

Christ is led bound to Annas, from him he is carried prisoner to Caiaphas.
Among that sort of people the Trurb is ever in bonds. For none dare say any
thing to them, but what they like and love to hear.

The wickedness of Annas is seen, in that he did not release Christ after he
had made a sufficient and full answer, but suffered him to be manicled: yea and
bound him over to a greater and more potent Adversary. Mark says expressly (
chap. 14.53.) that in the house of Caiaphas, the chief Priests; and the Elders,
and the Scribes were assembled, earnestly expecting every moment when Christ
should be brought prisoner before them. This was the ground of their meeting,
that very Night when they should have thought of eating the Paschal Lamb, in
remembrance of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage. But this they
wholly neglected, so burning hot were they against Christ, that their malice
would not let them think upon any thing, but how they might soonest dispatch
Christ out of the way. These were their godly exercises which they employed
their time in all that Sacred Night of the Possover. Here note, that they who
should have been a succor to the afflicted, and a refuge to the oppressed, and
whom it did best become to be just Judges, because of the Priesthood, Office,
Knowledge and Gravity which they had: Christ found these as bad, nay worse than
any; it being most truly said of them: Wickedness came from the ancient Judges,
who seemed to govern the people, Hist. of Susan ver. 5. The Seed of Canaan
indeed, not of Juda. Nevertheless pity is to be expected from any, than from
Hypocrites. Christ is never more undervalued, than by those to whom he should
be most welcome.

Thus when his Adversaries were met and staid for his coming, Christ was
brought in before them bound, and beaten, and woefully handled: with great noise
and hooting they drag him along, being overjoyed that they had got so great an
enemy in hold. The meek Lamb stands in the midst of ravenous Wolves, looking
lowly on the ground, and speaking not a word: but they on the contrary gazing
upon him with bended brows and a stern countenance, gnashing on him with their
teeth, as if they would instantly devour him, which they had done, but that
they intended to reserve him for greater torments. But before the Evangelists
set down what was concluded in this Council, they first dispatch the business
of Peter, which began in the house of Annas, (as some think, although others
are of another mind) and was finished in the house of Caiaphas. And first they
set down the cause and occasion of this his denial: The servants, it is said,
stood by the fire, and Peter with them. For now his love began to wax chill.
It Is a cold Season indeed when Christ is denied. The Servants were here talking
among themselves, of what was now in agitation, and another maid came by
chance, and observing Peter somewhat melancholy, suspecting how it was, said
to them that stood by: And this man also was with Jesus of Nazareth. When they
heard this, they took more notice of him, and diverse of them pressed upon him,
and laid it close to him. This Trial and Temptation was greater and more
grievous than the former. For now he was not questioned by a weak Woman, but by
men, and that many too, and they all armed, yea and Servants of the High
Priests. But he came off just as he did before. He denied him again. And no
wonder. For he that could not withstand the first onset, how should he stand
out the ^econd assault? He that was daunted by a woman, how should he retain
his courage against armed men? Finally, how could he choose but fall again, who
deserted his own party, and was conversant with wicked men, standing idle and
warming himself by the fireside, as if he had quite forgot himself; whereas
Christ said, I did not choose ye to stand idling it out, but that you should go,
and bring forth much fruit.

1. See here the effect of ill company. Peter confessed Christ when he was
among the Disciples, but when he was with the High Priests Servants, he denied
himself to be a Christian. So true is that saying, With the holy thou will be
holy; and with the froward thou will learn frowardness, Psalm 18. Thus the
Israelites, they were mingled with the Heathen, and learned their works, Psalm
106. Therefore the godly are called upon, Come out of Babylon my people, Rev.
18.

2. Observe what a rare thing it is to find the profession of Christ in Kings
Courts: indeed generally they are debauched in Princes Courts, who before were
godly and holy men.

3. Note also that the Devil is wont, of all men, to tempt those especially
that are idle. Be always doing something, that the Devil may never find thee
idle; For idleness teaches much evil, Eccl. 33.27. Slothful Pastors are
compared to Peter standing thus idle, who being greedy of filthy lucre sit down
and serve the sinful humors of men, but the Sword of Gods Word they put up
into the scabberd, not thinking what the Psalmist says, A little that a
righteous man has, is better then great riches of the wicked, Psalm 37.16.
They fancy themselves stout Porters of Heaven, if they can but take bribes
liberally, and speak the Truth sparingly. These are such as Peter was when he
stood by the fire, rather then what he was in the day of Pentecost, and
afterward when he said, Silver and gold I have none, etc. Act. 3. But as Peter
was more sorely tempted this second time then he was at first: so he sinned and
sell more hainously. For now he does not barely deny his Master, but forswears
him too. Thus one sin not repented of sinks a man into another greater than the
former. We see it in David, when he had committed Adultery, and repented not,
suddenly he fell into murder, which was a greater sin, 2 Samuel 11. By Peter's
fall let us learn,

1. To resist sin in the beginning, and to dash these brats of Babylon, that
is, the first motions of sin, against the Rock Christ. He that yields at first,
is easily drawn into many sins.

2. If we chance to slip, let us not lie in sin, but quickly get out of it: As
in Peter one temptation continually followed another, till Peter fell to the
bottom: so the Devil never leaves hurrying those whom he has once laid hold
on, till he has cast them into the depths of sin. So it befell Peter. He had
twice denied Christ. The Cock had crow'd once, as Mark relates, yet he does
not confess or acknowledge his sin, nor so much as forsake his bad company. And
what came on it? A fresh Temptation arises, the Servants assault him again, and
put him to it more closely. One affirmed that he was a Galilean, Another said
that he saw him with Jesus in the Garden. Here Peter was in great danger by his
kinsman, whose ear he had cut off. What shift does Peter now make, seeing
himself beset round? he flatly denies again: yea he began (as it is said) to
curse and to ban himself most bitterly, and to wish all the mischief that might
befall him, if ever he did so much as know the man. When fear has got the
upper hand in our heart, we can do nothing but deny Christ. What then shall we
say or think of this so great a lapse of the chief of the Apostles? Lo he has
not a word to answer, but this, I am not, I do not know him, I cannot tell what
you say, when neither the men nor the women did threaten him, nor would they
have done him any hurt at all and although the men convinced him plainly to his
face (for he heard them say, Surely thou art one of them, Thou art a Galilean,
thy speech bewrays thee, We saw thee in the Garden) yet he had the face to
deny all, yea and to imprecate most direful things on himself, whereas if they
had but held a naked Sword at his breast, he would scarce have stood it out.
But thus the word of Christ must be fulfilled, not that he was forced to it,
but that Christ knew beforehand that he would deny him.

Let us take heed that we do not flatter our selves, or excuse and mince our
faults by Peter's fall, or any of the Saints failings. These things are not
written to that end, but to make us more wary and watchful before we fall, and
to keep us from despair after we have fallen. But why do we spend so much time
about Peter's sin? Lets come at last to his Repentance. This will do us some
good. After Peter had fallen deep enough, and was about to sink deeper, yet
Christ caught him by the hand, that he should not be quite drowned; While he
was yet speaking, behold the Cock crew: Christ also turned about and looked on
Peter: A gracious Look indeed. The good and gracious God vouchsafe to look upon
every sinner with these Eyes of Mercy, and then of Delinquents they would soon
become Penitents. The maid that kept the door cast her eyes on Peter, but this
miserable man was never the better for that. But this of Christ was another
guess look then that, and had a far other effect. This Look of Christ was
nothing but the hearing of his Voice as it were inwardly speaking: How now
Peter? Why do sin against thy conscience? Come back again to me, put thy
trust in me. O the Wonder, Grace and Mercy of Christ, who did so kindly convert
Peter to himself whom he had so often denied!

Observe here, that Peter came again to himself, and was brought to Repentance
two ways: The Cock crowing signifies the preaching of the Law: but Christ's
looking on him signifies the preaching of the Gospel, or the powerful and
vigorous inspiration of Christ in the heart of a sinner, by which the sinner is
stirred up to an hatred of sin, and a desire of Grace.

If these two be not wrought in us, we shall never repent or cease from sin.
See a Pattern of true Repentance in Peter. When he was warned by the Cocks
crowing and Christ's Look, first he remembered the words which Christ told him
before. Then he goes immediately out of Caiaphas's house, and being got out,
he wept bitterly. When he knew his sin, that he had denied Christ, how could he
choose but weep bitterly? In this weeping condition he continued till the
Resurrection of Christ: nor can any man imagine what sorrow and grief, yea what
horror of conscience tormented him all that while. He could see nothing but
hell it self, till Christ appeared again to him in the Resurection. So is it
with every one else that comes to the knowledge of sin by the Law. Wherefore
blessed art thou, O holy Peter! and that many ways. First, in that Christ
looked so favorably on thee: Secondly, because thou did remember the words of
Christ: Thirdly, because thou did leave thy bad company: Lastly, because thou
did bitterly bewail thy sin. These four things are requisite to make up true
Repentance. First, the Grace of God to move and work upon the heart: Secondly,
to consider the terrifying Word of God in the Law, and his comforting Word in
the Gospel: Thirdly, a cessation from sin: Lastly, Weeping and godly sorrow for
what is past. By these means a sinner may yet recover the favor of God again.

They that comfort themselves with Peter's fall, let them here observe and
remember, that he repented after he had fallen, not many years after, but
presently. Go thou and do likewise, Repent and live.

To conclude, concerning Peter, observe that there are three things required to
perfect our love of God, viz. that we love him affectionately, prudently, and
fervently.

1. When Peter formerly said, Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto
thee, that thou should die, Mat. 16. There he loved Christ affectionately,
but not prudently. For it was expedient that Christ should die, but Peter was
not willing.

2. When he followed Christ after he was taken prisoner, he loved him
affectionately and prudently, (for it is true prudence, not only not to hinder
the suffering of Christ, but also to imitate it) but he did not yet love him
fervently and courageously: therefore he denied him.

3. But when he received the Spirit he loved him valiantly and boldly. And
therefore Christ after his Resurrection asked him the third time, Simon son of
Jonas, love thou me? John 21. For this reason also are we commanded not
simply, Thou shall love the Lord thy God: It Is added moreover, With all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength: which is all one as if
it had been said, Love sweetly, prudently, boldly, manfully. It follows:

Now the chief Priests and the Elders, Mat. 26.59.
and all the Council sought false witness against Jesus, Mar. 14 56.
to put him to death but found none: yea though many false witnesses came. But
their witness agreed not together. At the last came two false witnesses, and
bare false witness against him, saying, We heard him say, I am able to destroy
(I will destroy) this Temple of God that is made with hands, and within three
days I will build another made without hands. But neither so did their witness
agree together.

Hitherto we have heard what the wicked Officers did to Christ. Now we are come
to the chiefest of them, even the Princes themselves, who kept the Fort and
strong Hold of Religion, of whom no evil could be suspected, much less
expected. But what is the issue? These High Priests, these Pharisees, these
Elders are the worst in all the pack. So Jeremy found them heretofore. When he
had a while reproved the sins of the common people, at last he bethought
himself: Surely these are poor, they are foolish: for they know not the way of
the Lord, nor the Judgment of their God. I will get me unto the great men, and
will speak unto them; For they have known the way of the Lord, and the
Judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst
the bonds, Jer. 5. This was here verified in them to a tittle. Therefore not
long after that also was fulfilled in them which Jeremy speaks further,
Wherefore a Lion out of the Forest shall slay them, and a Wolf of the evening
shall spoil them. But what do they? Annas had examined Christ of his Doctrine,
but because he answered not to his mind as he expected, yea he so answered that
they could find no Law against hiw: for he proved his Doctrine to be
irrefragable, and his life spotless and most innocent. Wherefore now they take
a new course, and go another way to work with him, that every one should bring
in altogether what they could or had to say against him, that so from every
bodies charge they might patch up a just accusation against him. Caiaphas his
Counsel was enough to stir up the people, but it was not sufficient to regulate
the Office of a Pagan Judge. Yet Caiaphas would not have it spoken of him, that
he oppressed the innocent, and therefore had tyrannically put Christ to death.
Wherefore he laid his plot so, that because they could find no just cause, yet
at least they should seek out some fair pretense to destroy Christ. For he knew
that the first thing that would be enquired into about the death of the man,
would be for what cause he suffered, and what his crime was that made him
deserve to die: and if no just reason were given for it, the power would be
accused of Tyranny. This Caiaphas knew well enough: therefore he does first
hunt after a sufficient ground to kill Christ. The next way to obtain this is
by Evidences. Testimonies prove the crime, and the crime makes liable to death.
Thus innocent Naboth was hated by King Ahab to the very death, 1 King. 21. but
that he might rid him out of the way, there must be good ground for that, and
to bring this about, there were false witnesses suborned, and so sentence of
death was pronounced against the innocent. The same did some ungodly men
attempt against Daniel, whom truth it self miraculously delivered from his
false witnesses, Dan. 6. So Saint Steven was stoned to death by false
witnesses, Act. 7. The like proceedings were there in the judging of Christ.
See what righteous Judgment, and what a holy Council was here! Christ was now
in hold, bound, buffered, and many ways abused by the servants, and yet no man
knows why or wherefore he was accused. Wicked men use to condemn before they
know the crime. Thus Saul cut off the Priests of the Lord before he heard them,
or before they were convinced by any, 1 Samuel 22. So Jehoiakim slew Vrijah the
Prophet, Jer. 26. Ungodly men say as they did, Jer. 18. Come, let us smite him
with the tongue, and let us regard none of his sayings. Thus Satan hurryeth the
hearts of wicked men with a spirit of giddiness. But these men exceed and do
more. For they labor all they can to find out false witness against Christ,
knowing they could find no true evidence. And all this they do in the night of
the Passover, when they should have eaten the Lamb. Mean while they accuse
Christ as a transgressour of the Law, whereas but of late he had eaten his Lamb
with great devotion. But those wicked men did most notoriously neglect the Law,
and greedily thirst after innocent blood. In this Council there was nothing but
wrath, envy, hatred and violence reigned. All the cry was, kill, slay, destroy
crucify, etc. This is that Council of which the holy Patriarch Jacob of old
spoke, saying, Simeon and Levi are Instruments of cruelty; O my soul, enter
thou not into their secret, cursed be their anger, for it was fierce etc. Genesis
49. In this Council was fulfilled that which David in the person of Christ
foretold long since in many of his Psalms: They gaped upon me as a ramping and
roaring Lion, Psalm 22. Again, They that seek my hurt speak mischievous things,
and imagine deceits all the day long, Psalm 38. Again, They have sharpened
their tongues like a Serpent, Adders poison is under their lips, Psalm 140.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, etc. Psalm 5. False witness did rise up,
they laid to my charge things that I knew not, Psalm 35. They opened their
mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, Aha, our eye has seen it, ver. 21. This
thou have seen, keep not silence, O Lord, be not far from me. False witnesses
are risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty, Psalm. 27. See how many
things David prophesied of this Council. Their rage was nothing humane, but
altogether hellish and devilish; for they did not rave to satisfy their rage,
but rather to kindle and inflame themselves more yet. Therefore they let
nothing slip that may increase their fury.

But what good did they get by forging false witness against Christ? For
however many false witnesses came, yet no full proof could be made of any
charge: For what one witnessed for a truth, the next varied from him: so their
witness did not agree, just as it was in the story of Susana. And no wonder:
for when Testimonies are false in themselves, they can never agree together.
Here then the great and unblemishable innocence of Christ was cleared and fully
proved to all men, as one whom so many false witnesses were not able to accuse
falsely; and so many enemies that took their oaths against him, could not find
so much as the shadow of any cause against him. First then let Christians here
learn so to live, that their enemies may not be able to speak ill of them.
Secondly, but let Bishops and Ministers be here taught by this Example, that
they behave themselves blamelesly.

Finally, That Christ's innocence may yet shine more brightly, two false
witnesses arise: (this was their proper name by which they wree called,
inasmuch as they did not rightly relate the words or meaning of Christ.) These
stand up, and are confidently persuaded that they shall bring in just ground
enough to make away with Christ. O desperate knaves, how durst ye lie so
against the very Truth, yea against God himself, to curry favor with a wicked
man? Is this your keeping the Law, which commands that none should bear false
witness against his Neighbor? Go to, speak on, we will hear what ye have to
say. We, say they, did hear him say, that he could destroy the Temple of God,
etc. Here they tell a lie at first, they speak false, not only as base fellows,
but as per jur'd Rogues. Our Lord Christ never spoke those your words; how then
could you hear them from him? But thus indeed he did say, Destroy this Temple,
and in three days I will raise it up. And that we may know of what Temple he
spoke, John says, He spoke this of the Temple of his Body, John 2. The Jews
Temple was built with hands: but Christ's Temple, that is, his Body, was built
without the workmanship of man.

How do these words of Christ agree with the Testimony of these Villains?
Christ speaks of his Body, which not he, but the Jews would destroy, he would
only raise up the same again. But these witnesses speak of the Temple of stone,
which was built in the days of Esdras and Zorobabel, which Temple also Christ
highly honored, as Haggai prophesied, chap. 2. The dissolution and destruction
of this Temple belonged to Titus the Emperor and the Romans.

Why do ye not hale him before your Tribunals, and produce your witnesses
against him, who did indeed destroy your Temple? Could ye find no claw at
Christ, but your Temple? Thus did ye afterward to Saint Stephen, Act. 6. But
what is become of your Temple now? We can tell where our Christ is, whom you
accused of sacrilege in reference to your Temple: and in due time ye shall
know it too with a witness. In the mean time we are ready through his Grace,
when he shall see it fit, to offer our bodies, which are the Temples of the
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.
to you or any other unbelievers to be afflicted by you for his Names-sake:
being well assured that they shall be raised again, and restored to us in the
general Resurrection, Ezekiel. 37. Dan. 12. 1 Cor. 15.

But what says the Evangelist? Their witness, says he, did not agree, and
it was true indeed, they did not. For the Jews themselves understood that Christ
spoke of the Temple of his Body. Therefore they said to Pilate; We remember
that this deceiver said, after three days I will rise again, etc. Matthew. 27.
And they are not ashamed to cast this in Christ's teeth, when he hung upon the
Cross, Thou that destroyest the Temple of God, come down, etc. What would not
such men have done? We have daily experience of them, from whom we take wrong
quietly and silently, not counting them worthy our reply, as here Christ did,
and as was prophesied of him, I was dumb with silence, I held my peace from
good, while the wicked was before me, Psalm 39. Where David calls it a holding
his peace from good, not always to excuse his innocence, but to commit it to
God the Judge of all. What then does Caiaphas do here, when he saw his project
disappointed, and the witnesses flag in all their Evidence, and Christ standing
silent all the while? He stands up in the midst of all, as if he would do some
great matter, and daunt Christ out of countenance with his person. And now all
men were gazing upon him. Isa. 16.
See the pride of this false Israelite, but true Moabite; of this mungril
Priest, but a very Thief and Robber. He is very exceeding proud: but his pride
is more then his prowess.

Mar. 14.60.
And the High Priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest
thou nothing? What is it which these witness against thee? But he held his
peace, and answered nothing. Again, the High Priest asked him, and said unto
him; art thou the Christ, the son of the blessed? Mat. 26.63.
I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ
the son of God? Jesus says unto him, Thou have said, ( I am, Mar. 14.62.)
Nevertheless, I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven: Then the High
Priest rent his clothes, saying, He has spoken blasphemy, what further need
have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy, What think ye?
And they all condemned him to be guilty of death, Mar. 14.64.

When the witnesses could not promote the design, the High Priest himself
starts up, and shows the madness of his mind by the motion of his body. His
hairbrain'd and unbridled rage would not suffer him to be at rest when he could
find no cavil against him. Answerest thou nothing, says he, to those things
which these witness against thee? And he did well to answer nothing: for what
should a guiltless person answer to most notorious lies? They gave in false
Testimony from the true saying of Christ, to which also they did add and
diminish as best served their turn, and made most against Christ. Therefore
Christ held his peace, because such a Judge, such Witnesses: such Justices,
such Officers. There was a show of Judicature and Legal proceedings, but in
deed and in truth it was nothing but a rabble of most cruel Thieves.

1. Then Christ does hereby show his Righteousness, both because they were
unworthy to hear his answer, and also because those things which they brought
against him were utterly untrue, and needed not an answer.

2. By his silence, he also shows his mercy, to wit, lest they should sin
more, if after they heard him give satisfaction, they should yet persist in
their envy.

3. Whereas Eve offended by her tatling, he would make satisfaction by his
silence to so many false aspersions cast upon him.

4. By this his silence he showed also his Wisdom. For as he was God, he knew
that whatever he had answered would have been wrested to an ill sense, and so
they would not have been the better by his answer; but rather the more incensed
against him.

5. But above all, he did hereby show his patience, of which Isaiah prophesied
of old: As a Lamb before the shearer is dumb, so opened he not his mouth, Isa.
53. All this was for our Example, that we should learn to slight the tongues
of clamorous and calumniating men, and rather force our silence, than make our
defense to no purpose. We ought to answer them that ask a reason of our Faith.
But when open wickedness goes about to exstinguish and put out the Truth, then
we are to be silent, and not cast the precious Mysteries of God before hogs and
dogs, Matthew. 7.

But by this silence of Christ the rage of Caiaphas was more incensed then
appeased: for he thought it was done in contempt to him. Thus foaming therefore
in this fury, when neither the multitude of witnesses, nor his own authority
could get any answer: he no doubt, but by Satan's instigation, devises another
course, to wit, a fearful exorcism or adjuration, by which only he hoped to
wrest an answer from him: but if he should still hold his peace when he was
conjured to speak, he might then proclaim and condemn for a manifest despiser
of Gods Name. This was the cause and reason of this exorcism and conjuration.
Therefore he scraped all his poisonous rancour together, and shot all the force
of his fury in one Dart, saying, I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell
us whether thou art the Christ, the Son of the blessed God? It was the custom
and manner of the Jews to swear by the living God. This custom of swearing they
received from the Law, Numb. 5. Josh. 2. Caiaphas urged Christ to answer by the
highest Oath, the Devil his Master had so instructed him, who himself also
formerly said to Christ, What have I to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of the
most High God? I adjure thee by God that thou torment me not, Mar. 5.7.

1. It is much to be observed, that this Caiaphas does understand and
acknowledge these two, to wit, Christ or the Messiah, and the Son of God to be
both but one, which coming from the mouth of a Jewish High Priest, is an
evident Testimony for us against the Jews. For although he might doubt whether
that Jesus that stood then before him, were the Christ, and Son of God: yet by
his own question he plainly confesses these two, the Messiah, and the Son of
God, might well consist and agree in one person: so that the same that was the
Messiah might also be the Son of God, which Paradox our Jews strongly deny, and
oppose it thus: If, say they, your Jesus were a Christ, or a Messiah, yet he
could not be the Son of God, as he acknowledges he is, etc. These miserable
creatures neither read nor confess the Scriptures. For in the second Psalm, the
Messiah is plainly called the Son of God. The Lord said unto me, thou art my
son. And in Jeremy, the same Messiah is clearly expressed, and called by the
great Name of the Lord Jehovah: They shall call him our Righteous Lord, Jer. 23.

2. This also is to be observed, that wicked Caiaphas in the worst act, did not
presume to take the Name of God into his mouth without an addition of praise
and Benediction. How blameworthy, yea how ungodly then are they amongst us, who
not only rashly and irreverently name that dreadful Name of God, but most
wickedly blaspheme, mock, and all to bespit it? If God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain; what shall become of them that
blaspheme his Name, and most wickedly abuse it? Let us even from this ungodly
Caiaphas learn,

1. To give more Reverence to Gods Holy Name, for the honor whereof Christ
could here no longer hold his peace, lest he also should seem to despise and
dishonor the Sacred Name of God, otherwise he would never have answered that
wicked man.

2. Christ did therefore answer Caiaphas, that the Jews in after ages should
have no ground to excuse or defend their treachery, saying, That Nazarene was
examined by our high Priest, and was adjured by the holy Name of God to tell
whether he were the Messiah and Son of God, or no, but he held his peace, and
could not answer a word. If he had told the truth, we would have believed him.
And for this reason Christ would hold his peace no longer. Wherefore in that
Christ did answer now and not before, it is not to be ascribed to any power of
the exorcism, for what conjuration can prevail against God?

Here we are likewise taught, freely to confess the truth when we are
questioned about it. Christ denied not who he was. Let us also confess who we
are.

Moreover Christ did so frame his answer, that he might both insinuate the
truth, and also make it his business to withold them from their malice, who
sought to murder him with the fear of future punishment.

The truth he confesses in two words: Thou have said it. And, I am. The first
whereof was somewhat obscure: Thou have said. But the second was clearer then
the Sun. The meaning then is this, Thou have said, as if he had said, True; it
is as thou say. Or, I need not answer, seeing thou thy self say it. Or he
does rather refer it, and send him to his own conscience, Thou have said; that
is, why do thou ask that which thou know well enough already? I need not
tell thee what thy own conscience dictates to thee. Nevertheless I ingenuously
confess, that I am, what thou at once ask and acknowledgest, even the
Messiah and the Son of God, who is blessed for evermore.

Christ does here first take Caiaphas himself for a witness. Secondly he does
freely confess it. Thirdly he does prove his confession by his ascension into
heaven, which was shortly to follow, and by his coming again to Judgment,
which is not yet come to pass. For who can ascend into heaven, and so sit at
the right hand of God in equal power with him? Also who can descend from the
clouds, but this one Jesus? He therefore without all question must needs be the
Messiah and the Son of God, however he was abased on earth, and notwithstanding
he did suffer so unworthily at the hands of men. Then indeed he stood bound
like a Malefactor before Caiaphas, (who yet was, is, and ever will be the best
Benefactor to all men) but shortly after they were to see him after another
manner. For the Apostles (who were Jews) saw him afterward go up into heaven,
Acts 1. Stephen (who also was a Jew) saw him standing at the right hand of God,
Acts 7. We all shall see him coming out of the clouds as a Judge, and justly
judging his unjust Judges, Luke 21. How can it then be, but that he must needs
be both the Messiah and the Son of God? Therefore he does now warn them of this
Judgment to come, if happily he might convert them with fear, whom he could
not win or reclaim with his courtesies and innocence. The meaning then is this,
You do here accuse me indeed for a base fellow, and endeavor with might and
main to cut me off and destroy me: but hereafter I will not show my self to you
so weak and despicable. Behold ye shall see me, that I am the Son of God,
sitting at the right hand of the power of God, equal with God, equally
powerful, in the glory of the Father, coming in the clouds of heaven to judge
both the quick and the dead, though now ye look upon me as the son of a man,
and so wickedly accuse me as a man, plotting and purposing my death: This
Judgment I now tell you of beforehand. I warn you of this day at present.

Here he does fitly compare his first and second coming together. The first
coming of Christ was with much reproach and scorn among unbelievers, but most
saving to Believers. His other coming will be glorious; very comfortable and
joyful to the godly, but to the wicked it will be most terrible.

But let us hear what good Christ did these naughty men by this confession of
the truth. Caiaphas asked the question, and answered it himself: besides he
heard the truth of Christ also, as also the proof of the truth, or of his true
confession; so that he might well have been satisfied. But see his carriage. He
rents his clothes, and brawls at Christ as if he had committed some notorious
and heinous crime. He has spoken blasphemy, says he, that is, he has sinned
against the holy Ghost. There needs no further accusation or evidence. All ye
that are present here in this sacred Council have heard out of his own mouth
this horrible and egregious blasphemy. Is it not more then too much for any man
to say, and make himself to be the Son of God? Judge ye therefore what
punishment such a man is worthy to have, etc. The rending of the garments was a
good custom among the Jews, especially in extreme troubles and amazements, and
when any thing befell them which they much dreaded, and would by no means
should have come upon them. Examples of this kind we have in Jud. 11.35. and 2 Samuel 1. and chap. 13. and 2 Chro. 5. Thus this wicked Caiaphas does here, as if
he had so abhorred the blaspheming of Gods name, when there was no fear of God
at all in him. The wretched man perceived that Christ spoke this from that Text
in Daniel 7. where we read that the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven,
and was brought before the ancient of days, and had power to judge given to
him. It seemed impossible to him that this Jesus of Nazareth should be that Son
of man. Therefore he does so rave and rage, and so earnestly press and call for
sentence to be past upon him.

But see the malice and hypocrisy of this high Priest. They had often heard
Christ say that he was the Son of God, and that he came down from heaven: and
they had as often strove and contended with him about it, as is clear in John
10. and many other places. But here this Caiaphas exclaims at it, and tears his
clothes, as if he had heard some new and strange thing from him. And all this
he does in ostentation, and to stir up others more eagerly against Christ.

This was done by the counsel of God, that Caiaphas the high Priest of the Jews
should rend his own clothes at the Passion of Christ, when all the enemies
could not tear the coat of our Lord; whereby was signified, that the Jewish
Priesthood should be torn in pieces for the wickedness of their high Priests,
as it is now too much to be feared, that our Priesthood will be shattered and
torn for the sins of our high Priests.

What Caiaphas did hypocritically do in renting his clothes, counterfeiting
great sorrow: That let us do really and unfeignedly, to wit, grieve heartily
for the blasphemy against God, and not only be troubled at it, but use all
means to withstand, forbid, But such means only as God has appointed.
and punish it. What great confusion are we in, who daily hear blasphemings,
and yet are not a jot troubled at it, nor seek to vindicate and withstand the
wrong offered to the name of God, whereas wicked Caiaphas trembles at that
which he did but think was blasphemy?

Let us now hear the sentence of the Council against Jesus. It is said, They
all condemned him, saying, he is guilty of death. Who pronounced this sentence?
The Priests and Pharisees, the Scribes and Elders, the blindest of all men. But
why did they pass this sentence? Because Christ answered well, and proved the
same before by signs and miracles, and afterward with real proof: They were
swift, and made haste to shed blood. Therefore they were called to the Council.
Caiaphas knew very well where and of whom to get votes enough. He knew they
would all vote as he would have them. Therefore the Evangelist says plainly,
that they all condemned Christ, not one among so many learned, wise, and grave
men opposing it. There was none stood up for the innocent, there was no patron
for him there, none made his appeal, no man craved further time for him to make
his defense: so wholly were they made and addicted for Caiaphas. They all
agreed in evil, who could never accord in good. And how often amongst us also is
sentence given in favor of Princes, Potentates and great men against the
innocent?

Thus Christ, who sought the glory of his Father in all things, is said to
blaspheme: and he that was free from all sin, is proclaimed worthy of death.
Who sees not what shame they here cast on Christ, when they condemn him to
death for a blasphemer, and so impiously disgrace that most holy Name, which (
Phil. 2.) is above every name, at which every knee shall bow, and by which only
we must be saved, whereas there is no greater loss than of a man's name and good
report, nor is there any thing that can be outwardly inflicted, will so grieve
a wise man, as disgrace and shame. A good name is better then great riches,
Prove. 22.1. Here then is fulfilled what Christ in David foretold long ago; The
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me, Psalm. 69 We were
and are Blasphemers, and by consequence guilty of death. These reproaches were
ours, but Christ transferred them, and took them on himself, lest our
consciences should be tormented with them for ever. Beware therefore O
Christian, that thou do never blaspheme Christ: for that reproach redounds on
God himself. For he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, John
5. Wherefore Christ upbraideth the Jews, saying, Say ye of him whom the Father
has sanct fied and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am
the Son of God? John 10.36. Let us rather give thanks to him, who was judged to
death as a blasphemer for us. It follows.

And the men that held Jesus mocked him, Buke 22.63. Mat. 26.67.
and spit in his face, and buffeted him, and covered his face (Mark 14.65.) and
smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ
who is he that smote thee? And many other things blasphemously spoke they
against him, Luke 22.65.

They have condemned Christ to death for a blasphemer. Now they mock him as a
fool, and handle him most shamefully, and exercise all kind of devilish spite
upon him. When wicked men have extremely defamed, and impiously dealt with a
man, at last they jeer him: so they first make a man a blasphemer, and then use
him like a fool. And although nothing does more scandalize and offend carnal
men then the infirmity of Christ: yet the Evangelists esteem it the greatest
honor of Christ to record this injury offered to him. For his goodness and
mercy does so much the more appear, by how much the more he was abased and
humbled for us. And it is so much the sweeter to us, by how much he was made
more despicable for us. For we may truly glory in his affliction.

And hence arises our greatest Consolation, to see that he has so abundantly
expiated our pride and rebellion against God. Therefore O my soul, who art
redeemed by the blood of Christ, betake thy self into thy chamber, and retire
into the closet of thy heart, and meditate on those great things which thy Lord
endured for thee in that shadow of the night. Consider the words of the
Evangelists, which though they be few, yet they do fully express the huge
affront and indignity offered to Christ. The men, says he, that held Jesus,
mocked him, etc. These were the servants of the High Priests, and the Soldiers
of the Romans, which held Christ entangled in their snares. To these he was now
delivered, to do with him as they listed after the Council had examined him.
And they, to gratify their masters who stood by, loaded him with all the scorn
and shame they could possibly devise and invent, and exercised all the fury of
their malice without any control, and no doubt but they received a special
reward after from the High Priests, for their great pains taken, and their good
service done in mocking Christ. In expectation whereof these lewd servants and
Soldiers did so much the more glory, the more they could revile, afflict, and
lash him. So that they did cruelly and most miserably use the King of Glory all
that live-long Night. For,

1. They did childishly fleer at him, as they use to make sport with fools,
abusing him with most contumelious words and actions. Who is not sensible what
a horrid thing it was to deride him, whom the Father had sent for our
salvation? And yet they now flout and fleer at Christ, who likewise talk and
prate of his Words, and Works, and Sacraments.

2. They spit upon him, or spit even in his face. To spit on a man is far
greater disdain, then simply to mock or strike him. For that which we spit on,
we account a nasty stinking thing. Behold, here the bread of Angels is loathsome
to men, they abuse that Face which the Angels desire to behold; they bespatter
him, whom their Fathers so longingly desired; saying, cause thy face to shine,
and we shall be saved, Psalm 80. Here that of Isaiah is truly fulfilled: He
has no form or comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that
we should desire him. We esteemed him not. Truly he bare our griefs, Isa. 53.

3. They buffeted him. The Jews had a custom, that they thought they could
never sufficiently misuse one that had offended God, and so thought that they
had performed a most acceptable service to God, if they had poured out their
wrath by spitting, and all sort of despite upon him, then they took themselves
for most dear children of God, because they were fervently and burning hot
zealous for him, and did stoutly vindicate his wrong. Hence they did not blush
to do those things which the basest fellow in the world would have been ashamed
of. But they knocked Christ on the head, and Satan now does the like to them.

4. They cover his face: First, that they might not be moved to pity him: for
his face was most lovely, and enamored all that beheld it. He was truly fairer
then the children of men, Psalm 45. Secondly, They were so malicious that they
could not devise what to do to him. And therefore by the just Judgment of God
the Veil is yet upon their heart, according to that, Let their eyes be blinded
that they see not.

5. They stroke him on the face with the palms of their hands, with scoffing
words, Prophecy thou Christ, etc. speaking it in scorn, as to one that fain
would be accounted by the people for a Prophet and the Messiah, when indeed he
was not. And many other they spoke blasphemously against him. Many things,
says he, which neither the Evangelists nor the Prophets wrote of. Not such as
the former, but other things, says he, they tauntingly spoke against him. And
what great, how grievous, and what unheard of things did our Lord suffer for us
this Night?

Here that Prophecy was fully verified: I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheekt to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and
spitting, Isa. 50. Unthankful man, get thee gone, and seek after the joys of
this world, since the Lord has suffered such unworthy things for thee. See
what solace Christ had in the Paschal Night, which was the greatest and
gladsomest Festival of the Jews.

Behold what great thanks he had from his people that Night, wherein he did
them the greatest kindness heretofore. That night they did sprinkle their
Door-posts with the blood of the old Lamb. But they besmear this true Lamb with
most execrable and cursed spittings. O the strange frowardness of men! O
unutterable patience of Christ! O the never sufficiently admired patience of
God! Had it been any wonder if he had even destroyed the whole world for this
one horrid fact? Truly the Lord is very patient and long-suffering. But thus
the Scriptures must be fulfilled, and thus man must be Redeemed. As for our
part, Dear Brethren, let us,

1. Consider seriously all and every of these Premises and particulars, for no
man can with words ever sufficiently express them. Consider them every one in
order. Compare the persecutors with him that was persecuted. Think of them as
if they were now before your eyes, and done afresh in your sight; meditate upon
them in the inmost parts of your heart. Thy Savior is set at naught, They
Master is spit on, Thy Lord is buffeted. Thy God is more basely handled than
ever any man was dealt with on earth. Hear this, understand it, consider it
well, ponder it thoroughly, whosoever thou art that do acknowledge thy self to
be a sinner. For they are our sins. Brethren, I say, our sins are they that
brought Christ to this pass. If we had not sinned in Adam and Eve, our innocent
Christ had never suffered these things. In this various and manifold Passion we
see as before our eyes, how unrighteous, how guilty, how full of sin we are,
and especially have been. Look how vile Christ outwardly in the body did appear
or seem before men, so vile were we inwardly in our souls before God; and such
as Christ was here, such must we have been for ever, if he had not undertaken
all these things.

2. Let us give him thanks, who by his reproach and contempt delivered us from
eternal shame.

3. Learn we also patiently to bear what wrong and scorn is offered to us. For
if our Lord Christ was thus mocked, spit on, scoft at, contemned, and made a
laughing stock, (as he had before told his Apostles he should, Luke 18.) and
was beaten with more stripes then any can express, why should not we his
servants and scholars suffer the like? This and no other way must we go to
Heaven: even by death to life by shame to glory. He that refuses this, when
according to the will of God, to do it, may be called a prudent man indeed, but
he will never go for a true Christian. Know therefore, that Christ did not
suffer these things only as his work, but also for our Example: that is, He did
not only suffer these things for us, but his Will is that we also should suffer
patiently the like things, if need require.

4. But above all, let us take heed that we do not reproach Christ, which the
unthankful Christians now in these our days make no bones to do, and never
leave slandering him. For they buffet him, who confess him with their words,
but deny him in their works. A buffet is that which is given behind the back.
They spit on Christ, who defile their souls with filthy thoughts, or laugh at
godly men for serving God. Or lastly, such as contemn their true Prelates or
Ministers. They strike Christ on his face with the palms of their bands, who
disturb and vex their Neighbor in his presence, and before his face; or that
take the Sacraments, or administer them with unwashen hands. They cover Christ's
face, who, when they sin in secret, are more afraid of men then of God. Also
they who sin out of wilful and affected ignorance. So they who wittingly cheat
and defraud their Neighbor, etc. Of these and such like do thou beware, O
Christian, whosoever thou art. For all these redound to the injury of Christ.
But study rather in word and life to glorify that Christ which the Jews
contemned, etc.

Here ends the second Part of our Lords Passion.
Here begins the third Part of the Passion of our Lord.
Dearly beloved Brethren,
I See an earnest desire increases in your to hear more of the Passion of our
Lord: And there is as fervent a desire kindled in us to treat yet further of
the same Subject. Although I confess ingennously, that your devotion does
deserve such a Preacher who is able, and can tell how by the sound of his voice
to pierce so into your souls, and so to quicken and rouse ye up, as that you
may yet stand more strangely amazed at this unparalled Fact, and suffer, all
your inward parts to break forth, even to a flood of tears. Christians should
be most of all affected with the Passion and sufferings of our Lord, especially
seeing all that was done, was done for us. This we believe for a truth,
therefore we may well be moved at it. God grant that we be not only moved with
the Passion of Christ, but edified too, and also strengthened with patience to
undergo the like.

We have finished two parts already, come we now to the third part of Christ's
Passion, to wit, from the evening to the night, and from the night to that
joyful and happy day of our Redemption. For this day will show us the
Judgment of death passed upon the innocent blood, yet for our eternal
salvation. Thus far then we have seen that fulfilled in Christ which he
prophesied of by David: Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan
have beset me round, Psalm. 22.12. By these Calves and Bulls, which were counted
clean creatures, are meant the Jews, who first fastened upon Christ, and were
the prime Authors of his sufferings. Now you shall hear how that was fulfilled
in Christ, which David in the same Psalm presently adds: Many dogs compassed
me about. These dogs were the Gentiles, who finished those sufferings of Christ
which the Jews had begun. You shall bear, I say, what Christ suffered afterward
from the Gentiles. Woe unto all High Priests, Scribes, Priests, Pharisees,
Elders of the Jews, etc. who sat in this Council, and by this Council
delivered up Jesus to the civil Magistrate as one guilty and worthy of death.
For so says the Text:

When the morning was come, (Mat. 27 1.) all the chief Priests, and Scribes,
and the Elders of the people, and the whole Council, (Mar. 15.1.) came together
(Luke 22 66.) against Jesus to put him to death, And led him into their
Council, saying, Art thou the Christ? Tell us. And he said unto them, if I tell
you, you will not believe: and if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor
let me go. Hereafter shall the son of Man sit on the right hand of the power of
God. Then said they all; Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them,
ye say that I am. And they said, what need we any further witnesses? for we our
selves have heard of his own mouth. And the whole multitude of them arose,
(Luke 23.1.) and led Jesus bound from Caiaphas into the Hall of Judgment, and
delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Governor, (Matthew. 27.2. John 18.28.)

All these things yet passed in the house of Caiaphas. The Council held all
night. But toward the morning it grew more hot and fierce, and they now flock
together in swarms. For now the news of Christ being taken was noysed all
abroad. Their rage increased, and the better Christ answered, the more
outrageous were they. The more patiently he bore their injuries, the more they
vexed at him. Therefore as soon as it was daylight, they consult again what
was requisite to be done. These prying busybodies mist their aim, and this
Nocturnal and dark Council came short of sufficient evidence to accuse him as
guilty of death before Pilate. Although there were men, and they wise ones too,
yea enemies, yet could they not invent or forge any thing so much as like a
crime against the innocence of Christ and his Gospel, which they sought to
condemn and cut off. He confessed that he was the Son of God: but that was not
a sufficient cause or ground enough to accuse him before a Pagan Judge and an
Idolater. Therefore they call the Council together again, if peradventure they
might find out something more certainly whereof to accuse him before the
Governor. Christ therefore is brought bound again before them, that so they
might even satiate and glut their wicked, cruel, and greedy eyes, at least by
gazing and staring upon his misery. For as the affectionate force and strength
of love is not satisfied with one glance or look, nor contented with one
address to its beloved one: so the rancour of malice still ^steth to exercise
yet more revenge on him whom it hates. ^is morning then was not the rising,
but the setting of the true Light unto the Jews: nor did the wonted day break
forth before their eyes, and shine upon them; but a night of black darkness and
blindness covered and fell upon them. This morning threw down their Temple and
Altar, cut off their Prophets, took from them their Kingdom and Priesthood, and
turned all their Festivals into an eternal lamentation and woe* and that justly
too, forasmuch at that day they began their barbarous and bloody Counsel like
mad dogs and savage beasts, that they might deliver the Author of Life and Lord
of Glory unto death.

They press it therefore upon him further, and urge him yet once more, whether
he were the Christ and the Messiah? They knew that the Messiah was so promised
in the Scriptures, that he should be the King of Israel, which if Christ had
confessed, then they knew they should have just cause to accuse him for a
Traitor, and as one that intended to rebel against Caesar.

Now as this question, Whether Jesus was the Christ, held in debate all night
until the morning: so is it yet canvassed, and does still remain doubtful
with the Jews. This is it that is the scruple now, and does most perplex and
trouble them, viz. who and where the Messiah should be, and when he should
come, etc.

But they Quere to no purpose, forasmuch as they would neither believe nor
receive this Jesus of Nazareth to be that Messiah. As for our part we need not
question any such thing: for we believe and know that he is the true Christ and
Messiah, Matthew. 11. Nor do we, or ever will we believe any other, Matthew. 24.

Christ therefore when he was asked again, makes almost the same answer as he
did before, except what Luke adds, that he said this more, If I tell you, you
will not believe, and if I ask you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go.

This wise and well contrived evasion does sufficiently hint out what wicked
Judges were in this Council, such as would hear nothing that was just and true,
and who knew nothing but how to oppress and condemn. To what end should he
multiply words to such cruel minded men, who intended nothing but mischief to
him? A man shall get nothing of such men, nor prevail any thing with them, no
though God hims^ were his Advocate to plead for him. For thou will be compelled
to be, not what thou art, but what they feign and fancy thee to be. So that
thou have need of nothing but patience to deal with such men.

No good could have been expected from them, although Christ had spoken never
so excellently of the Incarnate Word: surely nothing but scorn and blasphemy
had come of it, and consequently greater wrath and rage in these furious men.
And it had been to as little purpose, if he had asked them about those
Prophetical Scriptures, none of them would or could have answered him. What did
they answer him, when he asked them about John's Baptism? Matthew. 21. And so
concerning the son of David, and of that verse in the Psalms, The Lord said to
my Lord, etc. Also when he asked them, whether it was lawful to heal on the
Sabbath Day? Mat. 22. Luke 14. Christ must answer either as one accused, or ask
as one contriving his defense.

The belief of his Judges was requisite to his answer, but to his question
their answer only was sufficient. But in this Council Christ had neither credit
given to his words, nor an answer to his questions; why they should he speak
much, especially seeing he knew that they were peremptorily and obstinately
resolved to kill him, and never more to let him escape alive out of their hands?
And indeed how should they believe the words of Jesus, who would not believe
his Divine Works, which were more effectual to persuade.

Therefore this was a time to keep silence: so that he answered nothing, but Ye
say so: by which reply he does send them again to their own consciences.
Besides he does thereby again inculcate, that they must come to judgment for
what they did. Hereafter, says he, the son of Man shall sit, etc. q.d. I shall
say no more but this, the time will come when ye shall see me Judge you and all
the world, though now you most unjustly Judge me. At this they made a fearful
and hideous outcry again: What need we any further witness? we our selves have
heard out of his own mouth. And what was it, O ye blind and wicked men, which
ye did hear from his own mouth? I dare say you heard no blasphemy come out of
his mouth, for which he deserved death, but an awful reverence of Gods Name,
for which he was much to be honored: and will ye for all that pass sentence of
death against him? Are ye so forward to commit that grand sin, even to murder
the innocent Son of God? O ye High Priests, and sons of Aaron, what is become of
your Unction now? Where is your Clemency? Have ye cast away all pity and
compassion from you? David could not go forward with the Temple, because he had
shed the blood of enemies: and dare ye who offer Sacrifices daily, ye that so
swell, and are puffed up with such a conceit of sanctity, who glory in the
sanctimony of your life and height of honor; how dare you, I say, to pass
sentence upon that most innocent and spotless one, the very Fountain of life,
as one worthy of death? Herod who was a stranger, and otherwise a very bloody
beast, yet gave him more reverence then ye, and would not pollute his hands
with the blood of this harmless man. Pilate also that barbarous bruit was
terribly afraid, and excused himself, and washed his hands from his blood. But
you, (and shall like your holiness) you holy high Priests affirm that he is
guilty of death. O the Religion, O the Righteousness that shines in you!
Doubtless the very Heathen, and the Samaritans will be your Judges: Nay out of
your own mouth shall ye be judged, how much your ungodliness has beed more
cruel then the unrighteousness of Herod and Pilate. But let us leave those
vile men, and proceed. The conclusion of that bloody Counsel was: Jesus of
Nazareth does deserve to die. The reason is, because he proved himself to be
the Messiah, and the Son of the living God, who is blessed for ever; and that
by the very Testimony of their own consciences, besides the Signs and Wonders
which he had wrought. This was the Judgment which was given by those holy
Pharisees at Jerusalem in that Counsel. And now they have no need of any more
evidence. For they carried their own cause, but Jesus lost his. Wherefore they
hale him out of hand before the secular Court, and set him before the Roman
Governor bound with cords, chained, spit on; and therefore irrevocably
determined to be worthy of death: the scullions and rafscallions, with a great
concourse and clamor of the people egging on against him: that it might be
fulfilled which Christ said, Mat. 20. The son of man shall be delivered to the
chief Priests, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to
the Gentiles. This they now fulfill. The whole multitude, says he, arose, etc.
viz. to set the fairer gloss upon the proceedings, that their cause might seem
to be the more just and honest. Then they present him bound to the Governor,
thereby to show that they had condemned him already. They carry all things with
much pomp and state, that so they might the better cloak their hatred and
malice.

Lo here he that came to loose all men's bonds, is now the third time bound
himself. He is often bound and manicled, because we had many fetters and chains
which he was to break with his bonds. Here then let us a little remember and
consider our selves. For as Christ is here brought to his Judgment and Trial
for life and death, by one consent and with great rejoicing of his Adversaries,
without any mercy or pity, without all hope of acquitment or release, no man
owning him, or opposing the sentence against him: so should we have been
brought before Gods dreadful Tribunal, if Christ had not put himself in our
place, and stood in our stead: Wherefore if thou would stand with boldness in
Gods Judgment, cast thy self on Christ by Faith. For without him none can
stand before God in the day of Judgment. For no man living is justified, or
found righteous before God, Psalm 143.2. Let us therefore follow our Lord
Christ also, as he was tossed too and fro, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from the
spiritual Court to the civil Magistrate, from the Jews to the Gentiles, from
the wicked to the ungodly, from the superstitious to the Idolaters. Nor is
there any cause why we should be afraid. All things shall work for our good in
the end. But first let us hear what end Judas came to, who was the Ringleader
and incendi ary of all this mischief. It follows in Matthew:

Then Judas which betrayed him, Mat. 27.3.
when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the
thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests and Elders, saying, I have sinned,
in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, what is that to us?
see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself. (And he burst asunder in the midst, and
all his bowels gushed out, Act. 1.18.) And the chief Prests took the silver
pieces, and said, It is not lawful for us to put them into the Treasury,
because it is the price of blood. And they took Counsel, and bought with those
(silver pieces, the reward of iniquity, Act. 1.18.) the potters field, to bury
strangers in. And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem, insomuch as
that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is, the field of
blood unto this day, Act. 1.19. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by
Jeremy the Prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the
price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value:
And gave them for the Potters field, as the Lord had appointed me.

This part of the History is inserted by Matthew, that we may first hear the
just Judgment of God upon the Traitor, before we hear the unrighteous sentence
of Pilate against Christ that was betrayed.

And this miserable man must first dye. For he was not worthy to live so long,
till Christ had dyed for the sins of men. There is a twofold sense of what is
said: When he saw that he was condemned.

1. He either knew by certain signs and conjectures that Christ would now be
condemned, inasmuch as he was led to the Judgment seat, from whence none
return acquitted, and for that he knew that the malice of the Jews toward him
was implacable. Or,

2. He saw him to be but a damned creature for such an heinous and horrible
fact, as if he then first began to feel the weight of his sin. The Devil will
not let them whom he tempted see the hainousness of sin till they have
committed it. But when the sin is once acted, then he will aggravate it, and no
less endeavor to throw them headlong into despair, then he did before hurry
them to sin. Judas therefore being now sensible of his sin, repents himself:
which repentance Jerome says was too late, and Ambrose says it was to no
purpose. For he did not repent according to knowledge, says Origin: He did not
bewail his sin, but his loss. This was the repentance of Cain, Saul, Ahab,
Esau. Wicked men are sorry that they are come into trouble and anguish of mind,
and if they can once get out of their streights, they will make but light of
their sin. Besides this repentance of Judas was not sound and true; for
although he acknowledged his sin, yet he did not hope or believe in Gods mercy.

His sin was revealed to him, but not the Gospel: This is the repentance of
them who by the righteous Judgment of God are damned, seeing indeed, and
acknowledging their sin, but not daring to beg pardon for the same. But true
repentance is, to judge or condemn, and believe. Now to judge or make
judgment, is to acknowledge ones self to be a sinner, to condemn, rebuke,
confess, and punish or mortify ones sins: but to believe, is to trust and
rely upon God by Christ, that he will not impute the sin, but pardon it. Thus
did David, Psalm 32. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and
thou forgavest, etc. Again, Many are the sorrows of the wicked: but he that
trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about. So the Wise man: For if we
sin we are thine; Wisd. 15.
knowing that we are accounted as thine. This Faith in Gods mercy through
Christ is most necessary to salvation and the remission of sins. For when a man
knows that Christ is the true Savior, the pledge of Righteousness, the
Fountain of Mercy; he will hie and betake himself to Him, notwithstanding the
hugeness and excess of his sins. By his knowledge shall he justify many, Isa.
53. And again, To know thee is perfect Righteousness, Wisd. 15.3. Therefore if
thou art terrified with the remembrance of thy sins, thou ought not to look
upon the greatness of them only, but also to consider and have respect to the
mercy of God in Christ; otherwise with Cain thou will cry out full of fear and
despair: My sin is greater then can be forgiven, Genesis 4. Thus David begins his
penitential Psalm 51. with remembrance of Divine mercy, which makes scarlet
sins like snow, Isa. 1. Judas perished because he had not this repentance, nor
did he know what it was. Peter's conversion was a Token of Gods mercy: So
Judas's damnation was a signal of his wrath. God of his goodness grant that the
like never happen to any Christian, but help us rather to seek for Grace by
true Faith, and with our whole heart.

But what does Judas do more? He brought back the thirty pieces of silver, etc.
See here this wicked Judas made restitution of his unjust gain: but he was
never the better for it, because he believed not. To show us that all our good
works without Faith are nothing worth in the sight of God. The wretched man
could not long keep that money which he had sold Christ for: for a sign, that
all those good things which God of his bounteous liberality had formerly
bestowed upon the Jews, should ere long be taken from them again. God had given
them the Lands of the Heathens, that they might keep his Statutes, and observe
his Laws, Psalm 105. ult. and because they did not so, he said, I will return,
and take away my corn and my wine, Hos. 2.9.

Judas did not only repent and restore his ill gotten goods, but confessed his
fault too: I have sinned, said he, in betraying the innocent blood* And yet he
was nothing the better for his confession, and all because he believed not. Yet
is it of much advantage to us. For this one Testimony of it self is sufficient
for us against all the blasphemies of the Jews. First, The Traitor himself
excuses Christ. Secondly, He that denied him repented, and was converted.
Thirdly, Pilate himself who was the Judge could find no fault in him. Fourthly,
And what is yet more, the chief Priests and Scribes themselves could not tell
what to say, when Judas confessed that Christ was innocent, but only reply, so
as that they did upon the matter yield, that what Judas said of Christ's
innocence was true; Say they, What is that to us? see thou to it. Which words
of theirs sound as if they began now to doubt what they had done. But all the
blame they lay on Judas the Traitor: which they would never have done, had they
known that what he did had been warrantable and just. And yet how coldly do
they answer, when they hear of innocent blood? As if they would fain have said;
If it be righteous blood, what is that to us? We bought and sold: we paid what
we promised. Therefore there can be no flaw against us at the Law. Look thou to
it, whom thou did sell, it nothing conterns us.

But hear, O ye Heads and Rulers of the Synagogue. Ye dealt either justly, or
unjustly with Christ. If unjustly, (as it is plain enough that ye did) then are
ye Christ-killers, that is, such as murder your own Messiah. If ye did justly
with him, then ought ye to have comforted poor miserable Judas, and not have
heaped all the guilt upon him, and laid all the load on his back: but
ingenuously have confessed that he was in no fault at all. But whereas ye shift
of the blame from your selves, and lay it on Judas, certainly you acknowledge
that he did very wickedly. And if his Treason were a filthy fact, doubtless
your murder could not be lawful nor just, and so ye are manifestly convinced
of unrighteousness, and that out of your own mouth.

1. Note here, what wicked men will do against their conscience, so they may
but satisfy their lust. They deny not but that it was guiltless blood that was
betrayed. Wherefore hence we may observe, to whom the poor sheep may safely
commit themselves. These should have comforted his conscience that was driven
into despair: but they say, what is that to us? O tender hearted Shepherds!
Here we see little of that affection that was in Moses toward the people, Exodus
32. And in Paul to his Brethren, Romans 9. They are indeed no Shepherds, but
Wolves rather, seeking their own, and not the good of the Lords Flock, etc.

2. Observe here, that they who do evil to please men, if the wind turn, and
things fall out contrary, they shall be flouted and forsaken by those very men
for whose favor they did it. Let no man therefore at any time do evil to
humor others, etc.

What should Indas do now being terrified in conscience, and finding no comfort
from those men whose turn he had served against his own conscience? What else,
I say, should he do, or what indeed could he do, but despair? Wherefore he cast
down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and went and hanged himself, being
forced so to do by that sorrow which is unto death, (2 Cor. 2.) and that by the
righteous Judgment of God, that so the wickedness which he fomented against
the Head of all the Saints, might fall on his own pate, and that he should be
his own judge and Executioner. Now,

1. He hanged himself, to show that he was hated of heaven and earth, who would
not only not reform and amend that sin of Treason, but also added this horrid
offense, to be his own murderer.

2. He hung in the air, died and burst a sunder in the midst, and all his
bowels gushed out, as Peter says, Act. 1. for he was not worthy of a burial:
Indeed he was not fit for the company either of Angels or men: Therefore he
could find no place in heaven among the Angels, because he betrayed the Lord
of heaven and of the Angels: nor ought he to be buried in the earth amongst
men, because when he was on earth, he was a companion of Devils; justly then
did he perish in the air, which is the place appointed for the Devils, until
the day of Judgment.

A figure of this untimely death we have in Achitophel, who plotted the death
and ruin of David, 2 Samuel 17. who came to the same end as Judas here did, for
he hanged himself, and for no other reason, but because he foresaw that David
would get the Kingdom, in that Chushi David's Friend was come over to Absolon
not cordially, but only personally. So Judas saw that Christ's name would not be
forgotten, in that the Apostles yet live to keep up the remembrance thereof,
and would survive that his memory should not perish. As therefore Achitophels
hanging himself was a sad presage that Absolon himself also should come to an
ill end: So Judas hanging himself portended the end and destruction of the
Jews; for unto this very day they hang yet between heaven and earth, because in
heaven they have no hope, and on earth have not any settled place; and their
bowels are gushed out, for they are scattered over the face of all the earth.
Now whereas it is here said, that Judas brought back the 30. pieces of silver
to the Priests into the Temple: it is plain,

1. That some of the Priests and Elders tarried in the Temple because of the
Feast, whilst others of the chief Priests and Elders accused Christ before
Pilate. For the Sacrifices of the Feast must be taken care of; and if no other,
yet the morning Sacrifice, which was the daily offering, must be looked after,
that nothing might be now left undone, but that in both they might hold up the
Service of God, both by their Oblations in the Temple, and by condemning Christ
that grand Seducer, who is indeed the Savior of the world. Hence we see how
justly their Sacrifices were rejected (Isa. 1.) Because your hands, says he,
are full of blood.

2. Here also we may see what a fearful thing it is to be forsaken of God. For
he that is deserted of God, has indeed a sense of his sin, but he dares not
hope for any mercy or pardon for his sin, nor can he find any comfort from
men, but must necessarily run into despair.

3. We see also what a miserable end they come unto, who are the persecutors of
Christ, they hang between heaven and earth. They lose earthly things, and
cannot obtain heavenly.

4. But let covetous men principally mark well this passage; for here they may
see what becomes of their covetousness: For what profit or pleasure had this
miserable Judas by all the money that he took? Surely he got nothing but grief
and sorrow of heart. Riches are a perpetual vexation, although thou get them
with distracting care, and fill all thy Storehouses therewith, scraping them
together by all means, right or wrong: What becomes of all at last? Thou losest
thy money, bring thy body to poverty, and betrayest thy soul to the Devil.
And therefore, O Christian, take better heed, and let not money master thee;
but if thou have got it honestly, use it soberly; if dishonestly, be careful to
dispose of it to good uses, or make restitution to those thou have wronged.

But whence had Judas all this money? And what became of it at last? Doubtless
the Jewish Prelates being in a confusion were forced to pick up the money again
which he scattered in the Temple, inasmuch as it came from them at first; but
when they had it, they could not tell what in the world to do with it. But it
was the least of their thoughts to take care for the preservation of the
Traitor when he had cleared Christ's innocence. They saw that Judas repented and
recanted what he had done, and returned again the earnest and contract of the
bargain which he made. But they keep the Merchandise which they bought, and the
money too; all which was just and honest in their opinion. Nevertheless their
stomachs did a little rise against that money, and they call it the price of
blood: whereby we may clearly see that the worm of their conscience did begin
to sting them: wherefore they would not put this money into the Treasury,
because it was ill gotten goods; thus they did strain at a Gnat, and swallow a
Camel, Mat. 23. Whereas if they thought that money to be profane and unholy,
not fit to be employed about any use for the Temple, because it was the price
of blood; Why then did they shed that blood? And why did not they themselves
refrain the Altar and Temple, as being defiled with blood? but this they make
light of, and count it no sin, they can swallow this Camel, though they are at
a stand what to do with the money, this is the righteousness of the Pharisees.

Now Corban in the Chaldee Tongue, signifies a Gift offered, whence the Chest,
Box, or Coffer in which such Oblations or Offerings were laid up, were called
by that name, the thing containing, being put for the thing contained.

And that this money may be well bestowed and laid out again, they buy part of
a field with it of a certain Potter to bury strangers in. Just like those who
rob and cheat the poor, and then throw away a drib of it to paint the Church,
or buy some trifling ornament for the Temple, forsooth, whereby they imagine to
expunge and wash away their sin, but all the while they will not abate one jot
of their Covetousness and Cruelty. But,

1.
1. This came to pass by the providence of God, that the price of our Savior
should not be lavisht on the State and pomp of Sinners, but serve for the rest,
succor and refreshment of Strangers: that Christ by shedding his blood might
redeem the living, and by the price of his passion might recover and raise up
the dead.

2.
Nor does it want a mystery that the Potters field should be bought. God is
that Potter, who of the dust of the earth did make and fashion the vessels of
our bodies; the field is the Lords Inheritance. So then the field of this
Potter is purchased by the blood of Christ, and that for Strangers; for true
Rest and eternal life is obtained for those that are truly strangers in this
world, by the blood of Christ.

But although Hospitality be a good and pious Work, and Christians ought
especially to observe this, that they entertain strangers and cherish them, and
to bury their dead decently, yet it is left as a perpetual blot upon the Jews:
and it had been far better for them if that money had been laid up in the
Treasury; for so their reproach might one way or other have been concealed, but
now their shame lies open to all the world; for God so ordering it, that field
is not called Xebergerim, that is, a place to bury Strangers in; but Hakaldama,
which after the Chaldee, is the field of blood: this is continually cast in
their teeth; and they must hear on it whether they will or no; nor have they got
them much honor by purchasing a Burying place for Strangers: but thus it must
be, that the Scripture might be fulfilled in Zachary, who prophesied long since
in the person of Christ, after this manner: And (says he) I the Messiah said
to the Jews, If ye think good, give me my price; if not, forbear; so they
weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto me, Cast
them to the Potter: a goodly price, that I was prized at of them, Zach. 11. And
I took the thirty pieces of silver, and I cast them to the potter in the Temple
of the Lord. In this prophecy we hear not only of the thirty pieces of silver,
but of throwing them in the Temple too, as also of the Potter; so that it is no
less than a Miracle that the Scriptures of the Prophets and Evangelists should
so agree together, which is a great confirmation of our Faith. Christ calls
these thirty pieces of silver his price, because he was bought and sold for
just so much and no more: and because this was so small, contemptible, and
ridiculous a sum, God the Father bade him cast it to the Potter, and does
Ironically call it, a goodly price, which so eminent a person was valued at.
What the Lord there commanded to be done, the Evangelist here says, as the
Lord appointed me. And whereas the Prophet says, that he did do so, it is as
much as to say, he foretold that all things should so fall out. And whereas the
Evangelist says further, whom they of the children of Israel did value, it
seems to have respect to the History of Joseph who was sold, Genesis 37. For so
the froward and stubborn children of Abraham bought him of the children of
Israel, that is, of Judas and his Associates; the Ishmaelites bought him of the
Israelites, one wicked man of another as bad as himself.

Nor let it trouble any man, that Matthew does here put Jeremy for Zachary, for
either one name is put for another in the Greek copies, or else this Zachary
had two names, as we know many others had. But some are of opinion, that
Matthew has respect here to the 22. or 33. chapter of Jeremy. Let these things
pass, for they profit not much: we should rather study to be thankful unto
Christ, who bought an inheritance for us Strangers with his own blood, of the
Father, who is our former and fashioner, Isa. 64. Romans 9. Ier. 18. It follows:

Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the Hall of judgment; Joh. 18.28.
and they themselves went not into the judgment Hall, lest they should be
defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. Pilate then went out unto them,
and said, What accusation bring you against this man? They answered, and said
unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto
thee. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your
Law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man
to death, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying what death he should die.

Most dear Brethren, we have now followed Christ to the very Judgment Hall of
Pilate: I wish we could follow him a little further without cross, as we now
follow him in heart and thought. Now that Pilate was a very potent man, and a
kind of a petty Prince, whom Tiberius Caesar had sent at that time to
Jerusalem to be the chief Governor and Ruler of the Jews Country. His surname,
or rather his fore-name, was Pontius, perhaps it was from the Country, which is
called Pontus near Cappadocia and Bythinia. The house in which he lived at
Jerusalem was called Praetorium, the Judgment Hall, after the custom of the
Romans, or the house of the Praetor, although indeed he had much more Authority
and power then any of the Roman Praetors ever had. And no doubt but he was a
man of very great command and prudence. Which does most plainly appear by this
History, in that he behaved himself far more just and upright than all the High
Priests, Priests and Pharisees of the Jews.

The Jews then bring Christ to Pilates Judgment Hall, imagining that if they
did not put him to death themselves, the guilt of the Fact would not be imputed
to them. Nor is be brought thither by one or two, but by all of them together,
that so by their presence and multitude they might both amaze the Judge, and
vex and grieve Christ the more with their envy. But they (forsooth the Priests)
out of an implanted and inbred hypocrisy; whereby they were ever
superstitiously observant of small matters, but altogether neglecting the
weightier things, would not go into the Judgment Hall for fear of being
defiled, but that they might eat the Passover, as if hitherto they had nothing
polluted themselves at all by their unworthy dealing with Christ, or as if the
house only of an uncircumcised man would contaminate their Sanctity, whereas
they spare not by all ways and means to hunt and chase the innocent to death.
They had a murtherous mind, and murtherous tongues; they bribed the Traitor,
they hired a Band of Soldiers, they procured false Witnesses, they forged
false accusations. Besides, they urge and threaten the Judge, and yet all this
while they wipe their mouth, and what have they done, they are pure and clean,
and fit to celebrate the Passover, but upon no other ground, but because they
refrained to go into the Judgment Hall. A most egregious purity indeed, or
rather a stupid and sordid blindness: could another man's house pollute them,
and would not their own wickedness defile them? See how cleanly these
hypocrites are, how neat they make the outside of the cup, when the inside is
full of ravenous cruelty, Mat. 23. See the preposterous and disorderly
righteousness of these men, which consisted not at all in the heart, but
altogether in the outward show: painted Sepulchers they were. Their
righteousness also consisted only in observing men's Traditions, as though the
precepts of God did conduce nothing to purity and righteousness. It was an
Humane constitution, that no Jew should go into the house of any uncircumcised
man, that the unclean and uncircumcised might not defile him. But Gods Law was,
Thou shall not hate, thou shall not kill, thou shall not bear false witness:
This Law of God the Jews violate and contemn, whilst they are zealous of men's
Ordinances. Thus the greater part among us rely more upon humane constitutions
only, and from thence flatter themselves into a conceit of righteousness, and
yet wholly sleighting the commands of God, as being of no account with them.
Against these the 23. chapter of Matthew was written, as well as against the
hypocrites of old among the Jews. For although for the most part they are
wholly wicked, yet they cloak and hide their wickedness just as the Jews here
did, with obedience to men's Traditions. Who would not have thought that they
were a very holy people, and so had just cause against Christ, who with so
great Devotion and Religion did observe the Canons and constitutions of their
Holy Fathers? If they make conscience to keep a good man's Law, how much less
are they to be suspected to break Gods commands? You see their hypocrisy: But
Christ taught us another manner of righteousness, when he said, Sanctify them,
O Father, with the truth, Joh. 17. That is true Sanctification, when the Father
possesses our hearts, renewing and enlightening them with the knowledge of
Christ, Faith, and the remission of sins. The flesh will not acknowledge this
sanctification, but conceiteth some carnal kind of holiness made up by
abstinence from certain meats, and the company of some sort of men, as the Jews
here did, neglecting the true righteousness.

Now whereas it is said, That they might eat the Passover, it is not to be
understood of the Paschal Lamb, which they did eat the night before, but of the
unleavened bread, which they use to eat all the seven days: as also of the
other solemn Sacrifices, which was lawful for such only as were clean, to be
eaten. For Christ did not (as some would have it) prevent the use of the
Paschal Lamb one day, as does plainly appear by Luke, who says expressly (
chapter 22.) that the night wherein Christ did eat the Paschal Lamb, it was
necessary to kill and eat that Paschal Lamb. But enough of this already.

The Jews indeed did eat the most excellent Passover: not to themselves, but
unto us. That true Lamb, which they by their wicked act offered, is sufficient
for us. For this is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
Joh. 1. and is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5. Pilate therefore went out to those Jews
which refused to come in unto him, and that contrary to the custom of other
Governors, who were not wont to condescend so low to the people. And though he
was a Gentile and an Heathen, and had only his reason, and the Laws of Caesar
to regulate his actions by, yet he carried himself more justly and civilly than
the Jews who had the Scripture and Law of God, and were counted the people of
God. For,

1. It was a great civility in Pilate to conform himself to the custom of the
people, and give place to their obstinacy. For when he saw that they abhorred
the house of an Ethnic, he did not compel them by any tyrannical force to come
into the Judgment Hall, contrary to the custom they had received: but waving
his own power, he went forth to them. A Superior must not always stand stiffly
upon his prerogative, but sometimes accommodate himself to the manners of his
Subjects. And therefore,

2. We read in Josephus concerning Pilate, that he behaved himself as pliable
to them, when the Statues of Caesar were commanded to be set-up in the Temple
at Jerusalem; for when he saw that the resolution of the people was such, that
they would rather die than endure those Statues there; he yielded to them, and
removed the Statues out of the Temple, although he might have destroyed them
all with that Army which was raised for that purpose, unless they would have
submitted. Pilate showed a great deal of Justice, in that he did not presently
condemn Christ before he heard him, as they desired that brought him before
him. He did much disappoint their expectation; for the Judge would do nothing
rashly, but would first sift out the bottom of the business. Therefore he said,
What accusation bring ye against this man? No man is said to be condemned, if
he be not first accused, and have leave to answer for himself. This Ethnic
here observed the equity of this Law: but on the contrary the Jews cry out, If
he were not a Malefactor we would not have delivered him unto thee, q d. the
evidence and clearness of the Fact committed needs no further accusation. Do
thou Justice; there is no need of any more examination. Do thou question our
righteousness? Do thou think we will not do Justice? Do not see who and
what we are who have brought this man bound before thee? Is this all the
respect thou give to the Priests of the most High God? Do thou make no
difference betwixt us and the common Rabble? Do not think that we would bring
one before thee that were not guilty of death. Thou may see how strictly we
keep the Law, for we will not so much as come into thy house, we dare not tred
within thy doors. Nor think thou that we have done any thing in this matter,
either out of envy or hatred, or too precipitate without deliberation and good
advice. We have considered all things, and find that he does deserve to die,
thou have nothing to do but to pronounce Sentence; For if he were not a
malefactor. etc. O the hypocrisy! O the lies and malice of these men! Should
things be thus carried? Is this to execute Justice? Is every prisoner a
malefactor and guilty of death? Who sees not that they distrust the goodness of
their Cause? Therefore,

1. They go about to blind and delude the Judge with vain and empty words, lest
they should be put upon it to prove him a malefactor. Consider well, O
Christian, the malice of these men. They would fain seem to be just and
righteous, even against the check of their own conscience; as if they had never
attempted any such thing, and never went about to destroy any but a Malefactor,
when it is evident that they were the men that did most unjustly put all the
Prophets to death.

2. In this also they show their malice, in that they would have Christ cut off
before he was examined or convicted: nay they think him not worthy that the
Judge should so much as give him audience, or that he should be tried according
to any Rule of Law.

3. They openly charge him as a Malefactor before the common Bar, and in the
face of the open Court, who had healed all their sick. Ask the Lepers whom he
cleansed, and the blind whose sight he restored, etc. whether he were a
Malefactor, etc. But thus it is written, They rewarded me evil for good, and
hatred for my love, Psalm 35. Again, For my love they are my Adversaries, but I
prayed for them, Psalm 109 Christ did here truly pray even when he held his
peace, considering with himself our sins, for which he suffered all this wrong.

But Pilate being now incensed and moved with some chollar at such proud and
unrighteous expressions, cries out to them again: Take ye him, and judge him
after your own Law: as if he had said, if he be a Malefactor, as you say he is,
but do not prove it, why then put your own Law in execution against him. The
Roman Laws prohibit me to condemn any man before he has a full hearing. Truly
Pilate, the Law of Moses did enjoin the same too; but so it is by the malice of
these men, that the Heathens Laws are now preferred before the Law of God. The
Jews very well know it from Exodus 23. and we also know the same from the words
of Nicodemus, that the Law of Moses judges no man until he be first heard and
convinced, John 7. But see how they evade it: It is not lawful for us, say
they, to put any man to death. Well, but who then I pray, put Stephen to death?
Act. 7. What Authority put him to death? Therefore they lie grossly. Was not
this to put Christ to death, when they delivered him up to be sentenced to die,
and labored with all importunity to have him put to death? But they would have
him put to death by the laws of Rome, that so as well they as their laws might
be acquitted from doing any such thing. Their Law was to stone to death; but
the Roman Law was to crucify. This is that they would have. They would not
barely have Christ put to death, but they would have it done with the greatest
reproach and shame that might be. Nor did it so fall out by chance, or by their
consultation, but that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, when he
certainly foretold, that he should be delivered to the Gentiles, and be
crucified by them, Mat. 20. Christ also had said, that the Son of man must be
lifted up, as Moses lifted up the Serpent, John 3.12. Again, When I am lifted
up, I will draw all unto me, Joh. 12. And again, When the son of man shall be
lifted up, then shall ye know that I am he, John 8. Now when the Jews perceived
that they should miss their aim, and that there was no good to be done with
Pilate, unless they brought some Accusation and certain proof of clear crimes
against Christ.

They began to accuse him ( of many things, Luke 23.2.
Mar. 15.3.) saying, we found this fellow perverting our Nation, and forbidding
to give Tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a King. Then
Pilate entered into the Judgment Hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto
him, Art thou the King of the Jews? (John 18.33.) Jesus answered, ( standing
before him, Mat. 27.11.) Say thou this thing of thy self? or did others tell
it thee of me? Pilate answered, am I a Jew? thine own Nation, and the chief
Priests have delivered thee unto me, what have thou done? Jesus answered, my
Kingdom is not of this World: If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my
Kingdom not from hence. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then?
Jesus answered thou say that I am a King. To this end was I born, and for
this cause came I into the World, that I might bear witness unto the Truth:
every one that is of the Truth hears my voice. Pilate says unto him, what is
Truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and says
unto them, I find in him no fault at all. And they were the more fierce,
saying, he stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Jury, beginning from
Galilee to this place, Luke 23.5.

This was Christ's first examination in Pilates Court, where the Jews
Accusations are first laid down. Lest thou should think, O Pilate, say they,
that we have nothing to lay to this man's charge, hear, we pray thee, what just
cause we have to hate and abhor him. He is a seducer of the Nation, the Author
of all mutinies, he f^ribids men to pay Custom and Tribute, he calls himself
King of the Jews, which is no less then high Treason against his Imperial
Majesty. And is not this crime and cause enough against him? What would thou
have more? Every one of these Accusations is sufficient to condemn him. Here
thou see, O Christian, how truly David said, The teeth of the children of men
are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword, Psalm. 57. Thou see
also the perverse mind of those men. They think to be converted, is to pervert:
they put good for evil, and evil for good. Lastly, they lie most notoriously.
They accuse him for three things.

1. He perverteth the Nation, say they, from the Law and Worship of God. This
they were by no means able to prove. For Christ never led away, or called any
man off from the Law and Worship of God: but rather put all men upon the
observation of Gods Law and Service, Mat. 5. where he says, I came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, etc. And therefore he does there expound the
Law unto them. To be turned from the Pharisaical Traditions, is not to be drawn
off from God, or from Gods Word and Worship.

2. They object against Christ, that he forbad to pay Tribute to Caesar. This
was a manifest falsehood; for it is evident to all the world, that Christ
commanded to give unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's, Mat. 22. And not
only so, but Christ himself paid the toll-mony, Mat. 17. Finally, he took care
by the Apostle Paul, that this very thing should be given in charge to all
Christians, To. 13.

3. They charge him for saying he was the King Messiah. Neither did these lying
men hear Christ speak any of all this. For he never spoke so plainly of
himself, although it was all very true: For he was, I say, and is the King
Messiah, and has proved him self to be so: for which he does not so much
deserve to be accused, as commended. How durst thou then, O thou Jew, to cry
out: He said that he was the Messiah? Why did not thou put this in also; that
he was born after the same manner, nature, time, and place, as the Messiah was
to be born? And that he preached the Kingdom of God, and did work such Miracles
as never any else did; yea and those very Miracles which the Prophets foretold
of the Messiah? But here their malice blinded them, that they could see nothing
but what made against Christ. These wicked men knew that Pilate would be netled
and grow impatient to hear of Treason. Therefore they harp so much on this
string, and so often with envy inculcate the name of King. For his other Names,
as Christ and Messiah, Pilate did not so much regard.

Christ was charged with these three things: as a Transgressor of the Law of
God, of the Law of man, and of the Law of nature.

1. As a Transgressor against the Law of God, as one that had taught false
Doctrine, and did labor to draw men off from God.

2. Against the Law of man, in that he moved sedition.

3. Against the Law of nature, as one denying Tribute to the civil Magistrate.
These are the Accusations which our conscience must have been charged with all,
and that justly too, before the Judgment seat of God. But Christ took them all
upon him, that we might for ever be freed from them. Therefore,

1. Be thou thankful unto him, who was unjustly accused, and was contented so
to be, to deliver thee from a just Accusation.

2. Learn thou also to bear the unjust slanders of men patiently. For thou art
not greater then thy Lord. And by all means do thou beware that thou accuse not
Christ by murmuring against God, etc. Now when Pilate had heard the Accusation,
he went again into the Judgment Hall, wherein he did the duty of a just Judge.
For,

1. Although the Jews flockt together in great multitudes, as if they would
force the Judge to pass sentence, yet Pilate was not daunted. And it is the Wise
man's Counsel, that none should defire the place of a Judge, unless he has a
spirit and courage enough that dares control wicked men, though never so
potent, and not to fear the faces of any, so as to pervert Judgment for them,
Eccl. 7.

2. Although the Jews laid many and grievous things to the charge of Christ,
yet he did not suddenly give credit to them, notwithstanding they were men of
great power and Authority: but does first examine the cause.

3. He does ask Christ privately by himself, and question him alone, lest
Christ should be baffled by his potent Adversaries, and not suffered to answer
for himself.

4. He does not threaten or rayl at him, but speaks him fair, and gives him
very good language. It becomes a Judge to be civil and courteous. For he also
must come before his Judge, Wisd. 7.

5. Lastly, Of all the Accusations which the Jews brought in against him, he
takes notice but of one, the rest he past over in silence. These are the
Properties of a good Judge. There was nothing wanting in Pilate, but Faith and
the fear of God: which whosoever has not, he will not long continue just and
honest, as we shall see anon in Pilate.

But what is that about which Pilate did examine Christ? Art thou, says he,
the King of the Jews? This was the crime which he enquired after, because it
concerned Caesar's Majesty, and the public peace, and was that which might
have some probability in it. For about Christ's time there were many mutinies
and seditions among the Jews raised by Judas of Galilee, and by a certain
Egyptian Prophet; also by one Theudas, and Caphedon, as Josephus reports. It
was probable Christ might be of the same gang with those seditious persons,
inasmuch as he taught some new things never heard of before, and the common
sort of people were wonderfully taken with him. Now those seditions did spring
from hence, viz. because the seventy weeks spoken of in Daniel 9. were now
almost expired, and the Messiah was earnestly looked for every moment, to
restore the people to their former freedom, and deliver them from the Roman
Yoke. Many therefore arrogating to themselves the honor of the Messiah, and
promising the people liberty, became thereby the Ringleaders of such as
revolted from the Roman Empire. And most of the people did conjecture that
Jesus was that long expected Messiah. For if he had not made an escape, they
had chosen him King, John 6. Pilate therefore understanding nothing of the
Spiritual Kingdom of the Messiah, and minding only a carnal Kingdom and Empire,
could not but take notice of the Title King, which was fastened on him, not so
much out of fear for Caesar, as himself. Therefore demanded whether he were
King of the Jews? For the Wise men had called him King of the Jews, Mat. 2. And
the people called him King of Israel, John 12. And truly so he was King of the
Jews, and of Israel too: but not in Pilates sense. But why do I say King of the
Jews? Christ was and is King of all Kings, yea and of all people in the World,
1 Timothy 6. Psalm 47.

Now as in the first place, the Worlds great complaint against Christ is, that
he will not hold his peace and let the World alone and be quiet, as we heard
before in the house of Annas: so secondly, it does as much complain of Christ
that he will and must Reign. The world is in bodily fear of losing its Kingdom.
Thus Herod was exceeding afraid when Christ was born, Matthew. 2. So here, the
Roman power is cast into a quaking fit, lest it should be destroyed by Christ.
And thus Worldlings are still afraid that Christ will take away their Riches
and Honors from them. But there is no ground why these silly men should so
fear it. He that can give Heavenly Kingdoms, will scorn those that are mortal.
He came not to take our earthly things from us, but to give us Heavenly things
with them. Christ does not deny us things terrene, but teaches us to make good
use of them.

To Pilates Question Christ makes his answer so, that he does neither deny
himself to be a King, nor directly affirm it: and this he did most wisely. For
if he had presently answered and said, I am a King, before he had distinguished
his Kingdom from the kingdoms of men, he had given Pilate occasion to revile
him. What then does he reply? Speak thou this of thy self, or did others
tell it thee of me? Which may be taken,

1. By way of Admiration, q.d. O Pilate, what a great thing, and how certain a
Truth do thou speak, of which thou art altogether ignorant and unwitting?
Whence had thou it that thou should call me a King, whereas none can say
that this Jesus is, (that is, that I am) the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost?
Doubtless, whencesoever thou had it, whether of thy self, or from others,
thou have truly spoken a mighty matter, if so be thou did but understand
thine own words, and know what thou say. In like manner Christ admired that
noble answer of the Centurian, who said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should, etc. Mat. 8.

2. It may be taken as a reprehension of Pilate, as if Christ had said: If thou
would fasten this upon me from thine own jealousy, then thou do not the
part of a just Judge. For a Judge must not judge according to his own private
surmises, but as the cese is. But if others have told thee these Tales of me,
they must prove what they say, let them make it appear that I went about to
raise a Rebellion. But,

3. Christ did thus answer, especially to give an occasion to speak what
follows. Am I a Jew? says he, q.d. How should I say this of mine own head,
when I am no Jew, but a Gentile? What do we that are Heathens know of your
affairs? Thine own Nation and the High Priests have delivered thee unto me, and
have accused thee under this Notion before me. They have thus aspersed thee: I
neither apprehended, nor accused thee. What is it which thou have done? let me
hear it from thine own mouth, do thou tell me thy self, what have thou done to
cause so many and so great men, yea thine own Prelates and Clergy, and all the
whole Nation to hate thee?

Christ made no answer to this. For he had done nothing to deserve their spite
and spleen. But all that he did was rather worthy of commendation: for he did
all things well, he did all good things, and nothing but good; and all good
things were created by him. But he did answer to the former question, and
distinguish his Kingdom from the kingdom of the World, to show that he had
nothing offended against Caesar; My Kingdom, says he, is not of this World,
q.d. Pilate, I acknowledge and confess that I am a King, and this is all that I
have done. This is the crime that I am accused of. But understand it aright:
It Is true, I am a King, yet so, as that I neither usurp or diminish the power of
thy Caesar, or intend to pull down the Power or Dominion of any King or Prince:
And that thou may fully know my meaning,

1. I am not a worldly, but an Heavenly King, in whose hand are the hearts of
all Kings, though thou do little see it.

2. My Kingdom, that it is, my Principality and Administration; or my Kingdom,
that is, my Laws and Statutes; or my kingdom, that is, my officers and
subjects, this my kingdom is not of this world, that is, it is not of men, but
of God. I am, says he, made a King by him upon his holy Hill of Sion, Psalm 2.

3. It is not of this World, that is, it is not a Temporal, but a Spiritual
Kingdom. For the World and the desire thereof passes away.

4. It is not of this world, that is, it does not consist in the things of this
world: as in Riches, Pleasures, Pomp, (for whatsoever is of this world, is the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life) but in Spiritual
things, as Righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.

5. It is not of this world, because it has other Rights and Laws which a
worldly Kingdom has not.

6. It is not of this world, because it is not corporal, but Spiritual.

7. It is governed after another manner than the Kingdoms of this world. For
these are Ruled by a material Sword, but my Kingdom has no need of such a
Sword. The Sword of my Kingdom is the Word of God. The Kingdoms of the world
have Cities, Towers, Towns, Villages, Hosts, Armies, Ammunition: but my Kingdom
does require nothing but the hearts of men. The world does rule over men's
estates and persons, but my Scepter swayeth only their hearts and consciences.
The world vaunts it with carnal power, but must stoop to that which is
Spiritual. I care nothing at all for fleshly strength, but I Triumph and Reign
spiritually over sin, death, and hell. See how lively Christ sets forth his
Kingdom. In the same manner almost does Zachary speak of Christ's Kingdom:
Behold, says he, thy King comes unto thee meek and lowly, Zach. 9.

Note also that he does not say, my Kingdom is not in this world. For he is
Lord of the world too. All things were made by Christ, and by him are they all
governed and disposed. All power is given unto him in Heaven and in earth, Mat.
28. Now if the Kingdom of Christ be not of this world, then it will follow that
there is another world besides this. And therefore,

1. If thou do not see the Promises of Christ fulfilled in this world, yet do
not despair; for there is another world, wherein shall be made good whatsoever
was not performed here.

2. Whereas the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, therefore we are
commanded to pray, Thy Kingdom come.

So then Christ does here free Pilate from all his fear. And by his Example
also he does prove that he did not at all affect the Caesarean or regal power.
If my Kingdom were of this world, says he,

1. I would not march with naked Disciples, but would provide me armed men:
yea, I would have my Counsel of War, Soldiers, an Army, etc. who should guard
me as their General with their Swords in this my necessity, and would hazard
their lives for me. Or,

2. If I sought a worldly Kingdom, the Angels themselves would defend me from
the violence of the Jews. But I have no need of the help of Angels or men. My
own right hand is able to supply me with aid sufficient. Here the weakness of a
worldly Kingdom is seen, which has no strength of it self, but all from its
Subjects and Officers: and if these fail, a King is but in an ill case. But if
they do list themselves under him, they may prove false and betray him many
ways. But the Kingdom that is from above is sufficient of it self, and needs
not the help of any. From all this Christ concludes that his Kingdom is not
from hence, as if he had said, Thou may certainly assure thy self by this
Argument, that my Kingdom is not worldly or earthy. What ever thou, or thy
Caesar has shall be in no danger for me: I covet nothing of yours. I care not
for all the glory and riches of the world, which you so highly esteem. These
things were spoken to Pilate, but they do as much concern us.

1. For if Christ's Kingdom be not from hence, Why then, O Christian, do thou
seek after the Riches and Honors of this world?

2. If the Kingdom of Christ be not of this world, then Christians must expect
to suffer in the world, so long as they have the peace of their consciences in
Christ, John 16. Wonder not then that the godly meet with so much trouble in
the world. A good man in all his afflictions should comfort himself with this
word, saying, My Kingdom is not from hence.

3. If Christ's Kingdom be not from hence, they are much mistaken then who place
the Kingdom of Christ in outward things, and the Elements of the world. The
Kingdom of God (says he) is within you, Luke 17. Which is not so to be
understood, as if this lower world were not created by God, or did not belong
unto God, as having nothing to do with it; as Manichaeus was of opinion. For it
is certain that all the ends of the earth are his, the sea is his, and he made
it, etc. Psalm 95.

But however Christ put a clear difference between his Kingdom, and the kingdom
of the world; yet the name of King did stick in Pilates stomach. For he was
never wont to hear in all the dubblings of honor amongst their Princes, that
ever any did usurp the Royal Title. And he conceived that this Title ought not
to be given to any without Caesar's consent and approbation. Therefore he says,
Art thou then a King? notwithstanding thy Kingdom be not of this world. He
stickles much at the Title King, this he could not bear. For he saw it would
follow, that if his Kingdom were not from hence, it must be from somewhere
else. Let the Kingdom be whence it will, a Kingdom it was and would be.
Wherefore by way of conclusion he infers upon him, Art thou therefore a King?
The question had been better put thus: where is then thy Kingdom? Where is that
other world thou talkst of? He might perhaps have had an answer to this
question that might have done him some good. But he asked not after any of
these things, he was afraid of his own kingdom and office.

Christ therefore does undauntedly answer him, Thou say that I am a King: as
if he had said, what need I tell thee, when thou thy self say it? Is it not
enough that thou say it thy self? which is all one, as if he had plainly
said, I am, I grant that I am a King. Christ does Emphatically repeat the name
King, to show us that he did not repent him, nor was he ashamed of his
Celestial and Spiritnal Kingdom, but had rather that by all means it should be
known to Caesar himself, as well as to all men. For inasmuch as the salvation
of us all does depend on this Kingdom, it ought not to be denied or concealed.
And it is a sweet and comfortable word for Christ to say that he is a King. He
is truly a King, as it is said, I have set my King, etc. Psalm 2. Again, Thou
made him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands, Psalm 8. Wherefore if
thou sinnest, do not presently despair: for thou art not without the Kingdom of
Christ, till thou ceasest to be the work of God. Hence says the Wise man:
Though we sin, we are thine, Wisd. 15. He will acknowledge thee for his
possession, if thou will acknowledge him to be thy Lord. But that Pilate might
not further be offended at the Title of King, Christ proceeds to explain his
Kingdom yet more fully; as if he had said, Pilate, understand this business
well, and lay aside all suspicion of a worldly Kingdom and Tyranny. Thus stands
the case: I will not deny that my Kingdom is altogether and wholly Spiritual,
whether before thee, or before Caesar himself. Only know this, that it is not my
purpose to molest any with Arms, or to Reign in State like other Kings, but
only to raise up and establish the truth of God upon earth. To this end was I
born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I might bear witness unto
the Truth. I say, I came for that end, and was born for that cause, and not to
fight with the Sword, but that I might teach and preach the Gospel and the
Truth of God, which is his power to salvation to every one that believes, Romans
1. And as I publish the Gospel, so I rule by the Gospel in the hearts of
Believers, over Sin, Death, and the Devil: that for sin I might bestow
Righteousness, for Death Life, for the Cross Joy, and Heaven instead of Hell:
These are the Tenures or customary Holds and Privileges of my Kingdom, of
which none can be partaker, but he that hears my Voice, and believes with
his heart. I do not endow my followers with Riches, Cities, and other Fee
farms, Manours, etc. but through my Word I bestow upon them Joy, Peace, Life,
and Heaven it self. My Gospel is the Scepter of my Kingdom. And what prejudice
are these to the Roman Emperor? Would Caesar have none born, would he have no
man come into the world that should bear witness unto the Truth? Would it be
any stain to his honor, if any of his Soldiers should hear his voice that is
a witness of the Truth? Who would not utterly detest and abhor him that should
harbor such a thought in his breast? The very Name of Truth is am able: yea
the Nature of man it self agrees to this, that the Name of Truth is most
honorable: and though arrant knaves hate the thing, yet never any had the face
to dislike or find rault with the Name of Truth.

1.
And truly Christ testified the Truth with a witness. For the Testimony of Truth
is the confusion of falsehood. The world was mistaken in the use of Temporal
things. For those things which were given only to be used, in these the world
place their love and confidence. Christ by reproving this falsity, bare witness
to the Truth. 2.
The Jews erred in a wrong understanding of the Law. The Gentiles were deceived
by their Idolatry. 3.
Christ in reprehending and bearing down both their errors, did bear witness to
the Truth. Well then might he say, that therefore he came, and to that end was
he born. For this cause, says he, I became man: for this purpose am I now
here, that error and iniquity may be destroyed, and that truth and
righteousness may reign. This I do, and this I will do; it is, and ever shall
be my business to beat down, keep under, and crush the Devil, that God alone
may be exalted and Reign. If thou therefore art a child of Truth, if thou do
love the Truth, if thou desire nothing but the Truth, thou will hear my Voice
with joy and gladness. For I am Truth it self, and can speak and teach nothing
but the Truth. Which thing we that are Christians and are of the Truth, do not
only believe it, but are also the thing it self. The Voice of Christ is Truth,
which abides for ever, yea though Moses, Jupiter, Mahomet, Heretics and
Antichrist die, nay Tyberius and Pilate too, yet this lives for ever.
Therefore every one that is of the Truth hears my Voice. Hereby teaching us
who they be that belong to his Kingdom; He does not say, every one that truly
is, or has truly a being, for the Devil and wicked men have truly a being: but
he says, he that is of the Truth. A lie is that which is not, or is not
manifest: Adam is not, the World is not. He then that is of Adam, of man, or of
the World, is of a lie. He is of the truth that loves the constant truth, that
seeks the everlasting Good, that thirsts after Righteousness and eternal
Life: This is he that hears my Voice, this is he that belongs to my
Kingdom, and one that subjecteth himself to my Government. Christ therefore is
no Lord and King to those who covet Riches, aspire to the Honors of this
world, and hunt after pleasures. Nor is he their King who are mutinous and
raise seditions: but he is their King who thirst for Righteousness, earnestly
breath after the Celestial Joy, and willingly hear and obey the Truth. From all
which it is plain and evident that Christ had not at all offended against
Caesar.

When Christ had given so high a commendation of the truth, Pilate being
somewhat moved and taken therewith, and as an Ethnic to whom such things were
somewhat uncouth, he asked Jesus what was Truth? An excellent question indeed,
if it had proceeded from his heart, and that he had been in earnest. For what
is more profitable and pleasant to search after, then the truth? All the world
invocateth the truth, as we read, 1 Esdras 4. Yea wicked men themselves, though
they be liars and false, yet will press others to speak the truth, and would
not be cheated and deceived: Much more beautiful is truth in spiritual
things. But Pilate did not ask this question heartily, but as it were
scornfully and disdainfully, as if he had said, Do thou broach any other
truth then what your High Priests and our Priests teach? Thou have said enough
and more then enough, there is no need of any more at this time. I came not
hither to hear a Sermon. There are other matters in hand. We have more Irons in
the fire. Wicked men loath nothing more then the Word of God, and those things
that tend to their good and salvation: here they stand upon thorns, and think
long ere they be at liberty.

1. Pilate should have been warmed and encouraged by Christ's Word. But he was
no more moved then if he had offered Gold or most Orient Pearls to a blind man,
he was as blind as a beetle, the Sun was darkness to him. He whose
understanding is darkened cannot discern the splendour of Truth which darts the
rays of its luster into the minds of the godly. Pilate indeed was not worthy to
hear an answer to his question. He heard enough if he would have believed it.

2. But Christ would no longer linger out his Passion. And what need was there
to enquire what was truth? Lo Christ that stood there present, was and is the
Truth. Whatever Idolatrous Priests trifle about Virtue: or the Jewish High
Priests teach concerning fleshly righteousness, they are all but lies: nothing
but Christ, and the Gospel only is Truth, and what follows and is drawn by
consequence from the Gospel.

But Pilate having not received an answer to his mind, went out to the Jews
again. He supposed that the Laws of Caesar would have served his turn, and that
he needed no other knowledge of the truth. Secondly, He perceived that this did
not much concern the case in hand. Thirdly, He saw the Jews were in haste, and
it was no time to talk any longer with Christ. For the Jews were afraid lest
Christ should mollify the mind of the Judge with his words, which they knew
were very efficacious and penetrating. Lastly, He had now learned by experience
that there was nothing in Christ whereby he might defend himself if he were put
to death, and complaint thereof should be made to Caesar against him for his
unjust punishment: for the Prince of all just men, and the King of
Righteousness had put on Righteousness for a Breast Plate, and true Judgment
for an Helmet, and equity for an invincible B^kler, that no man could by any
means catch him in his words. Therefore he who first went forth that he might
hear some Accusation against him, does now go out to excuse Jesus before his
Accusers. I find, says he, no fault in this man. Here we find again a civil
Righteousness in Pilate. For,

1. Although there were rich and potent men on one hand, from whom he might
hope for gain, or fear some loss; but Christ was all alone, a poor man, quite
cast off by all his friends, from whom he saw no ground to expect any
advantage, or fear any detriment: yet he takes Christ's part against the Jews,
which is the duty of a Righteous judge, though such be rare to be found. Whence
it is that the Princes of the Jews are so often reproved for not judging the
cause of the Fatherless, Isa. 1. Therefore Moses would have such Judges that
hated covetousness, Exodus 23. For bribes will make men blind. Hence it is that
Judges are so often called upon to fear the Lord: Be instructed ye that judge
the earth, serve the Lord in fear, Psalm 2.

2. Pilate does not only take his part and stand for Christ, but he does
clearly confound his Adversaries, by proclaiming him guiltless, and that after
he had thoroughly examined the whole business, although they had bound him as a
Felon, and one that deserved to die.

3. He does plainly prove them liars to their face, if they would but have
taken notice of it, and could have blushed for shame at it. But they were of
those to whom it was said, Thy neck is iron, and thy forehead brass, thou
refusest to be ashamed; Isa. 48. Let Judges here learn, not only to favor a
good cause, but to confound those who go about to promote a base business, so
as that they dare not to do or presume upon the like before him for ever after.

4. It is much to be noted, that he does not only absolve Christ from the crime
which they accused him of; but he speaks in General, I find no fault in him.
And this may be most truly said of Christ: For he did no sin, nor was there any
guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.

5. There is an Emphasis in what he says; I find no fault in This man. For
Christ only is free from any stain or spot of sin: but no other man is clear
from crimes. Therefore it is a very great and full Testimony of Christ's
innocence, that the same Judge who afterward crucified him, not once, but often
proclaimed this Jesus innocent in the open Court: which alone is sufficient for
us against the calumnies and slanders of Jews and Pagans. Let him therefore
that is yet incredulous here, see whether Christ did not suffer wrongfully or
no. This defense then of Christ is diligently to be considered. It is also to
be well observed, that Christ was accused of his own people, but excused by
strangers. And so it was to follow, that the Jews should blaspheme him, but the
Gentiles should with great desire receive and glorify Christ. Thus is it even
at this day, that the Gospel is of no repute among his people the Jews, but is
had in high esteem by strangers.

But what do the Jews, now they hear that Pilate had not condemned Jesus, but
excused and highly applauded? Their first Engine shattered to pieces. Reason,
and conscience, and plain experience was wholly against them, nor could they
well tell what to do more. But shame and rage will break through all, and bear
down all before it. Their shame made them slink away convicted from the place
of Judgment. But their rage would not suffer them to rest quiet. But as mad
and frantic men use to do, what is wanting in reason, they make up in clamours
and revilings. He stirs up the people, say they, etc. Where not, that here
they wholly omit that Accusation which they thought would be of most force
against him, and run off to other things, so did their malice toil and torment
them, as they were worthy and well deserved that it should. And that this
second Accusation might carry the more credit, they tell where Christ began his
Doctrine, to wit, in Galilee, and had spread it as far as Jerusalem it self.
What they object as an heinous crime, that we take for a great honor to
Christ. And we bless God, and give him thanks, that his Word ran forth so far
and wide in Syria before Christ was glorified: how much more should we now do
so since the glorifying of Christ? Christ first began his Gospel in Galilee,
viz. In Capernaum, Cana, Nazareth, etc. this is certainly true. And secondly,
it is as true, that his Doctrine spread as far as Jerusalem. But thirdly,
whereas they speak of stirring up the people, that was a lie. For Christ was
not mutinous, but meek: not quarrelsome, but quiet, as Isaiah prophesied of
him, Isa. 42. The Doctrine of Christ brings peace, love and unity. Christ's
Doctrine does not plunder any man of what is his own, nor incense one man
against another. Nay it lets any Infidel alone as he, in respect of offering
him any force or violence, or exercising any coercive power over his
conscience, yet is it not given to unbelievers, but to believers.

It was not for nothing that they made mention of Galilee in that Accusation of
theirs; for thereby they thought to stir up the greater hatred in Pilate
against Christ, because there was another Galilean, Judas by name, who went
about to make a mutiny and an uproar among the people. Him they slily insinuate
unto Pilate, as who should say, Thou must look to thy self, Pilate, and take
good heed of these Galileans which have ever been seditious, etc. Mark here,
they let slip nothing whereby they might any way aggravate their Accusation
against Christ. Such enemies Christ had, and the holy Apostles and Martyrs
after him: that we might not think it much when we see like plots and projects
of wicked men contrived against us. To proceed:

When Pilate heard of Galilee, Luke 23.6.
he asked whether the man were a Galilean? And as soon as he knew that he
belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was
at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad, for
he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many things
of him, and he hoped to have seen some Miracle done by him. Then he questioned
with him in many words, but he answered him nothing. And the chief Priests and
Scribes stood, and vehemently accused him. And Herod with his men of War set
him at naught, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him
again to Pilate. And the same day Herod and Pilate were made friends together,
for before they were at enmity between themselves.

Pilate was glad when he heard them speak of Galilee, and not without cause:
for he was willing to shift his hands of this branglement, and to slip his neck
out of the collar, he saw there was danger in it: for either he must condemn
the innocent, or else he most incur the fierce displeasure of the Jews against
him, fain he would have done neither. That therefore he might wind himself out
of this mizmaze; he sent him to Herod, which he might lawfully do, for Tyberius
Caesar had made Herod Tetrarch of Galilee, so that all that Country, and
whatever belonged to it was under his jurisdiction, Luke 3. Now Christ
according to his Humanity was of Nazareth, which is a Village or Town of
Galilee. There his holy Mother lived. And Pilate had rather expose his enemy
then himself to so dangerous a business. But by the way take notice, that there
are three Herod's spoken of in the Gospel. The first was surnamed Ascalonita,
the beastly spawn of which the other two were bred: this is he that slew the
Children of Bethlem, Mat. 2. The second was called Antipas, this is he that is
here meant, and this is he that beheaded John Baptist, Mat. 14. The third was
called Agrippa, He slew James the brother of John with the sword, Act. 12. The
middlemost between the two Herod's, was he of whom we now speak. He was at this
time at Jerusalem, because of the Passover: For otherwise he had nothing to do
there; all business there was in Pilates Jurisdiction. Thus then we follow our
imprisoned, but most innocent Jesus, from Pilate to Herod, that is, from a
wicked Heathen to an ungodly mungril Jew. For so it must be, when ye shall
stand, says he, before Kings and Governors, that is, before Herod and Pilate,
etc. And so it befell the Apostles not long after. And whereas Christ was tossed
up and down, sometimes to Annas, and sometimes to Caiaphas, now to Pilate, and
then to Herod, this was done by the divine Counsel of God, that every where he
might have the greater testimony of his innocence. As it befell Christ to be
dragged hither and thither, from Judge to Judge; the same does still befall the
poor in the Courts of men, where they are always sent from one Judge to
another, till they perish, and are utterly undone, Acts 4. Thus the poor is
every where trampled upon, that he may be crucified with Jesus. But for all
this we should not become impatient; for the world has no better usage for
them, of which Christ himself had sufficient experience. All these things are
for our trial, and that every Creature might be a witness of our trial and
patience.

But to return again to Herod. When he saw Jesus brought before him, he was
exceeding glad, but this his joy was not good, for he did not rejoice in the
verity, but in vanity. He regarded not Christ's Doctrine, or his own amendment,
but he looked only for some new and strange thing, because he had heard so much
of Christ, and of his Miracles, he was in hope that Christ would work some
wonder in his sight to satisfy his curiosity. Others desired signs to
strengthen their faith, but this man for his curiosity only. He had of a long
time desired to see Christ, but he would never vouchsafe to hear him preach,
nor never so much as invited Christ to his house, so that you may see there was
no goodness in the man at all; just as it is at this very day, the major part
of our Grandees care little for Christ or his Doctrine. God does know, and in
his time he will make all know what it is that every one does seek for in
Christ. Sure Herod was a Type of such who read and hear the the Scriptures only
out of curiosity, having no cordial respect at all to godliness. Herod
questioned Christ in many words, but he was not thought worthy to receive any
answer, much less to see the least sign or miracle done before him. For why
should Christ cast his pearls to such swine? Herod's cruelty did not deserve to
hear the things of God, and the Lord slighted his vaunting carriage. Christ
does not use to speak, but when the conscience of the hearer is in a capacity
to hear. For he does not speak after the hearing of his ears, nor judge after
the outward appearance, Isa. 11.3. Herod was one that did not seek after any
true and solid matter, as Pilate did, he sought for nothing but vanity.
Therefore Christ answered Pilate, but he would not answer Herod; for it was
shortly to be, that the truth should be more clearly manifested and revealed to
the Gentiles than to the Jews, because they were more disposed and fitter for
it than the Jews were. And as Pilate was more ready to hear the truth than
Herod, so the Gentiles did sooner and more readily embrace the Gospel than the
Jews. Where Christ finds never so small a desire to search out the truth, there
he is ready to reveal all mysteries. Pilate sought but sparingly, yet sincerely
after the Truth, therefore he was counted worthy to hear more. But Herod sought
not the truth at all; therefore Christ speaks not so much as one word in his
presence, which he would never have done, had he been asked to another end,
viz. to prove and make good his Doctrine, as he did before Annas, or to declare
and reveal the Truth, as before Pilate. To be short, When Christ held his
peace, he was patient as a Lamb to be offered for the whole flock; but when he
answered, he was as a good Shepherd that withstood the assaults, and brake the
snares and gins of thieves and wolves to preserve the sheep committed to his
charge. Learn we hence,

1. That we give not that which is holy unto dogs, nor lay open divine
Mysteries to those who will scorn and scoff at them.

2. Let us not brag and boast of our virtues and graces, and of Gods gifts and
our good works, to flourish it out before vain men, as Christ here would not
put forth his Power. For they that affect the praise of men, they get nothing,
but lose and shatter all the fruit of all their pains in themselves. We cannot
at one and the same time hunt after the favor and applause of the world, and
thereby attain the Reward of celestial Glory. Hence Christ says of such as
vapor out their good works with a Trumpet, That they have all their reward
already. Mat. 6.


But though Christ said nothing, the Jews did not hold their peace; They stood,
and accused him vehmently. They had no other crime to produce against Christ,
than what they had already charged him with before Pilate, yet they aggravate
the same by their brawling clamours, hoping that Herod would sooner satisfy
their desire then Pilate did. Besides, the longer the business was delayed and
put off, the more they were afraid that their cause would cool, and at last be
quite cashiered the Court. Therefore they press it on might and main. They
thought Pilate was a little too remiss in this business. They conceited of
themselves that they were such men that nothing must be denied them, were it
never so base and dishonest. But Herod also by reason of his inbred pride and
levity, does not do any thing seriously and to the purpose, but only gives him
a flout, and jeers at him* especially for the title and name of King, of which
Herod thought none so worthy as himself. Herod therefore does no more but
disdain and scornfully set him at naught: For with such kind of men a Jugler,
or Stageplayer is more taking and acceptable than a Preacher. He with his army
set him at naught. A wicked King has none but ungodly officers. Pro. 29.
He disdained him as one that could show no tricks, and as not able to do any
feats; he scorned him as a silly fellow that could not tell how to answer a
word: he looked on him as a fool that knew not how to defend himself against his
Accusers.

1. Thus the Power and Wisdom of God is despised, (1 Cor. 1.) that the
loftiness of man might be abased and laid low. Col. 2.
Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, is forced to
be Herod's fool; and because he did not do as he would have had him, therefore
he slights and scoffs him as one that knew nothing, and as if he had been a
mere Idiot. This Herodian scorn is very comfortable to all, especially to such
as live among sectaries and factious people; for such do truly live among Lions
and Scorpions. But a man had need of great patience to stand it out against
such Scoffers and Scorners, in as much as a scoff and a jeer will many times
trouble a wise man more than a cuff on the ear, or a blow with a Cudgel.

2. They did not only mock Christ with words, but withal they put him on a gay
and gaudy suit, to make a laughing stock of him. This clothes was trimmed after
such a fashion, that all that saw him might flock about him, and that
wheresoever they led Christ they might ask, What fool is that? It Is a sign of
infinite contempt and scorn, to make such a mocking stock of any man. Here
then, O Christian, consider who it is that was so shamefully contemned, and so
basely scorned, and all this for thy sake. See what a fools coat they put upon
him, behold what unworthy affronts and affronting indignity is offered to the
Son of God. The very Elements themselves would never have put up this wrong of
their Creator, nor let it pass without revenge, if God for our salvation had
not otherwise so ordained and withheld them.

But neither Herod, nor his Officers shall ever do any such thing to the person
of Christ any more. For death and hell it self has long since forbad them so
to do. Christ indeed wore that white Garment of our eternal salvation, though
it was a sport, and a jesting matter to the Jews and Herod's companions. For
this white Raiment was a Token of his unspotted Passion; and that Jesus was
that Lamb of God without blemish, which should gloriously take away the sins of
the world, John 1. Mean while, let us learn so to live here, even as Christ
lived; who had rather be despised by wicked men, then to be commended by
fawning Flatterers. Do thou so likewise. Nothing does so corrupt the minds of
men, as Flattery. A Parasites tongue does more mischief than a Persecutors
sword.

When Herod had thus mocked and abused Christ, he sends him back again to
Pilate. He was truly the most miserable of all men, who when Christ was offered
to him, he thrust him, and shut him out of doors, he had been most happy, if he
had kept Christ when he was freely tendered to him. But the world esteems
nothing more vile than Christ, though there is nothing more excellent then he.
For in him are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2. In him
dwells the Godhead bodily, in him is eternal life, which that wretched man
banished from him, when he returned Christ back again unto Pilate. Thus Christ
is again brought back a prisoner, and not only a prisoner, but basely abused;
with which abuse they having made themselves somewhat merry, they spue up their
rage, and miserably tormented him as they haled him along. What heart can
imagine how our meekest Savior was tired out with these torturing and
injurious delays and draggings? We read once, That he was weary of his
journey, John 4. How much more may we suppose was he now tired, when he could
not go at liberty, but was drawn along in fetters and chains by wicked men and
that all the night and day, without any rest allowed him? He was baled and
pulled out of the Garden to Annas, from him to Caiaphas. And after he was vexed
and disquieted there all night with boxings, and buffetings, and spittings, and
other abuses, as soon as it was light, he was carried before the Council, from
the Council to Pilate, from him to Herod, and again in a hurly burly he was
sent back from Herod to Pilate. And he was hurried and posted away in all
haste, for they were insatiably thirsty after his blood, and one pulling,
another thrusting him, it is to be supposed that our Lord had many a sore fall,
because his hands being bound, he was not able to save himself. See then how
much he endured for his own innocence, and our guilt. For if we had not sinned,
he had not suffered; and if he had not been guiltless, those guilty men had not
been so enraged against him. He was altogether unlike them, and therefore
grievous to them to behold, Wis. 2. And by how much the more they feared he
might be set at liberty, by so much were they more vehemently incensed against
him. They were obstinately resolved to put him to a most shame full death;
which resolution could no way be more strengthened, than by delay and doubting,
and nothing but affection could any way abate it. And as the Lord Jesus, by how
much the nearer he drew to his death and greater sufferings from the beginning
of his Passion, and the more his Passion was prolonged, so much the more
meekness and patience he discovered: (For when he was first laid hands on, he
was more rigid, when he hurled them on the ground by the Word of Truth: he was
less severe before Annas, more mild before Pilate, and upon the Cross he prayed
for his Persecutors with many a tear) So on the contrary, by how much the
greater punishments the Jews tormented him, by so much the more they were
embittered against him. The pride of them that hate thee ascends continually,
Psalm 74. ult. But all this while Christ never thought of revenge, but of our
misery. For he saw that he did not suffer these things for his own necessity,
but for love of us. He considered our sins, and out of his greatest charity
willingly underwent whatsoever they imposed upon him, only that he might redeem
us. And therefore he is more thoughtfull to destroy our sins, then he is to
escape his own suffering.

These things are well to be considered; for truly it is a worthy, just, equal
and comfortable thing for us always, and in all places to give him thanks, who
would be so led up and down for us, that he might lead us into the way, and
make satisfaction for our sins. But see what follows, Herod and Pilate were
reconciled, etc. The ground of their quarrel was about their Power, which of
them should be greatest; or rather because Pilate slew some Galileans which
were under Herod's Power and Jurisdiction, Luke 13.1. This grudge continued till
Christ removed it, by being sent a Prisoner up and down between them. It was a
most acceptable thing to Herod, that Pilate should send Christ prisoner to him.
Now all anger was laid aside and forgotten. So easily do these wicked men
agree, and become friends in the killing of Christ, whom otherwise no Virtue,
no Justice could strike a League between, or reconcile them. Wicked men are
sometimes at strife and variance among themselves.

But in this they all agree, to persecute Christ. As concerning Christ, Herod
and Pilate, yea, Jews, Gentiles, Turks, Heretics, they are all unanimous,
however they differ never so much otherwise among themselves. Here then that of
David is fulfilled, Why do the Heathenrage, says he, and the people imagine a
vain thing? The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Princes take Counsel
together against the Lord and against his anointed, Psalm 2. The Gentiles did
rage indeed like bruit beasts, for they knew not what they did. The people, to
wit, the Jews imagined vanity. They laid their heads together, as it is
written, Psalm 109.
They compassed me about with words of hatred; the Kings, that is, Pilate and
Herod. Hence the Apostles composed their mournful prayer, Of a truth Lord, say
they, against thy holy child Jesus, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with
Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together, etc. Acts 4. To this
may be added that of the Psalmist, They are confederate against thee, the
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens, Gebal and
Ammon, etc. Psalm. 83.
They are like Sampsons foxes, their tails be tied together, and like the
scales of the Leviathan, sticking so close together, that no air can come
between them, Job 41. So when it comes to persecution of the godly, and to
propagate ungodliness, now wicked men are easily reconciled and made friends.
But all this while Christ is not set at liberty, but compelled to the Cross, and
die he must. Thus Tyrants for the most part now adays are quickly quiet one
with another after they have robbed, and spoiled, and plundered, and utterly
undone the poor; and not one amongst them all will restore or help the poor man
to that which is his right. Concerning this peace of the wicked, David says, I
was envious at the wicked, when I saw the prosperity of sinners, Psalm 73. But
a little after he says, Thou did set them in slippery places, thou castest
them down into destruction. How are they brought into desolation as in a
moment? They are utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream when one awaketh, so
shall thou make their image to vanish out of the City, Psalm 73. All this was
fulfilled in these two men, for both of them were banished. It follows:

And Pilate when he had called together the chief Priests, and the Rulers, and
the people, said unto them, Luke 23.13.
Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people, and
Behold, I have examined him before you, and I have found no fault in this man,
touching those things whereof ye accuse him. No, nor yet Herod; for I sent you
to him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him. I will therefore
chastise him, and release him.

And when Jesus was accused of the chief Priests and Elders, Mat. 27.12. Mar.
15.3.
he answered nothing. Then says Pilate unto him, answerest thou nothing?
Behold, how many things they witness against thee. But he answered him to never
a word, insomuch that the Governor marvelled greatly.

Christ is now brought back again from Herod to Pilate, but so, as without
doubt many godly men wept to see how miserably he was led along. We use to say,
when innocent men suffer, Thieves and Robbers should be thus dealt with, not
honest and just men. But the Lord Christ was neither Thief nor Robber, and yet
he endured all this, and was so tossed to and fro, from one to another, and
with such disgrace too, that it would have made one shed many a tear to see the
veryest Rascal in the world so used. Paul an Apostle of this Jesus was tossed and
tumbled up and down in the same manner. For as the Lord Jesus had his Annas's,
Caiaphas's, Pilates, Herod's; so Paul had his Annanias's, Felix's, Festus's,
Agrippa's, etc. Why should the Scholar speed better then his Master? And let
it not repent thee, Brother, of the Cross, be not thou ashamed of it; for thy
Lord and mine did never blush at it. Holy truths can no otherways be brought to
light; Good men must look for no other usage. Pilate and Herod have no better
entertainment in their houses. Innocence, Humility, Simplicity, the Spirit,
Knowledge, etc. are nothing worth in their market, they make but a piff of
these. Thou must be their Mocking-stock, and make them fools sports, yea,
though thou were as good as Elias, unless thou will say, and do as they please,
that is, to say and do the filthiest and basest wickedness in the world. Satan
knows his time and advantage, and can tell well enough how and when to make
wicked men friends, but so, as that their reconciliation shall be thy ruin and
destruction. But Pilate, who was a little honester than the Jews and Herod,
that he may seem not to wrong any man, does once more call together the chief
of the Jews, and leaves no stone unturned, but uses all means possible to set
Jesus at liberty, and release him safe and sound.

Ye have brought this man to me, says he, and have accused him of many things,
and I have examined him as strictly and as narrowly as possibly I can to sift
out the truth, and sound the business to the very bottom to bring things to
light. I have taken him aside, and asked him alone, and examined him in
private; and now I have questioned him in your presence, before your own faces,
and yet I cannot hear or understand any thing, but that he is wronged
exceedingly, and all that I can do for my life and heart, I can find no cause
of death in him. And if ye will not believe me, behold Herod also his own Lord,
under whose jurisdiction he is, does think and say the same, he is of one mind
and opinion with me in this matter. For he under whose power he is, has sent
him back again without punishment: which he would never have done, if he had
found him faulty. What therefore will ye do, seeing according to the truth of
the business, there is nothing to be found in this man worthy of reprehension,
or wherefore he should be put to death? Will you use violence to him, and kill
him contrary to all Law and Reason? Does your Law teach you to serve men so?
Surely Solon, Lycurgus, Minos, and the Roman Tables allow no such thing, much
less command it. The chiefest Law of Lycurgus was, that no man should be
punished before he was convicted and condemned. Nor did ever any Lawmakers
allow of so notorious a wickedness, as to cut off and destroy the innocent. How
much less ought you to do any such thing, who go under the name of Religion,
and are professors of the most holy Law? Let me desire you therefore to hearken
to my advice, which I suppose may somewhat pacify you. I will chastise and
scourge him after the manner of the Romans, that it may not be said you have
bound him and brought him before me without a cause: but I neither can, nor
will I put him to death, because I find no such fault in him. See here Pilate
does again bear witness of Christ's innocence against the impiety of the Jews,
that by the righteous Judgment of God their damnation might be the greater.
You shall shortly see the Sun, and the Heavens, the Earth, and the stones
testify against them, and proclaim the innocence of Christ. Nor could they be
thus assuaged: but when they heard that he should be released, they cried out
the more vehemently, and were more impatient then before. Those bloody minded
men would be satisfied with nothing but his death. They would have the memory
of him wholly abolished. Therefore they thought it not enough, and could not be
contented that Christ should only be chastised, and escape with nothing but
scourges.

But Christ makes no further answer to all that they charged upon him, no not
when Pilate questioned and chid him for it. For all that they objected against
him, did not deserve an answer. Well might he be silent, who had no need to
make his defense. Let them go about to defend themselves (says Ambrose) who
are afraid to be worsted in their cause. He does not then confirm their
Accusation by his silence, but sleights it by not wrangling against it. Pilate
indeed takes it in great dudgin and disdain, that he who had answered so
handsomely before him in private, should now say nothing before the people. And
therefore first he does wonder at his patience; for never in all his life
before did he know any man that was accused, but he would use his tongue to the
utmost to plead for his life, and seek by all means possible to defend himself.
Secondly, He does admire, that seeing he was guiltless, he does not petition
for his liberty and enlargement. Thirdly, He does think it strange, that he was
no more afraid to dye. He sees no cause he had to be silent, but great reason
why he should speak for himself: because he that is convicted should stop his
mouth and hold his peace, and not he that is innocent and clear.

Here then was fulfilled that of David: But I was as a deaf man, and heard not;
and as a dumb man, that opens not his mouth. I was as a man that hears not,
and in whose mouth are no reproofs, Psalm 38. Christ by this his Example taught
us what Weapons Christians ought to fight with against Death and the deceits of
the World, and against the Accusations of our Adversaries: to wit, with
innocence, patience, and silence. In quietness and in confidence shall be your
strength, Isa. 30. It follows:

Now at the Feast the Governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner,
Mat. 27.15.
whom they would. And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas. Which
lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed
murder in the insurrection. And the multitude crying out, began to desire him
to do as he had ever done unto them, Mar. 15.7. Pilate says unto them, ye have
a custom that I should release one unto you at the Passover, John 18.39. When
they were gathered together, he said unto them, Whom will ye that I release
unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus (the King of the Jews) which is called Christ? For
he knew that for envy they (the chief Priests) had delivered him, Mat. 27.17.
But the chief Priests and Elders stirred up the multitude, and persuaded them
that they should rather ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. The Governor answered
and said unto them: Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? And
the whole multitude cried out all at once, saying, away with this man, and
release unto us Barabbas, Luke 23.18. Pilate therefore willing to release
Jesus, spoke again to them, and said, what will ye then that I shall do with
Jesus, whom ye call the King of the Jews? And they all cried out again,
Crucify him, Crucify him. He says unto them the third time: why, what evil
has he done? I have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise
him and let him go. And they cried the more, saying, let him be crucified. And
they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified: and
the voices of them, and of the chief Priests prevailed.

This custom of releasing one prisoner at the Passover, arose from their
deliverance out of Egypt, which was upon the day of the Passover. And this
custom had a great show of piety in it, but it was clean contrary to the law of
God, which commands that none but offenders should be punished. Nor had the
Jews any need to be put in mind of their deliverance heretofore out of Egypt
by this releasing of a prisoner. For God himself had Instituted a memorable and
remarkable sign of this thing, to wit, the Paschal Lamb, and so that whole
Festival. But they, not content with this sign which God had Instituted, did
institute another, and that quite contrary to the Law of God. Thus Hypocrites
are not content with the bare Word of God, but always either add something of
their own invention unto it, or prefer it before the Word of God.

But again we here see a most notable passage of prudence and civil
righteousness in Pilate. And I heartily wish that we might have no worse and
more indiscreet Magistrates. Indeed we do desire good and godly Princes in a
Commonwealth. But if for our iniquities we do deserve none but ungodly
Magistrates, we wish they may be as good and as prudent as Pilate was. For
consider I pray,

1. With what Wisdom he endeavored to set Christ at liberty. For when he could
not do it by force and might, because of the peoples uproar, and the power and
importunity of the High Priests, he attempts it in a wise and judicious way,
proposing their own custom, and offering to give them satisfaction before they
desired it at his hands. For by this means he hoped to have bowed the Jews, and
made their minds flexible to him herein, so that they would have yielded and
have been willing to release Christ, inasmuch as he offered to confirm their
custom with such readiness, though he were an Heathen, and thereby to show no
small favor to their Kingdom. Ye have a Custom, says he, etc.

2. He does very wisely propound those two, and no more, unto them. He does
propose no other with Christ unto them, but that notorious Villain Barabbas,
whom he knew to be a most mischievous and pestilent fellow to them all: so that
it could not be suspected that they would absolve him, but when he had set them
both before them, they might be put in mind of what both of them had done.
Whether of the twain, says he, would ye, etc. And he calls Jesus the King of
the Jews, that so he might seem either a little to appeach their Kingdom, or at
least abate and mitigate their fury with some laughter and merriment, and
withal show them that he was falsely accused of this crime. For a Roman Viceroy
would never have released one that was accused to undermine the Roman
Government, if but in the least he had apprehended him to be guilty. The
Evangelists on the contrary do describe and set forth this Thief in his
colors, that the malice of the Jews may appear to be the greater, who would
prefer such a Rogue before Christ.

1. Now Barabbas signifies a Son of the Father, that is, of the Devil or
Antichrist: for according to Matthew he was not simply, but notoriously wicked.
He was a seditious fellow, a Thief, and a Murderer. Hence Peter says. ye
desired a Murderer to be granted to you, and have killed the Prince of Life,
Act. 3.

2. Barabbas also may be interpreted the son of a multitude, or the son of a
Master. For he had the same Father to be his Master, which taught Judas to
betray his Lord.

3. He is truly a son of the multitude, that is, a son of the World. To this
fellow then is Christ likened and compared, the most innocent man with the most
notorious robber, yea the most precious Son of God, with the very child of the
Devil himself. This was figured forth by the two Goats under the Law, upon
which the Priest ( Levit. 16.) was commanded to cast Lots, which should be
slain, and which should be the Scapegoat. Barabbas was that one stinking Goat,
the other Goat was Christ: who according to his innocence was a Lamb; but
according to our iniquities, and in reference to our sins which he took upon
him, he was as it were a Goat. This is slain, and the other is let go. But as
he that slew the Goat, did sprinkle his blood upon the Altar, that God might be
propitious: but he that led away the Scapegoat was thereby made unclean, till
he had washed himself with water: So by the blood of Christ the Fathers anger
is pacified and alaid again. But the Jews who desired Barabbas to be released
unto them, are become unclean, and never can be clean, until they be washed by
the blood of Christ. But hear the Vote, and how the Lot falls. Pilate did not
doubt but that they would adjudge Christ to be set at liberty, rather then a
common Cutter upon the High way, but he was much mistaken herein. For the chief
Priests had otherwise persuaded the common Rabble of people, to wit, that they
should desire Barabbas to be released to them, but that Jesus should not only
be kept in hold, but also condemned to a most filthy and shameful death. This,
says he, those Princes and prime men persuaded the people unto. Therefore they
especially are guilty of shedding Christ's blood more then the rest. See here
how pestilent and pernicious an evil Counselor is. The multitude of the
people at first were wholly for Christ, and did generally follow and cleave to
him. But now these wicked men having prevailed with them, they cry out against
him, and desire to have him put to death. The whole multitude, says he, cried
out, Away with him, and release unto us Barabbas. O notorious blindness, or
madness rather. For what else was this but to say, kill him that raised the
dead, and set him at liberty who killed the living; put out the light, and let
us sit in darkness: Away with the Peace maker, and let the mutinous and
seditious alone. We will not accept of Life, we desire Death rather: Let Truth
be banished, we choose falsehood before it. Finally, they scorn so much as to
mention the very Name of Christ, but they cry out for Barabbas to be set at
liberty: they had rather celebrate the Passover with him, then with Jesus: for
although he were a lewd and wicked fellow, yet he was more tolerable to them,
because he never used to reprove them for their faults: but Christ was an
intolerable man, not to be born by them, because he rebuked them for their
Vices. This then is that complaint made in Isaiah: I looked for Righteousness,
but behold a cry, Isa. 5. So in Jeremy, Mine heritage is unto me at a Lion in
the Forest: it cries out against me, therefore, etc. Jer. 12. For as the Lion
terrifieth the other creatures with his roaring voice, so these men by their
outcry did force the Lord unto the Cross.

This people therefore did here commit two evils, as it is said in Jeremy the
second. They have forsaken me the Fountain of living water, and have dug to
themselves broken Cisterns that can hold no water. The first evil was, in that
they thought a guilty person more fit to be released, then an innocent man. The
second was, in that they would offer to condemn their best Benefactor. It is
not so bad to desire the enlargement of an offender, but to choose it, and that
rather to desire the freedom of a wicked man, then of a godly man, this can
never be good in any sense. We that are Christians ought to pray for all men,
yea for Infidels, but mean while willingly to forget those that are of one
Faith together with us, this must needs be evil.

1. The Jews by this their outrage did notably lay open their ingratitude, in
that they did so basely esteem of him, who set so great a rate on them, as to
choose them for his people before all others.

2. They did betray the madness of their malice, which was so great, that they
rather desired all righteousness should be utterly ruined, and that all malice
should have its swinge, then that the current of their hatred should be stopped.

3. Here they bewray their great blindness, because they desire that which by
all means they should have feared, avoided, and prayed against, to wit, that
their Savior might not be cut off, and a Robber released to them. But as they
desired both, so it befell them: They chose a Thief, and rejected a Savior:
justly therefore are they exposed to the Sword and Robbers without any Savior.
They asked a Murderer to be given them, but killed the Prince of Life, for
which very thing they perished by seditions and murders, and were, and are
involved in such great calamities, that none is able by Pen or Tongue
sufficiently to express them. And for this very fact the Prophets call that
Nation the daughter of a Robber. Well does Isaias also speak of them: Ah
sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children
that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, etc. Isa. 1. Here we see,

1. That there is nothing but a wicked mind will prefer it before Christ and
the truth, if it does but know and hope it shall get never so little by it.

2. We are taught not to trust in the applause of the world. For they who but a
little while since did sing before Christ, Blessed is he that comes in the
Name of the Lord: now cry out as loud, Away with him, etc.

3. Here we see the disposition of the world, which does ever make choice of
the worst, and reject the best. It is always more favorable to the guilty, then
the innocent. But all that we here see or hear of did not fall out by chance,
but by the Decree and Counsel of God. For it behooved Christ to be made the
lowest of men, and to fall under the greatest contempt, that he might be most
highly exalted and glorified over all, Isa. 53. The lowest descent of Christ
was, to be accounted more base and wicked then a Thief or a Robber: but this
Descention is a means of his Ascension, and the true and only way for him to be
more highly exalted. If thou therefore art despised, and reckoned worse then
the worst, have recourse presently to Christ, who in the sense of so great
contempt transferred it on himself, and overcame it, that thou by Faith in him
might overcome it also. No marvel then if guiltless men be sometimes
punished, and the guilty escape Scot-free. So it was with Christ. And as it
here fell out in Pilates Court, the very same happened in Gods Court. Adam that
notorious Thief with his whole posterity stood accused before God, all of them
guilty of Death: So did also the most innocent Son of God. Now one of them must
be punished with Death, Divine Justice did so require it. But God of his great
mercy spared him, and delivered his own innocent Son to Death for him.

1. Brethren, let us embrace this mercy of God, and be thankful unto him for
it.

2. Let us take heed that Christ, that is, the Righteousness of God be not
taken and kept prisoner in us: and the Thief, that is, unrighteousness, be not
let go at random.

But what does Pilate do, when he saw this frantic obstinacy of the Jews? He
little thought that they would desire Barabbas to be released unto them. And
nothing seemed more strange unto him then this unworthy behavior of them.
Therefore he says, What then shall I do with Jesus? etc. q.d. If ye think it
meet and just that a Thief should have his enlargement, much more he that is
proved to be innocent: or with what justice can I condemn this man, if a Thief
must be released instead of him? ye desire that he should be sent packing, but
require a Thief to be set at liberty. Nay in requiring a Thiefs enlargement, ye
do necessarily desire this man's releasment. For he that would an offender let
go, would much more that a Righteous man should not be kept prisoner. And so is
it indeed with those that are in their right wits: but malice had blinded these
men's eyes. Therefore they cry out again: Crucify him, Crucify him. These
wicked Husbandmen had a will and a resolution to kill the Lord of the Vineyard,
thinking that then they should possess his Inheritance safely, and hold it sure
enough, and so brave it out with great gladness and glory, Mat. 21. Wherefore
they sharpened their Tongues like Serpents. But first of all they determine
what kind of death he should dye. Where again they discover their wickedness,
in that they would prescribe what manner of death to put him unto, whereas this
did not belong to the Accusers, but to the Judge. And it was not for nothing that
they would have him crucified. For thereby they thought to delude the people,
and alienate them from Christ: that whereas it is written in the Law, Cursed is
every one that hangs on a Tree; they might show them that Christ also was
accursed of God, and so by that means Christ might wholly perish, not only in
his person, but in his good Name and repute among the people, and the clearness
of his Miracles, and whatever else was good in him. This was that which that
wicked crew did plot and purpose, even that the whole memory of Christ might
utterly be abolished. But God crossed their contrivances. For the curse of the
Cross was far from clouding Christ's Renown, that his Glory did the more sparkle
and spread thereby. Let not us think shame of the Cross of Christ, but esteem
it our greatest honor. Let us now glory in nothing save in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. For this will turn all cursing into blessing to us.

But how madly soever they cry out, Pilate does yet withstand them, and does
the third time publicly protest Christ's innocence. What evil, says he, has
he done? I find no fault in him. For he knew, and now had sufficient experience
by the fact it self, that for envy they had delivered him. Nothing but envy (I
say) was the ground of all this clamor. For this had so blinded them, that
they could not see the Law of God, or of Nature. A manifest and plain Sign and
Token of this their envy was, in that they took no notice of the Judges
excusing him, but still cried out more and more; and what else should they do,
when they had nothing else to prove their charge? In like manner the world
afterward cried out against the Martyrs of Christ, The curse of the Cross light
on them, Away with them, Throw them to the beasts, make dogs meat of them,
Hence with these Malefactors, etc. How should they escape better then their
Lord? But though Ravens or Lions devour us; although the fire burn us, or the
water drown us: let us never deny Christ, or desert his Church. It follows in
the Text:

Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. John 19.1. Mar. 15.16.
Mat. 27.28.


And the Soldiers led him away into the Hall, called Pretorium, and they call
together the whole band. And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet Robe.
And when they had platted a Crown of Thorns, they put it upon his head, and a
Reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him,
saying, Hail King of the Jews ( And began to salute him, Hail, etc. Mar. 15.)
And they smote him with their hands (John 19.3.) And they spit upon him, and
took the Reed, and smote him on the head; (Mat. 27.30.) And bowing their knees,
worshipped him, (Mar. 15.19.)

The Devil now at last, through the furious rage of the Jews, so far prevailed
with Pilate, who endeavored to carry on things in a politic way of Justice,
to lay violent hands on Christ. I say he laid hands on him, whom he had so
often excused. For so the Scripture must be fulfilled. Pilate knew well enough
that for envy they had delivered him, and yet he does so far gratify and
condescend unto them, that for their sakes, and in favor to them, he does
suffer and command innocent Jesus to be scourged. And how many such Pilatists
are there to be found now adays in every Country, who commonly Apprehend,
Oppress, Spoil, Kill, and condemn even the innocent, for no other cause, but
because it will please their Princes? Pilate might have rescued Christ out of
the hands of the Jews, having power and force sufficient to have done it, as
Lysias the Tribune or chief Captain did rescue Paul, Act. 21. But thus it must
be. Christ foreknew and foretold his scourging long before, Mar. 10. Luke 18.
And Isaiah prophesied the same long before the Incarnation of Christ: I gave my
body to the smiters, and my face to them that plucked off the hair, etc. Isa.
50. The Apostles also in like manner were thus scourged and whipped afterward,
Acts 5. and 12. Of which usage Christ warned and told them of beforehand, Mat.
10. and 23. But let us explain the words of this Text a little more largely.
Hitherto ye have heard what Christ suffered from the Jews: to wit, that he was
taken hold on, bound, hurried up and down, buffeted, accused, spit on, in fine
he was accounted worse then a common Thief. Now we shall hear what he suffered
of the Gentiles after all this. Although what we have already heard was
sufficient to have redeemed all the world, yet he would endure more than that:
First that he might make full satisfaction for our sins: Secondly, That none
might have any occasion to despair, considering the largeness of the Remedy:
Thirdly. To re-enkindle our love again unto him, because it is as it were
natural for a man to be won and wrought upon by courtesies and kindness. Hence
in the Prophet such Benefits and good Turns are called the Cords of Adam, Hos.
11. Such as with which a man is drawn. I will draw them, says he, with the
cords of Adam, that is, with Benefits and Kindnesses whereto men easily incline
and suffer themselves to be prevailed on. And whom would not this so great love
of Christ draw unto himself? Pilate (says he) took Jesus, and scourged him.
This was the first Sentence of the Judge against Christ, and that a most unjust
one too: inasmuch as the Judge himself had more then once declared him to be
guiltless already. But this is Christ's Lot in the world, that although men know
him to be innocent, yet he fares no better, and meets with no civiller usage at
their hands: which is no other then what all the Saints, who are members of
Christ, ever have had, and still have experience of continually. For how often
are wicked men compelled to confess, and say, Verily this was an honest man:
but for all that they will show him no further favor; this is all the kindness
he shall receive at their hands, or is likely to find from them. Now according
to the opinion of some Christ was whipped,

1. Because it was the custom of the Romans, first to strip and whip those
openly that were to be put to death, to show that they had nothing to cover or
excuse their fault. Although this is true in part, yet it does not hold here.
For Christ was not yet condemned to die: Nay, the Judge himself had not as yet
resolved to adjudge him to death, and therefore in favor to him did but
chaftise him. He saw that the Jews were so drunken with such envy against
Christ, and did so rage against him, that they could not be kept from killing
him with all the Rhetorical Eloquence and fair persuasions that he could use to
them. And therefore,

2. To avoid a greater mischief, to wit, the putting of the innocent to death,
therefore he gave sentence that Christ should be scourged, if happily the Jews
being satisfied with this punishment, might abate the rage and fury of their
minds; for of two evils, the least is to be chosen. This is all the pity that
the world has of Christ, even to beat him with many stripes. Let us look on
this with the eyes of our mind. It is a great spectacle for the World, Angels
and Men to behold, that the Prince of all liberty should in such a servile and
base manner be beaten and buffeted by the slaves and vassals of sin. For,

1. He that clothes and covers all, is stripped of his own garments, and led up
and down naked before all men.

2. He that covers our confusion, is confounded before all, that we might not
eternally be confounded; which certainly we must have been, if Christ had not
undergone this stripping and whipping for us.

3. He that releaseth the Prisoners, is himself brought into bonds; Nay, he
that gave the Israelites a cloud and pillar of fire to conduct them when they
came out of Egypt, is by the same men bound now to a pillar himself: Although
this also had some good resemblance of the rectitude of his righteousness, for
he always stood upright.

4. He that with much pity and compassion touched the sick and weak, is now
brought under the lash, and is beaten with so many stripes, so many strokes,
and with so many scourges, that if the Godhead had not supplied him with fresh
strength to endure more lashes and blows, he had sunk, and dyed under the hands
of those rascallions for want of breath and blood. Thus they add stripe to
stripe, gash to gash, rent upon rent, wound upon wound, blood upon blood, till
that beauteous and comely body, which was more lovely than any the children of
men, was wholly deformed and disfigured, that as the Prophet says, It had no
form or comeliness, Isa. 53. Here was fulfilled that of the Psalmist, Supra
dorsum meum fabricaverunt piccatores, The plowers plowed upon my back, Psalm
129. Again, From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no
soundness in him, Isa. 1.

All this he underwent and endured for our sakes: Our sins were his scourges;
so many sins as thou have committed, so many scourges Christ suffered. For it
is written, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
are we healed. Sins do justly deserve scourges, which seeing they were
innumerable, and yet Christ had undertaken them all, yea, and God himself would
exact the punishments of all sinners at his hands, there is no doubt but this
whipping was most grievous to be born, especially if we consider the most noble
and tender complexion of Christ's body. So that Christ did like a natural and
meek mother, who seeing the Father displeased and angry with his Children, runs
with her arms all abroad, and steps between, taking the blows on her self to
save her children. So Christ run to meet the Father when he saw him incensed
with our sins, and suddenly providing perpetual plagues for us, offering his
own back to bear our blows. O the unspeakable bounty of God, by which it was
that we were so dearly redeemed. O the strange Judgment and Correction; O the
wonderful ordering of the unutterable Mystery! The wicked offends, and the
righteous is punished: the servant commits an heinous crime, and the Lord makes
satisfaction for it. Man does the Fact, and God bears the blame.

Whither, O thou Son of God, whither does thy humility descend? Whither did the
fire of thy love flame? What were the bounds of thy pity and piety? How far
did thy compassion extend? I did the evil, and should have born the punishment.
I committed the wickedness, but thou did penance, and sufferedst vengeance
for it. Thou wast humbled for my pride. I was disobedient, but thou wast most
obedient in all things, yet do thou expiate the haynousness of my rebellion.
I did eat the sower grapes, and thy teeth were set on edge. I wretched man, and
undone Creature, I say, I was the cause of all thy bruisings, and of all thy
confusions. Thy love and my sin made thee become so weak. Consider this, O thou
miserable sinner, consider of this when thou make provision to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. Here we see how that,

1. We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, But with
the precious blood of the unspotted Lamb, 1 Pet. 1.

2. How Christ made satisfaction for the sins of the flesh.

3. How the lost sheep is not only found, but brought home again upon the
shoulders of the good shepherd with great labor and toil. Woe to those
miserable men that polluted their hands in the blood of the innocent. And woe be
to us also, if we be not thankful.

But there is something else to be taken notice of in this whipping of Christ:
for while the world is so busy about scourging of Christ, God is not idle, or
neglecting his care in the mean time toward those that are his. The Lord is
wont to do his work, when wicked men are active in theirs for the trouble and
affliction of the godly. When the Patriarchs sold their harmless brother
Joseph, and fulfilled their lust upon him, then did God carry on his design, and
accomplish his work. For under that sale of him did God secretly advance Joseph
to have dominion over his brethren. So here, When Pilate and the Jews did their
business in this whipping of Christ, mean while also God does his work as fast.
For,

1. He has so sanctified and blessed all stripes and all afflictions by these
scourgings of his Son, that what afflictions soever do now befall a godly man,
they do him more good than hurt, and help him forward in the way of holiness.

2. By these stripes wherewith Christ was beaten, God the Father has so
ordered it, that all the scourges of a godly man shall prosper to his good.

3. God has here declared in his only begotten Son what usage his adopted and
elected Children must look for in this world. For if he suffered his only
begotten Son to be whipped, shall he not much more let his adopted Children be
slasht? For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, Prove. 3. And scourges every
Son whom he receives. What will they say to these things, who live in
pleasures, and never think of adversity; so far are they from being willing to
suffer the least and lightest cross, as if they went about to build another
Paradise in the earth? Behold, says he, That which I have built, I will break
down; and seek thou great things for thy self? Jer. 45. They whose Judgment
it was not to drink of the cup, have drank of it; and do thou think to
escape? Learn therefore, O Christian, from this scourging of Christ, to bear
the scourge of God patiently, and say with David, In flagella paratus sum, I am
ready for the Rod, as the vulgar reading is, Psalm 38.17. And with Paul, I am
ready not to be bound only but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus, Act. 21.

Hitherto we have heard of the whipping of Christ, which indeed had been
sufficient for the redemption of all mankind. But all is not at an end yet, the
wickedness of perfidious men, as well of the Jews, as of the soldiers, is not
yet satisfied; but affliction is added to the afflicted, and the injuries of
our King abound, the pain of his manifold punishments and reproaches increase
more and more. As Soon as they had done whipping him, Pilates soldiers, (who
were then under the Roman pay, and kept garrison at Jerusalam under the
Governor, because of the frequent seditions and mutinies of the Jews) they
begin to mock and make sport with Christ, and that with such looseness and
sawciness, that the like was never seen or heard of before: no, nor were it to
be believed, if the Evangelists had not so punctually set down every
particular. We do not read that Pilate commanded these things to be done, but
the soldiers did it of their own accord, to gratify and curry favor with the
Jews. However Pilate winks at it, holds his peace, takes no notice of it, he
does not restrain or forbid them. Whence some suspect that Pilate all this
while did but with a counterfeit mind defend and plead for Christ, but really
and indeed did conspire his death with the Jews. And therefore we heard before
that the Governor sent a band of Roman fouldiers to take Christ. Whereas if
the soldiers had done this without Pilates privity, yet Pilate could not be
excused, who did not so much as check them, or speak one word in dislike of
their great malice against the innocent. Wherefore, O Christians, seriously
consider again, and think upon this so great suffering; but withal, take
notice, that our sins were the cause thereof. Eight jeers.
That Prophecy of David was here many ways fulfilled in Psalm. 22 and 39. and
69. There are eight manner of jeers reckoned up which these knaves put upon
Christ, for which no doubt the Jews did well reward them: nor would they march
out to take Christ for nothing. For truly Officers of an Army are but vassals
to Gold. That side which allows the best pay, has the justest cause. But these
were Tiberian and heathen Soldiers. What then are ours, and what do our
sou^diers do, who are baptized for Christians? What people under the sun are
worse, and less fearing God? Those soldiers of Tiberius did scourge, crown,
mock, spit on, and at last crucify Christ: But our soldiers, whom we daily
see before our eyes, do no less to Christ, by swearing and blaspheming the
blood and wounds of Christ, etc. No wonder if such soldiers were always
worsted, not only by the Turks, but also if the earth had swallowed them up
alive. And no question but the earth and the people therein are the worse for
such kind of Blasphemies. For is it not a diabolical thing, that Christians
know not what else to swear by, but by that by which they are redeemed? But of
this we shall speak elsewhere. Let us now consider those eight things which
Christ suffered from those soldiers.

1. They muster up the whole devilish band together, to make the greater
mockery and derision of it. Surely it is no small vexation to be jeered at by
one single person alone; how much more to be made a laughing stock before so
many men?

2. The band being called together, they clothe, and put on him a purple robe,
which was a military garment of a red color, which Commanders use to wear. The
military attire of other soldiers was called a Corslet, or Coat of Male. This
they did scoffingly, to signify thereby that he was a King. Herod's servants
put a white robe upon Christ, these clothe him in scarlet.

3. They plat a Crown of Thorns, and set it on his holy head for a royal
Diadem. Who can imagine the pain that reverend Head endured by so many prickly
thorns fastened on it, when we are so tormented with the prick of a thorn that
we can hardly endure it? 1.
First, Then these thorns were the covetousness and riches of the Pharisees,
which moved them to persecute Christ. The world cannot be content to scratch it
self with its own thorns, i. e. Riches, but it must vex its Neighbor too, and
dishonor God, either by getting them dishonestly, or keeping them too
niggardly. 2.
Secondly, These thorns are our sins. For because of man's sin, the earth fell
under this curse, that it should bring forth thistles and thorns, Genesis 3. So
that we also as well as the soldiers did put this Crown of thorns upon the
holy head of Jesus. For 'twas we that sinned, though Christ bare the punishment
of our sins. See and consider this thou graceless and grateless man, who do
now give up thy self to vanity and pleasure, while Christ sits with a Crown of
thorns on his head. See, I say, how grievously Chrirst was afflicted for the
expiating of our pride and vanity. For this Crown, besides the pain that it
caused, was contemptuous and reproachful, it was full of confusion. Both which
were our due, as well the punishment, as the eternal consusion. Wherefore
Christ underwent both for us. O the unspeakble charity of Christ indeed toward
us! But on the contrary; O the detestable ingratitude of us for the same!

4. The soldiers put a Reed into the hands of Christ for his Kingly Scepter,
and this they did out of disdain to him, thereby signifying that he had made
himself a King, and yet he had nothing to carry it out in the port of a King:
but such as his Scepter was, such was his Kingdom, even a vain empty and frail
Kingdom.

5. They bowed the knee before him, mocking and scoffing at him in that
scornful salutation, saying, Hail King of the Jews. Here we may much bewail
the great malice of these wicked men. For how could they have more basely
abused the most vile and contemptible man in the world? and yet for all that
our Jesus does still continue to be the true King of Israel; even in spite of
Pilate and his soldiers, notwithstanding they had used him worse than they
did. I say he is still a King, now they are hurried into the infernal fire to
be burned everlastingly. Therefore we are not ashamed to hear of those unheard
of abuses of our Lord, but are thereby rather strengthened and encouraged to
undergo the like. Now these wicked Worshippers shadowed those Hypocrites, who
by their outward deportment and a pish gestures feign themselves to be very
godly people, when their hearts are lewd and unbelieving, and most remote from
God.

6. They smote him on the face with the palms of their hands. There is nothing
more cruel, and more void of all compassion than a wicked man. And therefore in
the Psalms, the Persecutors of Christ are compared to Lions, Bulls, Dogs and
Calves, by reason of their petulancy and cruelty. Moreover, Ungodly men do
always add sin unto sin, as if they could never sin enough. Hence says Isaiah,
Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, Isa. 5. After they had
done mocking Christ, they buffet him. They fall from jest to earnest, from
sport to spurning, from words to blows; for so wicked men are wont first to
scoff, then to strike, and so to spue up and disgorge all their rage and fury
against those that are made miserable. Thus it befell Christ the King of all
Glory, and thus it befalls all those that bear his Cross after him. However we
know that as all scourgings and whippings, so all buffetings and beatings which
the godly do undergo, are all sanctified in Christ. And therefore he that gives
blow for blow, what else does he but thrust away, and cast off sanctification
from him?

7. They spit upon him, which is the highest disdain and contempt of all.
Eternal God, how comes it to pass that thy creature man should be so
unspeakably wicked and abusive, as to bespit his own Lord and Savior? Who can
but tremble to hear it only? Brethren, consider here that wonderful patience
of Christ, and his truly to be admired silence.

8. They smite him on the head with a reed, on that head which all the devils
in hell should tremble at, and all the powers of Heaven reverence and which all
the Saints do worship. I say, that everlastingly blessed head, from which all
blessing is derived unto us, and does descend upon us. By this smiting the
prickle of the thorns did more and more pierce the crown of his sacred head:
whence it did still bleed, and the blood gushed out afresh, so that all his
body, neck and face were tinctured, and dyed therewith, and by reason of the
execrable spittle of the soldiers which was mixed with it, they made his
beautiful and lovely face look most rufully and like a Leper, according to the
Prophecy so often already alleged, Isa. 53. We saw him, says he, and there
was no comeliness that we should desire him, he is despised and rejected of men,
and we hid our faces from him, or his face was hid from us. It was hid indeed
because of the tumors, wounds, spittle and blood. Therefore, says he, we
accounted him as a Leper, and stricken and humbled of God. The soldiers then
did all these things unto him, because the Jews had told them that he did much
affect to be a King, and to reign over the Jews. This was the ground of all the
sport which they made with the Crown, Clothing, Scepter, and scoffing
adoration. See here a Spectacle never before in the world, nor never heard of
until now, except that afterward some of the Martyrs suffered the like in
contempt of Christ. Who could have believed these things, or who would have
dared to preach them, if they had not been written in the Gospel? But because
they are written, we boldy believe and preach them. Who can but tremble to hear
these things, seeing it is most certain that we must have endured them
eternally, (I mean the worm and sting of conscience, the dirision of all the
creatures, and a final separation from God himself) if Christ had not
voluntarily undergone them for us? This grain of wheat was thus to be
multiplied, it is sown in most abominable contempt, that it might sprout and
grow up most wonderfully unto Glory. Thus the Kingdom which was not of this
world, did conquer and overcome the proud world, not by cruelty of battle, but
by humility of sufferings and patience. The tremendous and fearful power was
hid and concealed awhile, that the imitable patience and sufferings of him
might be set forth and commended unto us. Mean while what those soldiers did
in greatest contempt and cruel mockery, this Christ the Power and Wisdom of God
did not only undertake and endure, but took care that it might be done
profitably, and with good advantage, which was mystically thus.

1. The Mystical sense.
The Purple Robe (which was a sign of royal Majesty) did signify that Christ
having overcome all enemies, to wit, the Devil, Sin, the World, and Hell it
self, should set all mankind at liberty again. Or by the Purple mantle is
signified the service of love which he performed for us, and to us in his
Passion. For Scarlet in grain is of the color of fire, which the Lord
commanded should be taken for the service of his Tabernacle when it was twice
dipped, Exodus 28.5. to signify our love to God, and to our Neighbor; whence it
is, that whatsoever we offer by fire, and that will endure the test, is well
pleasing in the sight of God. Now Christ out of his exceeding great love to us
did drink off the cup of his Passion to the bottom. Well therefore might he be
clothed with a purple Robe, to express this his overflowing charity to us, or
else it was to show that he himself was that very self-same one signified by
the red Heifer in the Law, whose body was commanded to be burnt for a
sin-offering without the camp, and the ashes thereof to be sprickled upon the
people in water, Numb. 19.

2. The crown of Thorns signified that the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world: that is, it does not glitter with stateliness or pomp, nor does it
consist of outward force and might, but it is thorny and of a scarlet dye: that
is, it is subject to sufferings and afflictions. The crowns of the Kings of
this world are made part of Iron, part of Silver, and part of Gold: intimating
that the Empire of this world consists in carnal power, luster, and
nobleness. But Christ's crown is made of Thorns, thereby hinting unto us, that
the Kingdom of Christ does consist, and is full of Thorns and Afflictions. Such
a King as Christ is himself, such Kings does he make us, obnoxions to all
tribulations. If then thou would reign with Christ, do not startle at, or
throw aside the thorny Crown; for if thou art crowned here with him with
thorns, hereafter thou shall be crowned with him with a crown of Glory and
honor, Psalm 8. 2 Cor. 1.

3. The Reed in his hand signified, that he had power to lay down his life, and
to take it up again, John 10. Although they thought no such thing. Seeing
Christ's Kingdom is such a one as grows up among Thorns, no marvel that the
world does so scoff and jeer at it. 1 Cor. 1.
For the Gospel and the preaching of the Cross is foolishness to the world.
When they heard say that Christ was a King, but seeing him crowned with Thorns,
they disdained and made light of him: hearing that the Gospel promises freedom
from all evil, and seeing it come along accompanied with nothing but the cross,
they ^out and ^eer at it: When they hear that Christians are Kings over sin and
death; yet seeing that they are sick and dye as well as others, they do but
laugh at it. Christians therefore do look like fools to the world, because they
hope for aid and deliverance, but for all that are at present overwhelmed with
all manner of miseries. Hence it was that Jobs Wife said to him: Do thou
still retain thine integrity? Curse God, and dye, Job 2. But however the cross
and afflictions crush Christ, he is nevertheless, and will be a King with all
Saints, which will appear to be so one day, whether the world will believe it
now or no. It follows:

John 19.4.
Pilate therefore went forth again, and says unto them, Behold, I bring him
forth to you, that you may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus
forth, wearing the Crown of Thorns, and the Purple Robe: and Pilate says unto
them, behold the man. When the chief Priests therefore, and the Officers saw
him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, Crucify him. Pilate says unto
them, take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him. The Jews
answered him, we have a law, and by our law he ought to dye, because he made
himself the Son of God. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the
more afraid, and went again into the Judgment Hall, and says unto Jesus,
Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. Then Pilate says unto him,
speak thou not unto me? Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee,
and have power to release thee? Jesus answered, Thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he that
delivered me unto thee has the greater sin. And from thenceforth Pilate sought
to release him: (But the Jews cried out, saying, if thou let this man go, thou
art not Caesar's friend: whosoever makes himself a King speaks against Caesar.

It Is not to be uttered what the malice of the Jews plotted against Christ, how
earnestly they did press and urge against him, what various and several things
they invented to crucify an innocent Christ. As for any thing concerning the
civil Laws, Christ ought to have been set at liberty, inasmuch as the Judge was
satisfied in his opinion, and the civil Laws do appoint but one punishment for
one offense. But thus Christ and they that are his do speed in this world, they
can scarcely find civil honest Judges. Christ ought to have been absolved by
the Judges sentence, forasmuch as he had now suffered the punishment pronounced
against him. But wickedness is so insatiable, that it will not be satisfied
when punishment is inflicted, although the Judge himself does omit nothing that
might tend to Christ's liberty, but does use his utmost endeavor to effect it,
excepting only this, that in the end he does suffer himself to be pressed to do
open injustice for fear of his Superiors. How much had he done, and stood
hitherto on the behalf of Christ? How many consultations had he, and how did he
debate the business in his behalf? But all his art and skill neither could nor
ought to take place: for God had otherwise determined. Indeed Pilate does now
openly and sharply speak to the Jews, endeavoring what possibly he could to
maintain what was just and honest: And then he examineth Jesus in private, that
he might find out the truth of the mattter; but all that he attempted was to no
purpose. Now when his servants had most miserably and most shamefully abused
and made sport with Jesus, he offers to show him to the people in that
pitiful pickle and deformity, if thereby happily he might move them to some
compassion. Pilate therefore went out again, but not altogether so hot and
zealous to do him right, as when he went out before. He had not a little
swerved from the right Rule of true Justice when he did but scourge innocent
Jesus. Now he brings him out again, and sets Christ before them, that ye may
know, said he, that I find no fault at all in him. He does here again
acknowledge that Christ was innocent, and that it was plain injustice to
proceed any further against him; Nay, he does clearly confess that he had gone
beyond his bounds, and had done more then he could answer in scourging him. For
if the Judge could find no fault in him, surely he must needs be whipped
unjustly. Here then was fulfilled that of the Psalmist, Thou have tried me, and
shall find nothing, Psalm 17.3. Whence it is that Christ said at Supper, The
Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me, John 14.30. Jesus
therefore went forth, wearing the crown of Thorns and the purple Robe. He went
forth without any Imperial splendour, but full of reproach. He went forth indeed
without any form or comeliness; for what comeliness was it for the Son of God to
be crowned with thorns, and to be mocked, weltring in his own blood, and
exposed as a gazing-stock to his enemies? Who would have believed that this was
the Son of God? But this deformity of Christ is full of consolation unto us.
For hence we are assured that he made satisfaction to the utmost for us. What
could not so great humiliation of his Son merit for us, it being voluntarily
undertaken for us? Go forth also, O ye Daughters of Sion, ye believing souls,
and behold King Solomon, the peacemaking King, who reconcileth all things that
are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Cant. 3.11. Col. 1.20. Behold, I say,
your King with a crown of thorns, a crown of grief and misery, with a
ludibrious Robe and reproaches, wherewith his mother crowned him; yet not his
mother, but his stepmother the wicked Synagogue. Here is truly a most
wonderful spectacle indeed to be seen. He that goes forth, has indeed some
likeness of a King, yet is he over-loaden with the confusion of a most
despicable servant: he went along crowned, but his crown was his torture,
wounding his glorious Head with a thousand prickles. He is clothed in Royal
Purple, not for honor, but disgrace. He bears a Scepter in his hand, but is
smitten with it on his head. They worship and bow the knee to him, and cry him
up for a King, but presently chase him to the Cross. Think upon these things, O
Christian; look on Christ in this hue, and never despair of his Grace and
Favor. For doubtless as long as thou do trust in him, he will never forsake
thee, who has already suffered so much for thee, that did not deserve the
same at his hands. To this end therefore is Christ held forth and set before
thy eyes, that thou should not despair. Whenever therefore thou art in any
tribulation either of body, or conscience, or mind, look this way, turn thine
eyes toward Christ, and thou shall be comforted.

But Pilate, the better to assuage these savage beasts, and move them to some
pity, knowing what compassion there is in nature, whereby as every creature
loves its like, so also does every one naturally take compassion on its like.
Therefore he cries out to them with a loud voice: Behold the man, as if he had
said, O ye Jews, be satisfied with the scourging of this man, which yet I was
forced to inflict rather out of necessity, then any offense of his. Behold what
a man ye have made of him, see how he is used, mark if he does look but like a
man. The sight of him is enough to melt and break an iron or flinty heart. Ye
see there is no whole skin left in all his body from top to toe. No part or
member of his body is free; ye see nothing but wounds and gore blood all over
him. Have compassion therefore and take some pity upon him, for he is not a
dog, but a man, as ye are, although indeed he has been used worse then one
would use a dog. Let this punishment suffice, be ye satisfied with what he has
suffered already, and lets dismiss him and send him going. For if he has
formerly erred in matter of Faith, this whipping will be a perpetual warning to
him, that he never more broach the like errors again. If ye envy him as King,
yet forbear, for ye see him abased and dejected; the name of King is vanished
from him into the basest penance and highest mulct that can be exacted, he has
been whipped, crowned with Thorns, put into a mock-habit, scorned with bitter
revilings, beaten and buffeted sufficiently: let his shame abound, and let your
envy abate. All this Pilate spoke very civilly indeed and religiously unto
them, but to little or no purpose with these men.

Most truly does he say, Behold the man. Hearken Heretics, ye that deny the
Humanity of Christ. Behold the Man, says Pilate. Hear this, O Christian; what
did Pilate here see but a man? If thou can not see God, yet behold this man,
who became so despicable for thy sake. Hear it too thou sinner, Behold the man.
See what man merited, see how miserable man is made, see what God-man suffered
for thee, that thou be not found unthankful. Take heed thou be not like the
Jews, who were more enraged at that miserable Spectacle of Christ; and that
whereby they should have been moved to compassion, therewith was their wrath
and malice more enflamed. They cry out, Crucify him, Crucify him, q.d.
proceed and go on as thou have begun. If thou have scourged him, crucify also.
It Is not enough to have him whipped, we are not contented with that, we long to
see him dying upon the Cross. Thou do show us his wounds, but we must have
his life too. We shall never be at quiet till we see him dead. He shall never
escape alive out of our hands, though it cost us all that ever we have. It shall
be so, thou cursed, cruel, wicked Jew. It shall be as thou say, but not
because thou would have it so, but because God has so disposed it: Thou
shall see him on the Cross, and there dying too. But it had been better for
thee to have suffered him to preach in the Temple, and that Barabbas had been
hanged on the gallows. The Evangelist does justly tax their impiety; saying,

1. When they saw him, they cried out. Therefore they cannot excuse their sin.
For they have seen, says Christ, and yet have hated both me and the Father,
Joh. 15.

2. Those wicked Blasphemers of Christ's Passion are here taxed, who have seen,
and do see, know, and confess, that Christ did suffer all these things for us,
and yet will not cease still to blaspheme.

3. It is spoken Emphatically, that the chief Priests did cry out, for happily
the rest of the multitude might be moved with some natural pity and piety, and
begin to think upon the Miracles which he wrought among them, and so might be a
little ashamed of what was so wickedly done unto Christ. The chief Priests
therefore at least with their Officers cry out. Servants are easily persuaded
to do as their Masters do, supposing that they shall be excused, if they do but
imitate their Lords. In these High Priests was fulfilled that of Jeremy, The
Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord: therefore they shall
not prosper, and all the flocks shall be scattered, Jer. 10. Because the Flock,
that is, the people were not only not brought to the Knowledge of Christ, but
withal were stirred up to seek his death, therefore they fell into the pit and
perished. But all the fault was in their Leaders and Governors. Pilate took
nothing more hainously at their hands then this obstinate envy of the Jews.
Therefore when he saw there was no hope to do any good by fair means, he does
try to restrain their fury with big words and sharp threatenings: Take ye him,
says he, and do you crucify him, q.d. Shall I, O ye bloody men, who are more
cruel then any bruit beasts, and because ye envy the Roman Laws, shall I kill
and cut off the innocent? Do you think to affright me with your clamorous
outcries, and make me act the part of a Murderer? I am a Minister of Law and
Justice; I am not to maintain or vindicate the spleen and envy of others, but
to punish Offenders by my Authority: I am no Executioner to torment the
innocent. I have hitherto yielded to your hatred, I will no longer be persuaded
by you to exercise any more cruelty against the innocent. Amongst all our
Lawyers I can find no such Law, that does command to put any man to death who
has not deserved it. And therefore if it be so capital a crime, and such an
high offense with you to be innocent, and if you have any such Law among you,
that punishes the guiltless with death, do you execute them your selves: I
cannot, nor will I consent to this fool-hardiness and gross indiscretion. I
don't intend to defile my Hall, which is the Roman Court and Empire in this
place, with innocent blood. Take ye him at your own peril, and lead him away,
and do you crucify him, if ye think it best. I do not use to crucify any but
Malefactors and naughty fellows. But as for this man, I can find in him no
crime worthy of the Cross. This Sentence of Pilate were much to be commended
indeed, if he had persevered and continued in his resolution. But we shall
quickly see the wind turned, and hear other things of him.

For all this the Jews never so much as blush at the Justice of this Heathen
man. Nay when they heard the Judge favor and defend Jesus with such diligence
and industry, they verily thought that one way or other Jesus would slip from
them, and get out of their hands: and therefore they forge another new crime
against him, which, to a Judge that was not versed in their Laws, might seem to
be a most notorious offense. We have a Law, say they, etc. True, you have a
Law, but none of you keeps the Law: as Christ did most truly and justly
upbraid you, John 7.19. Thus the greatest Transgressors of the Law do most cry
up and make their boast of the Law. But what is it that ye allege against
Christ out of your Law? By the Law, say they, he ought to dye. And wherefore, I
pray, for what cause? Because he made himself the Son of God. But what is become
of your former Accusation, that he should say he was King of the Jews? They
were found liars in the first, therefore now they invent a new charge against
him. And what great crime had it been if Jesus of Nazareth did say that he was
the Son of God? If he did the works, why might he not profess the Name of God?
It was extreme hatred in them to accuse him with such a clamor and noise of
words, because he only said that he was the Son of God. They speak not a word
all this while of those Divine Works which he did, and whereby he proved
himself to be the Son of God. And they tell a lie too in saying, that he made
himself the Son of God. For he did not glorify himself, that he might be made
High Priest: Nor did he think it any Robbery for him to be equal with God, but
the Father glorified him. The Lord, says David, said unto my Lord, sit thou on
my right hand until, etc. Psalm 110.1. Mat. 22.44. See here also how malice
and envy does disagree with it self. They had said before, It is not lawful
for us to put any man to death. But now they say, we have a Law, and by our Law
he ought to dye. So forgetful and ignorant is envy, that it can neither tell
what it did say, or what it should say. the Law which they allege must either
be that of putting a blasphemer to death, Levit. 24. or that concerning a false
Prophet seducing the people by lying signs and wonders from the worship of the
one and true God, Dent. 18. But neither of these Laws take hold of Christ. For
he was neither a blasphemer, nor a false Prophet. Therefore it was not
sufficient to allege that Law which was for the putting of a blasphemer or a
false Prophet to death, but they were to prove that Christ was such a one, for
otherwise he would truly and fully clear and quit himself from both Imputations.

The Jews thought that Pilate would presently pronounce Sentence of death
as soon as ever he heard but this one crime charged upon Christ: but it fell out
far otherwise. For when he heard this saying he was the more afraid. For he
thought thus with himself, Who knows who or what this man is? For certainly
none can make himself the Son of God, unless first he were so. And if he be the
Son of God, surely it is not lawful for me to pass sentence of death upon him.
Therefore of necessity I must sift out this matter more narrowly yet. Wherefore
he brought the Lord of Majesty into the Judgment Hall again to enquire further
of this thing. Here then we see,

1. That even a Heathen Judge gave more honor to the Name of God, then the
Jews who made their boast of God, as does here plainly appear by Pilate, who if
not really and in Truth, yet was at least civilly just and honest, and if not
religiously, yet did he morally fear and reverence his Gods, as many honest and
harmless men do, who are of opinion that there is a God, but have no true and
right faith in him.

2. But observe that Pilate was afraid indeed, yet did he not repent. Whence
it is plain that his fear was servile, not filial and proceeding from Faith: he
was afraid lest he had done too much in scourging the Son of God. For he
believed as the Gentiles do, that the Gods descended from heaven, and ascended
thither again, as the Poets fain of Jupiter, Mercury, etc. And therefore that
he might not seem to be so wicked against his Gods, as to condemn the son of
Jupiter or Vulcan, he does narrowly pry into the truth of the business, and
asks, Whence art thou? He beats about the bush, and questions him afar off,
to fish out the truth. But Christ makes him no answer. For,

1. It was nothing either to Caesar or to Pilate, whether he were the Son of
God or no. For whereas they accused him of sedition, he was cleared and quitted
of that charge already.

2. He did ask it too unseasonably. For then was the time for Christ to keep
silence.

3. Pilate was now unworthy to hear it, having torn off the wool of the Lamb of
God by whipping him, and polluted his hands with his innocent blood.

4. Christ does here hold his peace, because he had told them often enough
before, that he was not of this world, Joh. 19.

5. He also told Pilate, that they only who were of the Truth could hear his
Voice. Now he knew that Pilate was not of the Truth, nor did he ask that
question in love to the Truth, but only out of fear of some shrewd turn or
Temporal loss that might befall him.

6. Christ does hold his peace, that he might not seem to endeavor an escape,
and so be unwilling to suffer and go through his Passion. And therefore,

7. He would do nothing, nor say any thing that might hinder his suffering.
This is that silence of which Isaiah speaks, He is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth, Isa. 53. And David in his person says: I was dumb with silence, I held
my peace even from good, Psalm 39. By this his silence Christ taught us:

1. That all the Learning and Education in the world is nothing worth, if it be
not employed in love to godliness, but either out of a vain affectation, or
fear of punishment; therefore he gave no answer before unto Herod, who asked
him out of curiosity; nor now unto Pilate, who asked him out of fear. Just so
do many men run after Sermons, some out of vain glory, others for fear of Hell,
but very few in love to Righteousness and Truth. Therefore the first sort of
these shall be deprived of their hope, for let them hear the Word never so
greedily, God will not answer them. Nor shall the second escape damnation. For
that which the wicked fears shall come upon him. The last only shall obtain
their desire. For blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness,
Mat. 5.

2. Christ does here teach us silence, that we should not be like fools, who
multiply words, whereas nature it self teaches silence, having given two ears
to man, and but one mouth. First then consider that an account must be given of
every idle word at the day of Judgment, Mat. 12.36. Secondly, Locutum fuisse
saepe me poenituit, etc.
That of the Heathen is to be observed: I have often repented, says he, for
speaking, but never for my silence. Thirdly, That of James especially: He that
bridleth not his tongue, this man's Religion is vain, Jam. 1.

Pilate being somewhat displeased at Christ's silence, (for he thought he had
slighted him) speaks to him a little more sharply. A proud man of all things
cannot endure to be scorned. Speak thou not unto me? Thou, says he, who art
but a vile and mean fellow, to me who am in highest Power and Authority? If he
had known the person of Christ who he was, he would have spoken a little more
mannerly and modestly to him. But the world despises all those who carry no
great port and pomp outwardly. And the men of this world who are proud, and
presume upon their power and riches, do scorn and contemn all others in
comparison of themselves.

1. And whereas Pilate says further to him. Know thou not that I have power
to release thee, and to crucify thee? It is the expression of a wicked
Magistrate, who thinks he may lawfully do what he pleases.

2. In Pilate here is clearly manifest what the disposition and nature of
humane Reason is in the gifts of God. For he that is more then ordinarily
endowed with the gifts of God, and yet has not faith: he does not acknowledge
them as Gods gifts, but as his own deserts. And so he thinks he may do what he
lists with them. But Faith teaches, that the gifts which God bestows on a
man, are not to make him a Lord, but a Servant, and a Minister to improve them:
and the greater gifts any man has received, the more industrious and laborious
should he be. Hence says Christ, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them; they are proud of their power, and abuse it at their pleasure: but
it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister, etc. Mat. 20. Magistracy therefore or Power, is the gift of God:
but if it be conser'd upon wicked men, they do but Arrogate to themselves
something of Law and right in or by that gift. And if a good man has this gift
bestowed upon him, he does acknowledge himself so much the more a Servant, by
how much the greater his gift is that he has received. Pilate was ignorant of
this. Therefore he spoke so proudly of his power. But by this his vaunting he
condemned himself both before God and before men. Out of his own mouth is this
evil Servant to be condemned, because when (by his own confession) he might
have acquitted the innocent and just one, yet he chose rather to condemn him,
and to crucify him. But have a little patience Pilate, and he will speak to
thee hereafter, and tell thee whence he is. The Lord, I say, who is now weak
and held prisoner under thy power at present, he shall go forth as a strong
man, he shall lift up his voice and cry: I held my peace, I always kept silence.
But must I still be dumb, and never speak? Yea I will speak as a woman in
travel. Then shall he speak to thee in his anger, telling thee plainly what
thou now ask of him. He has made me King in Sion, etc. Psalm 2.

But Christ cannot forbear to reprove that so proud presumption of Pilate, and
to check his Arrogant boldness, lest by his ^ilence he should seem to
acknowledge and grant what Pilate said to be true, that he was at his own
dispose and might do with men as he saw good. Christ cannot bear blasphemy or
impiety. Pilate did usurp and attribute to himself that which belonged to God.
For God the Father was the chief Author of Christ's suffering. But Pilate
claimed this power to himself. I, says he, can crucify thee. Christ can no
longer endure to hear this blasphemy and unrighteousness. Thou could, says
he, have no power against me, etc. q.d. Should thou, or any man else have
power over the Son of God? No such matter. Thou with thy whole Military force
and all the Jews together could not touch so much as an hair of my head, if
the Counsel and Will of my Heavenly Father had not determined that I should
suffer. Wherefore thou have no power from Caesar, nor from those who by their
great exclamation strengthen thine arm against me, but from him that is above
all, is this power given thee over me. Who foretold it by the Prophet long
since: Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, and against the man that is my
Fellow, smite the Shepherd, etc. Zach. 13. And if he did not hold my right
hand, and dispose of me at his pleasure, I could break thee as a Potters vessel
with the Rod only of my mouth, or with one beck or twinkling of mine eye.
Therefore because I am delivered into thy hands from above (for the Father has
delivered me, and has not spared his own Son, Romans 8) do not thou glory and
boast so: for it is not thy power, but Gods permission. Besides, it is no true
power which thou do exercise over me, but Tyranny and Robbery, Power is given
for the praise and protection of them that do well, and for the punishment of
evil doers, Romans 13. Thou have received power, yet it is not lawful for thee to
use it as thou listest. For as the Law is given or made for the lawless and
ungodly only, (1 Timothy 1.) So the Magistrate has right to use the Sword only
against the wicked. Now if he destroy the guiltless with the Sword, it is no
lawful power, but Tyranny: it is Theft, not Magistracy. Whereas thou art let
alone to abuse thy power, do not brag and make thy boast of that, for the Lord
will not suffer the Rod of the wicked to rest upon the Lot of the Righteous,
Psalm. 125. Shall the Ax boast it self against him that heweth therewith? Isa.
10. A Thief has no power over a true man, no Law against an honest man: yet he
may lay wait for him, fall upon him, and kill him. So thou have no more power
over me, but by permission of my Father. Hereby,

1. Christ does quell Pilate, who boasted so much of his power, but abused the
same.

2. He does show him, that he did not suffer unwillingly, nor was he compelled
to the Cross by man's power, but his Fathers pleasure.

3. He warns all Judges, that they do not proudly vaunt of their power. Also
that they should consider and know themselves to be but Judges, not Tyrants;
And that they do not bear the Sword against the godly, but against the wicked
doers.

4. But especially he does hereby comfort the godly, and confirm their
consciences, letting them know that the Kingdom of the world can do nothing
against them, but what the Father of his good pleasure allows, to give them
experience of his presence and assistance, and to strengthen their Faith.
Therefore he says, I will be a wall of fire, Zach. 2. But Christ tells him
further, Therefore he that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin, q.d.
Thou have no power to crucify me, but thou have much sin in so doing: but yet
Judas and the Jews have more sin then thou have. For it was he and they that
laid hands on me, and falsely accused me. What they do is out of envy: but what
thou do is for fear, yet not without sin. It Is true, thou art a friend to
innocence, but the baseness of the Jews carry thee captive another way. They
have the Law, and do not ignorantly, but wittingly abuse the permission of God:
but thou never had that Law; and therefore it is not so much folly and
malignity in thee to hate the Wisdom, or be ignorant of the Sacraments of God.
Thou committest murder in shedding the blood of a man thou do not know: but
they by delivering their King and Lord to death, do add Sacrilege to their
Murder. Where we see that one sin is greater then another: sins of knowledge
are greater then sins of ignorance: So he that sins maliciously does offend
more then he that sins out of infirmity. And a wicked Counselor does sin
more then an ignorant Prince or Judge. A naughty Christian does sin more then
an Heathen, and more grievously in the same kind of sin.

Pilate being troubled at these words of Christ, does labor yet more earnestly
to set Christ at liberty. For although he was a Heathen, yet he was troubled at
the denunciation against sin, nor would he willingly sin against God, although
he knew him not, no more then the Heathen could know him, to wit, by the things
that are made, Romans 1.

Now when the Jews perceived that Pilate was afraid lest he should offend God,
and polluet himself with sin, they recur to the former cavil, that he affected
and desired a Kingdom; that he would fain be King and supplant Caesar, which
they show was not safe for him being Judge and Viceroy to neglect; and
therefore they threaten him with Caesar: that which does most terrify and
compel wicked Judges. If thou let this man go, say they, etc. q.d. If it does
not concern thee, that he has sinned against God: yet doubtless it is
something to thee, that he has offended against Caesar. Thou art a Royalist, a
Caesarian, and do reside here to the end thou may not diminish, but defend
and increase the Name, Honor, Renown, and Power of Caesar. But this man does
directly set himself against Caesar. For Caesar's main drift is to be King of
Syria, especially over us Jews, where thou, O Pilate do preside and command
in the Name of Caesar. Therefore if thou should let this fellow escape, and
not punish this his affectation to be a King, none could think otherwise but
that thou thy self also wast Caesar's back-friend, in that thou do not punish
his open enemy. For whosoever makes himself a King speaks against Caesar.
All this they said, not for any love to Caesar, for they hated him to the
death, and had often made insurrections against him: but out of hatred to
Christ, only coloring it over with the pretense of Caesar's Name and Honor,
that they might satisfy their lusts upon Christ. This is the Weapon that
wounded Pilates Justice, with this Exclamation his constancy does flag and
shatter in pieces; his justice is turned into injustice, and all the reason and
gravity of this man falls to the ground. So that here it is plain, that civil
Righteousness is not able to hold out a true and full Trial, and so is nothing
worth unless it stood it out to the utmost. Thus we are now come to an end of
that long Dispute of Pilate, both with Christ and with the Jews, which did
wholly tend to the freeing of the innocent: It follows therefore:

When Pilate therefore heard that saying, John 19.13.
he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the Judgment seat, in a place that is
called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of
the Passover, about the sixth hour: and he says unto the Jews, behold your
King. But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate
says unto them, shall I crucify your King? The chief Priests answered, We
have no King but Caesar.

When he was set down on the Judgment seat, Mat. 27.19.
his Wife sent usto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man:
for I have suffered many things in a dream this day, because of him.

When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, verse 24.
but that rather a tumult was made, willing to content the people, Mark 15.15.
gave sentence that it should be as they required, Luke 23.24. He took water and
washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of
this just person, see ye to it. Then answered all the people, and said, His
blood be on us, and on our children. Then released he Barabbas unto them, who
for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired, but he
delivered Jesus to their will, Luke 23.25. When he had scourged him, Mat.
27.26. and mocked him, ver. 31. to be crucified.

Behold, dear Brethren, how the Devil prevailed, first in Judas, then in the
Jews, and lastly in Pilate also: he is greatly importunate to bring the
business to an issue; but he little thought that he should have the worst of it
in the end. The Judge then sits upon the Bench ready to Judge him, whom God the
Father had appointed to be Judge of the quick and of the dead, Acts 10.42. And
albeit Pilate well knew that all meances were to no purpose, and what was this
way attempted, was but in vain: yet because he saw (first) the implacable
malice of the Jews against Jesus, and (secondly) the strange consent of the
people and Princes for the ruin of one man: withal (thirdly) seeing Christ
himself, that although he was harmless indeed and innocent, yet he was a mean
man, and of a slender estate, and did not much plead for himself: but
(fourthly) this stuck much in his stomach, that many, though falsely accused to
Caesar through envy and malice, were yet much in danger to lose their places:
and (fisthly) he thought that he had now done enough, and sufficiently
endeavored himself against all the confederates of the whole Nation that had
conspired his death, and that he had put forth his utmost in defense of the
innocence of innocent Christ, therefore he now resolved to serve their turn,
and yield to their hatred. So that Pilate was seduced by the Favor and
general Vote and consent of the people; the contemp and meanness of Christ,
and the fear of Caesar. He gets upon the Bench again, not regarding Law now,
nor considering that he had so often proclaimed Christ innocent. What right
Judgment can be expected when the Judges breast lies open to the passions of
hatred, covetousness, and the fear of man? Pilate was afraid lest he should be
falsely traduced to Caesar, as one that favored Caesar's enemy, and for that
cause should be thrown out of his Office and place of a Magistrate. But what
the wicked fears, that does come upon him. For afterward he was thrown out
of his praefectureship, and banished, as Josephus says, lib. 18. c. 7. and so
miserably was he tortured, that he killed himself with his own hands, and
violently cast away his abominable and filthy life, as Eusebius witnesses in
his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 7. c. 8. Thus the Judgment of the Lord,
though it tarry a while, yet is it not quite taken away.

But John does not only describe the Judgment, but withal the Tribunal and
place of Judgment; as also the day and hour, that the History might have the
greater crrdit both with those that knew the proceedings, and with those that
were not acquainted with them. He expressly names the place both in Greek and
Hebrew: for Lythostrotos (the Pavement) is a Greek word, and Gabbatha is an
Hebrew word. Yet these two words do not signify the same thing. Lythostrotos
is a Causey or Pavement, a place pitched or laid with stone: but Gabbatha is as
much as to say, a High or Eminent place, so called either from the Height and
Ascent of it, or because a Judge should sit in an high place above the rest in
the Court; that is, he ought to have his mind raised unto God, and lifted up to
him on high, that he may so judge others, even as he himself would be judged of
God.

The Day when Christ was sentenced to death, John calls it the preparation of
the Passover. The Day when these things were done was the very Feast of the
Passover, as we have proved in the entrance to this Discourse. And it is called
the Preparation, because of the Sabbath which always followed, in which it was
not lawful for the Jews to dress any meat, Exodus 16.23. But in other Feasts
they might, even on the Feast of the Passover. This Day then was both a
festival in it self, as also a preparation to the following Sabbath: wherefore
that year it fell out on the sixth day of the week, this day therefore was the
Jews preparation of the Sabbath. But to us it was Parasceve, and the
preparation of Eternal Life, which was prepared for us on that day. Most
Emphatically therefore does John so diligently set down and name the day of
Christ's death.

1. To show that the work of Redemption was completed upon that day on which
the work of Creation was finished; and that man was Redeemed the same in which
he was made, to wit, on the sixth day, Genesis 1.

2. He does so punctually describe this day and hour, as well in respect of the
Resurrection, as of the three days space in which Christ lay in the grave,
that the saying of our Lord to the Jews might be found true: As Jonas, says
he, was three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale, so shall the
Son of Man be in the heart of the earth, etc. Mat. 12.

But the Evangelists seem to disagree about the hour of Judgment. For Mark
says it was the third hour, John says it was the sixth. However there is no
contradiction between them, although the Ancients have taken great pains to
reconcile the Evangelists, especially Augustine and Theophylact. The later of
whom is of opinion,

1. That there was a mistake in the Penman, putting one letter for another.
For the Greeks signify their numbers by letters.

2. Augustine speaks of the twofold crucifying of Christ; One by the tongues
of the Jews, who cried out, Crucify him: The other by the hands of the
soldiers; one was at the third, the other at the sixth hour.

3. But this knot may more easily be untyed another way: thus. Whereas Pilate
gave sentence that Christ should be crucified, this was about the beginning of
the third hour, and continued till the sixth; so that the crucifying of Christ
was begun and ended between the third and sixth hour. And because these two
hours comprehended the whole business of the Cross, therefore Mark names one,
and John another, as the beginning and end of the crucifying of Christ. In
short, The crucifying and passing sentence was within three hours, to wit, the
third and the sixth. From the sixth there was darkness till the ninth hour,
when Christ gave up the Ghost. Or thus, It may be collected out of Mat. 20.
that the whole day was divided into the Morning, Third, Sixth, Ninth, and
Evening hour. Whatever was done between the third and sixth hour, is said to be
done at the third hour, because the sixth was not yet come. John therefore does
not say, that Christ was adjudged to die at the sixth hour, but about the sixth
hour, signifying that yet it was the third hour, as Mark says it was. But the
third was almost out, and the sixth hour now was at hand.

Now the Hebrews had a far other Computation of their hours than we ( English,
or) Germans have. For then the sixth hour was about noon. Their day had twelve
hours, and the night as many, John 11. But enough of this. Let us return to the
Court of Judgment. When Pilate sat on the Judgment seat, the place, day and
hour aforesaid, before he would pronounce sentence, he speaks again to the
Jews. For he was very unwilling to pass sentence of death: And therefore he
delayed, and put it off so long, contrary to those who make nothing to shed
man's blood, Behold your King, says he, whom ye have delivered Prisoner to me
under that indictment! Why are ye so implacably bent against him? Look upon
him! he is whipped, buffeted, mocked, spit on, here he stands before you full of
derision and reproach. Behold your King, What hurt has he done you? What harm
can he do to you? He could not help himself, in vain therefore do you fear him.
If he did say he was a King, see now he is brought low enough. If he was indeed
your King, lo he is subjected to Judgment. If he fain would be a King, Behold
what a worthy King he is, just such a one as Boys use to make. Nay, In this
respect he is so much worse, in that he has endured more punishment and
reproaches. Behold therefore your King, What do you see in him? What are you
resolved to do with him? Are ye satisfied with what he has suffered? Will ye
desist from your wicked intention, lest you unjustly destroy him, and
consequently incur your own utter ruin? See here with what unwillingness
Pilate yielded to the rage of the Jews; For although they threatened him with
Caesar's displeasure, yet he does try all means, if possibly he might, to rescue
and deliver the innocent. Certainly he was more righteous and just than many in
our times, who rave against, and fall foul on the innocent, before they have
any command or commission from Caesar so to do.

But it is to be observed, that Christ had three names, and those very eminent
and famous too, even from unbelievers. For (First) Pilate said before, Behold
the man. Now (Secondly) he says, Behold your King. The Jews (Thirdly) add,
Behold be made himself the Son of God. These three, a Man, King, God, or the
Son of God, are the most true names of the one only Christ; whom his enemies
indeed did scoffingly confess, but his friends who reverence and truly adore
him do seriously acknowledge. And in these three names, all our faith, hope and
comfort do consist.

As it is the costome of envious men to interrupt ones speech, when any thing
is spoken which they would not hear of willingly, as it happened to Paul, Acts
22. When he made his defense, and gave an account of himself at Jerusalem: So
the Jews here interrupt Pilates speech, crying out, Away with him, away with
him, Crucify him. Thus he that did so mercifully visit the children of men, he
that dealt so gently and sweetly with the weak among them, is grievous to them
to behold. They rest not at once, crying Away with him; but they cry out twice,
to show their greater disdain and indignation against Christ. Although this
their bawling rebounded on their own bosom. For their Savior was taken from
them, both in this world, and that which is to come. When those wretched
Caytiffs cried out to have Christ taken out of their sight, they brought this
misery upon themselves, even to be deprived of their King, Prince and Priest.
Then was fulfilled that of Hosea, The Children of Israel shall be many days
without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, Hos. 3. Again,
They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the Lord, but
they shall not find him, he has withdrawn himself from them, Hos. 5. And that
justly too, because they cried, Away with the Savior, Crucify the
Propitiator; so that they have lost their salvation, and have no defense left
them.

Pilate, When he heard these unclean dogs bark, and these cruel Lions roar a
fresh, he does again make mention of their Kingdom, Shall I crucify your King?
as if he had said, What strange men are ye, who will needs crucify your own
King? It will be a perpetual blot and stain to you. He speaks this more in
jest, than in earnest; how be it, be does still endeavor to break their fury
with such kind of Ironies or Riddles. He did yet tremble to shed innocent
blood. But the Jews were not in jest; this was no matter of mirth to them. We
have no King, say they, but Caesar, q.d. Why do thou talk so much of our King
to us? as if we Jews would have a King of our own? We will not be tainted with
this suspicion. We will not have this man either for a King, or for Ceasar. We
are well enough contented with Tiberius Caesar. We acknowledge him for our
Sovereign, and do pay toll and tribute to him, as thou Pilate do very well
know. Thus ye miserable Jews have denied your Messiah, and rejected him, and
have chosen Caesar in his stead; whom yet ye ever hated, and have traduced him
for a very Edomite or Idumaean. Him therefore ye shall have to be your King,
whether ye will or no, and him indeed ye have. This our Jesus would never have
tyrannized over you with such cruelty, as Vespasian and Titus have since done.
But if ye are so addicted to the Roman Caesar, why have ye so often rebelled?
Why have ye made so many mut nies against him? But such was their hatred
against Christ, ( Zach. 9. Mat. 21.) that out of envy to him they would applaud
and commend Caesar, whom they did mortally and most of all hate.

See what malice will do. If they might but destroy Christ, they would
perpetually enslave themselves, as if they had said, We had rather be vassals
to Ceasar, than Freemen under this King. Well then, ye shall be his slaves,
that you may learn the difference between the service of God and the service of
men. By these words they cast off both Christ and God, both of which are called
their King in the Scriptures. They say of God, The Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, Isa. 33.22. And of the Messiah the Scripture says plainly,
that he should be King, Behold thy King comes to thee meek, etc. Zach. 9. And
again, I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, etc. Jer. 23. But here they cast off both, God and their Messiah; when
they say, We have no King but Caesar. Justly therefore is it said of them, The
Princes of Israel have forsaken me, and I have forsaken you.

But whilst Pilate sat on the Tribunal, his wife sent to him, straightly charging
him that he should not pass any severe sentence against Christ, affirming that
she had suffered many things by reaof him. O miracle, says Theophylact, he
that is judged does terrify the Judges wife. What that woman's vision was in
her dream of Christ, the Evangelifts do not express. Nor can any man positively
conclude it. But certain it is that this Vision was not showed to that woman
without divine providence. God knows how to pre-ordain and dispose all things
better then all the wise men in the world can imagine. Pilates wife was in some
measure converted unto Christ, and did labor all that possibly she could to
withdraw her husband, and hinder him from doing any hurt unto Christ. Herein
doubtless she is to be commended above all the Jews, in that she durst
acknowledge Christ by his proper Epithet, and pronounce him a just man; which
was as much as to accuse all the Jews of a lie and unrighteousness. This Vision
was not showed to the man, but to the woman, because happily he was not worthy
of it, nor would any have believed him, because he had so labored to set
Christ at liberty.

Some there are who do attribute all these things to the Devil, as he who now
labored might and main by this woman to hinder the Passion of our Lord, which
before he had endeavored with all industry. For now he perceived that it was
himself, and not Christ that would be ruined by that Passion; which that he
might the more speedily prevent and hinder, he makes choice of a woman, a very
fit and familiar Instrument for him by which he might destory mankind. But now
he had out slipped his time, and staid too long; for he had already swallowed the
hook, Haman heretofore was strangled on that Gallows which he had provided for
Mordecai: Esth. 7.
so the devil was destroyed upon the Cross which he had prepared for Christ.
For upon the Cross it was that Christ spoiled Principalities and Powers, etc.
Col. 2.15.

Thus much concerning Pilates wife. But all this while Pilate was nothing
wrought upon, he resolves to pass sentence for all this, for his carnal
prudence thought it more safe, if he served the common good with the loss of
ones man's life. Sedition (thought he) is a grievous inconvenience, and of great
damage to the Commonwealth; therefore he will please and satisfy the
multitude. A Typeof those who will do Justice so far as the world and the
worlds friends will allow of it; they will keep so long to the rule of
Righteousness, that they will be sure to lose nothing of their wealth and
honor. However Pilate was yet in a great straight. He was willing to gratify
the Jews, but on the other hand, the sheding of innocent blood did stare
fearfully in his face. And therefore he does call for water, and wash his hands
before them all, by which he would signify that he had no hand in shedding
this innocent blood. And this he did not after the custom of the Gentiles, but
of the Jews. For David says, I will wash my hands in innocence, Psalm 26. This
Pilate would fain imitate; and wash his hands he did, but not his heart. For
the Lord had said before, that he sinned in what he did, though not so much as
the Jews and Judas did. I am clear, says he, from the blood of this just
person; See ye to it. I am but the Minister of the Law, it is your cry has shed
the blood, and not I. But thou must not think to escape so, O thou Judge, who
must also thy self be judged, who do not judge the cause of the poor and
fatherless, but art dastardly afraid of the clamours and threats of the base
people, and swervest from doing Equity and Right. Know thou not what courage
and constancy becomes a Judge, that he should rather die a thousand deaths,
than not do Justice? Therefore the wise man says, Seek not to be Judge, being
not able to take away iniquity, lest at any time thou fear the person of the
Mighty, and lay a stumbling block in the way of thy uprightness, Ecclus. 7.6.
Why do thou suffer Liers to turn thee from the truth? O thou double tongued
Judge, who with the same mouth do three or four times excuse, and by and by
condemn most unjustly. Thou do condemn the innocent, and yet do pronounce
him innocent. Wretched man, who did thus bewitch thee? Who infected the purity
of thy mind? Why do thou thus pervert Judgment? See thou not what enmity
thou causest to the Roman dignity hereby? It is a slur to Ceasar, a stain to
thy Honor and Reputation, thou rendrest thy self odious and insamous to all
men; finally thou do give an ill example to other Judges to do as bad as thou
do. Have forgot what oath thou did take? Art not afraid of the wrath of thy
Gods? To what purpose are the Laws, and the Power, and Authority of Governors,
if it be lawful to do thus? All the Elements may justly rise up and arm
themselves against thee, inasmuch as thou do what in thee lies to destroy
their Maker. What need thou fling all the fault upon the Jews, when thou thy
self might have rescued him? Thou knewst full well that for envy he was
delivered, and it was in thy hand, by thine own confession, to absolve or
condemn him. But he from whom thou had thy power will one day examine thy
works, and search out all thy thoughts, because when thou wast an Officer of
his Kingdom, thou did not judge justly, nor keep the Law of Righteousness,
and did not walk according to the Will of God. But what do the Jews answer
when they heard Pilate cast all the guilt of Christ's blood upon them, and lay
the sin at their door? They are not in the least startled, but count it rather
a trifle, and make light of it. Let not this, say they, trouble or binder thee.
Take thou no further care; Be this Jesus just or unjust, let him be good or
bad, all the guilt of his death be upon us. We would have the business
dispatched: We would fain be guilty of his blood. Do thou only give sentence;
His blood be on us, and on our Children. O wicked Parents! by this one word
they destroyed themselves, and all their posterity; A Generation of Vipers
indeed, Mat. 3. Therefore O ye naughty Jews, be it unto you as you have said,
for in as much as ye have unanimously desired it, let all the righteous blood
that has been shed from the beginning of the world rest upon you, Mat. 23.
Your hands are defiled with blood, therefore ye pray in vain, Isa. 1. Your
house shall be left desolate to you and yours: Ye shall be Runagates and
Vagabonds upon the earth like Cain, Genesis 4. And no doubt but ye have felt the
smart of it long since, how sorely this blood of Christ has lain upon you, But
now 1659. years.
and oppressed you and your Children, now more than these fifteen hundred years.
Nor shall you ever have rest and quiet, till ye be converted, and turn to him,
and acknowledge your iniquity.

After Pilate had washed his hands, and thought himself whiter than the snow,
then he gives sentence against Christ to put him to death. He thought it a
small matter to adjudge a poor mean man to die: He thought no body would
revenge his blood; but he found it otherwise at last. What matter is it if a
godly man has no man to take his part, or none to revenge his quarrel, so long
as he has God to avenge his wrong? Vengeance is mine, says he, I will repay,
Deuteronomy. 32. Thus Barabbas the Robber is let go without any punishment, but
innocent Jesus is whipped, and judged to death, even the death of the Cross, The
just for the unjnst. So those sons of men, Whose teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp sword, did prevail and get the day, because they
stiffly stood it out, and held on their clamor so long, till at last he was
delivered to them to be crucified. And so he that gives life to all, bare the
sentence of death for us. For in the righteous Judgment and Court of God this
sentence of death was due to us: But Christ took it upon himself. Thus, I say,
He to whom the heavenly Father had committed all Judgment, John 5. And who
shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his
people, Psalm 50. 2 Pet. 2.
At whose Judgment the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken, and the firmament
shall pass away with fervent heat; Hell shall give up its dead, and every
creature shall tremble, he it this day set at naught, and despised as the
vilest fellow in the world, and condemned to die. But woe and alas!

1. How were the hearts of his Disciples, and the rest of his friends
overcharged with sadness and grief, when all hope of life was taken away, and
they heard that their faithful Master, their Lord and Helper was condemned by
a most unrighteous Judgment.

2. On the contrary, what a frantic fit of jollity and howling exultation were
these mad dogs put into, when they had at last prevailed with the Judge by
their importunate clamours to grant them their most abominable and horrid
request, which he had so often denied them before, when the wicked Judge
delivered up Jesus the Savior to the cursed, and most cruel will of those who
thirsted so much after his blood?

3. How did the hopeless sadness of his friends, and the furious mirth of his
foes, torture and afflict this meekest Lamb now in the midst of Wolves?

1. Here we see, Christians, what we must have expected at Gods Judgment day,
even the Sentence of Eternal Death, if Christ had not took pity on us, and
taken it upon himself.

2. We see what little confidence we are to put in the World, when Pilate who
had hitherto so often stood in defense of Christ, now to gratify and please
the Jews, does crucify him without any other cause in the world. So Herod
heard John willingly, yet cut off his head at last, Mark 6. This unrighteous
Sentence Christ took and accepted of, to free us from the most just Sentence of
damnation; and to teach us not to fear the unrighteous judgment of the World.
Let us always remember this Judgment, that we may with all our might and
whole hearts give thanks to our Lord Christ, who would be condemned to death
for us, and be delivered to the will of the wicked Jews; yea he delivered
himself, that we might be able to stand before the Judgment of God.

And they took off the purple from him, Mar. 15.20.
and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. And he
bearing his cross, went forth, John 19.17. And as they came out, they found a
man of Cyrene, Simon by name, Mat. 27.32. who passed by, coming out of the
Country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, Mark 15.21. and they laid hold
upon him, Luke 23.26. him they compelled to bear his cross, Mat. ibid. and they
laid the cross on him, that he might bear it after Jesus. And there followed
him a great company of people, and of women, which also bewailed and lamented
him. And Jesus turning unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but weep for your selves, and for your children. For behold the days are
coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the Wombs that
never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to
the Mountains, fall on us, and to the Hills, cover us. For if they do these
things in a green Tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke 23.27.

Dearest Brethren and friends of God, you who wait to hear the end of the
saving crucifying of the blessed Lord and beloved Jesus; the good God imprint
in your hearts the memory of this great suffering, that thereby you may not
only be more strengthened in your Faith, but also animated and encouraged in
patience to undergo the like, if need so require, Amen. Invocate the Lords
mercy, and with most fervent minds pray for all Jews, Pagans, Heretics,
sinners and sinneresses, that God the Father and Creator of all, would bestow
his Grace and Mercy upon all men, whereby they may be converted from unbelief
to the Faith, and from a wicked life to godliness. O thou most high God,
remember this so infinite Passion, and be not angry with us for ever. These
things I thought good to premise, to stir up your minds, and make ye more
attentive to those things which now follow.

We have heard (first) what our Lord suffered before final sentence was past
upon him. We have heard (secondly) what that sentence was: to wit, that he
should be crucified. Now (thirdly) we shall hear next, how that sentence was
put in execution. Here then let us give all attention, not so much with the
ears of our body, as of our mind. The next thing to be done, is to open the
Veins of the Fountain of living Waters, that that precious balsam which
pierces and softeneth the hearts of all the godly may flow out.

After that wicked sentence was pronounced, those truculent and bloody Wolves
took that meekest Lamb Jesus, to rend him in pieces and destroy him utterly, a
thing which they had long desired, and now at last had obtained. So that what
Christ had foretold, was now fulfilled, to wit, that the world should rejoice
in his sufferings, Ioh. 15. Then is the world glad when it may do what it
lists without control, when there is none to reprove it, and when it has
those that rebuke it under its own power; they took Christ like a Lion that is
greedy of his prey, Psalm 17. Now the Lion when he has got his prey, he does
carry it away presently, lest it should be taken from him. The Lions whelps
instantly devour that part of the prey which their Sires bring to the Dens,
lest the other young Lions should snatch it out often heir paws. And thus they
dealt with Christ. So do these wicked men seem to prevail, for this was their
hour and power of darkness. Not that the wicked do truly and indeed prevail
against Christ, but in that he emptied himself, and was made obedient even to
the death of the Cross. The Soldiers are here Emphatically expressed, for
these also mocked Christ in Pilates house, and now they take the place of
hangmen, to lead away Christ and crucify him; for this was not a meet work for
the Jews. But for all that the chief Priests of the Jews ought more justly to
be termed the crucifiers of Christ, inasmuch as they first laid hands on him,
and were the cause of his death. And indeed they were the true crucifiers of
him. So that Peter tells them, Ye by wicked hands have crucified and slain,
Acts 2. And a little after, Even Jesus whom ye have crucified, has God raised
from the dead. Stephen tells them the same, calling them the betrayers and
murderers of Jesus that just One, Acts 7. Paul says plainly that the Jews did
crucify the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. For what they did by other hands, is all
one as if they had done it by their own.

The Soldiers then took Jesus, for he was now delivered into their power: and
not only unto their power, but also to their most perverse and wicked will. And
because they were in earnest, they now pull off the jesting garment, and put
his own clothes upon him again, to his greater confusion, and to make the more
sport with him, that he might be the better known by his own clothes, forasmuch
as he could hardly be known by his face, it was so spit on, buffeted, beaten
and deformed. But the Crown they let alone upon his head: for they would not in
the least lighten or lessen his pains, although this was done by Gods
providence, to show that Christ who was once crowned King, abides a King for
ever: nor can any take away his Kingdom, or pull his Crown off from him, his
Royal Crown. Therefore it became him to clime the Cross when he was crowned,
that in that his Sacrifice, he might at once show himself to be both King and
Priest. So they led him away. Thus these wicked Husbandmen cast the Son and
Heir of the Father out of his Vineyard, Mat. 21. Here comes in that Figure of
the Goat, which was to be offered for sin, Levit. 16. That was to be burnt
without the Camp; but his blood was to be sprinkled within the City in three
places. The Tabernacle was to be sprinkled with it in the inside, and the
Sanctuary and the Altar on the outside. So the Lord Jesus who was to wash away
the sins of all men, sprinkled his blood within the City in three places, in
the house of Caiaphas, without Pilates Hall when he was tied to the whipping
post, and in the Judgment Hall when he was crowned with Thorns. Now being to
be burnt, through his abundant love upon the Cross, he is led without the City.
And he is not brought forth as a Preacher of the Truth, but he is cried out
upon, mocked, derided, hissed at as a Prevaricator, as a Thief, as a Magician,
as a Seducer, as a Blasphemer. All they that see me, says he, laugh me to
scorn: they shoot out the lip, and shake the head, Psalm 22. And again, They
that sit in the gate speak against me, and I was the song of the drunkards,
Psalm 69. Thus he is led forth, he that leads his people out of Babylon, the
City of the Devil, and the congregation of wicked men, into Jerusalem the holy
Church. He that took his people out of Hell to be his Inheritance, is now cast
out of his own Heritage. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. He
that delivered his people from the fellowship of Devils, is now led forth among
Thieves and Rogues. He that leads his people to Triumph, is now led, or rather
dragged to death. Thus cursed Cain leads his innocent brother into the field to
kill him, Gen 4. O how unlike was this out-leading of Christ unto that, when
hereto fore heled their Fathers out of Egypt. There it is said: He brought
them forth with joy and gladness: but here he is led out with great anxiety and
sorrow, They were brought forth with silver and gold, Psalm 105.37,43. but he
is led forth in greatest misery and want. O miserable out-leading indeed! He
was not so entertained in the City but six days ago: for then he was desired
as the Sacrificial Lamb, now he is slain: then they bore up his Ass; now his
knees falter under the burdensome Cross: then he was accompanied with his
Disciples, now he is made a companion for Thieves and Robbers: then they
strawed the cross-wayes with Flowers, Palm branches, and garments; now they
force him to run through mire and dirt, to go through thick and thin, they
drive him along rough and stony-places: then the very boys did even melt their
mouths into praises, saving, Glory, honor and praise be unto thee, O Christ
our King and Redeemer, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord,
Hosanna in the Highest; but now all is full of nothing but wrong, reproach,
derision and cursing. O how unlike each other are these, Blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord, and Away with him, away with him, crucify him?
How unlike are these, King of Israel, and We have no King but Caesar? How
unlike are green Branches and the Cross, Flowers and Thorns? And that this
Eduction may be made more penal to him, they make him carry his own cross, a
thing never seen or heard of before; this they compel him to carry from
Pilates house out of the City, whereby they might make his sin greater then the
sin of those Thieves, and that the sufferings of Christ might more perfectly
satisfy for our sins. And he went forth, (says he) bearing his Cross. A grand
Spectacle, a great gazing-stock indeed: but to a godly man this is a great
Mystery; for here that of Isaiah was fulfilled: The Government shall be upon
his shoulders, Isa. 9. The Government of Christ is his Cross, for submitting
whereunto he was exalted of the Father, Phil. 2. Here those Figures were
fulfilled: for here is Abel led forth by his brother to be killed: Here is
Isaac with the wood, and Abraham with the Ram caught in the thicket, Genesis 22.
Here is Joseph with his party-colored coat besmeared with blood, Genesis 37. Here
is Moses with his Serpent put upon the Pole, Numb. 21. Here is the Bunch of
Grapes upon the Staff, Numb. 13. O how bitter and irksome was it to Christ to
depart out of that City which he so highly esteeme^, as to make it as it were
equal to Heaven in Wealth, Power, Dominion, Religion, but would neither now nor
henceforth afford it either his presence or assistance, because of the iniquity
thereof, and would leave the Vine which his right hand had planted, to be
devoured by the Bore and every wild beast, Psalm 80. This was Christ's last
farewell to the Jews; nor has he ever since unto this very day returned again
to them. Never man went so willingly to serve God, as he hasted to Calvery to
be crucified. Let us go forth with him, at least thinking upon his reproach,
Heb. 13. Most truly is it said of him, that he did bear his cross: for he did
not bear it outwardly only, but inwardly too. Nor was there ever man carried
such a heavy cross as Christ did. For,

1.
First he carried an outward cross, which being made infamous by the curse, and
burdensome by the weight of it, did grievously press and gawl his raw and
wounded shoulders. It may well be thought, that by this carrying of the cross,
all the skin of his shoulders to the very raw flesh, was so fret, and feak'd,
and rubbed, that either all his sores were renewed afresh, or were so extremely
torn, that they were made all but one wound. For the cross being long and
heavy, and Jesus quite tired out, he could not carry it but one end on his
shoulders, and the other dragging on the ground: so that the continual jogging
and jolting of it, as he haled along over stones and rugged ground, must needs
wound the wounded shoulders of the Lord more deeply: and sometimes hitting
against his head put him to fresh pain, by beating the prickles of the Thorny
crown into his head. Indeed no Tongue can tell, nor is any man able to express
what pain and torment Christ endured under this Cross: and no doubt but that he
was so weary and weakened, that many times he fell down under the load and
weight of the Cross. All these things were thus done and written, to show us
that they used Christ most unmercifully. And thus should we have been tortured
eternally without any hope of pity, if Christ had not taken all upon himself in
our stead. Now they lay this Cross upon him,

1. To put him to the greater pain and shame. For they were so impatent, that
they could not stay till they came to the place of Execution.

2. They lay the cross on him, because no body else would so much as touch that
wood, it was so odious by reason of the curse. Thus all of us do still
abominate, loath and fly the Cross of Christ which we should bear for Christ,
whereas for the most part we are forced to endure greater things in and from
the world. But,

2.
Secondly, It was not this outward cross only that oppressed Christ. There was
another spiritual Cross which did cruciate and lie heavy upon the mind of holy
Jesus with no less bitterness, from the minute he was born, to the very hour of
his death, without any refreshment of joy. This cross was our sins. For the
sins of all men were laid upon the cross of Christ. It was he that bear our
sins, in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. and upon him the Lord laid the
iniquity of us all, Isa 53. This Talent of Lead, these cords of impiety, these
faggots of Thorns, which were heavier then any Mountain, did grievously
surcharge Christ. This huge load that would have broken the strength of Heaven,
bowed all the Spheres, Orbs, and Regions of the Firmament, mouldred the
foundation of the earth, and crushed in pieces all things here below, this heavy
and intolerable burden was bound to the back of holy Jesus. Where by the way we
may take notice of our ingratitude: We sin, but avoid the cross, and suffer it
to lie on innocent Christ, and never so much as give him thanks for all his
pains. How great therefore must our condemnation be? Although Christ alone felt
the load and weight of the cross, yet he did not bear it for himself, who had
no sin, but he bare it to us, and for us, and that two ways:

1. He carried the cross before us Ministerially, serving and ministering to us
thereby. For his cross is our cross: which he took from our shoulders, and laid
upon his own. Now the appurtenance of the cross, is the curse: Cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree, Deuteronomy. 21. And this is that which is most
intolerable in the cross. For happily the cross might have been endured in
respect of the pain: but when the curse was added, that made it become most
extremely miserable. Wherefore when Christ took our cross upon him, he
undertook the curse also of the cross. For he was made an execration and a
curse for us, that we might be delivered from the curse of the Law. The cross
and curse both were ours: but Christ bare them both Ministerially before us.
When thy sins affright thee, thy conscience tormenteth thee, and the curse
oppresses thee, do but consider and think upon this, and thou shall never
despair.

2. Christ bare the cross before us for our Example, that we should follow his
steps, Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2. And Christ
himself says, He that will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his
cross, Matthew. 16. Again, He that takes not up his cross, and comes after me,
he is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. The cross must be born what ever come on it.
For the Word is steadfast: In the world ye shall have tribulation, John 16. And
through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Act. 14.

Object. But the cross is too heavy for us, and more then we are able to bear:
we are too weak and cannot carry it in our own strength?

Answ. What must we do then? Throw away the cross, or shun it? In no wise: but
rather look upon and behold the cross of Christ. But thou ask how is that,
how must that be done? Lo Christ who was the only begotten Son of God, and
blessed over all, it could not be, but that he did bless and sanctify all
things whatsoever he did but touch. For as filthy, cursed, sinful flesh,
whatsoever, as it did touch it, so it did torture it: (for to the impure all
things are unclean: whence all things are cursed to the first man after he
sinned, Genesis 5. so that God himself does show himself froward with the froward,
Psalm 18. Hence the sinner under the Law is laden with many curses: Cursed
shall thou be in the City, and in the field, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.) So on the
contrary; by the touch of the ever and above blessed Son of God are all things
blessed and sanctified, even those things which in themselves were cursed before.
Now Christ touched hunger, cold, persecution, reproaches, sweat of blood, the
cross, death, hell: And he so blessed all these things by his touching them,
and so sanctified them, that they shall never more burt, but help, never more
be for evil, but for good to them that believe. And therefore whenever any of
these afflict thee, see that above all things thou look to Christ in thy cross
and tribulation, which if thou do, thou shall not only bear up in thy
affliction, or against the cruel rage of persecutors, but shall withal glory
and triumph in thy adversity and affliction, Romans 5. A figure hereof was in the
Waters of Marah: which were so bitter that none could drink of them: but when
Moses had cast the wood which God showed him into them, they became sweet and
pleasant, Exodus 15.25. This is that Tree of Christ's cross which sweetens all
bitter things to us. So the poverty of Christ makes our poverty comfortable;
his death makes ours joyful, etc.

Learn hence patiently to endure thy travel in the way to Heaven; And cheer up
thy self from this, that thou may be able to bear thy cross. Come hither, I
say, whosoever thou art that art hunted and hurryed to death, either for
Righteousnesssake or Innocence. For in this leading of Christ away to the
cross, yea even at the cross, thou shall there by faith find thy self, that
even as Christ seemed to the world to be led to a most filthy and shameful
death, and yet indeed was guided to a glory far more glorious then all glory;
so if thou art a member of Christ by Faith, thou will seem to be carried away
into extreme misery, but yet thou shall be convoyed unto eternal Joy. For to
this end Christ came unto this hour, that he might lead thee along with himself
through death unto life. This is our comfort, that Christ bare his cross. Let
none therefore despair under his sins, or faint under his outward sufferings,
but in both conditions let him look up unto Christ: it will lighten his burden,
and he shall receive strong consolation.

But observe this, that it is not enough to bear a cross. For every cross does
not lead to life, but only the cross of Christ. There are four sorts of men
that carry the cross. First, Some bear it willingly, as godly men do. Some
unwillingly, as wicked and worldly men, for they also are not without their
cross, but they carry it very unwillingly, like Simon. Others bear the cross,
but it is other men's, not their own, this they utterly refuse and reject, as the
Hypocrites do. There are others who bear the cross indeed, yet they follow not
Christ, but the Devil rather, as all ungodly men do. Look thou therefore to it,
that thou bear thine own cross, and follow Christ also. But hear what follows:
And as they came out, they found a certain man passing by, etc.

Here we see that verified which Paul says, 1 Cor. 10. God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but will with the
temptation make a way of escape, that ye may be able to bear it. In this
respect that Simon here named was sent to meet Christ. Nor shall thou want some
Simon or other to ease and comfort thee, if thou constantly hold out in
persecution and temptation. Therefore do the Evangelists so punctually describe
this man by his name, his country, and his condition, for the greater
confirmation of our Faith: and that we may not doubt, but that we shall find
some to succor us in our distress. His name was Simon, which signifies
attentive, or obedient. None but the attentive and obedient do bear the cross
profitably. By country he was a Cyrenaean, from Cyrene, which was a
Pentapolis, or one of the five Cities. This Simon happily might be a Proselite,
or perhaps some Jews might then dwell there. Moreover his children are here
named, that none may doubt of what was done. The Soldiers laid hold on him,
and compel him to bear the cross, which no man else would so much as touch,
they were all so affrighted with that word of Scripture concerning the curse of
the Tree. Therefore they compel this Simon to bear the cross, not out of any
good will to lighten or ease Christ in the least of his heavy burden: but
either because Christ went so falteringly and feebly, they had not patience to
go so slowly, all delay was tedious, and they thought long before they came to
the place: or else because they would reserve him for greater tortures. Thus
whom the world does cheer up and make merry for a time, those it does torment
afterward with its courser usage. So the Egyptians at first entertained the
Israelites with greatest respect and honor; but into what streights and
troubles did they force them afterward? Read Exodus 1. and 2. And David was
first sent for from the sheepfold to the Kings Court: but afterward was
forced to fly for safety of his life. The friendship and good will of this
world does end in enmity and hatred.

1. But that which is here reported of Simon, The Mystical meaning.
did not fall out without a Mystery. For first, this Simon may be a Type of
all obedient Christians, who with Christ do carry their cross, although their
flesh stand in such reluctance that it must be compelled to that which is for
its welfare. And therefore Origin calls this a wholesome compulsion. For our
flesh will not bear the cross except it be forced and mortified by the Spirit
of God, which compulsion is yet very profitable for it.

2. Whereas Simon did indeed bear the cross, but did not dye upon it, he is a
figure of those, who for a time do carry the cross with Christ, but do not
persevere and hold out to the end.

3. Nor does it want a Mystery, that Christ did first carry the cross; and
afterward Simon. For none of us had been able to bear the cross, if Christ had
not born it first. But what more did yet happen in this progress? And a great
multitude, says he, followed Jesus. It behooved and it was fit that all the
people should be present when the High Priest did offer and complete his
Sacrifice. But they did not all follow him with the same mind and affection.
The High Priests who had so earnestly importuned his death, did follow him,
being glad to see him dye. The women followed him as they that loved him when
he lived, and desired that he might yet live longer; but when he was going to
dye, when he was dying, and when he was dead, they greatly lamented his loss.
But it did not cause the women only to bewail him so, as if they alone and not
very many men too were most sorrowful for his suffering: but because the
female sex, which is least taken notice of in such cases, might be more bold to
express their grief when the Rulers were present. The women then did
religiously lament him, but they bewailed only his humanity. And indeed what
Unbeliever, what Infidel (so he be but a man) would not be troubled to behold
this miserable condition of Christ, whereas godly men can hardly hold from
weeping when they see deserved punishment inflicted upon others? But Jesus
takes no notice of the raging multitude, but (knowing who are his) he turns
himself to the women who did both love and lament him, and forbids them to
weep: Not that it was evil to lament so great suffering, and such wrong that
was done to Jesus, but because it was not comely to bewail and weep for him, as
they use to do for others that are justly punished. Daughters of Jerusalem,
faith he, ye need not weep for me, who am now finishing this my sad progress.
For I do not suffer these things for my own faults; yea this my going away
(though you know it not) shall bring joy and great good to all the world.
Mourning does not sait with Triumph, nor does sorrow become Victory. But if ye
are resolved to lament, do it for your selves and for your children, although
ye go not, or be not with me in this progress. For I would have ye know, that
in this very place I foretell you of such sad, dismal, and dangerous times
which are coming, that all, as well men as women, as well young men as old, both
rich and poor, shall come into such great streights, that they shall wish they
had never been born. Happy (says he) shall that woman be, who has neither
sons nor daughters, for whom she must suffer so great sorrow. Yea so great
shall be the perplexity and distress, that you will wish your selves under
ground, and to be hid in the close caverns of the Mountains and clefts of the
Rocks, where none might see or find you out. For whatsoever shall be seen or
found, shall not escape death, no though it had a thousand heads. O therefore
ye Citizens of this bloody City, consider of what I say, and weep and wail for
those things that shall come upon you. For if they do these things in the green
tree, what shall be done in the dry tree? He calls himself and his Elect the
green Tree: but the dry Tree signifies sinners and wicked. If I, says he, who
have committed no sin, who am justly called the Tree of life, because I bring
forth the fruits of Grace all the twelve months, Rev. 22. If I leave not the
world without passing through the fire of my Passion; what torment do you think
they shall have who are not only barren themselves, but are so bold, and so
bad, as to set on fire, and burn down the very Tree of life it self? If this be
the time that Judgment begin at the house of God, and all they that live godly
in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. What shall be the end of
those that obey not the Gospel of God? 1 Pet. 4. But you will ask, Whereto
tends that terrible Prophecy of Christ? Mat. 24. I answer, It has respect
to the war of the Jews, that is, unto the great misery and desolation, the like
whereof was never read of or seen before, which after forty years did totally
ruin the Jews, even that notable and destructive war of the Romans against the
Jews under the Emperors Vespasian and Titus, which War neither Josephus, nor
Egesippus were able fully to describe. This distress and utter ruin of the
Jews Christ foretold, not only here, but elsewhere, Luke 19. and 21. And if
Titus in his rage smote the Jews with such fear and lamentation, with what
terror shall Christ, who is the Judge of the quick, and of the dead, smite all
Nations when he is angry, who shall judge righteously, as he was unrighteously
judged?

Christ then is that green and fruitful Tree spoken of, Psalm 1. and 52. For
what was better and more fruitful then he? The Jews on the contrary were the
dry and barren Tree, Mat. 3. Luke 13. Men will not suddenly out down young and
flourishing Trees, especially if they be fruitful: but if such be hewn down,
woe to the barren, fruitless, old, dry Trees: And if the Roman soldiers dealt
so cruelly with innocent Christ, it may easily be concluded how miserably the
wicked and sinful Jews were to be destroyed. Thus the Word of Christ is made
good and effectually fulfilled. Whence we learn,

1. To lament and bewail our selves in and over Christ. We should not weep for
Christ, but for our own sins, which were so great, that they caused Christ, who
was, and is the Son of God, to be put to death. And if the Son of God was so
cruelly punished for other men's sins, what should we have endured for our own
sins? The days will come indeed, when sinners shall wish that they had never
been born, etc. Let us therefore lament us of our sins here. The Passion of
Christ does certainly denounce this misery against us before hand, except we
convert and turn to him, and so escape, and be delivered by virtue of his
sufferings.

2. We are here taught, that the present evils of this life, which are but for
a moment, ought not to be any cause of our mourning or heaviness, but that we
should rather weep in consideration of future and eternal misery. These are
they that should be feared and bewailed. Christ did deplore the misery of
others upon the Cross, and put them in mind of the Judgment to come, who did
not only refuse, but persecute the Grace of God which was then offered them,
that thereby they might be terrified from sin. It follows:

And there were also two other Malefactors led with him to be put to death.
Luke 23.32.
And they bring him unto the place which in Hebrew is called Golgatha, that is,
being interpreted, the place of a Skull, Mar. 15.22. John 19.17. And they gave
him Vinegar to drink, mingled with gall, Mat. 27.34. They gave him Wine mingled
with Myrrh, Mar. 15.23. And when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink,
Mat. ibid. And they crucified him, and with him two thieves, one on the right
hand, and another on the left, and Jesus in the midst, Mat. 27.38. John 19.18.
And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, And he was numbered with the
transgressors, Mar. 15.28.

Dearest Brethren, we are almost now come with our Lord Christ unto the very
place where he was willing to die a most bitter death for all sinners, and have
followed hard after him, treading in every step that he trod, yet have we not
gone without grief for our sins, which were the cause of all this suffering to
Christ, inasmuch as it was not he, but we that deserved the death.

The place where Christ suffered is exactly described by the Evangelists, that
all men might not doubt, but give the more credit to the truth of the History.
Now that place in the Hebrew was called Gulgoleth, or in the Chaldee,
Golgoltha, which signifies something that is round, as is the head of a man,
or the Skull, Brain-pan, or Shell of the head. And that place was so nameed,
because there lay the heads of slain men. Nor did the Evangelists blush, nor
are we ashamed to confess, that Christ was crucified in that place, where
Malefactors were wont to be executed, yea, we count it our glory. For Christ
did exceedingly honor this shameful place with his holy death, so that it is
no longer a place of condemned persons, but a true Sanctuary for us; inasmuch
as there he shed his most holy blood for us. To this place do they lead Christ,
accompanied with two thieves, that the Banner of Martyrdom might be displayed
where the Gallows use to stand. As there is no place more filthy than that of
Calvary, so Christ being brought thither, did descend into extreme filthiness,
to purge and cleanse it away. And by this his Descension whereby he threw
himself into the utmost abominations, he ascended unto the highest Glory.
Christ has another ladder than what the world has, by which he climbeth up on
high, even into the heights of Heaven. The world by climbing on high, reaches
after high things; but the higher it climbeth, the lower it falls, and
tumbleth head long into the bottomless Gulf. But Christ presses into the
heights above, by descending into the depths beneath; and the lower he sinks
down, the higher he rises up. For that saying stands firm, Every one that
exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted, Luke 18.14.

When they had brought Christ to the place of his suffering, before they would
crucify him, they gave him drink, but it was a most bitter potion, mingled
with Gall and Vinegar, or Wine mixed with Myrrh; for they had nothing worse, and
more bitter to offer him. O cruel impiety, which tendreth nothing at all of
pity and comfort to the afflicted in his distress. The Lord was toiled and
wearied out all the night before, and had no respit to refresh his spirit,
because of the loathsome and filthy spittle, and furious buffettings all that
while. And now when he was quite spent, and had wasted all his strength, when
he was parcht and dry, when he was come to the place where he was willing to
die, that Wine which the faithful and the godly were wont to give to them that
are sad and heavy hearted, Prove. 31. even to them that were going to execution,
that Wine those notorious knaves had drunk up, and instead of it, they offered
Christ this most bitter potion, to fulfill that of the Psalm 69. They gave me
gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink. Well might
Christ take up that of Jer. 2. and Isa. 5. My choice and noble Vineyard, how
art thou turned into bitterness unto me? Now Christ did taste indeed thereof,
but he would not drink it, and taste it he did, to persuade us that death is
not hurtful but wholesome. For as a Physician does first taste the potion, to
persuade his Patient to take it: so Christ did first taste of death, (a bitter
cup indeed) that we might the more cheerfully pledge him. Thus Paul, We see
Jesus, says he, crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God
should taste death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Here comes in that of the Prophet, O
death, I will be thy death, Hos. 13. Again, Death is swallowed up in victory, 1
Cor. 15.

Here now begins the very crucifying it self, when the most holy, tender and
pure body of Christ was stripped stark naked, stretched out, racked and fastened
to the bare hard tree, to the extreme torture of the Lord Jesus. We must not
pass this over lightly, but insist a little upon it; for now we are come to the
very sum and upshot of the Passion. The Evangelists do very briefly, even in
one word express this matter, viz. And they crucified him. They say but little,
yet leave us much to meditate upon. For,

1. They spoil and plunder him again, before they crucify him. They strip him
of his clothes, who cloatheth the Heaven with stars, and the earth with
flowers; and as the first man lived in Paradise, so the second Adam entered into
Paradise: He suffered himself to be spoiled, that he might recover the Robe of
innocence for us again. He did not refuse to be stripped naked before men, that
we might not be found naked before God. He endured Confusion, that he might
hide the guilt of our conscience. Blessed is he whose sins are covered, Psalm
32.

2. Here we see in him the deepest poverty that ever was; for although (as Paul
says, 2 Cor. 9.) He was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor; he descended
and left the unutterable riches of Heaven, he came down into the world, and
refusing all those riches in the world whatsoever, yet he did not disdain to be
nursed up by his mother, the Virgin Mary, nor refuse the service and attendance
of others. For he had his food and raiment from them; and although the son of
man had not then where to lay his head, yet did he not despise the Manger where
his Mother laid him, nor scorn the entertainment of Martha, and others. But now
this day he lies under the greatest poverty and want that ever man did; his
mother is not permitted to do any thing for him, no not so much as to come near
him: when he was thirsty he had nothing but Gall and Myrrh allowed him for his
meat and drink: All shelter and succor is taken from him, he has not where to
put his head: He is cast out of every Hovel, House, and City: He is crucified
under the open Heaven. All his own clothes are plucked off, and not one lends
him so much as a rag to cover him. And thus he is reduced into extreme straits,
being not only deprived and robbed of his propriety to the creatures; but also
denied any necessary use of them, unless you will reckon this for his riches,
that he was only allowed a most smart and bitter Cross, which Cross John calls
the Cross of Jesus. Never do we read of the like poverty any where, no not in
Lazarus himself when he was most scabby, fore though no man bound up his
wounds, and there was none to wash or anoint him, yet the Dogs licked his
soars, and did more for him than any man would do, Luke 16. Although no man
would give him any clothes, yet his own poor rags were not taken from him.
Therefore,

1. What great misery Christ did endure when his clothes were pulled off him, no
tongue can express. For when they did violently and hastily rap and rend his
clothes off him which were next to his most holy flesh, being all gore,
weltring and sticking fast to those wounds which the whips had made, as being
impatient to delay the Lords death any longer, they could not but renew the
wounds afresh: They tore off his clothes so furiously, that the Sanies or
putrid matter gushed out with the blood with much cruelty, and greater pain
than it was caused by the former whipping. So that if Christ had suffered
nothing before, this only misusage of him had been sufficient to redeem the
world. For we see by experience, that if a little woollen cloth be clapped on a
green wound, it will make it fester, and if it be suddenly snatched off, it puts
the party to far greater pain and torment, and is intolerable in comparison of
the pain when it was first inflicted.

2. It was no small aggravation of the pain, that his most tender body being
again wounded a fresh, and dyed blood red all over, should be exposed naked to
the wind, and cold, with the skin all flayed off.

3. To say nothing of that confusion, which doubtless was most exceeding great,
thus to be stripped bare and naked before all his friends and foes too. Most
truly therefore may he say to every one of us, For thy sake have I suffered
reproach, shame has covered my face, Psalm 69. See here, O man, what thou have
stood thy God in, and what it cost him to save thee! But hearken, and I will
tell thee more yet; listen, and thou shall hear greater things.

When they had thus stripped the Lord naked, they make ready the Cross before his
face, to increase his sorrow; and the floor or place is prepared and fitted
where the true Lamb is to be offered for the whole world. The wicked Officers
then bore holes in the Cross. And then presently in a mad rage they sling up
Christ to the top of the Cross, naked, and nothing upon him, but the crown of
thorns. O Heaven, O Earth, O Sea, never did ye see a more sad spectacle before.
First, They catch his left hand, and with an Hammer and sharp nail of an inch
thick they fasten it to the Cross, so that the nail carried with it the very
palm and flesh of his hand into the hole, that one would think, it rather
soldered with the Iron than nailed. With like cruelty, but more cruel torture,
they serve his right hand. The holes were made too far asunder, so that his
hands could not reach to them when his arms were stretched forth. Besides, The
sinews (as is usual) did so contract and shrink up to assist each other, that
when his right hand was to be put against the hole in the cross, it could not
come to it by much. Therefore they use other Instruments of cruelty, and with
cords fastened thereto, they extend and rack out his arms. Some bind his left
hand again, and hold it with all diligence, that it may not slip: Others
stretch out his right hand till it come to the place where the nail was to be
put in, and then pierce and fasten it. Then they torture and rack his feet with
the same cruelty, drive in the nail, extend, rack, stretch him, till all his
joints and Ham-strings break: so that one might tell all his Nerves, Veins,
Fibers, Strings and Bones, and there was not a wrinkle to be seen in all his
body. Thus David's Prophetical Harp is scrued up and tuned, and that fulfilled
here which he prophesied, They peirced my hands and my feet; I may tell all my
bones, Psalm 22. This immaculate Lamb did not in the least bleat or open his
mouth when he was led to the slaughter to be offered upon the Altar of the
Cross fast bound and fastened thereunto, Isa. 53. Listen then, O Christian, and
observe with all diligence. Christ hitherto suffered many things, but it was
only in the flesh: Now we come to the very extremity, to the marrow and in most
pain, and grief of Christ. Now his Nerves and Bones are tortured, which is a
most vehement pain in the hands and feet, where the sinews and bones are so
near together, that they cannot be disjoined without extreme torture. But this
way must Christ cure our sins, because there was no soundness in man from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, neither outwardly, nor inwardly,
therefore must Christ be exposed to suffer in all parts of his body. He spread
forth his arms, to show that he did voluntarily, and out of the highest love
endure all these things. He let his feet be pierced and fastened, to show that
he would never stand still or give over till he had made full satisfaction for
us. He offered up his whole body for a burnt Offering, to reconcile the Father
unto us, and to teach us to give up every Member unto the obedience of Christ.
How well then might Christ here speak and complain against the Jewish people, O
my people, What have I done unto thee, or wherein have I wearied thee? I smote
Aegppt with its first born for thy sake, and thou in Requital, have delivered
me to be scourged. I fed thee with Manna in the wilderness, and thou have
beaten me with Cuffs and Scourges. I gave thee water of life to drink out of
the Rock, and thou have given me Vinegar and Call to drink. I smote the Kings
of the Cananites for thee, and thou have smitten my head with a Reed. I gave
thee a royal Scepter, and thou have set a Crown of thorns upon my head. I
exaited and lifted thee up in great strength, and thou have hanged me on the
Gibbet of the Cross. What should I have done more, that I have not done for
thee? I planted thee indeed my noblest and choicest Vineyard, and thou art
turned into the greatest bitterness against me, etc.

But let us leave the Jews, and come to do our own business. Consider
therefore, O man, this holy spectacle. Those hands which in Wisdom founded the
Heavens, which were wont to loose the Prisoners, to raise up the fallen, and to
cure all men which their touch, are now stretched out upon the Cross. His feet
with which he walked upon the sea, whose very footstool is to be reverenced,
those feet I say, which never stood in the way of sinners, but ever walked in
the Law of the Lord, are now peirced with picked nails. His purest body, in
which the hid treasures of all Grace are laid up and kept, is stripped quite
naked, and bare, and fastened to the Tree. His face that is fairer than the
sons of men, which did comfort all afflicted and sorrowful Ones, that face
which the Angels desire to behold, is now turned into the paleness of a
frightfull death. Sweetest Babe, what was thy offense, that thou should be
thus judged, and so unmercifully dealt with? What was thy heinous fact? What
was thy Crime? What was the cause of thy sorrow? It Is I, I am the cause of all
thy pain and grief. I did eat the sower grape, and thy teeth were set on edge.
I wretched Creature, wretch that I am, do now laugh, prate, etc. whilst thou
do lament, suffer, thirst, etc. for me. I run after merry meetings, and love
jovial Pastimes, when thou do hang fast upon the Cross for me. I anoint,
powder, and perfume my head, I paint my face, adulterate my skin, when thou
do hang like a Leper, all to besmeared with filthy spittle, gore blood, and
rankled wounds. My hands still work wickedness, as if I could never sin enough,
whilst thy most harmless hands are fastened to the Cross for me. O ingratitude,
worthy of all manner of punishment to be inflicted! Do we return thanks after
this fashion? How ought this crucifying of Christ to terrify us from sin? For
what hope can we have of pardon, if we be not only unthankful here, but do
moreover crucify Christ again with our sins? Now there may be many reasons
given why Christ would be crucified. For,

1. Being thus set between Heaven and Earth, he might show that he was the true
Mediator of God and Man.

2. Because sin was first committed by eating of the fruit of the Tree,
therefore would he expiate sin upon the Tree.

3. Because the Devil overcame man by the Tree, therefore would Christ conquer
him upon the Tree.

4. Christ would be crucified after this manner, that by the very posture and
form of his crucified body, we might learn what we are to expect from him. He
stretched out his hands, to show that the way to his Heart and tender Love was
open to us. He let his feet be fastened, to show that he would not go back till
we were fully Redeemed. He stretched out his right hand, because he came to
bestow good things upon us: and his left hand, that he might take away all evil
from us. He let his right foot be nailed, because he came to confirm and
establish the good: and his left, because he would suppress all evil thoughts.

5. He would be crucified, to show the fruit of his sufferings by the very
fashion of the cross. For as the cross has four corners, so there are four
principal effects and fruits of the Lords Passion. The upper end which points
toward Heaven, signifies that the Angelical Ruin was repaired by the Passion
of Christ, and that Heaven was open for us. The lower end signifies that
thereby the Fathers were redeemed out of Limbo, Let not this expression offend
thee: but attend the weightier things.
or from the borders of hell. The right corner shows, that the dispersed
children of God were by it gathered together in the world. The left horn shows
that by the cross even his enemies were reconciled.

6. Christ would be crucified, thereby to show of what fashion the Christian
life is to be. For as the cross has those four Dimensions: to wit, Length,
Breadth, Height and Depth; Thereby are signified the four principal Virtues, in
which the Life of Christianity does consist. By the Depth is signified Faith,
which is laid first in the bottom of the heart as a Foundation in Gods building
by the secret and hidden Call of the Divine Will. Perseverance is intimated by
the Length: by the Height is Hope signified, and by the Breadth, Charity. For
of these may that of the Apostle be understood, Ephesians. 3. That ye may be able
to comprehend what is the length, breadth, height and depth, etc.

7. He would be crucified, to teach us that our whole body should be put forth
to the utmost in the service of God, and that we should crucify the flesh, as
Paul says, I am crucified with Christ, Gal. 2. Again, I bear in my body, the
marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. To offer up a man's self is the most acceptable
service unto God, Romans 12.

Thus much for the fastening of Christ to the cross, which when they had so
done, they rear up the cross with great shoutings, with most bitter railings
and revilings. There was a hole cut out of the Rock to fasten the foot of the
cross in. Into which place they do not let the cross slide gently in, but they
jolt it in with great violence on a sudden, that they might add one more, and
that the greatest torture too to all his other sufferings, to shake his very
entrails, and to widen the wounds of his hands and feet again with so great and
sudden a jogg, which were filled before with the bluntness of the Nails,
causing those full and fertile Rivolets of his blood to gush out and overflow
again. Thus that Spring of Paradise, the Fountain of Christ's blood brake out
from that pleasant Garden, the place of pleasure, even the body of the Lord,
dividing it self into four parts: to wit, into the clefts and holes of his
hands and feet, Genesis 2. By its plentiful and most abundant flowing, it watered
the whole earth, washing away the sins of all Believers. Here then was
fulfilled that of Christ: And I, says he, when I am lifted from the earth,
will draw all unto me, John 12. Again, As Moses lifted the Serpent in the
Wilderness, so must the son of Man be lifted up, John 3. that whosoever
believed in him might not perish, but have everlasting life. Here that figure
of the Brazen Serpent was fulfilled, Numb. 21. Here was Christ standing before
God as the true Mediator between God and man; as the High Priest offering
himself for us, and taking up that saying in Psalm 40. Sacrifice and offering
for sin thou would not: then said I, Lo I come, in the Volume of the book it
is written of me, that I should do thy will: as if he had said, inasmuch as no
other Sacrifices have hitherto been able to Reconcile thee unto man: Behold, I
thine only begotten Son do offer up my self unto thee for man. And we,
Brethren, let us stand close to our High Priest with great devotion whilst he
offers himself for us; Let us lift up the eyes of our mind, and look upon his
Sacrifice, and from the bottom of our heart let us say, Holy Father, look down
(we beseech thee) from thy Sanctuary and holy Place, and from the height of thy
heavenly Habitation; Behold this sacred Sacrifice and Oblation, which our great
High Priest thy Holy child Jesus offers unto thee for the sins of his
Brethren, and be thou appeased for the multitude of our wickedness which we
have committed. Behold the blood of our brother cries to thee from the cross,
Genesis 4. Behold the spotless Lamb which was dumb before the shearers. Behold he
that did no sin, he has born and taken away our sins. Behold Lord the face of
thine Anointed, thy Christ, who was obedient to thee, even to the death: and
never do thou turn thine eyes away from beholding the marks of his wounds, that
thou may never forget what great and full satisfaction thou have received
from him for our sins. Look O most merciful Father upon him that does suffer,
and remember gracious Father for whom he suffers. Most meek Maker, look upon
the Humanity of thy beloved Offspring, and take pity on the frailty of thy
feeble workmanship. Have respect to the torn members of thy most tender and
acceptable Progeny; and remember whereof I am made, and what my substance is.
Look upon the penance, and take notice of the sufferings of God and Man, and
relieve the misery of thy poor creature man. Consider the Torment of the
Redeemer, and forgive the sin of the Redeemed. And thou also, O thou wretched
sinner, see the Sacrifice with which thou wast Redeemed: the blood wherewith
thou art washed; the punishment by which thy sins were satisfied for, the bonds
by which thou art set at liberty. See those hands which dissolved the wicked
works which thy hands had wrought. See the feet which carried away, what thy
feet left behind and offended in by neglect, sloth, or overmuch haste and
swiftness. Look upon and into Christ crucified in this fashion: for never was
he any where seen more lovely. His hands are open to give unto thee, his feet
are fast to tarry with thee, his arms spread abroad to receive and embrace
thee, his head bowed down to kiss thee. Take thou heed therefore left that be
cast in thy teeth: I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious,
etc. Isa 65. Romans 10. Again, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded,
Prove. 1. See O man, (says Christ crying from the cross) what I do endure for
thee? I that do dye for thee, I call and cry unto thee to see what punishment I
suffer; Behold, do but see with what Nails I am pierced, etc.

But the Jews were not content to put Christ to a most shameful death, in a
most ignominious place, but to aggravate his reproach they must crucify two
Thieves with him, not as if they were enemies to the Thieves, for they were
partakers of their wickedness. For when Pilate said, Whom will ye that I
release? the Thieves cried out and asked for a Thief. Now,

1. They crucified Thieves with the Lord, to stain and blemish his Passion,
that so he might be taken for an offender, at least from the wicked companions
with which he suffered.

2. That their crime might seem all one, who suffered all alike, and that the
report might be blazed abroad, that there were three Thieves crucified at
Jerusalem in one day. This is that which those wicked Jews would have. And the
more to defame Christ, they so set the crosses, that Jesus was placed in the
middle, hedged on either hand with Thieves, that all men might take him for the
Ringleader of Thieves, the very Captain of Cutters and Highway-men. True, the
Law does not only allow, but command that Thieves should be put to death, Genesis
9. Numb. 35.31. Well, but what has the Fountain of life done worthy of death?
what good has he omitted that he ought to have done? O Jerusalem, and thou
Judaea, is this all he shall have from you, who has done all good to you? Isa.
5. Is this all the thanks he shall have at thy hands, who ever since Abraham's
time has so wonderfully guided, saved, exalted and honored thee above all the
people in the world? Who did ever bid thee crucify thine own Messiah, King,
Bishop, Doctor or Teacher, Shepherd, Father? Woe be to thee Jerusalem for this
thy murder, for this thy malice. But thus thou must (though unwittingly)
fulfill that Prophecy: And he was numbered with the wicked, Isa. 53. Christ
must thus be humbled, that we might be reckoned among the just. But all the
drift of these wicked Jews was to disgrace Christ utterly: although it fell out
far otherwise. For the Fountain of all purity cannot be defiled with humane
impurities: for even the villainous and filthy acts of men serve to set off and
illustrate the clearness of the Spring of Glory. The Cross which formerly was a
reproach, is now made a Badge of Triumph by him, the head to which the world
boweth, which the Angels worship, and at which the Devils tremble. Christ when
he was condemned among Thieves, found one whom of a Thief he could make a
Citizen of Paradise; so far was he from being polluted by suffering with
Malefactors. But,

1. Christ would suffer among Thieves, and not among his Disciples, lest his
death alone should be thought not to be sufficient for our salvation, unless
his Disciples had dyed with him.

2. He was crucified with Thieves, because he dyed for thieves. A thief is one
that steals that which belongs to God. All we are thieves: therefore is
Christ crucified in the midst of us. And we also are crucified; for there is
none without his cross. But as here, one of the thieves is damned, so all are
not saved that bear the cross. Look to it therefore that thy cross become thy
crown: which it will not be, except thou believe in Christ. The two thieves
then, whereof the one was saved, and the other damned, do signify, First
either men or devils; Secondly, either Gentiles or Jews: Thirdly, either good
or bad men, both which bear their cross, but in a different manner.

Finally, Let us here learn to be raised from the earth, and with Christ to be
crucified in the midst of thieves. For as then there were three crucified, two
thieves, and Jesus in the middle: so there are in us three things morally to be
crucified in us, to wit, the flesh and the world, signified by the two thieves,
and the Spirit, which is signified by Jesus. The flesh is to be crucified as
the right hand thief: For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. We must crucify the world as the
left hand thief: The world, says Paul, is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world, Gal. 6.14. When those thieves are crucified in us, then is our spirit
crucified with Christ in the midst, so that we may say with the Apostle, I am
crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,
Gal. 2.20. As therefore the thief on the left hand was crucified indeed, but
not saved, for he continued in his unbelief: so the world, although it be
crucified to me, does still remain in its filthiness. But when the flesh is
crucified, it is saved with the spirit, for it shall be glorified in its
Resurrection from the dead. Therefore it is compared to the right hand thief,
to whom it was said, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.

Now the cross of the flesh is the severity of Discipline, which has four
branches; Watchfulness, Abstinence, course clothes, or meanness of apparel, and
well-ordered words, or savoury Discourse. The cross by which the world is
crucified, is poverty of spirit: which also has four parts: that is, contempt
of glory, gain, country, and of Parentage. The cross of the Spirit is fervency
of Devotion: which has four Arms, Love, Hope, Fear and Grief. Hope above, Fear
beneath, Love on the right hand, Grief on the left. Mat. 27.37. and Mar. 15.26.
and Luke 23.38. and John 19.19.


And Pilate wrote a Title, and put it on the cross, or the superscription of
his Accusation, and they put it on the Cross at the head of Jesus. And the
writing was: Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. This Title then read many of
the Jews, for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the City. And it
was written in Letters of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Then said the chief
Priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not the King of the Jews, but that he
said, I am King of the Jews. Pilate answered, what I have written, I have
written.

The Cross was now raised, and lifted on high, it stood strait upright: Christ
hung on it, many wept to see it, wickedness and injustice abound, and yet
Pilate would fain carry the business without suspicion of injustice or wrong.
And therefore being a subtle and crafty man in the worldly Wisdom; he invents
some new device, and writes a Title or scroul, wherein he signifies in four
words the whole Tragedy, with the crime annexed for which he was thus judged
and Executed. For now his conscience began to twinge him for what he had done,
he was afraid that he should be complained upon to Caesar for delivering such
and so great a man, with whom God appeared to be, to the covetous, greedy, and
malicious desire of the Jews, without showing any cause or reason of so doing.
And therefore that he might clear himself, that what he had done besides the
course and order of Law, he did it justly and upon weighty reasons, he feigneth
this, because he could not think upon or invent a more heinous Title for his
excuse and defense, relying upon it to be saved harmless with Caesar, as if he
had not put Christ to death, as he was the Son of God, or a Prophet of the
Jews, but as a seditious person, and an enemy to Caesar, and as one that had a
mind and intended to be King. This he thought would secure him, inasmuch as no
power can bear a Competitor. This was Pilates intention when he wrote this
Title, For he was banished and killed himself.
but what stead it stood him in he very well knew, and had sufficient
experience shortly after. But God or the holy Spirit of God intended something
else: that is, to give unto Christ a Name above every name, as the Apostle
says, Phil. 2. and the Title of a Kingdom, which shall last when Heaven and
earth are past away; because Jesus of Nazareth, that is, the Savior and the
truly Holy One, is made King of the Jews by his suffering upon the Cross: not
of those who say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan,
Rev. 2. But of those who confess and acknowledge God in Truth.

In these four words, JESUS of NAZARETH, KING of the JEWS, the whole effect of
the cross is expressed. First, he is called Jesus, 1.
because having made satisfaction and paid the price of our Redemption, he is
become the Author of our salvation. Secondly, he is Jesus of Nazareth, 2.
that is, flourishing or full of Flowers, because the Blossoms of his Godliness
are the Example and Pattern of an honest conversation unto us. He is also the
Heavenly Odor of that sweet Sacrifice which the Father did smell and accept
for us. He is the Hope of Eternal fruit, by which we shall enjoy the sweetness
of his Godhead. Thirdly, he is called a King, 3.
because of his Government and Guidance. For he does Rule us in the Life of
Grace, and direct us to life of Glory. Christ is King in Life and Death, which
cannot be said of any other. Fourthly, 4
he is King of the Jews, to inform us to whom these Benefits do belong: to wit,
to those that do confess and believe them. Behold, such great Mysteries as
these has God opened unto us by so vile an Instrument as Pilate was: which
very thing does set forth the wonderful Counsel of God. For he can tell how to
turn the counsels of wicked men to his own praise and glory.

This Triumphant Title does not a little confirm and comfort us that are
Christians, who glory in the cross of Christ, and count it our highest honor;
which Title was not set at the feet, but at the head of Christ, to show that
his Kingdom is not base and earthy, but high and Heavenly. For it is, and ever
will be most true, that this Jesus which was born in Bethlem, and brought up at
Nazareth, is King of the Jews, their own Prophets being witnesses, Psalm 2. and
45. Cant. 1. Hos. 3. Zach. 9. And because they cast off their King, we Gentiles
do joyfully receive him ( Act. 14.) as King of all, that do acknowledge and
confess him. Pilate hit the Nail on the head, when he wrote this Title, and
reached the very Truth it self, whatever his meaning and intention was. And
this he would have all people to read and understand: and therefore he wrote it
in the three principal and most general Languages, which were then, and still
are the chiefest Languages over all the world, to excuse himself in all
Countries and Nations of the death of so eminent a man.

He wrote it in the Hebrew Tongue, because of the Jews who made their boast of
the Law. In the Greek, because of the wise Philosophers of the Gentiles. And in
the Latin, for the Romans to read it. Every Kingdom in the World, all the
wisdom of the World, all the Mysteries of Gods Law do witness, in spite of the
Jews, whether they will or no, that this Jesus is King of the Jews: that is, he
is the chief Ruler and guide of all that confess and believe in God.

All these things came to pass, not so much by Pilates contrivance as by Gods
Providence. 1.
For first, God did hereby provide for all mankind, that all men might know that
this was he whom God had anointed King over all Nations, as it is said, Dan. 7.
All people, Nations and Languages shall serve him. So says Paul, At the Name
of Jesus every knee shall bow, Phil. 2. 2.
Secondly, that all Nations might know and understand how treacherous and
perfideous the Jews were, who crucified their own Messiah. 3.
Thirdly, that even thus it might be known, that Christ dyed for all men;
whether they be Jews, Greeks, or Romans. 4.
Fourthly, to show that the Gospel and the Grace of Christ do equally and alike
belong to all men, to one as well as another. 5.
And lastly, that all Languages and every Tongue should glorify Christ, which
was then fulfilled, and is so now. For in these three Tongues the Church
always has had, read, and sung the Scriptures. For every Tongue must confess
that Jesus is the Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.

But this Title the chief Priests of the Jews did begrudge Christ, and could
yet wish that it were changed or abolished: but God forbid that Pilate should
alter the least jot or title of what was written. He had leave enough given him
already against Christ. This Title must never be blotted out. The Jews were
ashamed that Strangers and Forraigners should read and understand this Title.
They were afraid lest one time or other it should be cast in their teeth, that
they had crucified Christ their own proper and lawful King: and therefore they
desire that the title should be altered. Thus wickedness is loath to be seen
when it does wickedly, but would fain palliate and cloak its naughtiness. But
Pilate had not respect to their infamy and disgrace, but to his own safety,
when he set up that Title: and therefore would not change it. But if he did
write that Title contrary to their intention, yet nevertheless our Jesus Christ
of Nazareth would have been King not only of the Jews, but of all other people
besides. For he had not his Kingly Name from Pilates inscription, but from the
will and calling of the Father, who anointed him thereunto. But as those things
which Christ had spoken concerning his Kingdom did still continue so spoken: so
what Pilate had written, remained still written. And truly, Pilate among so
many errors of fickleness and cowardice, yet in this one thing he did well,
not to alter the Title. For there could be no truer title written on the cross
of Christ then this. It concerns us to make good use of that title. It Is not
enough to write it on our walls, unless we write it also in our hearts.
Wherefore if any misery or misfortune trouble thee, remember that Jesus is thy
King and thine Avenger, and thou shall not want relief or comfort. If thou art
a sinner, consider that Jesus is he who saved his people from their sins, and
thou will be encouraged against thy sins, etc. It follows in the Text.

Then the Soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, John 19.23.
took his Garments, and made four parts, to every Soldier a part, and also his
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top thorowout. They said
therefore among themselves, Let us not rent it, but cast Lots for it, whose it
shall be, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my
Raiment among them, and for my Vesture they did cast Lots. And sitting down,
they watched him there, Mat. 27.36. These things therefore the Soldiers did.

When our most holy Lord was suffering on the cross, the Soldiers (just as
hangmen use to do) hale and pull his clothes off him: and because they had
power given them to put him to death when he was condemned, they had leave also
to take his clothes when he was dead: although it may be supposed that Christ's
clothes could do those Soldiers but little good, so that they divided them
rather out of a custom to satisfy their lusts, then for any advantage they
made of them.

Thus our Lord Jesus was so proscribed, and all that he had, openly set to sale
as an offender and guilty person, that he could not so much as dispose of his
own clothes to his dearest friends, who would carefully have laid them up, and
kept them charily as a great Treasure. But when his body was brim full of
reproaches, revilings, and abuses, he was content that the hangmen should have
his clothes for their pains. All which was done,

1. That the Scriptures might be fulfilled, Psa^ 22. For David plainly foretold
this, that it should so be: Not only the more remarkable things of Christ, but
also the smallest Circumstances were foretold of him in the Scriptures, that by
all alike we might be led into the very truth it self, and be kept from error
by one, as well as by another. And truly it is a great Testimony to our faith,
that the Prophesies of all the Prophets were so clearly and plainly fulfilled
in our Nazarite. The Jews are never able to find out any other man in all the
world, in whom the whole Scripture does so meet and agree.

2. This division of Christ's clothes was to signify and set forth a Mystery,
and to show how it would be in time to come For,

1. The Garments of Christ do signify the holy Scriptures, which heady and
rash Heretics rent and tear into diverse and various senses. For wicked men
will take nothing out of the Scripture, but what will serve their turn best,
and are content to hold the Truth of God by parts and parcels, and so the Devil
will own and keep to Scripture, Mat. 4.
if he may be allowed to pick and choose as he lift. And whereas the Lord had
more than one Garment, it signifies the many volumes of the Scriptures with
which the Word of God is clad. The seamless coat does fitly set forth one
entire, inviolable Catholic Faith, which those heretical soldiers could not
rent, cut and abolish, yet they would cast lots for it. Heretics do not deny
Faith and the Gospel, but they do so play with the Scripture, and darken it
with such obscure words, dead and dallying glosses, that one can hardly find
and know Christ by it. Or more properly thus:

The four parts of Christ's clothes signify the Church, which is parted into
four parts, extending to the four parts of the world, and yet is, and ever will
be but one. The seamless coat which was not divided, signifies the unity of
all the parts, which is bound about with the girdle of Charity. If this Unity
be once dissolved, the rent is still made wider, and the Schism waxes greater,
as Augustine says. But lots are cast for this coat, for all men have not
faith. All run indeed, but one receives the prize, 1 Cor. 9. Heretics
endeavor to rend this Unity, and thereby cut themselves off from the Church,
but yet the Unity of faith still has, and ever will be the same.

2. The Garment of Christ is his humanity, which is distributed and preached
over the four parts of the world, and is, and has been so published and
divulged, that wicked men are not able to conceal or hide it any longer.

3. Christ's clothes are temporal goods, and these also he does freely bestow
upon wicked men, yea, he does suffer them to snatch them off, and scrape, and
rake them to themselves. But spiritual things he does bequeath and give to the
godly, and with them he does bestow himself also upon them.

4. The Saints and good men are the Garments of Christ, who cleave and keep
close to Christ, as it is prophesied of them: As the girdle cleaves to the
loins of a man; So have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel,
Jer. 13.11. By the parting of Christ's raiment, the nature and property of the
world is signified, and how it does deal with the godly in this life. For good
men seem to lie open wholly to the will and pleasure of evil men in this world:
but for all that Christ's coat is rent, that is, although the godly are derided
and tossed up and down in the world, yet they are not destroyed, nor totally
rooted out. The Evangelist does emphatically add this in the case, These things
therefore the soldiers did: with which word he shuts up and concludes all
that they did. The Soldiers says he, did these things; and what more they
should do, they could not well tell. They had crucified his body, and taken the
prey; but the Power of God, the Word of God they could not destroy. And whom
may those soldiers, who did crucify Christ, and yet strove might and main who
should wear his clothes, whom, I say, do they more properly signify than those
wicked and ungodly high Priests, who were more truly soldiers, than high
Priests? For they neglected to search, interpret, expound, and open the
Scriptures, they slighted prayer and works of piety, they cast off the cure
and care of souls, they give themselves to nothing but to raise and foment war
to maintain their great vast estates and large possessions, and most
superfluous wealth, they shed blood, and make nothing to mingle all things, and
stain them with war and slaughter. They divide Churches and Benefices among
themselves, which ought to be for the maintenance of those that preach the
Word, and they have not every man one, but some two, three, yea, ten Benifices
apeice. Now they cast lots, that is, they chop and change, fell, give to their
Kindred, and infinite other monstrous things they do, to the subversion of
Laws, Justice, Gospel, and all honesty. Christ looks on all the while, and
says nothing, but he will not always hold his peace. These things, says he,
have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtst that I was altogether such a
one as thy self, but thou art much mistaken, I will reprove thee, and set them
in order before thine eyes, Psalm 50. Let every man therefore look to it, how
he does dispose the goods of the Church, the clothes of Christ, etc. It follows:

Luke 23.35. Mar. 15.29. Mat. 27.40.
And the people stood beholding. And they that passed by, reviled on him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Ah thou that destroyest the Temple of God, and
buildest it in three days, save thy self. If thou be the Son of God, come down
from the Cross. Likewise also the chief Priests, mocking him among themselves,
with the Scribes and Elders of the people, said, He saved others, himself he
cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross;
if he be the Christ, the chosen of God, let him save himself, that we may see,
and believe him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have
him. For he said, I am the Son of God.

Hitherto you have had Charity and Patience to hear what punishment and pain
the innocent and most meek Lamb has suffered. Now you hear that after and
above all that was foretold, he is here set upon and assaulted in his
sufferings with revilings, reproaches, mockings, evil speakings, etc. for when
they could no longer buffet and spit upon him, they invade and vex him with
their taunting tongues. The world will omit nothing that may add affliction to
the Elect of God; for they are not of the world, therefore does the world hate
them. Christ had many taunts, jeers and scoffs cast on him in Caiaphas's house;
and yet there is no end of them. Here first whilst he hangs on the Cross, they
raise and invent a new, and that so devilish a scorn of him that a greater and
more bitter one could hardly be imagined. First, Therefore observe here who it
was that did this. Secondly, How and wherefore they did it.

1. First, I say they were the chief Priests that did this. 2. The Scribes. 3.
The Elders. 4. The Soldiers. 5. The Thieves. 6. All the people that went by
the Cross. And what Inhabitant was there in Jerusalem that did not do it, the
Elect only and Believers excepted? Is it not a great, fearful and unspeakable
misery, that so many men both of high and low degree, should so bitterly, so
inhumanely, so venomously, so odiously mock him, who never did or said any
thing in the least that was ridiculous, or to be laughed at; but did rather
both do and say all things most praise worthy; and deserving the highest
commendations? But thus, and no otherwise does the Power of darkness do.

2. See now why and wherefore they do thus inhumanely deride Christ in his
greatest extremity: for this mocking does comprehend all those things of which
he was accused at first, both before Caiaphas, and before Pilate, and Herod.
And they were four, viz.

1. He is mocked and reviled for that which they had objected against him
concerning the destruction and building again of the Temple; which although in
Truth he did never say as they alleged, yet he must hear it, for they tell him
of it without any pity, and now too, in his greatest distress, when he was at
the point of death. But however, O ye mad Jews, as ye have most hatefully
upbraided him, so it must, and was to be done, and now it is accomplished, and
was so long since. In three days the Temple of his body was reared up again,
which ye destroyed, and not he. What pardon then can you expect, or what
admission can ye look for, when ye shall see the Temple of God built again
within three days in the resurrection of the body?

2. He is flouted at for being the Son of God; as if therefore he had not been
the Son of God, because he was crucified. But that he is so, was sufficiently
proved both in himself, and by many thousand men, whom he cured either in body,
or soul, or both.

3. They laugh at him about his being a King, and concerning the Kingdom of
Israel. But do what ye can, this is he that was, and is King of Israel, nor
have all your scoffs and taunts detracted or abated one jot of his royal
Majesty and Dignity. Yet God forbid that he should have come down from the
Cross to show that he was able to make it good. This is that which the devil
did long for, and would have been glad to see, and that which Christ could
easily have done if he would; but he would gratify neither you, nor that
wicked and subtle serpent; for by his descending from the Cross, the whole
salvation and redemption of man had been hindered. But if thou would, O Jew,
be assured by some token only, that he is the King of Israel indeed, consider
either his former Miracles with the agreement of the Scriptures and times, or
else look for him on the day of his Resurrection, then thou shall see something
more, thou shall then see him spring and mount out of the grave like a
Conqueror; which certainly is much more than if he had now come down from the
Cross.

4. They jeer at him for saying, that he was Christ and the true Messiah; which
is most true that he was, still is, and ever will be. And that which he did
many ways prove to be true both in your own Country, and in all the world
besides, so that never any did, or ever shall do the like. From this Christ it
is that we are called Christians, nor are we ashamed of the name. And whereas
ye say that he healed and saved others, you do thereby plainly confess that he
is the Savior. So that out of your own mouth are ye condemned.

All these things did those wicked men do, that they might not only stain and
blemish, but wholly pluck up by the roots, and extirpate out of the hearts of
all men all the good Report, Doctrine, Authority, Reputation and Miracles of
Christ, and on the contrary, deeply imprint, and inwardly fasten this weakness
of Christ in the rude people, that the memory of him might be totally blotted
out, as if they had said, Good people ye all now see, that he was a plain
Deceiver, for he cannot so much as save himself: How much less can he do any
thing for you? Now therefore be no longer seduced, but believe us, and not him.
You see that he does now hang on the Tree, which could never be, if he were not
accursed of God: For cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree. And therefore
he cannot trust in God, nor will God deliver him. Thus they thought that they
had casheir'd and canceled all his Miracles, and made them of none effect, so
that none would dare hereafter so much as lightly remember or make mention of
them. This they did most earnestly desire to do, and to accomplish it, they
rage so inhumanely against him. This kind of derision is spoken of in many
Psalms: Many, says he, there be that say of my soul, there is no help for him
in his God, Psalm 3.2. Again, They did tear me, and ceased not. With
hypocritical Mockers at feasts they gnashed upon me with their teeth. They
said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it, Psalm 35. It is as we would have it, it
likes us well, we are pleased, it is done as we desired. So in Job, They that
are younger then I, have me in derision, Job 30.1.

But Oye Jews, you work in the fire, you wash a Blackmoor, you do but labor in
vain, in going about to suppress and extinguish the Renown and Glory of Christ.
For by how much the more ye curtail and lessen the Authority of Christ, so much
the greater will it grow. You mocked him before Caiaphas, Pilate, Herod, and
now ye do the like as ye pass by, stand, and sit under the Cross, and what, O
ye malicious men, have ye omitted, and not done that might any ways tend to
darken and eclipse his honor? for ye apprehended him as a Thief, ye manicled
him as one condemned of some notorious villainy; ye spit on him, and at him, as
if he had been a poisonous Toad; ye desired the Judge to put him to death
without any more ado, as one that was not fit to have so much as an accusation
brought against him; besides ye preferred the egregious Thief Barabbas before
him; ye made him carry his own Cross; ye hanged him naked in the midst of
Thieves, in a filthy, loathsome base place, at a most solemn, sacred and
festival time, in the view of a huge multitude of people: ye envyed him any
Title or Badge of Honor, and now ye bespatter him with all the base Reproaches
and bitter revilings that ye can possibly devise and imagine. But your
wickedness is confounded, your design is blasted, you have not prevailed. He is
saved from his enemies, and from the hands of all that hated him. By how much
the more you slighted and despised him, so much the more did the Father
glorify him. For the Cup which you denied him, he has obtained the Heritage
of all the heathen, of all Nations and people: and when ye lifted him up from
the earth, he drew all things unto him, Joh. 12. For the honor which ye
thought to darken and extinguish, he now sits at the right hand of the
Father; all Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to him; he is made Judge both
of quick and dead.

Note that there are five sorts of men here pointed out, who then did, and now
still do mock and deride Christ.

1. The first are, They that passed by, they that go by, pass over, or tread
besides the Law and Commandments of God, that walk in the way and counsel of
the ungodly. The light is odious and offensive to the sick and sore eyes, and
he that is troubled with an Ague cannot relish or taste the sweetness of most
delicate dainties.

2. The Princes and Rulers, who esteemed Christ no better then the vilest thing
in the world, they cannot endure to hear him, they have tender ears, soon
offended, quickly wounded, yea they are wounded and hurt with a touch; they
were always bred and brought up among fawning fellows, they use to be shaved
with the smooth tongued Razors of flatterers, and to be bolstred and propt up
with the soft pillows of Parasites, such as these they love, cherish, hug,
embrace and bestow the highest preferment that may be upon them. But if a
righteous man come among them, and admonish them exhort to Repentance, and
preach the Truth freely; he is loathed, hissed at, beaten, whipped, imprisoned,
etc. Nature is indeed a state or condition that has a love to Truth written in
the breasts of all men: all men by Nature are convinced that Truth is a lovely
thing, but this state of nature, and the desire of hearing the truth is too
much depraved, diverted and corrupted in most men. They commend and speak well
of the Truth, they feign and profess that they have a perfect love to the
Preachers of it, but yet they cannot, they will not, they love not to hear the
Truth. Like Herod, they love to hear John preach, but at the request of a
dancing Damsel, they will chop off his head, Mar. 6. They like the sound of a
tinkling Cymbal, but their head is so weak, they cannot sit to hear it out.
Such were the Rulers of the Jews. But woe be to thee O Land, whose Princes are
those boys that scoffed (not without punishment) at the bald head of Elisha, 2
Kin. 2.

3. The Priests and Pharisees, who although they seemed to reverence
Righteousness, (for they pray publicly, Tithe Mynt and Cummin, etc.) yet none
sin more licenciously, nor dare any reprove their evil manners. Do not they
mock Christ, who practice not what they preach, and lay heavy burdens upon
others not to be born, But themselves will not touch them with one of their
fingers? Mar. 23. Are not they scoffers at the Divine Majesty, who come from
the stews and halfpenny harlots, and yet press with unwashed hands (that is,
without repentance for their sins) unto the service and Table of the Lord?
Obscene and filthy fellows dare presume to come to the Altar, and stand before
the Virgin-like and pure Jesus, with crisped and frizled locks before the
crucified one, sinners before the severest Judge, who not long after, even
presently return again to their whoredoms and adulteries. Are not these
mockers, yea Traitors of Christ?

4. The fourth sort of scoffers at Christ, are the thieves. These are covetous
men, who by hook and crook scrape up and heap to themselves the goods of the
poor, by usury, theft, fraud, etc. carking and caring both in getting and
keeping their wealth: these deride and laugh at good men, counting their life
madness, and their end to be without honor, Wisd. 2. They neither dispose nor
distribute what is their own as they ought to do: nor do they restore what they
have unjustly and wrongfully gotten, till at last they are ch^ked with the
thorns of their Riches.

5. The Soldiers are a fifth sort of Mockers, such as shed man's blood, who are
given to sport and pleasures, wrathful and voluptuous, frolic and (...) in
the clothes of Christ: to wit, temporal prosperity but yet crucify him; that
is, they lose their eternal salvation, persecute good men, and warm themselves
with the spoils of the godly. But while they riot it out in sport and pastime,
and spend their days in wealth, in a moment they go down to the grave, Job
21.13. The whole world is full of this kind of men, who mock and deride Christ.
We must not therefore lay all the blame upon the Jews only.

Here also we may observe, that in this mocking of Christ there are five kinds
of temptations hinted out to us, which usually set upon the godly, especially
at their death.

1. As Christ was fastened to the cross, and hung naked upon it in the sight of
all men, so the first temptation when we are a dying is, that the shame of all
our life will be seen and made manifest to all the creatures.

2. As Christ was not ^ed by one or two, or many only, but by all, both great
and small, high and low; so the second temptation of a dying man is, that all
the creatures will laugh at the whole Scene and story of our Life.

3. As they nodded their heads at Christ, and endeavored to over throw all
that he had spoken: so the third temptation of the godly is, when they are
terrified with the most powerful sayings of the Holy Scripture, such as these:
We must give an account of every idle word, Mat. 12. And, God hears not
sinners, etc. Joh. 9.

4. As it was said to Christ, Let God deliver him, if he will have him: so the
fourth temptation of the godly is, when they are tempted to question the will
and pleasure of their good God. For there is a great Emphasis in the word HIM:
Let him deliver Him, say they, if he will have him. Who doubts but that God
does know how, and is able and willing to save? For God is a God of salvation,
Psalm 68.20. But whether or no he would save Him, this is that which the Devil
would make doubtful, especially if a man live among wicked men, as Christ died
among thieves. It is a great temptation, when the Devil shall make a man that
professes the Gospel to doubt, that although he believes that Christ is Our
Righteousness, yet to question whether he will be His Righteousness.

5. Lastly. As it was said to Christ, If thou be the Son of God, save thy self,
etc. So the greatest temptation of dying men is, Predestination. Wherefore that
we may overcome these temptations, we must be dumb and deaf to all, after the
Example of Christ, who replied not a word to these railings and reproaches.
Thus those three children, Dan. 3. said, We are not careful to answer thee in
this matter, when that wicked King said, Who is that God that shall deliver you
out of my hands? God is able, say they, to deliver us. Thus men ought to commit
all the business to God, and cast all their care on him, whether they be
predestined, or not. Do not pry into the Majesty of God, lest thou be crushed
with his Glory. Hence says Isaiah, In quietness and in confidence shall be
your strength, Isa. 30.15. And Jeremy, It is good that a man should both hope,
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3.26. Therefore turn the
deaf ear to all these Temptations, especially to that Temptation of
Predestination. Give glory to God, glorify Him, and he will glorify thee: and
be not overthoughtfull of Predestination.

Now follow the Seven last Words of Christ.
Here begins the fourth Part of the Passion of our Lord.
HItherto it has been showed what Christ suffered. Let us now bear the close
of all, and how he finished his Passion. And here let us give all attention.
For as godly Parents, when they are at the point of death, do at that last hour
especially inculcate, and press upon their children those things which are most
necessary and profitable for them, that they may take the deeper impression,
and stick the faster in their minds. For the last words are thought to come
next from the heart, and fit closest to the mind: So our most loving Christ,
call him either Father or Brother, when he lay upon his hard deathbed of the
Cross, and was ready to yield up the ghost. He does first set his house in
order, make his Will, ordain Laws for his Family, discharge all Debts, appoint
his Coheirs, distribute and dispose of all his Treasure, And therefore they
that fear to be dis-inherited, let them presently learn and understand what the
commands of their dying Savior are, lest they never know them; let them not
despise him, lest he reject and pass them by, Prove. 1. But let them hear and
obey him faithfully, quickly submit to him out of hand, and not forget the
Grace and Favor of the Testator: I say, let them hear the instruction of
Christ their Father, as the Wise man says, Let them hear not the dotings of a
crazy man, but heavenly Oracles: Not the voice of a man only, but of God
himself. Let them give ear to the very Truth, which can neither deceive, nor be
deceived. Let them hearken to those things which they will never repent the
hearing of. For that Fountain of Wisdom, the Heavenly Organ and Instrument
Christ, being now about to leave the World, and to go hence to the Father
through that rough and craggy way of the cross, did first salute his elect ones
with the most pregnant and pithy speech of all that ever he made to them: and
what ever he had taught them before, he does now make repetition of, and sums
it all up together in a most effectual Epilogue or after-speech: which though
it be comprehended in very few words, either because his immense and extreme
Dolours disabled him, or because our dullness discouraged him, yet was it by
much the most pleasant and profitable speech of all, and pronounced with that
gravity, that nothing which any man could desire was omitted or left out. If
you look for stability and Fortitude, he roareth like a terrible Lion: If you
love to hear a more broken complaint, a more sobbing and doleful
commiseration, and a clear sign of sorrow, here is the lamentation as it were
of Dragons, and the mourning of Ostriges. If you would rather have a pleasant
Melody, he does sweetly warble it out, like a Swan that is about to dye: If you
seek for tenderness of love, no mother so mild, so gentle, so indulgent: If you
want comfort, here are ye disburdened of your sins, and whatsoever separated is
safely disposed of. Do thou fear like a slave to be punished for them? Behold
the punishment is taken away. Art thou afraid to be dis-inherited as an
hireling? Lo, here is a Thief received into Paradise. Finally, If thou do
thirst after, and long for pregnant and full Sentences, plenty and abundance of
most wholesome Precepts, or the very Fountain it self of all Knowledge; then
come hither and draw near to it: here is brought to remembrance all that ever
Christ taught at any time: Here we are taught what to pray for, what to sear,
what to hope for, what to do, what to avoid. And that which thou shall never
find any where else; here is a Doctor who at the same instant also infuseth
what he teaches: one that rooteth out Vice, and planteth Virtue, that chaseth
away error, sparkleth out the light of Faith, inkindleth Charity, and
bestows all the gifts of Grace: so that a man would wonder that so great a
Treasure should lie hid under so few words, and that seven drops should cause
such mighty floods to flow from them. But here that of David is fulfilled, The
Voice of the Lord is powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty, Psalm
29. And that of Paul, The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then
any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit,
and of the joints and marrow, Heb. 4.12. Whosoever is of God, let him hear,
keep, honor, and reverence these words of God. Let the ears hear the words of
him that created them, let man keep those words that will preserve him, let man
honor those words from which man's Salvation does arise. Christ would be lifted
up high in the air, 1.
that all might see and behold him: He lifted up his Voice like a Trumpet, 2.
that all might hear him: He chose Jerusalem, 3.
that famous City in all the East, to show such great Mysteries in, that from
thence his sound might go forth into all the earth, 4.
and his words unto the ends of the world, Psalm 19. Lastly, He would suffer on
the Jews Feast Day, in a wide and open place without the City, before such an
Assembly of so many Citizens, so many Forraigners, before so many of so many
several Tongues, that the so great Mystery of his Passion and farewell Speech
might not be concealed from any of any Country, State, Language, etc.

The Grace of God certainly is not in us, nay we do very wickedly, and
therefore Woe be to us, if either with Peter we betake us to our heels and run
away from Christ, or with the Jews fall a scoffing at him, or with the
Soldiers crucify him: and not with Mary the Virgin Mother of God, and John
the Evangelist, we hasten with all speed to this Sermon, standing at the foot
of the cross, attentively listening, hearkening with all diligence: and let us
treasure up those golden Words in a broken heart. We are Christians, whither
shall we go, but to that Master who has the words of Life? John 6. By whom can
we better stand, to whom can we more justly cleave, then to Christ our Lord and
Friend hanging on the cross? And if the very Heathen observe and keep those
commands as religious, holy, and almost divine Precepts, which are given in
charge by parents and friends upon their deathbeds: how much more strictly
ought we to mark and observe these last words of Christ, and fasten them most
deeply in our breasts? For our greatest and chiefest Philosophy is, To know
Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. For there is perfection of
Righteousness to be had; there is plenty of Knowledge, there is the very Truth
of Wisdom, there all our Riches, Righteousness, Merits, Mercies, Salvation,
Life and Resurrection do consist. Thus much by way of Preface. Now let us hear
every Word by it self.

Of the first Word, viz. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
WHen the Lord Jesus became that true and only Sacrifice, and when he was now
about to finish the work of our Redemption and Salvation, although he lay under
the pressure of unutterable distress and misery, yet he did not forget why, and
for whom he suffered such Torments, even for our sakes; for which cause he went
out to meet his Fathers wrathful displeasure with his prayers, as not minding
his own pain and punishment; he sets upon the Work and Office: he begins to
take the work of a Priest in hand: he stands in the place of a Mediator between
God and man, he becomes an Intercessor, a Protector for us, and puts himself
wholly as an invincible wall to withstand the Fathers anger. For he could not
possibly but remember his native and inbred goodness. And therefore when others
did curse, blaspheme and bitterly revile, he does pray and make Supplications,
not for himself, but for others; and not for others only, but for his most
cruel enemies and crucifiers, who yet were indeed most worthy to be destroyed
and devoured with fire from Heaven, or that the earth should swallow them up
alive. Hear and see how he does stand and pray for us, and thrust himself
between the revenging God, and us sinners, saying, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do. The meaning. Father.


A short prayer indeed, but very pithy and full of matter, containing much in
it. It is all one, as if Christ had said, O Father, I am thy Son begotten out
of the womb of thine own Substance, before Lucifer or the morning Star, Psalm
110. I am the devout, religious, and devoted observer of thine Honor,
diligently doing all thy will, and performing all thy pleasures: although I
hang here as the Prince and chief of all notorious Malefactors, and as a
blasphemer and enemy of thy glorious Name, yet in the midst of all these so
many calamities, tortures, torments, deaths, I cannot but think upon my duty,
and what I am to do, forgetting all the wrongs which these of the City have
done to me. It is my part and office to interpose and stand between thy most
righteous displeasure, and the heinous sins of man: It lies on me, and it is my
work to piece up, make whole and firm, reduce, bring back, and Redeem m^, the
work of our hands, a broken vessel, a stray-sheep, a poor captive creature. It
is committed and given in charge to me to Reconcile both the things that are in
heaven, and that are in earth. At thy beck and command I came forth from thee,
and came into the world, whom thou have appointed and made the Mediator, and
the Peacemaker, a Priest, and Intercessor. And that justly too. For,

1. I partake of both Natures, I am one God equal with thee, as also with men;
I am a true man, and therefore I am the most worthy and fittest Mediator, I can
lay my hand upon both, I can reach and touch thee the beginning of all things
with my Divinity, and I can lay hold on man the workmanship of our hands with
my Mortality. So that I am neither coy nor strange to man that does desire thy
Grace, nor unequal, or inferior to thee who art the giver of all Grace.

2. Besides, I am the fittest Priest, the worthiest High Priest of any, for I
am holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. I am made higher then the
Heavens, Heb. 7. I pay that I never had, I have no need to start or shrink back
from reconciling my Brethren: no man has any thing against me none can lay
ought to my charge, no not thou Father, nor yet these my Brethren which
crucify me: I have wronged none, I owe no man a farthing, I possess no man's
estate, I am out of debt to all the world, I have no need to make satisfaction
or offer Sacrifice for my self. Therefore I enter the Holy place, bearing the
Golden Censer, and carrying much incense of prayers; I lay down a price for
many of my own blood, I offer up my very self that unspotted Sacrifice and
Priest for the people. For certain I am, never any whole burnt offering came up
before thee more holy, more acceptable, more successful then this. Wherefore,
O Father, I knowing thy mercies very well, that they are over all thy works, in
the midst of these very Sacrifices I come forth to meet thee with strong crying
and tears, in Faith nothing doubting, I humbly crave, beseech, entreat, and beg
this at thy hands; pardon thy people, spare thy people, blot out the iniquity
of thy people with this my blood, Forgive.
Forgive them, Father forgive them, q.d.

I confess Adam has sinned, ( Genesis 3.) and all his posterity is become
abominable, ( Psalm 13.) it is prone to evil from their youth, ( Genesis 6) and
wickedness is multiplied upon the earth, Charity is grown cold long since, and
will do more and more, and iniquity will abound. Our own people also, whom we
have chosen out of all Nations, has committed a great and grievous sin, in
tormenting me thy only Son with so many and so great Tortures, they little
regard whether I be thine, or do belong to thee or no, although I am about to
give a clear Testimony, and make full proof of it: to which one crime and
horrid offense, if all their other villainous acts, and all the rest of their
wicked deeds were compared, they would seem as little as nothing. How great is
thy Majesty which is despised? and my Dignity which is derided? That people
despises both, and do heap up horrible iniquities to their Fathers
Transgressions. I acknowledge thy wrath has hitherto justly raged; by the
offense of that one Adam Heaven was justly shut up, the jaws of Hell opened,
and death entered into the world: Thou have justly armed the Heavens and all
the Elements for vengeance against sinners: justly has fire from Heaven burnt
up some alive: justly has the distemper of the air and the pestilence
destroyed others: justly has the Sea over flown and drowned others, with all
the increase of the fruit of their Land: justly has the earth with open mouth
devoured others. Righteous art thou, and just are thy Judgments. In Justice
thou might have continued thy displeasure, till thou had utterly destroyed
and exacted the utmost farthing for full satisfaction. And if all the men that
ever yet lived to this very day had never so profusely and prodigally lavished
out all their blood, they could not have expiated or blotted out the least
transgression. Such and so great is the weight and hainousness of the
unspeakable wickedness, that no man could make satisfaction for it, but God;
and none ought to have done it, but man, who had sinned. Now I am he, I am God,
and I am man; In me only the whole salvation of man depends. For that cause I
became an exile in a strange Country, I have been wearied and tired out with
cold, heat, hunger, thirst, nakedness, watchings, weariness; I have been
tempted, oppressed, afflicted. What pains, what torments have I not endured in
this poor, slender, thin body? What sorrows, what straits, what disturbances
and perplexity of mind have I not had experience of? Was there ever any sorrow
like to this of mine, when there is no soundness from the sole of the foot to
the crown of the head? What remains therefore, O Father, but that thou lay
aside thy anger, appease thy diseleasure, abate thy wrath, forgive them, take
pity on them, pour out the abundance of thy Graces upon them, seeing I have,
and do make such abundant satisfaction for them? I invocate and pray unto thee
as a Father, not as a Judge; I entreat thee not to punish, but forgive them,
for my blood does not cry for vengeance, as Abels did, ( Genesis 4.) unless
happily there shall be any that will not be saved by it. I have forgiven them
already, who am now tortured for them; do thou also pardon them, whom that thou
mighest pardon, thou did of purpose send me into the world.

Forgive Them, those that are thine own, Them.
whom thou did promise to have mercy upon before the world began, whom thou will also call and sanctify in time. Of which number are these that have
crucified me, and not only these Roman Soldiers, and Jews, and the rest of the
Standers by, but all men in the world besides. Alam crucifieth me, who sinned
in Paradise. David crucifieth me, who offended in Jerusalem. Every man
crucifieth me, for there is not a man but is a sinner. I supplicate for all, I
suffer for all, I sacrifice for all, do thou pardon and forgive all, that by my
death it may appear, that neither thou nor I do desire the death of sinners,
but rather that they should be converted and live. Ezekiel. 18. But in a more
special way of love I beseech thee for those my honest plain hearted Brethren,
for whose sakes thy pleasure was that I should be made a Gentile; forgive them
this grievous Crime: The Fact I cannot excuse. I confess they have sinned most
exceedingly, yet this I must plead for them, that their mind was not so
abominably mischievous.

They know not, etc.
They know not what they do. Will thou then destroy an ignorant Nation? They
are a blind and unthankful people, they do not yet see what they do; but ere
long they shall look on him whom they have peirced. They cannot tell who I am,
they know not that I am thy Son. The Devil yet, by our permission and counsel
has hid from them those great Mysteries of my Divinity and Humanity; Forgive
them therefore, for they know not what they do. For had they known, they would
never have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. Likewise forgive the rest
too, for they also know not what they do, for all that work iniquity have been,
and are deceived: In Adam they did proudly desire to know as much as we, justly
therefore are they become as ignorant as the bruit beasts. Have respect
therefore to the sacrifice of thy Son, that holy sacrifice, which I the great
high Priest offer unto thee, that unspotted oblation which I present thee
withal. Consider the simplicity and ignorance of our Work-manship, which was
so miserably cheated and seduced by the craft and cunning of that old serpent;
and for thy infinite mercy sake restore it again graciously into thy favor and
good Will, reconciling it to thy self. I will undertake to conquer death by my
death, to lay all Hell wast, I will return to thee with rich spoils and
glorious Triumph, and unlook the Heavens with my blood. Wherefore pardon them O
Father, for they know not what they do.

This was the first word of Christ, this his prayer for us, of which Paul
says, ( Heb. 5.) that he prayed with tears and strong cryings, and was heard
for the reverence which he showed. Here we see how truly it was said, And he
made intercession for the Transgressors, (Isa. 53.) that they might not perish.
To this prayer pertains what Paul says, I was a Blasphemer and a Persecutor,
but I obtained Mercy, because I did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. This prayer has
so far prevailed, that many thousands of those that persecuted Christ should be
converted, Acts 2. and 3.

Quest.
But you will say, If Christ was heard, why are not all his Persecutors saved?

Answ
Mark it; With desire did Christ desire the Cross to die for men, but it was for
such who by faith make themselves partakers of his prayer; not for those that
continue in their Unbelief. And the Lord does bestow faith at his pleasure,
Exodus 33.
and as he will. I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy: Nor is God to be
blamed, if he make one Partaker of Christ's prayer by faith, and harden another
through unbelief. For whereas he bestows faith on some according to his
pleasure, it is of Grace, not of debt. And whereas he does harden others, it is
the just and righteous Judgment of God, and no more but what they that are
hardened do deserve. If God therefore has set any at liberty, let them be
thankful. But Es^ gilt hic nit zancken, sonder danexen, i. e. Let us not here
raise a controversy, but be thankful.

Learn we then from this first word to confess and acknowledge our fins. For we
are the first, true and principal Authors of Christ's death, and he does mean
and intend us all when he says, Forgive them, etc. For those soldiers were
our soldiers, even the Officers or Servants of our sins, who imposed that upon
him which our sins had deserved. But who did then know, or does now think, that
our sins should crucify the Son of God? yet is it that which Paul plainly
affirms, speaking of some, who crucify Christ afresh, and put him to an open
shame, Heb. 6. And this is that of which we are yet too ignorant, how great he
is that is offended, and how grievous the sin committed is, both as to the
offense, and also to the condemnation. And because these things are hid from
our eyes, we do not indeed know what we do when we sin.

1. First, Then this word teaches, that we are the Crucifiers of Christ, and
such as know not God.

2. Let us from this word strengthen our faith. For if Christ did so fervently
pray for them that crucified him, how much rather does he now intercede for
those that call upon him, and believe in him? If he were so ready to forgive a
sin committed against his own person, he will much more readily forgive us. We
may therefore boldly now draw nigh unto God, as having a Patron and an Advocate
for us. We may now avoid the wrath of God, and dwell under the Protection of
the God of Heaven, under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm 91. For God is our
Refuge and Strength, Psalm 46. Hence is that of Paul, We shall he saved from
wrath through him, Romans 5.9. Again, We have access through him unto the Father,
Ephesians. 2.18. And that of John, But if we sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1
John 2.

3. From this word we may learn true Charity, as well to serve the good of our
Neighbors, as Christ served us by his Passion; as also to forgive those that
are indebted to us. Let them hear this word of Christ, who when they are once
exasperated, do rage with such hardness of heart, that they had rather pine
themselves with perpetual Rancor, than be reconciled to their Offenders,
whereas in the mean while they cease not to offend God with innumerable sins,
and yet dare to hope for Mercy. But of this read Ecclesiasticus, chap. 28.

4. Not of Devotion, as some say.
By this word we see what great evils Ignorance does carry with it, and how
much it is to be avoided. For it is the mother of Errors, the Mistress of
Scandals, the Foster-brat of wickedness, that which does banish bashfulness,
fear, awfulness, and all the incitements of Virtue, and hurleth those headlong
that hold it, into the deep and dirty ditches of Vice and wickedness; and then
strikes them dumb, takes away their tongue, and deprives them of all speech,
that they cannot call and cry out for help: when it has with held them from
help, it presents them to eternal darkness and death. It is that which led
the Jews into this extreme wickedness, to crucify Christ, the Son of God.

Of the second Word.
CHrist had scarce finished this first Word, and lo it took effect, and
brought forth fruit presently: that quick and quickening seed was as it were
ripe in the sowers hand before it was seen to sprout up out of the earth, that
ground which without this seed was but stony and barren. For one of the thieves
which did hang on the right hand, sucking in the first word of Christ with a
greedy desire, changed his barren land into a fruitful field; for immediately
of a Murderer he became a Martyr, and was the first that of the last escaped;
forsaking all, he followed the Lord, even as he hung upon the Cross: He
brought, and laid down all that he had, his whole possession, such as it was,
at the feet of crucified Jesus, he himself also being crucified with him: with
his heart he believed unto Righteousness, and making confession with his mouth
he found salvation. Wherefore he was accounted more worthy than all the rest,
to whom Christ spoke his second word upon the Cross: Of which word the
Evangelists thus write.

And one of the Malefactors which were hanged, railed on him, Luke 23.39.
saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the other answering,
rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive the due Reward of our deeds,
but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto him, Lord, Remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Venily, I say unto
thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Here we are first to take notice, that the Cross of Christ was not only a
torment to the condemned, but as it were a Tribunal also of the Judge. For it
did mercifully receive one of the thieves, and justly refuse the other: just as
it is now, the Cross of Christ is to some a stumbling block, but to others it
does become their salvation, 1 Cor. 1. As in the beginning of the Passion we
had an example both of Mercy and Judgment, in Magdalen and Judas; so now in
the close we have another example in these two thieves, whereby it was showed
before, that the Passion of Christ would not be profitable to all; not that it
was in it self insufficient, but because many refusing Grace when it was
offered, do yet sin with a stubborn will.

The first of these Thieves, who blasphemed Christ, it may be out of
desperation and impatience, as such men use to do, may be a figure of all
wicked wen, who although they see Christ hang close by them, yet they murmur
and blaspheme under the Cross; nor are they instructed by the example of
Christ, who took all things patiently. But in vain do they rage and vex
themselves, for they are released never the sooner; let them blaspheme never so
long and never so much, they get nothing by it, but they die in their
desperation without any Mercy, as this Thief did. The other Thief is a figure
of the godly, who do both patiently undergo whatever befall them, imputing it
to their own sins, and labor what they can to reduce others to a sound and
sober mind, who blaspheme and repine. This thief then hearing, and seeing what
would be done with Christ, and being divinely inspired, did not question that
Christ thus suffered upon another account than he was to suffer; for he saw
Miracles wrought in Heaven and Earth; and he easily conjectured, that they were
not wrought for any goodness or honesty of the Jews; therefore he began to
rebuke and blame his fellow, as one that made no conscience so to blaspheme
Christ. And then turning about to Christ he does beg for Grace and Mercy at his
hands, which petition of his was not in vain, for he obtained more than he
asked. The Lord does always give more than he is desired. His prayer was after
this manner, Lord, Remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; q.d. The
Reason why I so highly esteem thee, and run with such boldness unto thee, is,
because I see what tender compassion thou have of thy Creatures, and with what
unheard of patience thou do undergo such great sufferings. But especially
because I now hear thee pray for them that despitefully use thee, and do
excuse their heinous sin. These are not humane, but spiritual and divine
things. Remember me therefore. I dare not ask more or greater things at thy
hands. I am sinful, unworthy of any favor, do but only think on me, let me
not be quite forgotten, let me at least with thy dogs eat of the crumbs that
fall from the table of thy Grace. I desire no temporal thing in this life. But
when thou come into thy Kingdom, let me be remembered there, etc.

1. See here the wonderful Judgments of God. A Thief makes confession of
Christ, when all his Disciples did distrust him. Therefore do not rashly
condemn any, though never so wicked. For God can turn him in a moment of time.

2. Observe here the Ingenuity and Faith of this Thief. He had nothing at
command but his heart and tongue: Both these he presents to Christ, that he
might believe in his heart, and confess with his mouth, Romans 10. He did not
desire a Kingdom, of which he thought himself not worthy, but only that he
might not be forgotten, and then he did not care what he did endure, And if you
take good heed, you may see in this Thief whatsoever is requisite in a
Christian. He consessed his sin, he acknowledged Christ's righteousness, and
though he were a Thief, yet did he not despair of his salvation; no marvel then
if he obtained Justification and salvation.

3. Here is also the fruit of his faith, to wit, Confession and Charity, which
he showed to his brother when he reproved him, and would have him acknowledge
his sin, and seek salvation in Christ. Wherefore he was thought worthy to hear
that truly comfortable and sweetest word, Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall
thou be with me in Paradise: as if he had said: The meaning.
My only Companion, although thy great faith does not crave the greatest
things, yet I am not ignorant what becomes me to give, or what is fit for thee
to receive, I will reward that exceeding and admirable Virtue of thine with the
best and choicest good. For what is more wonderful, more pure than thy faith?
I am forgotten of all men, as a dead man out of mind, My Neighbors stand aloof
off, mine acquaintance will not own me, (Psalm 31.) My friends are become mine
enemies; my Disciples forsake and flee from me: Peter, the stoutest of my
Apostles was daunted at the voice of one silly woman, denied and forswore me:
Judas, whom I trusted with my self, and all that I had, is enticed with a
little money, and has sold me. The rest are scattered like stray sheep without
a Shepherd, destitute both of hope and faith. But thou O Thief art come hither
out of the lurking places of the thickets and woods, and do run to meet me
with great affection, more faithful than my friends, more constant then my
Disciples, thou do believe, hope, adore, confound the unthankful, rebuke the
blasphemous, bear witness to him that is condemned without a cause, plead with
thy tongue, fighting for me with all the weapons thou have. Thou see me used
like a most notorious Villain, and yet do acknowledge me as the most holy
Redeemer; Thou see me as thy Companion in punishment, and yet do pray to me
as to the Lord in Heaven: Thou see nothing but the misery as it were of the
vilest and worst of men, yet thou confessest the infinite blessedness of my
Kingdom in another world. Surely flesh and blood has not revealed these things
unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 16. Truly thy faith is great,
greater I have not found in Israel, Mat. 8. Abraham believed me, but 'twas when
I spoke from heaven, Genesis 15. Moses believed, but I spoke to him out of the
midst of the fire, Exodus 3. Isaiah believed, but then I sat upon my Throne of
Glory, Isa. 6. But thou believe now I am hanging on the most shameful Cross,
and can hardly fetch breath, as well as if I were working some extraordinary
Miracle. I never met with such a faith before. Nicodemus and Nathaniel
believed, being instructed out of the Scriptures. The woman of Canaan believed,
being persuaded thereto by clear and convincing signs, Mat. 15. The Disciples
believed, because they were encouraged by being promised to sit upon twelve
Thrones, Mat. 19. Thou never saw any of all these things. Thou have not read
the Scriptures, thou have seen no signs, thou have heard none of the Promises,
and yet thou believe, nay, thou do make glory appear out of infirmity, and
innocence out of condemnation. Have but a little patience, thou shall not stay
long without a reward of so great a faith. For although thou art now hard by
the gates of death, and the Ax is cutting down the tree of thy life, yet thou
art come in good time, and seasonably enough. There is place yet for pardon,
the gate of Mercy is not yet shut, nay the fountain of Grace and Favor does
now flow more abundantly than it was wont to do. Go to, Be it unto thee
according to thy Faith. Faith stopped the woman's issue of blood; it shall cleanse
thee from the contagion of all thy sins. Faith freed the Cananitish daughter
that was vexed with Devils; it shall quit thee of the serpent that lurketh at
thy heel, deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter, and from the expectation
of thine enemies whom thou have served. By faith the Lepers were cleansed, the
blind made to see, the sick of the Palsy restored to health; thou by this thy
faith shall obtain eternal Glory, and the salvation of thy soul. By this thy
faith thou shall not (with Enoch) see the bitterness of death; thou shall he
saved from the flood with Neah, thou shall with Abraham receive a place which
thou know not, for an Inheritance; thou shall not with Moses, be smitten
with the destroying Angel, and shall pass safely through the sea. Thou like
another Caleb shall enter into a land flowing with Milk and Honey. I Jesus will
conduct thee thither. It shall be better and more honorable for thee, that
thou have hung by my side, than if thou had sat before Caesar in golden
Hangings, and in his Ivory Chair. Thou shall have much more Honor and Renown
than Augustus himself. It shall be more sweet and pleasant to thee to partake
with me in my torments, than if thou had been Monarch and sole King of all
the earth. For what had it profited thee if the whole world had been subdued
under thee for a moment, and thy soul tortured with eternal pains and darkness?
Mat. 16. What good would a little paltry pelf do thee, if thou should lie
under perpetual torments?

Verily I say unto thee, Verily I say to thee.
I shall not bring thee into fools Paradise with tempting and enticing
allurements; rely upon what I say, be secure: my Word is as much as my Oath.
But because of the excellency of faith I did heretofore swear to Abraham and
the Fathers, and I will swear to thee also, but much more happily; I swear unto
these that which I performed many Ages after, but what I swear to thee I will
presently perform. To day.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise: This shall be thy Reward. To day I
say, lest long delay become tedious to thy expectation. This day is salvation
come into thine house, Luke 19. This day will I begin to exalt thee before all
Israel, that they may know that I am with thee. This day shall thou take the
Land of the living, which thou have trampled upon with thy feet, for thine
eternal possession, because thou have followed the Lord thy God. This petition
of thine seems but a light Request to those that are without, for what is more
easy than to remember? Thou think that thou have asked but a small matter,
but they are great things that thou suest for, and such only as none but my
faithful servants pray for, even to remember thee in my Kingdom. For whom I
remember, they are not forsaken; but whom I forget, they are thrown aside out
of my hand, and do vanish away as the smoke. Those on whom I have Mercy, I
remember them; whom I remember, on them also I have Mercy. They cannot but be
blessed, whom I remember in my Kingdom. So that in this short form of prayer
thou have asked more than thou art aware of; for I ever give more than I am
desired. Wherefore remembering, I will remember thee, and bless thee; Memory.
Thou shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, and shall not be afraid of evil
Tidings, Psalm 112.

With me.
Thou shall be With me, lest at any time thou should slip out of mind, mine
eyes shall be still upon thee, thou shall be born upon my shoulders: I will
cover thee with my feathers, and thou shall put thy trust under my Wings, Psalm
91. Thou shall be with me, with whom, that the Saints might be, they desire to
be dissolved. Thou shall be with me, thou shall fear none ill, for I the Hand
of the Lord, and as a mighty man of War am with thee. Thou shall be with me,
free from fear, full of joy, in peace and safety. Thou shall be with me who am
every where, and am All in All. Then thou shall see what and how honorable a
thing it is to be with me, thou shall overflow, and thy heart shall be
enlarged. For,

In Paradise.
Thou shall be with me in Paradise. Nor shall that flaming Sword, or guard of
the Cherubins drive thee thence. Adam who hid himself out of my sight, was
justly expelled that Garden, Genesis 3. But thou who have turned to me, that I
might remember thee, shall mercifully be led thereinto.

1. Thou shall be in Paradise, not in the earthy, but Heavenly garden of
pleasure, where thou shall be enlightened with the inaccessible Rays of Light,
which enlighteneth the eyes of Angels, cheareth the youthful minds of the
Saints, where thou shall drink of, and be filled with the Fountain of Life;
where thou shall celebrate the Sabbaths, and keep Holy Day in the celestial
Jerusalem, in the pure and pleasant beauties of peace. Thou art the first that
entered that Kingdom prepared for good men before the world began. No man shall
go into it before thee. None had ever so much and so many good things bestowed
upon them before. Thus they that honor me, I will honor them, 1 Samuel 2. And
thou shall be for a Sign, that all may know from the greatest to the least, how
Saving, how Honorable, how fruitful the Faith of Believers in me is.

2. Thou shall be with me in Paradise and the Kingdom of the Church, which this
day I erect with my blood.

1. That whosoever shall know that thy wickedness is pardoned, he may not
despair of the forgiveness of his own, but that he also may be turned to me,
that he may seek salvation and find it, ask of me that he may receive pardon.

2. I say thou shall be an Example and a Spectacle of my mercy, in whom all
that are laden with sin shall see, that my mercy is greater than man's
frowardness, so that they will but return to me, that I also may turn to them,
Zach. 1.

3. That by thee I say, they may know, that I desire not the death of a sinner,
but that he should be converted, and live, Ezekiel. 18.

4. By thee they shall understand, that as long as a man lives there is no
time too late for Repentance.

5. They shall understand by thee, that I pardon all offenses alike, both small
and great, few or many, and that my mercies are over all my works.

6. By thee they shall know what great joy there is in Heaven over one sinner
that repents, when thou shall go before ninety and nine just persons, and
first enter into the kingdom of Heaven, Luke 15. All these great Rewards I
bestow upon thee as a recompense of thy excellent Faith. Verily I say unto
thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. What great piety? What great
pity was in this w^ of the Lord? How could he but dye joyfully who had so
large a promise in his life?

1. Sinners may learn from this Word, by the Example of the Thief, not to
despair; let none think that the bottomless Sea of mercy can be drawn dry.

2. Let Christians here learn to pray, not to multiply gain, or to find out the
old hoorded Gold of Kings, not that they may join house to house, and lay land
to land, but that Christ would remember them, not in an earthy, but in his
Kingdom.

3. We may learn from hence, not to conclude any man either blessed or damned
before the last day of his life. We know not who is worthy of the hatred or
love of God: inasmuch as we see an Apostle damned, and a Thief saved.

4. But let none make the Thief an Example to defer his repentance and put it
off till the last hour. It is a rare thing for Grace to be given to such a one.
The Thief repented the same hour he was called, and was saved. The Lord also
does call thee to day, this very day, do not loyter nor linger, follow the
Lord, lest happily with Esau thou go about weeping-cross, seeking a place for
repentance, and find none, Heb. 12. Look to it, that thou abuse not this
Example of mercy, but rather be stirred up to a speedier approach with all
thankfulness to the Throne of Grace.

Of the third Word.
NOw there stood by the Cross of Jesus, John 19 25.
his Mother, and his Mothers Sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalen. When Jesus therefore saw his Mother, and the Disciple standing by,
whom he loved; he says unto his Mother, Woman, behold thy Son. Then says he
to his Disciple, behold thy Mother. And from that hour that Disciple took her
unto his own home.

The women follow Christ even to the Cross, and stay with him even to the very
death. Mean while the Apostles shift for themselves, and get them out of sight.
Thus God chooses the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, 1 Cor. 1.
Among all the Women that followed Christ, the first that is named is the
Virgin Mother, to whom Christ spoke the third Word. He had first prayed for
them that crucified him, and first comforted the Thief: not that he did not see
his Mother standing by, or did not know what great trouble and sorrow she was
in, but that he might not seem to respect persons or particular affections. It
was for the sake of sinners that he came into the world, and they had most need
of him: therefore he does first speak to the Thief. But now the third time he
turns him to his Mother, that he might not seem to neglect her.

Now John does most sweetly describe and set down this third Word, with all the
circumstances thereof: and does use such words as have truly a very hidden
Virtue in them, and are so powerful to resolve and melt the tears of Believers
into an Heavenly sweetness, that if the most obdurate and hard-hearted man in
the world should with dry heart and eyes pass by the reading of this
stupendous and amazing Passion of Jesus, yet when he comes to these words, in
which are recited the standing of that blessed Virgin by the cross of her Son,
the tender respect and expressions of a dying Son to his Mother; his silial
recommendation, and the separation, parting or taking leave of that most Holy
Mother, and that so loving and dutiful Son one of another, he would not be
able to refrain weeping. For every word here expressed will increase and heighten
his Devotion. What need else had there been to have so exactly set down and
described both how and where the Virgin. Mother stood. For,

1. The presence of friends is wont to be a refreshing to the afflicted, when
they are destitute and deprived of some other comforts, as Solomon says, Two
are better then one, because they have a good reward for their labor. For if
they fall, the one will lift up his fellow, Eccl. 4. But this presence of
friends here had no such advantage. It was a most sad sight both to the Mother
that stood by, and to the Son that was hanging on the Cross.

2. What a strange and new thing is here reported, that the Mother of Jesus
stood by the Cross? For what have thou, O Holy Virgin, what have thou to do
with the Cross? What fellowship has a loathsome and despicable place with the
Temple of God? What agreement is there between a cursed place of butchery, and
a blessed Armory of Heavenly Ammunition? what accord is there between the
punishment of Malefactors, and the Mirror of Virgin-purity? But she did not
stand simply by the cross, but by the Cross of Jesus, who was both her Father
and Son at one and the same time; her Bridegroom and Lord, her child and her
God; and because he had all these (Relations) in him, and was all these to her,
therefore she could not forsake him. She followed her beloved Son all alone, at
least accompanied with a very few, although the Disciples were fled, and the
enemies enraged. She does follow, I say, and see what is done, when he could
neither help, nor comfort her any way, but with tears and tender compassion.
When she had lost him before but for three days, she went up and down about
the Villages near Jerusalem, sorrowfully seeking him amongst her Kinsfolk and
Acquaintance, till she had found him, as it is, Luke 2. But now she could no
longer look for him among his Acquaintance, for they all stood afar off from
him. Therefore she took this motherly counsel with her self, and resolved in
her heart thus: Here will I stand and stay to see the Sentence of death
executed upon my dear child. I will follow him close at his heels as he goes
out of Jerusalem, I will observe and look with weeping eyes whither they lead
him. I will see how they spoil him, I will seriously mark how they pierce his
hands and feet, how they fasten him to the gallows, how they will toss and
mount him up, how they will sling and swinge up the cross. After all is done,
and when all are gone and stand aloof off him, as not daring to come too nigh
him, hanging like an accursed fellow upon the cross, then will I approach
nearer, and stand fast by the cross of my Jesus: I will hug, and clip, and
cling about the Tree with my arms, I will embrace it dearly, I will bedew it
with tears, I will kiss it with my lips: and because I cannot die with him, I
will hang my eyes on my crucified Son. I will tarry till he depart, I will see
how he goes out of the world, for I only know how he came into this world. I
will not leave him dying, whom I could never forsake living. Thou did very
well, O Holy Mother to stand by him, when every body else had forsaken him. For
so did he first vouchsafe to come to thee, passing by all other creatures. This
is that invincible Unicorn which none could ever take or overruled, who was
long since earnestly importuned, and as it were rouzed up by the servent
prayers and desires of the Holy Fathers, and not able to contain himself any
longer, was at last taken in thy Virgin-lap. And lo, now thou do (according
to thy power) requite that his so great favor to thee. He left all and
bestowed himself upon thee: and now all forsake him; thou like a dear Mother
do stand it out with him: thy standing by him at the Cross, is but sad
company to him, whilst thou do there invisibly suffer in thy heart,
whatsoever he did visibly endure in his body: When the Evangelist would
describe this ineffable and sad suffering, he does not call her by her proper
Name, but discovers her by a Name of pity and Piety, Mother, his Mother. Nor
could he more fully express or describe her grief, then by saying thus: His
Mother stood by the Cross of Jesus. Here she had full trial of what Simeon
told her before, Luke 2. A Sword shall pierce through thine own soul: the pains
she escaped in childbed, she now meets with at the cross. To other Women it is
said, In sorrow shall thou bring forth children, Genesis 3. But Mary felt not the
pains of travel; yet was she not therefore free from all pain: Now if the
Virgin mother was not without her cross, who amongst us shall think to escape
it? Christ does suffer, and his Mother does suffer with him: and do thou
think of nothing but merriments? The Virgin stood, and yet they were not come
to the place, but she followed him as he went out with his cross: and yet she
stood, not afar off, but hard by the cross: whereby she showed the constancy of
a Mother, and the valor of her mind. Consider, O man, consider what great
grief this was to her. None ever received greater Favor; and never any endured
greater pain and sorrow then the Virgin Mother. His Mother stood full of
courage, full of affection, and full of devotion. She stood, rouling that
unutterable flame of Love in her Bosom, wherewith her Son was set on fire. And
she also was enflamed with a vehement heat of Love, examining her self, if it
were she that had brought forth such a Son, who could so willingly pardon and
pass by such affronts, yea and excuse them also who dealt so cruelly with him.
She stood, considering and pondering the hard and most bitter extremities of
her Son, with which she, by reason of her Motherly affection, was most
grievously Tortured: but withal she did, according to her wisdom and burning
charity, consider the benefit that would thence redound to Mankind, and the
glory of God that would arise from it. She stood with the rest of the Women and
Friends at the cross full of sorrow and misery, slighting all the gibes and
jeers that she had cast on her for her Sons-sake Christ Jesus. But her Motherly
Love conquered and overcame all these discouragements.

But although Christ was in infinite streights, yet he does not neglect his
Mother in that hour. And when he had no member free, but his Eyes and Tongue,
he does not disdain to serve his Mother with them both. He directs them both to
her, looking upon her, and speaking to her, to show how highly he did esteem
her in his heart, and to teach us practically and really that our Parents are
to be honored by us, and that we should take care of them even to the death.
At other times Christ seems to speak more harshly to his Mother: to wit, when
he was about Gods business, as Matthew. 12. Luke 12. John 2. For all humane
affection and respect must cease and give place to Gods business. But here on
the Cross he does faithfully and humanely acknowledge his Mother: for what she
had brought forth did now hang before her eyes. When Jesus, says he; saw his
Mother. O the astonishing Miracle of Vision indeed! O the lamentable glances
which might have been seen in the eyes of Jesus! Those eyes at one and the same
time did hasten toward death, and turn aside to his Mother. The power of death
did close and weaken them, and the force of love did open them again to behold
his Mother. O how deeply was the Ray of that last look fastened in thy heart! O
thou Holy Mother, which the Lord of the world was pleased to glance upon thee
when he was about to dye! It was a Dart indeed, which did not only wound thy
heart, but it was also a Sword that pierced the very inward parts of thy soul.
O how full of sobbs and sighs wast thou! with what floods of grief wast thou
overwhelmed when thou do cast thy weeping eyes upward at once to see thy Son
dying, and at the same time wishfully looking upon thee?

Nor does Christ serve his Mother with his eyes only, beholding her therewith:
but he does also comfort her with his Tongue. Woman.
Woman, says he, Behold thy Son. He calls her Woman.

1. That he might not increase her sorrow. It was not a time now to complement,
or use smooth words and sugared expressions to her, nor to call her Mother. For
if Christ had spoken more sweetly to her, I believe it would have broken the
Virgins heart.

2. He does call her Woman, for if he had called Mother, it might have given
occasion to them that crucified him to use her more hardly.

3. Although she is above measure to be extoli'd as a Virgin, yet she is much
more highly to be commended by the Name of Woman: inasmuch as God was pleased
to honor her Bowels with this sacred issue; and by her to expound to the world
that Covenant which God heretofore made to Abraham. Hence it is that Christ
here from the cross does call her Woman. Hence it is that the Angel pronounced
her blessed among Women Hence it is that Paul says, Christ was made of a
Woman, Gal. 4.

The meaning of the word is, The meaning.
as if Christ had said, Woman, I know the perplexing cares of thy breast, I
know thy sorrow, I know thy pitiful compassion, thy Religion and thy Charity.
I know, I sadly know thy pensive thoughts; for as thou art not the least cause
of my sorrow, so I am the only cause of thy grief. I know why thou do stand
here. Thou would fain anoint me with the Ointment of Piety; Thou think to
comfort the desolate with thy presence, thou could wish to die with me, yea
to die alone, and excuse me by thy death. All this I accept, and take it in
good part: but it does as much wound as mitigate. For thy soul will not be
solaced except thou have me restored to thee again safe an sound: O therwise
all Plasters, Medicines, Comforts, are to no purpose: whatsoever is offered to
thee, is but all in vain. But thou have long since been confirmed with such
valor of Virtue, anointed thoroughly with so much oil of Grace and Favor,
completely accomplished with such perfections, that thou art black without
filthiness, mourning without nastiness, decently behaving thy self with all
comeliness in this thy bitter condition: thou art troubled, yet cheerful;
mournful, yet merry, free from faultiness; sobbing, yet singing, not utterly
dejected: thou art defective in nothing, for thou can smile when thou
weepest, abide most constant when thou art thrust through with so many Swords,
and preserve thy Life when thou art dying. Wherefore thou most valliant woman,
in due time thou shall receive a full Recompense and Reward; nor shall thou be
destitute of all comfort for the present, if a most miserable and afflicted man
can give any solace and succor to an afflicted woman. See thou in what
Torments I hang here? With what difficulties I struggle? with what vexations
and perplexities my strength is worn and wasted? At what price, at what rate
may I purchase but one sinner? With what charity shall I embrace mankind? I
have appeased my Fathers wrath; it remains now that I forsake thee not. Most
dear Parent, hitherto indeed thou have showed thy self a most tender and
careful Mother to me from the time I was born, to this very last hour; and
have discharged all Motherly affection and respect to me: and now I am ready to
dye, thou art perhaps afraid that none will own thee, but that thou shall be
left to the wide world. But be not cast down with such thoughts: lo here is
that John, thy near Kinsman standing by, very dear to thee, and also to me:
thou may expect and promise to thy self all assistance from him. Behold thy
Son.
He shall be thy Son in my absence, he shall respect, reverence, honor, and
highly esteem thee all the days of his life. And that thou may be assured
of it, behold I will speak to him before thy face. I bequeath him to thee in my
stead to serve thee, watch over thee, and instruct thee. His chastity will suit
well with thy Virgin and Superangelicall Purity, and for his fidelity, he will
be as honest and as constant to thee as he has been to me. Wherefore Woman,
Behold thy Son.

And presently he turned about and spoke to the Disciple, Behold says he, thy
Mother, q.d. O John, hitherto thou have answered thy calling to the utmost.
Therefore thou shall not go altogether unrewarded for thy singular Faith and
constancy toward me, yea thou shall be honored with more excellent gifts and
Dignities then thou do dare either to pray or look for. Thou have for saken
thy Ship, Parents, Wife, and thy own self too for my sweetest Love-sake: thou
have cast all thy care, hope, and thoughtfulness upon me: thou have built upon
me securely, as on a Rock. Nothing has been so sweet, neither Wife, Parents,
nor Patrimony: nothing has been of that moment as to withdraw thee from my
company. Thou have followed me through the High Priests wicked Houses, and now
thou stand by this infamous Cross full of compassion, and deeply suffering
with me. It has ever been thy delight to follow me, to be in my company, and
to obey my commands. Why then should I forsake thee, who have followed me? How
can I but take care for thee and nurse thee up, all whose hope is seated in me?
Thy hope in me shall by no means be wholly disappointed. I will not show my
self ungrateful to thee John. Behold thy Mother. Thou have said to thy Parents
for my sake, I know ye not. Behold the Mother of God is thy mother. Thou have
forsaken thy Wife who might have proved unfaithful to thee, lo thou have an
entire and most pure Virgin. Thou have renounced thy fishers boat, now thou art
made master of a Merchants ship that brings her food from far, Prove. 31. Thou
have despised small things, thou shall receive the greatest. Thou have refused
doubtful, thou shall have certain things, thou have found favor in my sight.
Thy course of life is more delicious to me. There is no Mystery concealed from
thee, thou saw my glory in Mount Tabor; thou did see me cure Jairus his
Daughter, thou have seen my misery last night in the Garden, and do now see
it on the Cross. Yesterday thou did lean on my bosom at Supper, and now I
commend the dearest thing I have in the world to thy trust and care. Behold thy
Mother: thou see I am about to die, thou see my mother is left desolate,
thou see there are many Adversaries to me and her. I assign, commend, and
make her over to thee as thy own. Lo she that was mine is now thy mother. Do
thou therefore discharge the duty of a Son to her, succor, cherish, love,
serve her. If thou acknowledge her for thy mother, I will acknowledge thee for
my Brother. Hitherto Christ comforted his mother: by which Word,

1. He showed both his love and care toward his mother, for an Example to us.
Nor is there a more clear and full Example of showing Honor and respect to our
Parents any where to be found then here; although indeed this was not an
unjust, yet was it a very unequal Exchange, that John should be given to the
Virgin Mother instead of Jesus: a servant for a Lord, a Disciple for a Master:
the son of Zebedee, for the Son of God; and no doubt but this word was a sore
affliction to that Holy Mother. However she stands steadfast in her says,
immovable and unshaken.

2. The Mystery.
But whereas Christ does so carefully commend his mother to the Disciple when
he was about to die, it was not done without a Mystery. Mary signifies the
Church, which is committed to John as the Minister thereof. Now John takes the
Church for his own, when he does Rule it by the Word of God. But Christ prefers
the Church before the Minister: Whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister, says Christ, Mat. 20. And Paul says, Let a man so account of
us, as of the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. Again, let no man thrust himself
into the service of Mary: that is, of the Church, unless God has committed the
charge thereof to him. He called his servants and gave them money to trade
with, Luke 19. No man ought to take this Honor to himself, but he that is
called of God, as Aaron was, Heb. 5. Let the Minister of the Church take heed
and see that he be a John: that is, that he express the Grace of God, not only
in Word and Name, but in deed and in Truth also. Beside, in this Recommendation
of Christ's Mother unto John; Christ alluded to that Spiritual acquaintance and
kindred which ought to be among Believers in the Church. Nay, he does here
institute and ordain this Kindred, whereby every one should be a Father,
Mother, Brother, and Sister to another, as Paul writes to Timothy, that he
should respect the Elder men as Fathers, and the Elder Women as Mothers, the
younger as Sisters etc. 1 Timothy 5. And as John, after this recommendation of
Christ, could say that the Virgin Mary was his Mother; so may we call her
Mother, inasmuch as she brought forth Christ our Brother. And as John might
call Peter Brother: so also may we. This is our Christian brotherhood and
Spiritual Kindred, which is our great consolation. For hence we see, that the
Saints belong to us, and we to them. They acknowledge and love us; let us also
acknowledge and love them. In conclusion it is said, that John like a faithful
and obedient Disciple, and as one mindful of his Masters command, did take
Mary from that very day for his own mother unto his own home: Not that he had a
settled place, or any thing of his own, (for the Apostles left all they had,
Matthew. 19. and what they had was common to all, Act. 4.) But that he took her
into his own care, and ministered unto her for time to come as a son to his
mother: He took her, not to his Farm or Manour-House, for he had none: but to
his charge, which he took care to discharge by his own ministering to her: so
says Augustine.

Of the fourth Word.
THree Words we have heard already, which Christ uttered on the Cross: the
first to his Father, the second to the Thief, the third to his Mother; and they
were all very sweet and comfortable Words indeed. The hour of death now
approaching, he expresses the fourth Word, and that with great gravity: he
speaks again to his Father, but very moaningly and pitifully, of which the
Evangelists thus write:

And when the sixth hour was come, Mar. 15.33.
there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour. And at the ninth
hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, Lamasabachtani: which is
being interpreted, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And some of them
that stood by, when they heard it, said, Behold, he calls Elias.

There were now six hours of the day past, and yet those wicked men were not
satisfied with what Christ had then suffered: Wherefore to reprove their
ungodliness, the Sun is darkened; that visible Sun is much afflicted and
obscured, by reason of the injury done to the true Son of Righteousness; and
that contrary to the custom and course of Heaven, forasmuch as about this time
there was no Eclipse of the Sun, as Theophylact out of Jerome says. Here then
the Divinity of Christ did a little discover it self, and as it were threaten
the Jews if they would nor cease from their wickedness. But of this great
Miracle of the Heaven, or the Sun, Dionysius the Areopagite, writes in an
Epistle to Apollophanes, confessing that he also with him saw that Eclipse in
Heliopolis, both which men were then Pagans: And there he affirms, that
Apollophanes should say, O good Dionysius, Vicissitudines sunt divinarum rerum,
the course of Heaven is altered. And Origin in his second Book against Celsus,
makes mention of one Phlegon, that wrote of the darkning of the Sun in the
time of Tiberius Caesar. But what is that to this Eclipse which Pliny writes,
that after Caesar was slain, the Sun was pale and wan a whole year about? Away
with all such comparisons, even of the greatest Monarchs. This is truly a sign
that does deserve to be written and read, to be said and sung as long as the
world lasts. This unusual darkness,

1. Did prove Christ's Divinity, to whom all the Elements do homage, and are
ready to serve him at his pleasure.

2. It showed his Innocence: for the Elements are disturbed at his death, to
make it known that Christ suffered innocently; the Creatures give testimony to
their Creator.

3. The heavenly Father would make it appear by these signs, that he took
notice of the great evils and unworthy behavior of men, which yet he was
pleased to turn to the salvation of them that should believe.

4. This uncouth Darkness did portend and fore-shew, that the Light of Truth
was now departed from Judea, and that all that denied Christ should be left and
shut up in perpetual darkness. The Jews had often urged to Christ to show them
a sign from Heaven. Lo, here they have it, but to their own undoing.

Now when this Darkness had continued for about three hours, Christ began to to
speak again, yea, to cry out with a loud voice, to prove the Truth of his
Humanity, and to show the intensness and extremity of his pain, against such
Heresies as should after arise, either denying the Lord to be a true man, or
that he did not truly suffer, but only made a flourishing show of suffering.
But his loud crying was a sufficient witness of his true and grievous sorrow
and pain: for although they were intolerable things which the Standers by did
see; yet Christ endured much more than what the outward eyes saw: And to make
it known, he cried out, to fulfill that of Psalm 69. I am weary of crying, my
throat is dried, etc. And well might he be hoarse, for hoarsness proceeds
from a defect of humors in the throat and Arteries. But his strength was dried
up like a Pot-sheard, the humors of blood gushing out in all parts of his body.

But let us hear how, and with what voice he cried out. He says, Eli, Eli,
Lama azabthani. This word is taken out of Psalm 22. which Psalm in the Hebrew
does begin with those very words. Christ therefore makes use of the beginning
of that Psalm, to show that the whole Psalm was made to him, and of him. Where
me may observe that Christ does not complain of suffering, but of Desertion;
and not of every kind of Desertion neither. For they to whom he had done much
good, yea, and his own Disciples too, had deserted and left him in the midst of
his enemies and persecutors. And yet he does not so much as think upon this
Desertion, but he does cry out especially, and complain that the Father had
forsaken him; which we must not so understand, as if the Divinity had separated
it self from the humanity of Christ, but that it left that Humanity for a time
to the power of his Persecutors, and did not defend it with his Power; and did
moreover for a while, withdraw from it all Consolation and supernatural
Assistance. God did always succor the rest of the Martyrs with his special
comforts, either by hindering the act of outward torments, as in the three
Children, Upon whom the flames of fire could not fasten, Dan. 3. Or else by
sending into them the inward sweetness of his Spirit, so that they did not at
all feel any pain of the body, or else might endure them more easily and
joyfully. But Christ had no sensible comfort at all from above in his whole
Passion, so that he might truly say, Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass the
way? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, Lam. 1.12. For
who did ever undergo such stupendous and grievous torments? It is God that
suffers. Nor does he lighten the weight and press of his Passion one jot, who
was wont, either altogether to free his servants, or else to ease or shorten
the force of their torments. He that uses to spare sinners, does take no pity
upon himself. Well therefore might Paul say, He spared not his (...) Son, but
delivered him up for us all, Romans 8. He did not only deliver him to death, but
he did not so much as spare him in punishment and afflictions.

The meaning.
The sense of the word is, as if he had said, They that disclose the troubles of
their minds to their friends, are half eased thereby. But now I turn to thee my
God, my Father, the Father of Mercies and all Consolations, I neither find, nor
seek any Relief or Abatement of all my ^es. For now I have voluntarily
submitted my shoulders to this burden, I must patiently bear whatsoever thou
shall please to lay upon me, and will. And although thou will not hear me when
I cry unto thee, yet I will relate and declare my grief and sorrows to thee,
lest men should think that I endeavor to mitigate them by my silence. If I
should wholly hold my peace, and not make known my troubles, some might think I
did it to disappoint my enemies of their Triumph and Joy. And others might
suppose that my soul was sound and whole, quiet, and nothing troubled, although
they saw the Garment of my (...) rent and torn in pieces. For the bodily eyes
can well enough discern the outward wounds, but the secret and inward troubles
of the mind they cannot perceive. I will therefore at least by my crying
testify the extreme necessities and stra^ of my soul, and deeply fasten them
in the hearts of the godly, to whom thou shall give to believe and suffer* For
where (...) poor man better make known my misery, and lay open my (...)
condition, but before thee, the most rich God of all comfort? To whom should I
thy Son complain, but to thee, O Father? Behold thou art my God, thou art my
God and my Refuge. Hear therefore the sorrowful cries of thy Son, Ell, Ell,
Lama azabthani.

My God.
The Ground and sum of all my anguish, is, because thou, O my God, my God haft
forsaken me. Others call upon thee but once, as God, because although they
stand in need of thy Glory, yet they deny thee by their sins. But I cry unto
thee twice, as God, because I do both partake of thy nature, and did never
start aside from thy commands. But thou do reject me who am most righteous,
and do expose me to wicked men for wicked men's sakes, thou do severely
chastise me who am thy Son, that thou may mercifully spare thy rebellious
and stubborn servants; thou do chase me from the streams of living water, and
forsaken me, to flow into cracked Cisterns and broken Bottles. Whence it is,
That I am counted with them that go down into the pit, and as one among the
dead, Psalm 88. Nor have thou only forsaken me, but thou have also stretched
out thy hand against me, and thy waves have gone over me. I am come into deep
waters, where the floods overflow me, the waters are come in unto my soul,
Psalm 69.

Thou have Forsaken me, Forsaken.
thou have left me destitute of thy help, thou have stripped me of all comfort,
thou have withheld the dew of thy refreshings from falling upon me, so that
neither the very blessedness of Glory which I delight in does any way soften my
Cross, and make it more pleasant to me; but thou have also stretched out thy
hand upon me, to make me a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief and
infirmity, Isa. 53. There is no whole part in my body from the sole of my foot
to the crown of my head. And there is no soundness in my soul from the lowest
feet of sense, to the top of the head of reason. The sword and spear wastes
without, and within fear and mourning: Without in the body are rivers of pain,
within is a sea of trouble in my heart. My flesh is sorely afflicted, because
it is more tender, quick and sensible. My soul is sick of greater trouble,
because it is more innocent, wise and excellent than others. My flesh is in
pain, my soul is full of grief: And what part is free, being deprived of thy
aid? Tribulation and Anguish have seized on me, and every moment my griefs
increase. What great sorrow does the offense that is taken at thy name stir up
in me? How does the trouble of my mother, the fear and cowardice of my
Disciples, the scandal of weak ones, the error of them that crucify me, how
do these things afflict me? And how also do the streights of all the Saints
which have been, are, or shall be, which they undergo for my Names-sake,
trouble me? How greatly also does the wickedness of their ingratitude who will
sin to Eternity afflict me? How do they rip up the scars of my wounds afresh,
pierce and prick my whole heart, rent and tear, waste and destroy all that is
capable to be consumed or disturbed in me? But a most clear Argument of my
unspeakable grief is, that if every particular sin of all mankind were brought
into one heap, a huge heap alas it is: yet it is thy pleasure that my blood
should suffice for the expiating of them all, and therefore have thou
imbittered me with such punishments, and have laid such a load on my shoulders.
I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the peaple there was none with me,
Isa. 63. So have thou forsaken, exposed, and delivered me over into the hands
of wicked men. Besides all this he says,

Why etc.
Why have thou forsaken? Evil is repaid for good, my price is slighted: After
so much sweat and anguish, my blood alas, and Passion too is to many become of
none effect. So many millions of men are carried through the red Sea of my
blood out of Egypt: and but one only Thief is ^ered with me into the desired
Land. There is none but this only stranger that gives glory to God. There is
none that does good but this one man. Why therefore have thou forsaken me? Why
have thou exposed me to so many sorrows? Do I suffer for this Thief alone? O
thy wonderful Love indeed to mankind! Thou have no need of the goods of any
creature. Thou art most absolute, perfect, and blessed in thy self: How
wonderful therefore is thy goodness, by reason whereof thou have set forth and
offered me thy Son to and for all men. Psalm 22.
Behold I the fairest of men, thy Delight, the Joy of Angel; am become a worm,
and a very abject of worms, for the Salvation of Worms. I admire thy wonderful
counsel in Redeeming man, I admire thy unspeakable goodness. Nor do I less
admite, that I of my own endeavor should so lovingly, so exceedingly beyond
measure obey thy commands, and offer up my self for unthankful and disobedient
men. But so it seemed good unto thee. Wherefore if there be yet any more
punishment be^d, inflict it, I willingly accept of it, and bid it welcome. I
acknowledge thee yet to be my God. It is my will that thy will be done. My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Behold my heart is ready to fulfill all thy
commands. I am in great pain, but the greatness of my love does far exceed it.
Yea though thou should yet forsake me more, and though they should be yet
more ungrateful, yet I cannot be separated from the love of thee and them whom
thou have called. For who shall separate me from thy Love? Shall tribulation,
or distress? But thou have forsaken me, that thou may not forsake me; thou
have humbled me, that thou may make me great: thou have cast me off, that
thou may receive me most honorably. Thou have forsaken me, and have left me
only this, that I may (though without comfort) flee unto, and call upon thee.
Wherefore let thy chastened Son be pleasing to thee, and willingly hear him,
who does in his great exercise of affliction send up his roaring cry of charity
unto thee. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

1. Now concerning this place we may observe first, that this cry, (Why have
thou forsaken me?) was not fictitious or feigned, but most real and true: and
not only of the mouth, but also of the heart, and all the humane force and
powers: For Christ at this hour had stripped himself of God, not by casting him
away, but by not perceiving and feeling him, acting the part of a pure man. It
was truly and overmuch an Humane voice, proceeding from Humane affection; so to
complain, why God should forsake him, and why he should suffer wicked men to do
so much. So David, I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of
the wicked, Psalm 73. And Jeremiah: Why does the way of the wicked prosper?
Jer. 12. And Habbakuk: Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold
grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me. How long shall I cry, and
thou will not hear? Hab. 1. Wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and holest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is
more righteous then he? Hab. 1.13. Thus Christ speaks here out of Humane
affection. And so he did sufficiently show his true Humanity when he prayed
before in the Garden. But this miserable cry does much more clearly show the
same against such Heretics as should after spring up, denying his Humane
nature. Let none therefore be offended at this complaint which was truly
Humane: but let every one think with himself that flesh and blood did here
truly hang on the cross, in the form of a servant, Phil. 2. These things are
tried and proved on the cross by death, and the pure Humanity. But after three
days you shall see and find much other things, when the new, and living, and
cheerful Body shall rise out of the Sepulcher. So then it is plain, that
Christ as he was girt with greatest gladness, so he was also compossed with
extreme sorrow. And as he was endowed with the highest Truth, so he was beset
with the deepest and lowest infirmity: and as he spent his life in the greatest
peace, so he lived also in sorest troubles. I say, as Christ enjoyed the
sweetness of life, so he tasted the bitterness of death.

2. Observe, that that Desertion of Christ, is the fear and dread of our
conscience for sin which we commit, which does find and feel the Judgment of
God and eternal Wrath, and is so affected therewith, as if it were perpetually
forsaken and cast out from the presence of God for ever, according to that of
David: I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes, Psalm 31.22.
Who can but despair when Judgment is revealed? There is none can stand before
the Judgment of God, or is able to bear it. For as the too great Splendour of
the Sun will dazzle and darken the eyes, and loud noise make one deaf: so the
Judgment of God is too loud for our mind and heart to endure: and too heavy
for our humane strength to undergo. And therefore it forces a man to despair,
because there is no way open to escape, as Amos says: They shall not escape:
he that flees of them, shall not flee away. Though they dig into Hell, thence
shall my hand take them, Amos 9. When the Lord comes thus to Judgment, all the
creatures obey him, and further the Judgment of God, to execute all fearful
plagues upon the damned, as it is in Joel: The Earth shall quake, the Heavens
shall tremble, the Suu and the Moon shall be dark, Joel 2. Again, In that day
the Sun shall go down at noon, Amos 8. That is, in the day of the Lords
Judgment. What is more miserable then man so judged of the Lord, destitute of
the counsel, comfort, and help of all the creatures, and despairing? This is
the Judgment that all we deserved for our sins. Christ therefore the only
begotten Son of God did of his mere Mercy, without any of our merit, cast
himself into our case, and took that punishment which we had deserved upon his
own shoulders. Here we see on one hand the common people stand reviling Christ,
the Priests blaspheming, the Thieves cursing, the Apostles denying him, his
Friends forsaking him, the Earth moved, the Sun darkened: in short, all horrid
things, and all the creatures set against him. On the other hand we see God
also his Adversary, and so forsaking him, that he cries out, why have thou
forsaken me? Which of us would not have despaired in such necessity? But Christ
took all this upon him, that he might overcome our desperation, and give us
also hope in the like extremity. So that this was our voice or cry, who by no
means were able to bear the Judgment of God, but must have despaired. But
Christ took that Cry upon himself, and overcame our despair, that now we may be
sure God will never forsake us, no though he seem so to do; as Christ in that
hour seemed to be forsaken of God, in that he could perceive no consolation
from him, whereas he was not indeed forsaken of him, but was even then the most
beloved Son of God. So that here we are well assured, that God is never more
present; then when he seems to be farthest of. In a small moment, says he,
for a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee, Isa. 54. Christ therefore that he might deliver sinners, put himself in
the stead of all sinners, yet was he no Thief, Adulterer, Murderer, etc. but he
undertook the wages, punishment, and desert of sinners (which are cold, heat,
hunger, thirst, fear, trembling horror of death and Hell, Desperation, Death,
Hell it self,) that he might conquer hunger with hunger, fear with fear,
horror with horror, desperation with desperation, death with death, hell with
hell; in brief, that he might conquer Satan by Satan. It is the gallantest kind
of Victory to kill the enemy with his own Sword. Hence says Paul: Godsent his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin, Romans 8. So
Isaiah: Thou have broken the Rod of the oppressor, as in the day of Midian,
Isa. 9. For the Midianites slew one another, Judge. 7. Thus Satan was overcome
by his own arms, as David slew Goliath with his own Weapon, 1 Samuel 17.

3. We are here taught how to behave our selves in Tribulations and
Afflictions: even to run to God in them all with a believing mind, that he
would be pleased to look on our Affliction.

4. Here also we learn, that we should freely follow Christ in the same way by
which he entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, and not grumble at our pressures,
forasmuch as the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord. But then shall we be truly blessed, when we partake of the sufferings of
Christ, suffer adversity for his Names sake; when nothing is sweet unto us but
Jesus, nothing harsh but to be parted from Jesus: and what wise man would not
rather go with the King in a mourning Habit, and with his Nobles clad in blacks
into a most stately Palace of pleasure and joy, then to be trimmed up in gay
clothes, and with the rascal sort to be shut out of doors? The Vestment of
Christ is dyed purple with blood: and so are the garments of the Martyrs, for
they pressed into the celestial Joy through many Tribulations and the most
strict Life; We see how little cause we have to complain of crosses and
afflictions, especially if we consider that we justly suffer for our sins.

5. Lastly, We are by this Word instructed how to quench the burning heat of
lust. To the beating down of which evil there is not a more wholesome and
effectual Herb to be had, then to consider that the Lord Jesus was thus
forsaken of all, yea of his very Father, exposed to so many Torments, void of
all comfortable Refreshments, and that he being guiltless should yet endure all
manner of Tortures and Adversities for other men's faults. But O ye Fornicators
and Adulterers, how do you requite your most miserably afflicted Christ? If ye
cannot endure to be deprived of some momentany and petty pleasures, nor taste a
little of some bitter or sharp potion for your health and eternal welfare, how
will ye be able to hazard blood, body, and life too for Christ and the
brethren? Where do ye fasten your affections? Why do ye stick so fast to the
earth, whose birth and blood is higher then the Heavens? O ye that dwell in the
Vineyards of Engedi, why perish ye like the dung in Endor? Ye Citizens of
Paradise, why wallow you in the styes of Asphaltites, why tumble ye in the mire
and mud of the dead Sea? Take a bundle of this Myrrh, meditate upon the
Passion of the Lord, that ye may be healed of that loathsome lust. And so much
for this Word.

It is added in the close, that Christ even in this his doleful and miserable
cry did not want such as mocked him, Behold, say they, this man calls for
Elias.

1. Jerome is of opinion that these were the Roman Soldiers, who understood
not the propriety of the Hebrew Tongue.

2. But others think they were Hebrews, who did openly deprave and wrest the
words of Christ against their conscience, as if he now implored the help of
Elias, who before had said he was the Son of God: If they had not been stark
blind, they might have seen, that by this great cry he applied to himself that
place of Scripture where all things were foretold which they then saw to be
fulfilled before their eyes, and for the most part were already fulfilled.

Of the fifth Word.
MEn that are desolate and forsaken use to seek ease and aid which way soever
they turn themselves. So Christ at the entrance into his Passion foreseeing and
considering those things which he was to suffer, fell into an agony and the
anguish of death: sometime running to God by prayer, then again returning to
his Disciples, seeking comfort from both. So now here also when he found
himself forsaken of God, he does seek for some small refreshment even from men,
especially by a little drink; for of the two the want of drink is more tedious
then that of meat to those that are weary and tired out, who sometimes are
resreshed with a few drops, Therefore,

Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, John 19 28.
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. Now there was set a
Vessel full of Vinegar, and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon
Hysop, and put it to his mouth.

Christ is last of all tormented in his Taste, as Eve in the last place sinned
in her tasting, Genesis 3. For before she had tasted the forbidden fruit, she had
sinned by lusting after it, and reaching out her hand to take it. Now this
thirst of Christ was partly natural, and partly Mystical. For,

1. First he was exceeding weary, and had sweat abundantly: besides he hung
naked on the cross exposed to Sun and Wind: So that questionless he must needs
be grievously athirst: which does easily appear in that he does so pitifully
express the sharpness of his thirst by a mournful entreaty, as if he had
forgot all his other pains; although he did not do or say this so much to
quench his thirst, as to fulfill the Scripture. That the Scripture might be
fulfilled, he says, I thirst. But,

2. He did spiritually thirst after our Salvation, his desire was to overcome
the Devil, and to set man at liberty, though he died for it. And this thirst he
was never without: but now in his Passion he did discover it more then before;
for here it does truly appear how earnestly he thirsted for our Salvation,
however all his works also everywhere do witness this very thing.

The meaning then of the word is, as if he had said, The sense.
Dear Brethren, whereas I am yours, and do extremely thirst after your
salvation as one that does entirely love you, and am now for the love-sake of
you and your Salvation cast off and forsaken of God, the fervency of my love
does command and compel me to search exactly and trace out, if happily there
be any place of pity and mercy to be found in your breasts, who are obliged to
me by large favors, and whom I have purchased at so dear a rate. Charity, I
say, and even necessity it self, do force me to beg of you and put you upon the
trial, to see what thanks you will render to me for the great sorrow and pains
I have undertaken and gone through for your sakes. I do not call to you to come
into the same misery with me, I do not desire that you should hazard any of
your blood or life: I neither covet nor seek any of your Gold, Silver, or any
precious thing that ye have got or purchased with great pains and industry: Nay
it is a very small matter and easy to be had: that which I entreat now in my
necessity at this very pinch of death, is no more but what Nature has made
common to all men: I thirst, I cannot hide it, and now I have it known, I
humbly entreat a little drink at your hands.

1. I thirst, I desire but a little cold water: what less can be desired? and
what can more unworthily be denied? I am sore athirst, I ask but so much water
of you as I have shed either sweat or blood for your Salvation: Nay not so
much, I ask but a very little of you. I thirst, I have not slept one wink all
this night, but have spent it in Toyling, Tortures, Travel, Stripes, and
Wounds; my blood, vital humor, and all my strength is quite spent and wasted.
My heart is like melting wax in the midst of my belly, Psalm 22. My strength is
dried up like a pot-sheard, my tongue cleaves to my jaws, my bones are as dry
as a stick. I have stretched out my hands all the day, my soul is as the earth
without water, as the parched ground; I thirst. I pray not for the lengthening
of my life: I pray not against death, the cross, or any other kind of torment:
do but only quench my thirst, this is all I beg of you. Is there none among so
many, that will take pity on my soul and refresh it? The water is not to be
fetched with such hazard out of the Camp of the Philistines, 2 Samuel 23. Nor is
there such a great gulf fixed between you and me, Luke 16. The distance is not
so great, but that ye may easily help me in this condition.

2. I thirst, not only in body, but rather, and more especially in my soul: I
desire thy Salvation, O man, more then water, and thy Redemption more then my
own refreshment. It is for thee, I say, that I thirst, nor do I desire only to
taste of thee, but to suck and swallow thee up wholly into my bowels by a full
draught of Love. To quench this thirst it is that I have undertaken such a
journey, set upon so much hardship, suffered so many Tortures: and that nothing
may be wanting for thy Salvation, I do yet thirst after a thousand more such
Torments. Behold now is the time that my strength should fail: therefore that I
may not be disappointed of my desired wishes, do not, O man, do not this day
harden thy heart: but take the fire of Holy Love, which may so boil thee by its
heat, that thou may breath forth chaste groans, and pour our abundance of
tears, and with these let me be fed. I crave not many things at thy hands, yea
I will abundantly recompense small matters: I will not despise a little frozen
tear, nor thy meanest desire proceeding out of the poverty of thy spirit. This
is my evening prayer: my only care next to the Love of my God is to Seek thee,
to Love thee, to Thirst for thee.

3. I thirst, that ye also may be athirst with this my thirst; that is, as I
have loved you, so ye would have fervent love one to another, then which I
account nothing more Sacred, so that as a good Shepherd I lay down my life for
you by the only impulse of Love, Ioh. 10.

4. Lastly, I thirst, even I the head and heart do earnestly thirst after all
my Members: nor does the misery of my friends a little afflict me, of which I
will no less upbraid the wicked than of my own, when I shall come in the clouds
of Heaven with Majesty and Glory, saying, I was athirst, and ye gave me no
drink; for what ye have done to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have
done it unto me, Mat. 25. Then shall thou quench my thirst, O man, if thou do
feed my hungry ones, give dsink to the thirsty, cloth the naked, entertain
strangers, visit those that are sick and in prison, comfort and deliver them:
then thou quenchest my thirst, if thou give the milk of Instruction to the
ignorant to drink, if thou break the bread of wholesome Doctrine to them,
reprove sinners, forgive the Debts and wrongs of thy brethren, patiently bear
the frowardness and distempers of others, and by pure and holy Prayers help and
assist them what thou can. This is my thirst, which is diffused throughout my
members, but contracted in me. Let this be quenched without the Vinegar of
sorrow, or Gall of bitterness. Let this my great and manifold thirst admonish
you, and the abundant and plentiful measure of the Recompense which I shall
measure out unto you. O man, I thirst.

Thus far Christ expressed himself. But what did he obtain by all this? You shall
hear: There was set, says he, a vessel full of Vinegar, etc. O insatiable
Fury! The wicked are never satisfied in persecuting good men. They give Vinegar
to Christ, which being squeezed out of the Sponge, and dropping besides his
mouth, could not satisfy his thirst, but offend his mouth, yea it would have
spoiled his taste: it would have troubled and tormented all his inward parts.
This was the best succor and refreshment that Christ found in so great pains
and punishments. Never was there any so obnoxious to condemnation, as not to
prevail for one crum of comfort, especially after Sentence of death once given
and received. But for the Lord that made all things there is simply nothing of
piety at all left. All things are carried in extremes now, because he was
delivered to their will. Thus the Fountain of life was dried up, who says, If
any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Joh. 7. He that moisteneth the
earth with dew and rain, and gives drink to all, he is thirsty, and cannot get
a drop of water. Thus Christ made hard satisfaction for our Surfeiting and
Drunkenness: So did he suffer in all his Senses, that man might be completely
redeemed. But thus the world uses the godly in their necessity.

Now that Vinegar does fitly set forth the bitterness and impiety of the Jews
hearts. For as Vinegar is but degenerate Wine; so the Jews had degenerated from
what they were at first: My noble Vine, how art thou turned into the degenerate
plant of a strange vine unto me, Jer. 2. Again, I looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes, Isa. 5. It is to be admired in
those ministers of the Lords death, yea in that Divine Counsel by which all
these things were ordered, that they should do every thing so regularly and so
exactly, as if they had sworn to fulfill all Prophesies in him; And therefore
it is here said, That the Scripture might be fulfilled: to wit, that which
says, They gave me Gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to
drink, Psalm 69, Hence we learn, how the world deals with the godly in their
extremity and distress. 'For at this very day Christ cries and complains in
the poor, and those that are destitute of the like succor and assistance: I
thirst, but the world does give nothing but Vinegar, scoff at, contemn,
reproach, revile the afflicted. Therefore it follows: But others said, Let be,
let us see whether Elias will come to save him. The rest should have reproved
those mockers which offered Vinegar to Christ when he was in that distress, and
did so earnestly desire a little drink. But there was not one to rebuke them.
Nay, what these do with Vinegar, the rest do with bitter words. Both sorts
wounded Christ. So unequally is Christ dealt with in this world. But it lasts
but an hour, etc.

Of the sixth Word.
WHen Jesus therefore had received the Vinegar, John 19.30.
he said, It is finished.

There were many things yet to be fulfilled, as Death, the opening of his side,
his Burial, the Destruction of Hell, which were also foretold in the
Scriptures. But inasmuch as they were how about to be finished, therefore he
says, It is finished. There was the Resurrection, Ascension, and sending the
holy Spirit yet behind. But those belong to the Conquest, not to the Contest:
They are the Laurels, not the labors of the battle. Christ then by this sixth
word does exceedingly fulminate and appale the Devil, which yet makes most for
our Consolation.

The meaning is all one as if he had said, The sense.
Thou wicked soulhunter, thou do here spread thy net in vain; thou shall
catch and carry away nothing but shame and confusion. Hitherto thou have done
what in thee lies to destroy me. But now and hence-forward none of all thy
cheating tricks shall avail any thing against me; thy thousand weapons and
wiles shall not hurt me: thou have bent thy bow, thou have sown the tares of
envy, thou have planted the thorn of ingratitude, thou have stirred up the
fury of the people, thou have blinded the Judges, encouraged the Executioners,
thou have spit thy venom and done the worst thou can. The Disciple by thy
instigation has betrayed his God, his Friends have despised him, the Soldiers
crucified him. Thou have shot all thy Darts, now thy Quiver is empty. Thou have
opened the pit which thou have dug, but shall fall into it thy self. Thy
wickedness shall come down upon thine own pate. Thou shall not only get nothing
by me, but shall also lose many millions of souls by me, I will be many a
thousand out of thy way: thy Power shall be weakened; thy Kingdom wasted,
Iniquity shall come to an end. My Wisdom shall overcome thy malice. For lo,
whatsoever the Father has determined (praised be God) is now accomplished; I
have fully suffered whatever the Law and the Prophets did foretell, all that is
necessary and may conduce to the Salvation of man. The Sacrifice is offered,
the Types fulfilled, the shadows are fled away. The Fathers command is
finished. The Scripture is sulfilled. The power is at an end which thou have
used, or rather abused over men. The rage and violence of the Jews against me
is at an end. Righteousness it perfected, it is come up to the height, greater
then which cannot possibly be imagined. Justice and Love is completed, it is
raised to the highest pitch. The Sacrifice by which alone God could be
pacified, is now perfectly finished. Finally, all things are now made ready.
Sin is at an end. Everlasting Righteousness shall now take place. The Law is at
an end, the Gospel shall now succeed. Man is now redeemed, and reconciled unto
God. Nothing has been omitted, all things have been vigorously executed;
nothing could hinder or withhold me from finishing the Mystery of man's
Redemption. An end is now put to thy Kingdom. The Kingdom of Christ and of God
shall now begin. Henceforth thou shall not be so formidable, nor shall thou
have such power upon earth. The people that dwell in Sion shall not fear thee,
O Ashur. The children also shall take up Rods, they shall whip and scourge
thee: they shall be so strengthened by Faith in me, that they shall be nothing
afraid of thy temptations: yea they shall tear thee all to pieces and spurn
thee; for it is finished.

1. By this Word of Christ is our Faith confirmed against all Heretics, and
Antichrist himself.

2. Hereby also may we Triumph over all adversity whatsoever. For if we be
tempted with any lust of sin; if death, if hell rush upon us, we may say, Why
ragest thou thus, why art thou so mad? Do not hear that Victory is at hand,
and that all things are finished? For however we may now be sensible of those
things, yet they are as a Serpent without poison, as a Be without a sting.
Therefore we may boldly say: Death, where is thy victory? Thou art swallowed
up, etc. 1 Cor. 15.

3. Whereas heretofore we were by the Law, we were very uncertain whither we
should go, and what should become of us after this life; Nay we were most sure
to be hurled into Hell: now by this consummation we are ascertained that we
shall be received into Heaven, if so be we are graffed into Christ by Faith.
But Christ said that all things were finished in the same sense as the Lamb is
said to be slain from the beginning of the world. Not that he was then
manifestly slain, but that Christ being once slain, his death and blood was
sprinkled backward and forward, even to Adam, and to the end of the world. Thus
also is our salvation finished, not fully yet and indeed, but in Hope. Man is
begun to be justified and healed. But mean while being justified and healed,
the sin which yet remains in his flesh is not imputed to him because of Christ,
who being without any sin, and now become one with man, intercedeth for him to
the Father, Romans 5. So that there is now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. Now after that word, It is finished, let not the Jews
expect any other, who shall do more then what Christ has done already.

Of the seventh Word.
AS Christ was now about to die in the midst of his unspeakable grief, mourning
and sorrow, when the Humane Nature could no longer hold out, this Fountain of
Life began to close his languishing eyes, his face waxt pale and wan, and the
signs of death appeared in him: he spoke the last Word to his Father, to whom
he had directed his first and fourth before.

And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, Luke 23.46.
into thy hands I commend my spirit. And having said thus, he bowed the head,
and gave up the ghost, John 19.30.

This last word is taken out of Psalm 31.5. which Saint Steven also made use
of, and would to God we could all imitate it. I say I wish that this might be
our last word. He takes good care of his soul that does commend it to God.

The sense.
The meaning of the word is, as if Christ should have said: O most excellent
Father, to thee all thanks do of right belong, and are justly due for thy
blessings bestowed upon us, and into thy hands the Salvation of mankind is
safely committed, from whom it does proceed. For at thy beck all things are
made safe and sure: and at thy pleasure and command are they again dissolved
and brought to nothing, out of which they were made. Thou art the beginning and
end of all things: from thee they all had their being. It is meet therefore
that they should return to thee again, and with so much the more confidence
commend themselves to thee again, there being nothing more acceptable, nothing
more sweet and pleasant, nothing more prompt and ready to thee, then to receive
the creatures that return to thee with thy Fatherly Kisses and greatest
Clemency. Thou do cherish and love thine own, and hate nothing that thou
have made, Wisd. 11.24. Thou art the most desired Bosom of thy children, Thou
art the safest Harbor of our Ships, Thou art the Surety, peace and security of
our souls. So that I thy Son have no small hope left me; while I sail through
the deep and wide Sea of Tribulations, thou supplyest my strength, and by thy
help have I overcome so many hazards and such great dangers. I have manifested
thy Name unto men. I have glorified thee upon earth. I have finished the work
that thou gave me to do. Now I come unto thee, John 17. And for the
prosperous gale of thy Goodness I render thee all possible thanks, and do here
upon this Altar of the Cross sacrifice and offer up unto thee my self for a
most acceptable Oblation. But because my spirit does with wonderful sweetness
cleave to the flesh which thou gave me for a companion, it is by a kind of
natural reluctance exceedingly afraid to be parted from it: Therefore I commit
the close of my life into thy hands, that thou would not leave me now at
this hour, who have ever done so many and so great things for me, and have
always heard me.

1. I commend my spirit into the hands of thy Majesty, which have made and
preserved all things, for thou have marvelously settled me in hope: In peace
therefore will I lie down and take my rest in thee, Psalm 4. Thou will not
leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption, Psalm 16.
Let my flesh flourish again, and let gladness compass me about whom thou have
girded with sackcloth. Look upon my Humility, save my soul out of all distress;
set my feet in a large room. Thou art my God; my Lot and lines are in thy
hands. Receive me thy highly esteemed One who commend my self unto thee.

2. Into thy hands also I commend my Reward or Purchase which I have obtained
at so dear a rate, Redeemed with so much blood; I mean those souls which are
preserved from Eternal death and destruction, and which hitherto have
brandished the Sword, and greedily sought for revenge, but are now reconciled
and become Champions for thy Truth. Take those souls into thy hands which I
have written and printed in my hands. These are my booty, the spoils recovered
out of the jaws of our enemy. This is my Venison; take and taste of it, that
thy soul may bless me. This is my stray sheep which I have brought home again
upon my shoulders. This is the tenth penny which I have found, rejoice and be
glad with me. These I commend into thy hands, for whom I now give up the ghost,
let them never fall out of thy hands. Keep the souls of the righteous in thy
hand, and let not the torment of malice or the wicked one touch them. Wipe off
every tear from their eyes: let the former things pass away, let there be no
mourning, nor crying, nor any sorrow: let not the pit any more gape upon them.
Dear and only Father, who openest thy hands, and fillest every living thing
with thy blessing; pluck them not back from me thy Son, and all my accomplices,
who are also reckoned among thy children; but receive, keep, cherish them, and
gather them up into thy Joys; bless, crown, exalt them. For truly, for that
very cause do I undauntedly lay down and offer up my life to thee, confessing
and trusting in thy will; and so, O Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

Whence we are taught, first to bear whatsoever comes from God; Secondly, to
commend all we are or have unto God; and thirdly, to persevere and hold out
unto the end. It is the end only and peseverance that will prove what our works
are. Perseverance only delivers up the spirit into the hands of God; that
alone does strive lawfully, and that alone shall be crowned. For what prowess
or praise is it only to begin? Who will suffer a tree to grow that does but
only bud and blossom, and never bring forth any ripe fruit? What can be more
dronish then to put on the Habegeon or Harness of War at home in the House, and
cowardly to cast it off, and run away when the Battle is set? What can be more
foolish and ridiculous then to be at vast expenses to lay the Foundation of a
House, to raise up the walls, and never lay the roof to cover it? What
advantage is it to make a long Voyage, and sink in the Haven? What profit is it
to buy oil and spill it on the ground when the Bridegroom is coming? To what
purpose is it to be zealous for a time, to climb up to Heaven, to make his nest
among the Stars, to walk with the children of God in the midst of a fiery
Furnace, and at last to sink down to hell, to be besotted in sin, and of a young
Angel to become an old decrepite Devil? Remember him therefore who loved us to
the end, and persevered in his love to us even to the end upon the Cross, and
will save none but such as persevere in good even to the end, to wit, in the
imitation of his Cross.

Now when our Lord Christ had uttered this his last Word, he bowed down his
head, and gave up the ghost. He bowed his head; First, as taking his leave of
the world. Secondly, he would thereby comfort us, by letting us know that he is
not cross or froward toward us. First, it is very significantly expressed in
that it is not said that he died, but that he gave up the ghost: for he had
power to lay down his life, John 10. Secondly, he is said to give up the ghost,
to let us know, that when our souls are loosed from the flesh, they should be
commended to the Divine Goodness, as into the hands of a most dear Father.

Thus innocent Abel is slain by his brother. Thus is Isaac offered, Genesis 4. and
22. Thus Joseph escapes naked to his fathers protection, being spoiled of his
garment of flesh by the Adulteress Synagogue. Thus our High Priest has
finished his evening Sacrifice. Thus the Life of the world died, the Fountain
of true Light was ecclipsed, thus the Spring of all Life, in whom all things
live waxed dry, that he might deliver them that were subject to death. Thus
that celestial Wedlock between the holiest soul and the purest flesh was
dissolved and divorced by the sword of Death, that we who were condemned might
be recovered to the indissoluble Union of his Beatitude. Thus the Organ of
Divinity, the Harp of the true David, the most melodious Voice of Jesus sunk
into the silence of cruel Death. Thus those Heavenly Lights of his most
gracious Eyes were darkened by Death. Thus that most sacred Breast of Eternal
Wisdom, and the Storehouse of the Treasures of Grace, is deprived of his life.
Thus he Redeemed us from our sins with so great a price; a greater then which
is not to be found among all the creatures in the world: thus did he satisfy
the Father for our disobedience with such obedience as was even unto death. O
how great was that grief, when that most holy Soul which was Wedded and United
to that most holy Body with an indissoluble bond of Love, must be separated now
and torn asunder by a violent death, and that most holy Life die! Never was
there death more bitter, because never was there man so sensibly sensible of it.

1. Woe be to thee therefore, O thou ungodly Synagogue, who art more fierce and
cruel then any wild beast; thou have devoured the life of Jesus, who out of the
Paternal Piety was sent unto thee to be thy Father and thy Husband.

2. O how grievous will thy Accusation be for rending and tearing the body of
Christ. And woe be to thee thou ungrateful heart, thou hard heart, harder then
any stone, who do not break and melt at the remembrance of so great a
Sacrifice for the expiating thy heinous sins: how strictly will that innocent
blood be required at thy hands? Here then, O man, O generation of Adam, here
knock thy bosom and beat thy breast; consider well and think of this death. The
chiefest and choicest good does here hang upon the Cross. Here the Eternal
Wisdom offers it self to be seen naked. Here the tree carried the Treasure
and Price of the whole world. O sinners, here dies the Son of God. I say here
the Son of the most High, the King of Heaven, and Lord of Earth dies: Nay he
dies on the Cross like a Malefactor in the midst of Thieves, in greatest misery
and anguish and shame. It was we, O ye sons of men that brought this just One
to this unjust and unworthy suffering. Our sins were the cause of this his
great Passion. Here the word of the Sacrament is made good, This is my body,
which is given for you. This is my blood which is shed for you, for the
remission of sins. Here now we understand what Christ meant by these sacred and
holy words, because all things are here seen with the eyes. Here that Article
of our most holy Faith has its Foundation: He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried. Think on this, O man, imprint these things in
thy heart, that thy very inward parts may be made sensible how that we men, we
sinners were guilty of this death. We should have hung on the cross, and died,
yea and have been eternally scorcht in Hell, but that our most holy Lord stepped
in, and said, I will hang on the cross, and die for all men. Take me, and smite
me the Shepherd, but let the sheep go free. I will pay what I own not. I will
undertake other men's debt. I will even all accounts, I will make peace, and
bring all things to a good end and issue. Think seriously on these things
Believers. Be pleased to accept this Ministry of Christ, and highly prize it.
For this his death is your life. For us thus to die, is to live, and escape
death. This weakness is our strength and fortitude. These wounds and scars are
our health and soundness. This malediction is our benediction; this cursing is
our blessing. This shame is our glory. This cross is our celestial Court and
Palace. These Nails are our Salvation. Lift up your hearts, O ye Faithful,
lift up your hearts in consideration of these wonderful things. There was War
between Christ and the Devil; the field was pitched, the battle set, and Christ
got the Victory. Let us therefore give him thanks who was pleased through his
infinite love with such hazard and hardship to Redeem us.

1. In this expiation of Christ, first we see that verified, which he said
before in John 10, I have power to lay down my life.

2, Here we see that the works of God are against reason. For who ever hearing
that Christ was the son of God, and seeing such great Miracles which he had
done before, could at all believe, that God should so far wink at wicked men,
as to let them kill so great and so worthy a man! Again, who would believe that
the true had then its beginning, seeing him die so shameful a death? But this
is the ancient and usual custom of God to promote and carry on his works by
strange, unlikely and contrary means. It was indeed the pleasure of God to
cause great and mighty boughs and limms to grow on this tree of Christ. He
intended to build up and quicken the Church. This he did by a work disagreeable
and repugnant to life, and nothing of kin to it; to wit, the death of Christ,
by which he quickened and made the Church alive. Hence is that of John 12.
Except a grain of wheat die, it brings forth no fruit: but if it die, it
bears much fruit. The Edifice or building of the Church did not then indeed
appear while Christ yet hanged on the cross, for here you see nothing but his
death and burial, as at Seed-time there is no show of Harvest. But as in Summer
the seed that was sown does spring up, so after the Resurrection the living
Church sprouted out of the dead and dry body of Christ.

3. From this Expiation of Christ we are diligently to confider, what
punishments we shall endure, if we persevere in iniquity, inasmuch as God did
suffer his innocent Son to be so cruelly and inhumanly dealt with for others
sins. Daughters of Jerusalem, says he, weep not for me, but for your selves,
i.e. Learn ye by my suffering, what ye have deserved. If this be done to me who
am guiltless, and harmless, and blameless, what shall be done to you who are
faulty and guilty? The Text follows:

(...). 27.51.
And behold, the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom, and the earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints Which slept, arose, and came out of the
graves aster his Resurrection, and went into the Holy City, and appeared unto
many.

Hitherto we have seen the weak things of Christ. Now his Majesty shines forth
and shows it self; discovering who, what, and how great a one he is that now
hangs on the tree. Here then consider what mighty Signs and Wonders were
wrought at the death of Christ. For those signs do show the Righteousness and
Innocence of Christ, and withal do reprove and condemn the hard hearts of
unbelievers. Men would not be troubled at the death of this man, but lo the
Elements are much disquiered at it. Flinty stones were here softened, yea
broken: and thou heart of flesh art thou turned into a stone! do thou stand
gazing on the Passion of thy Lord, and art nothing afflicted or moved thereat!
There are some who say, we should be jocund and jovial, laugh and be merry at
the Passion of Christ. Surely it was then no time for the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem to laugh, when Heaven and Earth were thus disturbed and moved at the
death of Christ. Indeed afterward we may well rejoice for the saving death of
Christ, as that by which we are redeemed from eternal death. But nevertheless
the same Passion ought to affect and move us as we are men, unless we should
altogether become inhumane, and from men be degenerated into stones. to say
nothing of what great joy it might be unto us, if we did but consider the cause
of this miserable Death, even our sins, which ought bitterly to be bewailed in
this Passion of Christ.

Now all these terrible Signs which are here described, were both within and
without the Temple, and did manifestly declare the wrath of God against the
unrighteousness of the whole world, for the purging where of the most High
Majesty gave his only begotten Son to die. And because men would not
acknowledge the same, therefore the Elements publish it. If these, says he,
should hold their peace, the stones would cry out. Besides, by the Passion of
Christ, and after it. God intended to make a great alteration in the world.
Which alteration these Signs did foreshew and usher in:

1. The Vail of the Temple was rent, to show, that by the death of Christ the
Holies of Holies are revealed, that by Christ there is an open entrance for us
unto God, that the way to the Temple of God is made open and plain, that the
flaming Sword is removed from Paradise, that the Wall of partition is broken
down, that those things that separated us from God are taken out of the way;
that what was hid and kept close before, Ephesians. 3.
is now made known, to wit, that the Gentiles should be coheirs, copartners,
and incorporated and become one body with the Jews. Finally, that all shadows
and figures were now ceased, and that the Truth it self was come and did shine
forth. Therefore the Vail of the Temple was rent. So that now we may look into
the Sanctuary, which the Vail hindered before. The Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God, which in the Old Testament were veiled and covered, are now brought to
light by Christ, who came a Light into the world. Henceforth therefore the
Gentiles may behold the Mystery of God; that is, they may acknowledge and
learn the word and truth of God, because the Vail is rent, and the Jew is not
better then the Gentile. Would to God also that Vail that is upon the hearts of
the Jews were spiritually rent, that they might truly both hear and understand
the Scripture, 2 Cor 3. And that they also might acknowledge Jesus Christ.
Origin speaks of a twofold Vail, as Paul also does: the first of which is rent
already and taken away, but the second yet remains, and hides those things
which we shall see in the life to come. For now we know but in part only, but
then we shall know perfectly, 1 Cor. 13. I say, the first Vail is taken away:
so that we may know many things of God, which before were kept close from us.
But the second Vail yet remains: therefore at present we cannot perfectly
know the things of God. In brief, Moses and the Prophets are now made clear and
plain; but as to the Historical part the vail of the Temple is rent already.
Therefore the Romans might enter, as also they did. The High Priests of the
Jews were wont to rent their garments, when they heard any thing that was
wicked or blasphemous. This does the Temple of God also now do, renting its
garment, being as it were amazed, and taking in great indignation the wrong and
injuries offered to Christ.

2. A second sign was the Earthquake, the earth abhorring as it were that such
wickedness should be committed upon it, and abominating the impiety of the Jews
done to the Universal Creator of all things. It did also foreshew that the
whole Earth should be moved and shaken at the preaching of the Apostles, as was
foretold in Haggai, I will shake the Heaven and the earth, and the desire of
all Nations shall come, Hag. 2.

3. A third sign was the renting of the Rocks. This was somewhat more then the
other. For we read of many earthquakes, but not of any Rocks rent before,
which was now done to reprehend the obstinacy and hardness of the Jews. And it
did foreshew, either that the writings of the Prophets should be so rent at the
coming of Christ, that all might see what was in the inside of them: Or rather
it did signify that the hard hearts of the Gentiles should be rent, that they
might receive the seed of Gods Word. For the Word of God and his Divine Power
was now about to pierce all things that were never so hard, never so fast and
firm.

4. A fourth sign was the rising of some dead bodies. This exceeded all the
foregoing signs. In this sign there was a special kind of Gods power seen.
These dead, (Joh. 5.) heard the voice of the Son of God when he with a loud cry
gave up the ghost. At this cry their graves opened, that the dead which yet
lived might again go out of their graves: not before, but after the
Resurrection of Christ. For he was the first born of the dead, and the first
fruits of them that slept. Whereby was foreshewed, first that the hope of our
resurrection is only by the death of Christ; secondly, that every man shall
rise again in his own time. The Evangelist does Emphatically add, that they who
thus arose, came into Jerusalem, and appeared unto many, that none might think
it was a phantasme or delusion. By this likewise was foreshewed, that many
snners should rise out of their sins and the death of their souls to a new
life, Romans 6. so as to be seen afterward in the holy Church, exercising
themselves in the works of Life and Spirit; to wit, good works, whereby others
may be moved to glorify the Father, Mat. 5. The graves were therefore opened,
to show that death was swallowed up by the death of Christ: for so it was
foretold by the Prophet, O death I will be thy death, Hos. 13. Thus we see,

1. That when Christ died, every creature suffered with him. Only the Jews
hearts remained hard, whom obstinate sinners also do now imitate, who by their
sins do still crucify the Son of God; notwithstanding they have heard and seen
so many signs and wonders, they do not yet fear nor rend their hearts: so far
are they from rising again, and confessing Christ to be the Son of God.

2. Here we see, that the glory or glorifying of Christ did begin presently
upon his death; so also will our glorifying begin immediately after our death;
and we who now seem to be despised in this life, shall then appear gloriously
in glory, as may be seen in the beggar Lazarus, who when he lived was hated of
all men, but when he died, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16.

It is to be noted, that at the death of Christ there were seven Signs, which
do yet likewise concur in every justified person. For the Sun is darkened at
noon, the vail is rent, the earth shakes, the Rocks cleave asunder, the Graves
open, the Dead arise, and the Gentiles make a good confession. For,

1. Whosoever will be justified, must have no hope or confidence in any worldly
thing; he must loath and cast them out of his sight: this is to have darkness
made, when worldly things seem to be colorless and dark unto us.

2. Internal things must be revealed to him; that is, he must have a true sight
of his sins, acknowledge his own filthiness: this is to rend the Vail, under
which such sins were hid, that they did not appear so foul and filthy as they
are.

3. Then he must fear and be astonished at the sight of such ugly sins, and so
defiled a conscience: this is for the Earth to quake; for no man is afraid or
troubled in conscience, but he that sees his sin and feels the weight thereof.

4. The rending of the Rocks is next: to wit, Contrition, Hatred, and dislike
of sin; and he that before was a Rock, is now cleft and broken, and so the Rock
sends forth waters of weeping and tears.

5. The Graves are opened, when the mouth makes confession and discloseth what
was before concealed.

6. He must come forth by Absolution, and go into the City Jerusalem, i. e. the
Holy Church, and be again reconciled unto it by a spiritual Life.

7. Lastly, He must confess and witness by word and work that Christ is the Son
of God, as the Centurion here did, concerning whom it follows:

Now when the Centurion which stood over against him, Mat. 27.54. Mar. 15.39.
Luke 23.47.
and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw that he so cried out, and
gave up the ghost, and saw the Earthquake, and those things that were done,
they feared greatly, and glorified God, saying, Truly this was a Righteous man,
and the Son of God. And all the people that came together to that sight,
beholding the things that were done, smote their breasts and returned. And all
his acquaintance and the women that followed him from Galilee, stood afar off,
beholding these things. Among whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of
James the less, and the mother of Joses, and Salome the mother of Zebedees
children: who also when he was in Galile, followed him, and ministered unto him,
and many other women which came up with him from Galile to Jerusalem.

Hitherto of the Signs which happened at Christ's death. Now we shall see what
fruit followed from thence. First, the Centurion and they that were with him,
which were Romans, were hereby converted to the Faith, glorified God, confessed
that Jesus who was crucified, was a just man and the Son of God, and
consequently that he was put to death wrongfully. And what wonder? Should such
great Miracles which were wrought in Heaven, and in Earth, and in the Temple,
and on the Dead, have no effect, and bring forth no fruit? Blessed therefore
are they that search out his wondrous things, Psalm 119.18. Now if Christ could
do these things with the Elements at his death, what might he have done upon
them that crucified him? What Jew can say but that God did here manifestly show
himself? Great were their ancient Miracles in Egypt, in the red Sea, at Mount
Sinai, and in the Wilderness. But compare them with those that were here
wrought at the death of Christ, with those at his Resurrection (which was the
greatest Miracle of all) with those for forty days after, at the Ascension and
sending of the Holy Ghost, and you will see that the rise and beginning of the
New Testament was far more excellent and glorious then that of the Old
Testament.

1. The Centurion and they that were with him could think no other, but that
all these signs were wrought for the sake of this Jesus. Therefore they excuse
his innocence, pronounce him Righteous, and do not conclude him to be such a
one as the Jews accused him to be, and as Pilate had condemned him. And which
is more, they confess him to be the Son of God, which they gathered and
concluded from the signs which they saw, Lo, this did the Gentiles believe, who
had neither the Law nor the Prophets.

2. The people which came together to that sight (for so is Christ truly with
those that are his, made a Spectacle to the world, 1 Cor. 4. A sign and wonder,
Isa. 8.) smote their breasts, and returned: as if they had said, O God, what
strange and new things have we seen and heard to day? Truly, truly, this shall
be our Messiah. O how basely have we used him, to whom we did owe, and should
have done all honor and respect? This innocent blood will be required of us
and our generation. Here then was fulfilled what Christ had foretold: When ye
have lift up the son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, John 8. even the
Messiah.

Here we see that he that dies for the Truth, does more at his death then when
he lived. Thus Christ converted more at his death then in his life. For when he
shed his blood it never ceased crying: Whence it is that the Elect who do
through ignorance afflict the godly, yet obtain they mercy, but the Reprobate
are damned. His acquaintance, especially those Women from Galile, stood and
diligently beheld these things; for they looked for no such Spectacle, but their
mind now presaged that after so sad a Tragedy they should see better days.
They stood afar off for fear that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Thou have
put away mine Acquaintance far from me, lover and friend from my misery, Psalm
88. Again, He has put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are
verily estranged from me, Job 19. They stood aloof, yet they saw and considered
what was done. It was a sight worth the seeing, to the beholding whereof all
the world should have run together.

But who can express the sorrow and grief of those Holy Women, especially of
the Virgin Mother, when they saw him hang so shamfully on the cross, for whom
they had done so much, and to whom they had ministered, not only in Galile, but
also in Iudaea? But they are much to be commended, that the fear neither of the
Jews, nor of the Romans could hinder them from following after Christ, and that
they would no more forsake him when he was dead, then when he was living. This
is to take good and bad together with ones Friend. The Disciples fled, but the
Womenkind stood it out, as being willing to repair and make amends for the
wrong done to all mankind in Paradise. And because those holy Women did so
stoutly stand it out, and tarryed to see the end of the holy Passion, they were
likewise counted worthy to have the first sight of Christ after his
Resurrection. They were last with Christ when he dyed, and first with him when
he lived. A godly man will learn many good things from those Women, etc.

The Jews therefore, John 19.31.
because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the
Cross on the Sabbath Day (for that Sabbath Day was an High day) besought Pilate
that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. Then came
the Soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was
crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead
already, they brake not his legs. But one of the Soldiers with a spear pierced
his side, and forthwith came thereout blood and water. And he that saw it bare
Record, and his Record is true, and he knows that he says true, that ye
might believe. For these things were done that the Scripture should be
fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken. And again, another Scripture
says, They shall look on him whom they pierced.

We have heard of the death of the Lord Jesus, and how it was bewailed by the
Women of Galile: his burial is yet behind, which the Jews indeed attempted, but
God reserved the solemnity thereof to be performed by holy and good men. The
day when these things were done, was the preparation: that is, a preparatory
day to the following Sabbath, which was called the Sabbath of the Passover,
because it fell out in the Paschal week. Whence it was celebrated more
honorably then the other Sabbaths. And this the Evangelist shows, when he
says, For that Sabbath day was an High day. This was a double Festival, both
in respect of the Sabbath, and also of the Paschal Week, which was wholly
Festival. When this Sabbath drew nigh, those bloody men thought it a dishonor
if the bodies of the slain should hang before their gates in the view of all
men. Therefore lest the Devotion and Religious observation of the Feast Day
should be clouded with so sad and doleful a Spectacle, they desired by any
means that they should be taken down and removed before the Feast began. A
perverse and preposterous religion indeed it was, to intend to celebrate the
Feast so holily, the entrance whereof they had polluted with so great impiety:
They would keep the Law, and yet had just now killed the Lord of the Law. The
Law by which they tie themselves to this observation was this: The Lord
commanding that they that were crucified should be buried the same night, Deuteronomy.
21. This Law was chiefly given in reference to Christ. For the Law written by
the Finger of God, in respect of him only who was then to be crucified, did
take care that all that were crucified should be buried the same night: whereas
there was no such Law or command concerning others that should suffer a violent
death. God indeed could have preserved the body of Christ also unburied from
shame and violence. But so it was expedient for the bodies of the Saints, that
this body of this dead man should be united to them in the graves, that by it
they might obtain a Resurrection. For as it was meet that the soul of Christ
should go down into Hell to deliver the souls of the Fathers: so it behooved
that his body should reach their bodies, that so he might raise them up again,
and thereby a perfect Resurrection might be hoped for. To this Law do these
wicked men now pretend. And now they begin to think of the religious
observation of the Feast, as if they had now omitted nothing, but had done
every thing as it ought to be done. Thus Hypocrites look only at the
Ceremonies, mean while leaving the greater and weightier works of Righteousness
undone, and think that all will go well with them, let them sin never so much,
so long as they leave out nothing of the Ceremonies. So here they are very
careful to observe that Law which was only for civility and humanity; but in
the mean while swerving from, and prevaricating the whole Law. Yet who would
have said but that those were very holy men? Who could have suspected that they
would have killed Christ contrary to all Law, who were such zealous and devout
observers of the Law? But thus does Hypocrisy use to palliate and hide its
iniquity.

But under pretense of this Law and reverence of the Feast, they address
themselves to Pilate: they entreat him that the bodies of those that were put
to death might be taken down before the evening, that nothing might hinder it,
and that the Governor would give command to have their bones broken, that they
might die the sooner. This they pretended to Pilate. But there was somewhat
else did bite them. They were afraid lest the people should repent of what they
had done, and believe in Christ, because of the signs that were showed at his
death; for then they heard the various judgments and opinions of men
concerning Christ by reason of his Miracles. Therefore they make Post haste to
get him down and bury him out of the way; for they were in hopes that he would
quickly and totally be forgotten, if he were but once removed out of sight, and
that never any hereafter would upbraid them with the death of so great a man.
But all in vain, their project is to no purpose; for they can hide neither
Christ's Glory, nor their own shame.

But wicked men easily obtain what they desire of a wicked Judge. The Soldiers
also are at hand, ready to gratify the Jews; they break the legs of the
Thieves hanging on the cross, and were about to strike the body of Christ, but
that they saw he was dead already; which was that which hindered them, and not
any pity of theirs. Nor need they further torture him, who was now insensible
of any torments. And as Christ though he was dead, yet had none of his bones
broken: so the godly are afflicted indeed, but not destroyed: and as all their
hairs are numbered, so all their bones are preserved, that nothing can befall
them without the good Will of God. But therefore Christ would not have his legs
broken, because the bones which Mystically in the Scriptures do signify power
and strength, would preach nothing of Mystery to us if they should be broken.
But on the contrary, whereas his legs were preserved whole, it signifies thus
much to us, that als his ways (which in the Canticles are described by his
Legs) are straight and inviolable.

But however they had no need to break Christ's legs, because he was dead
already, yet one of the Soldiers willing to please the Jews, thrust his
Javelin into his side, for which Pilate gave him no such commission. But God
ordered this also thus to be done: First, that the Scripture in Zachary here
quoted might be fulfilled. Secondly, that the Figure of Adam sleeping might be
explained, who had his Rib taken out of him when he was asleep, of which the
Woman was made, Genesis 2. And it is significantly expressed, that the side of
Christ was not wounded, but opened: to let us know,

1. That there is an open way for us to the heart of God. Here is our Refuge,
that we may hide our selves in the clefts of this Rock: for there, and there
only we shall be safe.

2. The opening of this side signifies, that the door of Life is open to us,
whence Sacraments flow forth, without which no man can come to the true Life.
For as Eve was formed out of Adams side when he was asleep, so the Church was
formed out of Christ's side when he died upon the cross. Therefore it is said
here, that when Christ's side was pierced, presently there came forth blood and
water. Which out-flowing was both very Miraculous and Mysterious. For we are
Redeemed by blood, and with water are we washed: So that the death of Christ
was both our redemption and purification. And it is observable, that neither
only blood nor only water came forth. For without blood water could do nothing,
nor had our redemption stood us in such stead, if we should have been and
continued as bad as we were before, and not been cleansed withal. Wherefore
that there might be wherewith to wash us from our sins, water which only
washes away the filth of the body, is joined to blood, which is the price of
our Redemption, and by conjunction thereto did it receive Virtue, that it might
be fit to cooperate with the Holy Spirit to the washing away the invisible
spots and stains of sin. This was foretold in the Prophet, There shall be a
Fountain opened to the House of David, for the washing of the sinner, and the
menstruous or unclean, Zach. 13. Whereby Sinner is understood the Heathen
people, and by the Unclean is meant the Jew, who sinned against the Law.
Therefore blood and water are the two undoubted Objects of our Faith and
Sacraments of the Church: The Mass.
to wit, the Supper and Baptism. The Blood was shed for the remission of sins,
and Baptism was instituted for the forgiveness of sins, Act. 2.38. and 22.16.
Such great salvation did there flow to us out of the Wound of our Lord. For by
these two is the Church built up. By Water we are new born, by Blood are we
nourished. Or thus, these two, blood and water, signify that both life and
comfort flow to us out of the Passion of Christ. The life is in the blood; and
water in the Scriptures does most commonly signify Consolation. Here then are
we confirmed, not only whilst we live, but when we die too, that we are
persuaded there is life in death, and that our life is hid in God. Well
therefore may Augustine here cry out, O mors, unde mortui reviviscunt!
O the Death, by which the dead do live again! What can be more pure then that
Blood? What more healthful then that Wound? But why Christ's bones should not be
broken, and yet his side pierced, John brings in and alleges two Testimonies:
one out of the Law, another out of the Prophets. But first he does affirm that
these things were true by his own witness, that none might think it incredible
which he said of the blood and water flowing out of the side of Christ when he
was dead. For it is against Nature that blood and water should come out of the
side of a dead man. John therefore does maintain that he saw it. And that his
Testimony is valid and true, may appear by this, in that he did not write only
of the glorious, but also the meaner things of Christ and of his abasement. But
he produces two other Testimonies more: that by the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established, Deuteronomy. 17.

The Testimony out of the Law is, Ye shall not break a bone thereof, Exodus 12.
which was concerning the paschal Lamb. And who is that paschal Lamb but Jesus
who was crucified and offered up upon the Cross? For he is our Passover, as
Paul says, 1 Cor, 5. By this Quotation it plainly appears, that John did not
so much intend to cite the History, as to put us in mind of what this History
did signify; to wit, that this Jesus was the true Passover, which was
signified by the legal Lamb. But even this Scripture does confirm us, that the
bones of the paschal Lamb are not broken. Indeed the power of darkness might so
far rage against Christ, as to take away his life and glory in the view of the
world; But his bones, that is, his life and glory with God it could not break
or deprive him of. The same happens to all the Saints; let the wicked rage as
much as they will, yet they break not the bones of the godly; that is, no power
or force of theirs is so great, but Faith will overcome it. For Faith is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.

The other Testimony is taken out of Zachary: They shall look on him whom they
have pierced, Zach. 12. This in the first place is referred to the godly, who
shall look on Christ crucified, and acknowledge that he so suffered for their
sins. To the same purpose also is that in the same Zachary: And they shall
mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son. This place here cited may also
be referred to the wicked: and then it is all one with that where it is said,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay it. For when Divine Vengeanceis a long time
forborne, the Lord does by these and such like words show that the wicked do
prevail and get the upper hand in this world: but so, as that they kill
themselves with their own Weapons. The more they prosper in their projects, the
juster they take their cause to be. Being blinded therefore, they run headlong
into the most heavy Judgment of God. For as it is with a man in his sleep that
dreameth he is fighting with, and beating his enemy; but when he awaketh he
finds that he has buffetted himself with his own fists: so he that does wrong
a godly man, does seem indeed to have the better of him, either because of the
godly man's weakness, or because vengeance is prolonged. But if we well weigh
it, he does wound himself with his own Weapon. Pharaoh oppressed the
Israelites: but to speak more properly and more truly, he did thereby oppress
himself. Saul persecuted David: one may better say, in so doing he did
persecute himself. The Jews pierced Christ: but in deed and in truth they did
more deeply pierce their own hearts, according to that, Whosoever casts a stone
on high, casts it on his own head, Eccl. 27.25. The wicked therefore shall
look on him whom they have pierced, and shall see that they did not kill and
condemn the righteous, but themselves. It follows:

And now when the even was come (because it was the Preparation: Mar. 15.42.
Mat. 27.57. Luke 23.50. John 19.38.
that is, the day before the Sabbath) Joseph of Arimathea a rich man, an
honorable Counselor, a good man and a just; The same had not consented to
the counsel and deed of them, who also himself waited for the Kingdom of God,
being a Disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, he came, and went
in boldly unto Pilate, and besought him that he might take away the body of
Jesus. And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead, and calling unto him the
Centurion, he asked him if he had been any while dead. And when he knew it of
the Centurion, he gave the body of Jesus unto Joseph; and Joseph bought fine
linen. And there came also Nicodemus, who at the first came to Jesus by night,
and brought a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes about an hundred pound weight.

It was now time to bury the body of Christ, but scarce any man durst undertake
it because of the raging madness of the Jews. Yet lo here are two who as it
were unthought of, offer themselves to do it, but not without the counsel and
pre-ordination of God. The Evangelists do diligently set down and exactly
describe both their person, and their care in the burial of Christ. It was and
is a matter most worthy for us to know and imitate, which was not done without
great danger.

The first was called Joseph, who was of Arimathea, whence Elkanah also in the
first of Samuel had his beginning. Now this Joseph was an honest, and a just,
and a Rich man, which three may well stand together, though they are very rare
to be found: Nicodemus is not so much commended here, because he is otherwise
mentioned to his praise elsewhere in the Gospel; He was a Lawyer: but Joseph was
a Senator. But in this they agreed, that both of them did affect and love
Christ's Doctrine, and esteemed it as the Word of God: yet they chose rather to
be Christ's Disciples secretly then openly. And the reason was because of their
riches and reputation, wherein they did excel, and which they could not
presently forsake, nor yet would they reject Christ's Doctrine. But that both of
them loved Christ, did sufficiently appear by what they did for him. Nicodemus
had formerly stood up in the Council of the Pharisees in desence of Christ,
John 7. And Joseph openly refused to consent to the death of Christ. They were
just men indeed, endowed with great gifts of Nature, in whom also the Spirit of
the Lord did begin to sparkle out: I wish we had more such men now in our
Councils, Parliaments, Conventions, Convocations, Assemblies that would
withstand wicked men and their Designs, and would do but as these two here did.

We are therefore diligently to take notice of these two persons. For first we
see here, that there is no time or age so bad, but God does preserve and
deliver those that are his, and that some good men at least are to be found in
the worst of times. Thus in the days of Elias, when every place was full and
abounded with Idols, and false Worships, yet then God reserved to himself seven
thousand men that had not bowed their knees to Baal. So at the time of Christ's
death there was nothing but scandal, impiety and distrust of Christ. For some
did wickedly revile, others out of weakness denied him. Some were offended at
his shameful death, and never expected any more good from him. But these two,
Joseph and Nicodemus do here openly show themselves, who steadfastly continued
in the Faith, being nothing shaken either by the impiety or unbelief of others.
Indeed the Faith of these men was to be admired, which is made more manifest by
the Antithesis or opposition. For they were both rich men, both Potent, both
accounted just men before the world. The one a Senator, the other a Pharisee.
But all these, Riches, Authority, Power, Repute, and Worldly Honor they
neglected, regarded not, and exposed themselves to trouble and danger to serve
Christ even when he was dead. Who compelled them to do this? Who forced them to
it? Was it it their kindness toward Jesus? Civil Friendship will go but to the
Altar, Death will put a period to it. Faith only carried them thus far, which
is of such force and power that it will draw a Believer from all sensible
things, and set him upon things insensible. Riches, Power and Senatorian
Dignity were sensible things. But Faith fixed these two upon eternal Power and
Wealth, having plucked them off from those things. The same Energy and vigor of
Faith was there in Abraham, who forsook his Country, his Fathers estate, and
his Friends, and followed after those unknown and invisible things which God
had promised.

Joseph therefore being instigated and strengthened with this Faith, went
boldly to Pilate, and confidently craved of him the body of Jesus, which none
of his Disciples durst ask for. Pilate presently grants it him, for so was the
Divine Grace pleased to work and order it. Pilate had adjudged Christ to die,
but fore against his will. Now he enquires of the Centurion, whether Christ
were already dead, before he would grant his body to Joseph. He could not
easily be persuaded that Christ should be dead so soon, whereas others
oftentimes use to live till the next day with their legs whole. And because
they were so long a dying, they used to set Soldiers to watch the cross to
keep them lest they should chance to make an escape; which here also they did,
as the Evangelists witness. But Pilate knew not that Christ had power to lay
down his life, Joh. 10. Therefore he wondered that he should be so soon dead.

Nor do the Evangelists describe only the persons of these two men, but also
the care of them both, and what either of them brought to the interring of
Christ. Joseph brought linen; and Nicodemus brought a mixture of Myrrh and
Aloes about an hundred pound weight. This Nicodemus is commended in the Gospel
for other things, for that he came to Christ by night, and that he defended him
before the Pharisees. Therefore he does happily finish what he had well begun.
Now Christ would have a glorious and sumptuous Funeral!

1. Because he had made satisfaction for the sin of man, and it was now time
that his Glory should appear.

2. That the Scripture might be sulfilled, which says, And his sepulcher shall
be glorious, as the vulgar reading is, or his Rest shall be Glory, Isa. 11.10.

3. To let us know, that our glory has it rise or beginning from death. For
the glory of Worldly things is swallowed up in the grave.

4. To give us to understand, that there is a sure and certain Crown of Glory
laid up for them that strive lawfully after their fight is finished, as Paul
says, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the
Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give unto me, 2 Timothy 4.7,8. It follows.

And they took the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in clean linen, Mat. 27.59.
and Mar. 15.46. and Luke 23.53. and John 19.40.
with the spices, at the manner of the Jews is to bury. Now there was a garden
in the place where he was crucified, and in the garden a new sepulcher which
Joseph had hewn out of the Rock for himself, in which was never man yet laid.
There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews preparation day, and the
Sabbath drew on. And they rolled a great stone upon the mouth of the sepulcher,
and departed. And there were Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Joses,
sitting over against the sepulcher, and beholding where he was laid. And they
returned, and prepared spices and ointments: and rested the Sabbath day,
according to the Commandment.

The wicked get them gone, and Jesus is now left to the godly, but crucified.
These two therefore take the body of Jesus for a great Reward and Treasure; nor
are they ashamed to take him down from the cross or gallows when he was dead,
whom they loved so dearly when he was alive. Nor do they regard what others say
of them, that such Noble men should undertake so mean a service: but slighting
all those things, they take down Christ's body from the cross with much weeping
and many tears questionless. Thus, my Brethren, if we would be Christians and
true Gospellers indeed, we must not be ashamed of such low and mean employments.

They wrap Christ's body in clean linen; for so it became this purest body to
be shrouded, which was so clean that the very linen was the cleaner for it.
They add also Ointments and Spices, which the Jews used to keep the bodies from
rotting. And this showed that those two had yet but a weak and imperfect Faith.
For they had no higher thoughts of Christ, but that he was an honest and
innocent man, and a Prophet. But Christ was also God, which they knew not, and
he was suddenly to rise again, therefore had no need to be so embalmed.
Nevertheless he was pleased to have this done, that his death might be more
glorious, and that we might learn from hence how we ought to receive Christ; to
wit, with clean linen and Spices; that is, with a pure heart, and a sweet and
savory conversation.

But if any Judas had been here present, without doubt he would have exclaimed,
as the other Judas said before, Why was this waste? Mar. 11.14. These Spices
might have been sold for much, and given to the poor. What good will it do
Christ to persume him with Spices when he was dead? But a Christian ought not
to say this cost is superfluous. For the charges of those men is not so much to
be considered as their Faith. That only is lost which is not done in Faith. But
here was nothing less then loss. It was rather truly a good work, whereby those
two declared their faith, and openly showed that they would hazard all they had
for Christ. For they must of necessity expect to be the hatred of the
Pharisees, and unavoidably look for the spoiling of all their goods for so
doing. It was a great work, and not to be compared with any works of
Hypocrites. For Hypocrites indeed are at great expenses, but they do nothing
out of Faith and abnegation of their goods: but all proceeds from impiety and
ambition of gain. But no work is to be rated or valued according to the
costliness or outward show of it, but according to the faith of him that does
it. Thus the Widow in the Gospel that cast in her two Mites is said to offer
more then all the rest, because she did it out of her faith and poverty, Luke
21.

So this work was not so great from the cost, but from the Faith, whereby they
did now renounce and hazard all the rest of their goods for Christ. Moreover it
is manifest by their Preservatives what is was that they sought for in Christ.
For Preservatives keep the body from putrefaction. It was life thereforre which
they sought after in Christ. But how? under death, in a dry body: and this
indeed is true Faith. Every body will seek life in a living Christ, this is
easy: but to look for any thing in a dead, dry despised Christ, hoc opus, hic
labor est, is hard to be done.

Now the Evangelists do not describe the manner only of Christ's burial, but the
place also; There was, says he, a garden hard by. These things seem to fall
out by chance, but indeed all things were thus ordered by Divine Appointment.
For,

1. Christ began his Passion in a Garden, and in a Garden he finished the same,
because Adam sinned in a garden. Christ was also buried in a garden, to show
that by him there is a way open for us to return into Paradise, not into an
earthly, but Heavenly Paradise.

2. Whereas he was buried in another man's grave, that shows his povery, who
neither in his life, nor in his death had where to lay his head, Mat. 8. Here
also our curiosity is condemned, who with such care and cost, yea with so much
pride do build Sepulchers for our selves. But it is significantly said of
Christ's Sepulcher, that it was a new one, and that none was ever buried in it
before, to take away all suspicion, lest it should be thought that any other
rose out of it.

3. As Christ prepared a Virgin-womb for himself when he was to be born, which
never man knew; so when he was to rise again, he would be buried in a new
Sepulcher, wherein never man was yet laid. Which new Sepulcher,

1. Did prefigure, that some new and unheard of thing was to be done; to wit,
that he who was buried in that grave should return again to life.

2. Also that Death was to be turned into a sleep, especially as to the godly:
out of which sleep they were to rise again in due time as in a most pleasant
and delicious garden. Note.
Note that we do not read of any one Disciple that was present at the butial of
Christ (though it is to be believed that John was there, which yet by the letter
does not appear) lest it should be thought that they had carried away the body
of Jesus, and hid it in some other place. Finally, those good men rolled a
great stone to the mouth of the Sepulcher.

1. That the Jews might not easily offer any violence to the dead body. And

2. That his Resurrection might be the more clear and eminent in that he could
come forth when the Sepulcher was fast shut up.

Thus honor then of such a Funeral Christ suffered to be done unto him by
these Honorable men, that his enemies might not say, none but base and
worthless men did stick to this Nazarene; although this was but a small Honor,
if compared to that wherewith he is now Honored in all the Earth, and in all
the Churches, not only as man, but as God and man; who does no longer lie in
the grave, but sits at the right hand of God in Heaven. Notwithstanding his
Sepulcher is so Honorable to this very day, that not only Christians, but many
Gentiles also come out of admiration very far to Jerusalem to see it. In short,
the Sepulcher of Moses is not known where it is: nor does it much matter where
he was buried: but all know where the Sepulcher of Christ is; for so it is
necessary, that by it we should learn both our own burial and resurrection. For
as the sufferings of Christ are ours; so also is the burial of Christ ours. For
we are buried with him by baptism into death, Romans 6.4. Lastly, It is said,
that those women of Galile observed the place where he was buried. For they
intended to anoint and perfume his body very carefully. They did not judge it
meet that so holy a body should putrify and be eaten up of Worms. For neither
did they know that he was God, and that he was shortly to rise again. It
follows in the Text.

Now the next day that followed the day of the preparation, Mat. 27.62.
the chief Priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we
remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I
will rise again. Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure until the
third day, lest his Disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto
the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last Error shall be vorye then
the first. Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure
as you can. So they went and made the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and
setting a watch.

The wicked are not, nor can they yet be quiet although Christ were now dead
and buried. They vex and trouble Pilate again, and importune him to make fast
the Sepulcher, for they were afraid that he had not given strict charge enough.
Now they understood the sign of Jonas which Christ said should be given them,
Mat. 12. Now also they understood the destruction of the Temple which was to be
raised up again in three days, however they wrested it to another sense
before, when they accused Christ. Therefore now they run headlong together
again, even on that their Sabbath, when the other Jews mean while were at their
devotion and prayers. They can neither rest themselves, nor can Pilate be at
quiet for them. Such great Signs were there showed at the death of this just
man, that they might very well have done otherwise. But these signs had the
same effect upon these men, as those great Miracles heretofore took upon the
Egyptians. They were only thereby more hardened. Well might they fear that the
last error would be worse then the first. They speak true at unawares, and
prophecy against themselves. For their mistake was worse, and they did err
more, in that they did not repent afterward. But the Faith of Believers was
thereupon the more confirmed concerning the truth of the Resurrection. Having
therefore got leave of Pilate, they make sure the Sepulcher, setting a watch:
and not content with this, they seal the stone too. Thus Humane prudence
strives against God, but all in vain. For Christ will rise again in spite of
your reeth, O ye Pharisees, nor can the Soldiers or sealing the Sepulchte
hinder it one jott. All the endeavors of man's prudence are to no purpose,
where God has otherwise decreed. Take to you all the strength of Caesar, yet
shall you not be able to keep this Nazarene in the grave. All the care and
pains which they take about the sepulcher, they take against themselves. And it
was Divine Providence, that the Sepulcher should be made so fast. For hence the
truth of his Resurrection is more clearly proved. Here then diligently again
remember the Divine chiefdom and Power, in that it does most wisely accomplish
his own, by another work. Caiaphas thought it fit that Christ should be put to
death and perish; but God saw it needful that Christ should be the life of the
world. God therefore made use of the work of wicked Caiaphas, and by it
accomplished his own Design. Thus also it was the prudence of the Jews to set a
watch upon the Sepulcher, lest any should steal away the body from thence, and
tell the people that he was risen. But it was the Wisdom of God, that the
Resurrection of Christ should be made most manifest to all men. God therefore
does take the design of others prudence to perfect thereby and complete his own
Purpose and Design. For by this strict and narrow watch the Resurrection is
made much more clear and manifest, then if the Jews had not so diligently
guarded the Sepulcher.

The Conclusion of the Passion.
Dearest Brethren,
HItherto we have heard, how many and how great things the Creator and Lord of
the world suffered from so many and such great men, who were so mad and did so
cruelly rage against him, that he might satisfy the Divine Justice for so many
and such great and miserable punishments which were due to our sins. Wherefore,

1. Let us give him hearty thanks for his most liberal and bountiful love
toward us.

2. Let us draw nigh and approach unto this Throne of Grace with full assurance
of Faith, that we may find mercy in time of need.

3. But above all let us take all diligent heed, lest at any time like
unthankful men we forget this so great work of Mercy and Love to us. But let
us fasten and indelebly imprint it in our minds, and keep it fast in memory, to
the end that those wounds, that Blood, that Passion, that Death may always be
before our eyes, to water our hearts continually, to take away their hardness,
to melt and soften them, and be a constant and safe conduct to us through
prosperity and adversity.

Let us meditate upon the Passion of our Lord; first, that we may not be puffed
up in our prosperity with vain mirth and foolish jollity: secondly, lest in
adversity we be cast down with too great grief, and swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow, seeing Christ has suffered far greater things for us. The All-mighty
and All-sufficient God grant that this Passion of Christ may become fruitful
to us and profitable for us. Let him vouchsafe to fasten it in our hearts by
his Spirit, that by this Passion we may rouse and stir up our selves to all
that is good, and comfort our selves in all our adversity and afflictions, but
especially in death. And at present let us give all diligence that we walk and
keep our selves in his fear, forasmuch as we are not Redeemed with corruptible
things as Silver and Gold, but with the precious blood of Christ. Therefore

1. If hitherto we have crucified Christ, let us now with the Centurion be
converted, and witness that Christ is the Son of God by a true and lively Faith.

2. Let us return into the Houses of our hearts, and with compunction cast our
selves upon our couch.

3. Let us wrap up pure Christ in the fine Linen of clean cogitations, and let
us not suffer any dead carcass to lie in the Monument of our heart, but let us
present our hearts to Christ only to be inhabited by him alone.

4. Let us chase away and banish hence all corruption of the World, that when
Christ shall return, and we rise the third day (that is, after the first day of
this Life, and the other day of Rest) to those Treasures of Grace which we
receive here, he may also bestow upon us the beatitude of our souls, and the
Treasures of the body of Glory, that being made like unto him, and fashioned
after his glorious Body, we may may have a most blessed entrance into the
Inheritance of an Eternal Kingdom: which he grant to us who Lives and Reigns
Eternally, to whom be all honor and glory of every creature now and for ever,
Amen. Blessed be God world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

