AN EXHORTATION, By way of EPISTLE TO THE Friends of Christ, Every Where.

Jesus said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self, Joh. 7. 16, 17. Where two or three are gathered together, in
my name, there am I, in the midst of them, Matt. 18. 20. If ye keep my
commandments ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my father's
commandments, and abide in his love, Joh. 15. 10. London; Printed for T.
Northcot, in George-yard, in Lombard Street, 1696.

AN Exhortation, etc.
DEar and tender Friends, Brethren and Sisters, whom the Lord in his tender
Love has visited in these latter Days, and after a long and tedious Night of
Darkness and Time of Apostasy, wherein the saving Knowledge of the glorious God
and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ has been but little known, and livingly
experienced; to you who are now visited with the bright-shining Light of his
glorious Day, that has sprung up in this latter Age, and are called by his
blessed Grace, and quickened by his living Spirit, raised by his eternal Power,
to be a People, to the Praise of his Grace, and to the Honor of his
everlasting Name, and through the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, are made
Partakers of God's saving Knowledge, in a good degree, and in whom the Almighty
God our Heavenly Father, by his powerful Word has began his glorious Work of
Righteousness, Redemption and Eternal Salvation.

To you, O my Friends, I feel the Love of God flow, and thereby am drawn to
send these following Lines, not only as a Salutation of endeared Love, but as
Counsel and Advice on the several Heads following, viz.

I. To be diligent in waiting upon the Lord. II. And frequent in that Christian
Duty, in meeting together for that End.
That you may renew your Acquaintance with him and your Strength in him, and be
enabled by him, in Faithfulness to follow him, and may feel your Hearts filled
with Love to him, Fear toward him, Zeal for him, and a godly Concern for his
Glory, the Propagating and Spreading of his precious Truth, the Exaltation and
Renowning of his excellent Name, and in Plainness and Simplicity may be found,
bearing your Testimony for him in all Respects, and not decline it in any. That
you may have his Blessings, enjoy his Presence, and be more abundantly made
Partakers of the Comforts of his Holy Spirit, and Joy of his Salvation.

And for this End I do in brotherly Love exhort all to be inward in their
Minds, and to have their Hearts exercised in that Light in which they have
believed, and that Spirit by which they have been quickened: And then you will
see your selves, know your States, be sensible of your Weaknesses and Wants,
and of the need you have to watch unto Prayer, and to wait on the Lord, and
frequently to meet with his People for that End, and to be diligent when met,
in attending upon the Lord in his Holy Fear, that you may feel his Presence,
renew your Strength, and know his Work to prosper, and be carried on in your
Souls.

But if you neglect this Duty, and are not diligent therein, although you are
called, you cannot be faithful, nor become his chosen People, but will grow
cool in your Love to God, and will slack in your Obedience, and will not
partake, Although you may hear of the GOOD of his Land, but will become dry,
baren and unfruitful unto him; and although you may retain a Profession of the
Truth, and confess thereunto, yet the Love of the Word, and the Cares of it
will grow, and the Spirit of it will prevail, and into the Evil that is in it
you will be drawn, and under Condemnation you will fall, and be in Danger to
bring Reproach upon Truth, Dishonor to the Name of God, and Scandal upon the
Christian Religion, and your Holy Profession, in your Lives and Conversations,
and to decline your Testimony for the Lord, both in Words, Habit and
Conversation

Oh! therefore, my dear Friends, prize the great Love of God to you, in
visiting and calling you by his Light and Grace, and consider the End thereof;
which is, that you might be a People to his Praise, and to the Honor of his
Name, and might show forth the Virtue of him that has called you out of
Darkness into his mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. to serve him with Reverence
and godly Fear, and to be found diligent in that Practice of Meeting often
together, and Speaking often one unto another, and thinking on his Name, Mal.
3. 16. as those that feared him did in the Ages past, of whom the Lord said,
these shall be Mine.

Oh! that is precious to know, and comfortable to experience that we are HIS,
his People, his Children, his Servants, his Sons and Daughters, then we shall
have his Blessing, enjoy his Presence, know his Care to be over us; and feed at
his Table, partake of his Bread, be nourished by the Milk of his Word, grow in
his Grace and the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and our Souls
will be filled with Love to him ( Joh. 15. 10, 12.) and we shall manifest it by
our keeping his Commandments, and be enabled by him to keep our Testimony
unspotted, and in Truth and Faithfulness stand Witnesses for him against the
World, all its corrupt Ways, Fashions, Customs, Religions and Traditions, and
be preserved from touching the unclean thing; then the Lord will receive us, 2
Cor. 6. 17. and own us, stand by and preserve us, protect and defend us,
support and sustain us in and under all we may meet with, for the faithful
Discharge of our Duty to him, and keeping our Testimony for him: Then, oh then!
neither the Frowns nor Flatteries, the Threats nor Entreaties, the Favor nor
Displeasure of Men will prevail upon us, to decline our Testimony or neglect
our Duty. But the faithful Discharg thereof, above all other things, by us,
will be preferred, and our Love to Christ thereby manifested, as it ought to
be; for you know he has said, If any man love any thing more than me he is not
worthy of me: Therefore let us look to him, and wait on him, and pray to him,
to carry on, to prosper and complete the Work of Righteousness, Redemption and
Salvation in our Hearts and Souls. And be watchful against all that which would
draw away your Hearts and Minds from the Lord into the Earth and earthly
Things, and the Love and too eager pursuit thereof; for that will cooll your
Love to God, and chill your Zeal, and cause a Slackness to your Christian Duty,
of meeting together to wait upon God, and will have a Tendency to bring you
into a cold, dead, formal State, and to make you like the Tree that had Leaves
only, and no Fruit, to which Christ said, Let no fruit grow on thee: And
presently it withered, and came to naught, Matthew. 21. 19.

Therefore my dear and tender Friends, that are visited and called of latter
time, be diligent in waiting upon God, and faithful to him, and answer his
Requirings, and be doers of his Will, so far as he has made it known; for as
you are faithful in a few or little things, God will make known more and
greater, for a bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
not quench; he shall bring forth judgment unto truth, Isa. 43. 3. But there
must be a waiting on him in this Way, and a following him therein, and not a
starting aside, like a broken Bow; for if ye do not follow Wisdom in the Way
she leads, which is the Way of Righteousness, and in the middle Paths of
Judgments, ye cannot be made Partakers of the living Substance, or know your
Treasures filled.

Therefore faithfully follow the Lord, and ye shall know him, ( Isa. 42. 13.)
to go forth as a mighty man; he shall stir up jealousy, like a man of war; he
shall cry, yea roar; he shall prevail against his enemies. For he has a bow,
and a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer,
Rev. 6. 2. This is the Captain of the Lord's Host; this is he whom the Armies
that are in Heaven follow; this is he in whom we have believed, Revelat. 1. 18.
that was dead and is alive, and lives for ever more; this is he to whom all
power is given in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28. 18. who will destroy our
Enemies, and that great Enemy, that is, Death; that will put an end to Sin;
that will finish transgressions; that will bring everlasting righteousness
(Dan. 9. 24.) into our Souls, and complete the Work of our Redemption and
Salvation, which the Father sent him to do, if we follow him in Truth, in
sincerity and uprightness of Heart in the way of the daily Cross ( Matt. 10.
28.) and in the Regeneration, which is the End of our Call and Visitation, and
is both our Duty and Interest; for thereby we shall obtain Peace to our Souls,
find Acceptance with God, through him, and be fitted for his Kingdom; and as we
live, abide and walk in him, shall we be kept, while here, in a patient
continuance in well doing, and be made sharers of Glory, partakers of
Immortality, and Inheritors of Eternal Life, Romans 2. 7.

Let nothing, therefore, in this low World, nor any thing you may meet with in
your Pilgrimage through this mortal Life or Vale of Tears prevail upon you to
neglect your Duty to God, or decline your Testimony for him, in any Respect:
For he has not only called and raised us up to be a People, but has kept and
preserved us in and under all our Exercises, Troubles, Sufferings or
Afflictions that he has suffered to come upon us for the trial of our Faith,
and exercise of our Patience, of what kind or nature soever, whether from the
World or among our selves; he has been a shelter in the Time of Storm and a
Refuge in the Day of Trouble.

Oh! Let us therefore remember his Love to us, and fear him and his Goodness,
Hos. 3. 5. and be daily exercised in meditating in his LAW, and in a Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication unto him, that we may keep the same and walk therein,
and in his holy and undefiled way will he then lead us. And we shall partake of
his Blessing and be directed by his Wisdom and guided by his Council, and in
the End be received into Glory, Psalm. 73. 24.

Once more, therefore, my dear and tender Friends, in brotherly Love, I exhort
you not to forsake the Assembling of your selves together, as the manner of
some is; but rather the more as the day approaches, Heb. 10. 25.

For although this is a Day of outward Liberty, which the Lord by his Power and
Providence has brought us to enjoy, and after a Storm has brought this Calm,
for which we ought, and my Soul in Humility does humbly thank the Lord, and
return Praises to his Holy Name, and am also thankful unto those under whom we
do enjoy this Mercy, and we ought to pray for them, That we may live a
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2.

But my dear Friends, now let us not decline or grow slack in this Christian
Duty, or forbear the assembling of our selves together, to wait on God in
Diligence, and to serve him in Faithfulness, and in a right Sense of his
Mercies, of the multitude of which, this of peaceably meeting together is not
the least: And if any of those that in the Discharge of this Duty did
diligently meet, when they could seldom enjoy a quiet Meeting, and hazard the
Loss of their Goods and Liberty, and by being confined in Noysom Goals and
Stinking Holes and Dungeons, hazarded their Healths, and consequently
endangered their Lives: If any of these should now grow cold, and slack in this
Christian Duty in this Time of Liberty, they may, notwithstanding what they
have done and suffered, fall short of that Rest God has prepared for his
People, and miss of that Reward he gives to the Faithful.

Therefore let all such be diligent herein, and persevere to the End in
Faithfulness and Diligence, i. e. in Meeting and Waiting upon God therein; and
rather the more as the Day approaches: For, oh my Friends! I must tell you,
there is a Day approaching, wherein we shall meet again with Trials and
Exercises, and shall need to know the Lord to be our Strength and Refuge, our
Rock and Hiding Place, and Defense.

And the more diligent we are now in serving him, and the more faithful we are
in following him, the more we shall renew our Acquaintance with the Lord and
Strength in him, and be the better enabled to bear our Testimony for him in
such a Day, and have the more Comfort and Peace therein. If then we can appeal
to the Lord, like good Hezekiah; and say; Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee,
how I have walked before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight, 2 Kings, 20. 3.

Oh! let this be our Care, to see that we are found doing that which is good in
his Sight, and that we slight none of his Mercies, nor neglect any Season or
Opportunity that he affords us, but may diligently improve the same to his
Honor, that it may in the end be to our Peace and Comfort.

And if any did, in the time of Suffering neglect and omit their Christian Duty
of Meeting together with God's People, to wait upon him, to worship and serve
him, and to bear a Testimony for him, such, that now remain ought to prize
God's Love and Mercy, in affording such a Season as this is.

And great Diligence and Care they ought to be found in, to improve these
present peaceable Opportunities of Meeting together, that they may renew their
Strength, and know their Love to God and Zeal for his Name and Testimony to be
increased; and that out of that slavish Fear that came over them, and from
under that Spirit of the World that did then prevail over them, they may be
brought, and by the Lord may be enabled to bear their Testimony in Plainness
and Faithfulness against the corrupt World, and the Language, Ways, Fashions
and Customs thereof.

And in that Fear, Humility and Modesty that becomes the Followers of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who was a Pattern of Humility; Who in the days of his flesh, when
he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears unto
him that was able to save him from Death, was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.
7. who was also exemplary in Truth, Plainness and Simplicity; the which, if we
would follow his Example, let not us exceed; and then in Simplicity, Plainness
and Truth, ( Matt. 5. 37. To. 15. 5. Joh. 1. 51. Joh. 3. 3. Joh. 5. 19.) he
will lead and keep all those in, that will learn of and follow him, and that
are diligent in seeking God and serving him in his Spirit, and supplicating the
Lord therein in true Faith, and the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ: There, oh,
it is there, that whatsoever they so ask shall receive, and these may be
enabled, in this Day, to stand faithful and true Witnesses for him in the
approaching Day, wherein we shall meet with Trials and Exercises, and therefore
as the Exhortation was, lets not forsake the assembling our selves together, as
the manner of some is, but rather the more, as the Day approaches, for if such
neglect this Duty now, they will not be able to endure the Exercises and Troubles
of the approaching Day.

Therefore let all Prize and improve the present Time and Seasons of Love, in a
diligent and frequent meeting together, and a diligent and faithful serving
God, when so met, and then the Lord will own us, appear among us, manifest his
presence in the midst of us, overshadow our Assemblies with the Wing of his
Glory.

And will cause the Holy Ghost to fall upon us (Acts 2. 4.) as we meet with one
accord, fill us with the Holy Spirit, and make us partakers of the Comforts
thereof, of the Life that is in his Presence, and of the Joy of his Salvation,
and will cause the Showers of his Divine Love plentifully to fall upon us,
whereby his Heritage will be refreshed, his Garden and Plants watered, and his
People comforted, and all grow up fresh and Green in Life, in Virtue, in Love
and Faithfulness to God, his Truth and Testimony, and one unto another.

And as all thus grow in Love and Faithfulness, and increase through the
Knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue, and give all
diligence, they will add to that, like precious Faith that they have obtained
(through the Righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ) Virtue, and to
Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience and
Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness and Charity; and if these things
be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful in the Knowledge of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 5,
6, 7, 8.

And therefore, my dear Friends, it greatly concerns us to wait and attend upon
the Lord God, in the Spirit of his dear Son, and to be frequent and diligent in
that Christian Duty, that we may sensibly know and livingly Experience an
Increase in the Knowledge of God, and in these Christian Virtues; which if we
neglect our Duty of Meeting and Waiting upon God, we can never truly know these
things, nor grow in these Christian Virtues, neither can we be true to our
Testimony, nor keep the same so clear and clean in all things, as we ought, nor
rightly do and observe Christ's Commands, endure his Cross and follow his
Example, in that plainness and simplicity which becomes those that are his
Disciples, that we may not in any thing decline therefrom, under any Color or
Pretense whatsoever, either for the Fear of suffering or to please any* And
then, oh then! my dear and tender Friends, our God will bless us, and Christ
will love us, and we shall love him, and to all Men, thereby, it will be known
we are his Disciples, in that we love one another, John 13, 35.

This is a pleasant Habitation and safe Dewlling Place: Here Fear will be cast
out, Jealousies will have no place, Life will be felt, Comfort enjoyed, Zeal
and Diligence increased, Care and Caution used, that we may not justly offend
any, or give occasion thereof, (1 Cor. 10. 31.) either to Jews or Gentiles, or
the Church of God, by our unfaithfulness to God, Coolness to love, and
Slackness to do our Duty, decling our Meetings, and being careless, drousie or
negligent in waiting and attending upon God therein; for one Cause, if not the
main and great, is, That some among us have been and are liable to be drawn,
and are too apt to imitate (in their Language vain Fashions, foolish Dresses,
evil Customs and Ways) the World, or those that do not keep in that Meekness
and Lowliness that Christ exhorted to, and was a Pattern of.

And this is through their weakness and Corruption of Heart, Love of the World,
and the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh and Pride of Life, (1 John 2.
15, 16.) which has had a Place in them, and has been too much occasioned
through Remisness in their Christian Duty, of frequently Meeting together in
the Fear and Name of God and Jesus Christ, and diligently, humbly and
reverently Waiting and Attending upon him therein, and giving up, in Obedience
to the Call and Requirings of God, and being true to the inward Discoveries of
his Light and Convictions of his Spirit in their Hearts.

Oh! therefore, all you who shall find your selves in this State, and have any
Desires to amend your Ways. Let me, in brotherly Love, and in great good Will
to your Souls Good, earnestly entreat you to be diligent in Waiting and
Attending upon the Lord, in the Assemblies of his Chosen People, and inwardly
exercised in the precious and unspeakable Gift of God's Spirit, 2 Cor. 9. 15.
and draw near him in Faith, and with a true Heart, Heb. 10. 22. Then will the
Lord draw near to you, renew your Strength, wean your Hearts, and draw your
Affections off and from all the fading Vanities, foolish Delights, sinful
Pleasures, corrupt Ways, evil Customs, unprofitable Talk: And from whatsoever
is either offensive unto God, hurtful to your Souls, unbecoming the Truth and
our Holy Profession, and set your Minds upon things above, Col. 3. 2. and raise
you up by his Power, Romans 6. 4 into newness of Life and redeem you, Rev. 14. 3,
4. from the World, and the Evil of it, and bring you into Covenant with God,
and Unity with his People, and teach you so to live and walk, that you may
please him, escape his Wrath, (1 Ephesians. 6.) and be a People to the Praise of his
Grace, and to the Honor of his Name, and to do what you do therein; then will
your Peace be as a River, and your Righteousness, like the Waves of the Sea,
and we shall not only give Honor to God, but be a Comfort one to another, and
be one another's Joy and Crown of Rejoicing in the Lord, which that we may be
kept in Love and Faithfulness to God, and one another, to the End,

Is the hearty Prayer of your sincere Friend and Brother, in that most precious
Truth, which will outlive and last all the Contemners of it, and gives Joy, in
Believing and Comfort, in obeying, and through them Peace and Salvation, to the
Immortal Soul, as there is an abiding therein. George-yard, London, the 11th of
the 3d Month, 1696. I. Field.

Errata, p. 8. l. 8. for Word r. World

FINIS.

