CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS Of present Concernment: TOUCHING THIS REFORMED Church
of ENGLAND.

WITH A particular Examination of AN: CHAMPNY (Doctor of the Sorbon) his
exceptions against the Lawful Calling and Ordination of the Protestant Bishops
and Pastors of this Church.

By H: FERN, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J.G. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1653.

THE PREFACE.
HOw the several points handled in this Treatise, concern this Reformed Church,
will be declared below, when first we have taken notice of the causeless
Aspersions and Reproaches, which the Romanists cease not to cast upon is, and
against which these Considerations are purposely intended and opposed. They
think, they have now a fitter opportunity, by reason of the confusions of these
Times, to deal that way by Reproaches, then as formerly by Arguments. And it is
no new thing for the enemies of Gods Truth, to scoff at the afflicted condition
of the professors of it. The Ammonite is challenged for it, Ezekiel. 25.3. Thou
said, Aha, against my Sanctuary, when it was profaned; and so is Tyrus, Ezekiel.
26.2. Thou said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken, and laid wast, I shall
be replenished; and so the Romanists looking now upon our disturbances say with
those in the Psalm. 35.21. Aha, we have seen it with our eyes, and so would we
have it: Endeavoring by mocks and scoffs against the English Church, to
prevail with ungrounded Protestants, and all unwary ones that will be jeered
out of their Religion.

One of their Pamphlets set out by a late Romish Convert, the Reader must give
me leave by the way to instance in: for it gives us proof and example, of what
I said both ways; It shows us a giddy unwary Protestant foolishly carried
away by the reproachful allegations of our Adversaries; and, having been a
while among them, presently instructed in this their way of scoffing at that
Church and Religion he had forsaken.

Some of his wit he spends in a few Cursory animadversions, as he calls them,
upon my former Treatise; Those I let pass as inconsiderable, and not fit to
trouble the Reader with. But the design of his book was against that Learned
and Solid piece of the University of Oxford, set out by Act of Convocation,
1647. against admitting of the Covenant. He tells us there, He is W. R.
sometimes of Exeter College, but now a Convert of Rome, and is not ashamed to
profess (that we may know his weakness) he had his impulsive cause of
conjunction with Rome, from that Act of the University, pleading Tradition, and
the necessity of it, as for Episcopacy, so for other chief points of Faith. But
(alas!) poor man, he did not understand either what those Learned men said, or
what our Church allows in the point of Tradition. For however he pretend to
Wit in reproving our Reformation and Religion, yet in arguing, when be ventures
on it, he behaves himself as a manforsaken of his Reason. By his Titles
prefixed to his book, one may read what strein he meant to follow, and hold
throughout his whole discourse: for being not content to have at first entitled
it, An Examination of the Oxford Act; he gives it two scoffing Titles more, The
Obit of Praelatick Protestancie; and again, The last dying words of Episcopacy,
faintly delivered in the Convocation at Oxford -- So he of the Modest and Sober
Defense of those Learned Men, against the then prevailing force. And so might
any Heathen (Julian, or Prophyry) have derived the Apologies of the Ancients in
the behalf of Christianity then under persecution, and might have called them,
The last dying Words of Christian Religion; So might the Arrians have termed
the Defenses which Athanasius and others made, The last dying Words of the
Catholic cause; and because Saint Hierom expresses it dolefully, with a
Miratus and ingemuit Orbis -- the whole Christian world wondered and sighed to
see her self made Arrian, Such a Reasoner as this might conclude, the true
Christian Faith was then groaning her last. Now albeit, there is nothing in
this Pamphlet considerable, either against our Church, or against Episcopacy
retained in it; yet did it give me occasion of further thoughts concerning them
both; and in order to the lawful Calling and Ordination of our Protestant
Bishops, to examine what Champny (who professedly wrote against them) has
alleged.

In the next place that I may give the Reader a better account of what was
intended in the former, and now pursued in this following Treatise, He may
please to take notice how the Romanists charge us with Schism in departing from
their Communion upon our Reformation, and reproach us with the Confusions of
these Times, as wrought under the like pretense of Reformation, and defensible
by the like principles, upon which we stood in the work of our Reforming, and
to which we must hold in the defense of it. To demonstrate the falsehood of
both: Either that We, who are now of a divided Communion from Rome, are
therefore guilty of Schism; or that They, who made the rupture in the Scottish
first, and then in the English Church, can say justly for themselves against
the former Doctrine and Government of those Churches, what we can for our
selves, against the Church of Rome, it was part of the work and purpose of the
former book.

And it was demonstrable upon these grounds: 1. There was a necessity of
Reformation, and we had just Cause for it, by reason of the overgrown Papal
power and the intolerable abuses in Doctrine and Worship: 2. It was Warrantably
done, not only for the Cause of it, but also for the Authority by which it was
done, whether we consider the Vote of the Clergy, and the Judgment of a
National Synod, or the assent and command of the supreme and Sovereign power.

In which regard we see the Vanity of all that the Romanists allege from the
Ancients concluding Schism Affirmatively or Negatively by Communion with the
Church of Rome; for however that Argument might be good when that Church stood
right, and held the Catholic Faith undefiled, yet was it no more then they
might and did conclude by Communion with other famous Churches, confessedly
Catholic. No such conclusion can now be made upon holding or not holding
Communion with the Romish Church, since it gave such Cause of Reformation, as
abovesaid.

We see also the Vanity of their Reproaches: that we leave every man to his
private Judgment and Reason: that we open a gap to all Sectaries, to work
confusion, when they get force, in any Church. For however we leave men the use
of their Reason and Judgment in order to their own believing, yet in order to
Reformation we require not only just cause in regard of intolerable Error or
Superstition, but also due Authority for the carrying it on in the way of the
Church. These particulars were spoken to more or less in the first part of the
former book. Now for the further clearing of this point of the English
Reformation, and defending it so against the reproaches of Papists, that no
Sectaries may pretend to the like defense, I thought it not amiss to treat upon
these three points chiefly.

First, The Submission of Judgment, and the external peaceable subjection due
to a Church. For unless that be yielded in due measure, there will be no
preserving of peace and Unity, no keeping out of Error: and unless that be
required in due measure (not absolutely and Tyrannically exacted) there will be
no Reformation of Errors, when they have prevailed. The first we contend for,
and I have endeavored to set the bounds of it as near as I can in the first
Chapter. The other ( viz. absolute submission) the Church of Rome so far
challenges, that she makes her self thereby incorrigible. And hence it is we
find her so liberal of Anathema's, in all her Definitions, however
inconsiderable or remote from Truth the matter of them be.

The first General Councels had to do with Heresies touching the Foundation,
and might well pronounce Anathema to them that believed or taught otherwise
then they defined in those Fundamentals; but it had been well, if
after-Councels had been more sparing in their Definitions, and more merciful
in their Anathema's. For although they conceived this to be the way to bind up
all professors of Christianity in a streiter bond of Peace and Unity, yet it
seems to have wrought to the contrary upon a double reason: because it was
notorious, that after-Councels did sometimes out of faction or ignorance define
against the Truth, and were notwithstanding as peremptory in their Decrees and
Anathema's: also because it is to be desired rather then expected, that
Christians should be all of one mind, and a due liberty of d ssenting in
points, wherein (salva pietate and charitate) good men may differ, makes for
preserving of Peace and Unity, rather then a peremptory binding them under
Anathema, to think and speak the same thing. The Church of Rome has thought
this good wisdom in some few points, as the Conception of the blessed Virgin,
the Popes power in Temporals, etc. in which she allower dissent of judgments
and belief, being content to hold such an external Peace and Unity as is
possible.

It may be said, that the Anathema's of the Church of Rome, in her Trent
Council; are pronounced upon the dixerit, against him, that shall say to the
contrary: and we acknowledge that he who shall pertinaciously, turbulently speak
and teach against the Doctrine of the Church in points of less moment, may
deserve to be Anathematized or put out of the Church; for such a one, though he
deny not the faith, yet makes a breach of charity, whereby he goes out of the
Church, against which he so sets himself; but to fasten the Anathema to a bare
dixerit, as the Church of Rome does, which will not suffer her Definitions to
be spoken against how modestly soever, is too presumptuous: yea sometimes to fix
it upon the senserit, the thinking or believing otherwise, as the Council of
Trent has done, though very rarely, is yet more presumptuous and Tyrannical:
In the last Canon, de peccato Origin: having defined Concupiscence in the
Regenerato not to have the Nature of Sin, it adds, Si quis contra senserit,
Anathema sit. If any think or believe the contrary, let him be accursed. And
this is agreeable to that absolute submission of belief, which the Church of
Rome requires to her Definitions: where he is accounted no Cotholick that does
not entirely hold, what she has decreed to be held and believed; as there will
be occasion to show in the first Chapter of due Submission.

Secondly, The next General point, will be the warrantableness of the
Reformation, begun at first by a National Synod under Henr. the Eight: carried
on justifiably under Edward the Sixth: and perfected under Qu: Elizabeth,
especially in the Synod, 62. Where the whole body of Uniform Doctrine was
determined, drawn up and published in 39. Articles. The power also of Regal
Supremacy will be considerable, as to this work of Reformation, for the
causing, carrying on, and establishing thereof.

Thirdly, There is one thing more, which mainly concerns a Church: The Lawful
Ordination of Pastors by Bishops according to the perpetual way of the Church;
in which respect our Reformation was more regular then in those Churches that
are without Bishops. This defense the Reformers to these times do not pretend
to: nay, have called themselves off from it by casting out Bishops, when they
had them in the Churches of all the three Kingdoms.

The Apostolical institution of Bishops has been sufficiently cleared by many,
in special by Doctor Hammond; in his learned Dissertations against Blondel, and
the Presbyterian claim. Our work here is against the Romanists, who, admitting
such Institution of them, deny plainly that we have such Bishops, so ordained:
for, being not able here to reproach us, as usually they do, by saying
Sectaries may plead the like for their pretended Reformations, they seek by all
means they can, to undermine this Church by overthrowing the Ordination of our
Bishops, and consequently the lawful calling of our Pastors.

Sanders, Stapleton, Kellison, Harding, Fitz-Simons and others labored much in
this work, before Master Mason set out his book in defense of our Protestant
Bishops, and their Ordination. Since that, Ant: Champny, Englishman, and Doctor
of the Sorbon, undertook the business, against all Reformed Churches in a book
of 19. Chapters; The first eight he spends against the Calling of Ministers in
these Reformed Churches which have not Bishops, the rest against the Calling or
Ordination of our Bishops: taking in Mason all along, and with great confidence
triumphing over him at every turn. Certainly, he has said as much in the
Argument as can be said, how firmly, we shall see upon examination. And
although it has carried me beyond my intended measure, yet I determined to
follow him by trespassing upon the Readers Patience, who, I hope, will consider
the concernment of this point (the having of lawful Bishops) in opposition
both to the Romanists usually reproaching us, you have no Priests, no Bishops,
no Church: and also to the Presbyterians inconsideratly rejecting them, and
presumptuously undertaking to Ordain without them. He that holds it not a point
of concernment, let him tell me, how he likes the confused Estate of this
Church, since the violence done unto Bishops; or how he can satisfy the
Papists objecting the want of due calling, where Bishops are not: Nay, how he
can answer the whole Catholic Church, which never knew any other Government
then by Bishops, as chief Pastors in every Church.

Having spoken the intent of this Treatise, I must, before I leave him, desire
the Reader to remember one thing in the former, (the Error of the Millenary
belief, and Infant-Communion often instanced there) and to take notice, that
nothing was intended or can be concluded by those Instances to the prejudice of
the whole Church, as if thereby might be proved, that the whole Church
Universally and in all the Members of it may Err, and be infected with Error in
points of concernment, or prejudicial to the Faith; for that of the Millenary,
as it was not Universal, so not of such moment: and that of the
Infant-Communion, though more Universal and of longer continuance, was but a
tolerable Mistake. The Church of Rome indeed, in her Council of Trent, has
pronounced Anathema to them, that shall say, such communicating of Infants is
Necessary: which the ancient Church of Rome under Innocent the first did, no
question, say, and accordingly practice.

Therefore the instances of those Errors were not, as I said, directed against
the whole Church, but only made use of against the Church of Rome, and the
Errors there prevailing, which they will not acknowledge can take hold on that
Church: First, to show that the use of Private judgment (which they scoff at)
is necessary in discovering and for reforming of Errors prevailing; these two
instanced in, being so discovered, and thereupon left off. Secondly, to show
that the Church of Rome did Err in this of Infant Communion; Saint Augustine
telling us directly, L. 1. Cont. Julian. c. 1. Definivit Innocentius, Nisi
manducaverint -- Innocentius defined, unless they (Infants) eat the flesh, etc.
Nay says Saint Augustine, Definivit Dominus -- the Lord himself defined it,
when he said, Except ye eat and drink the -- ye have no life in you. S. Joh.
6.35. Whereby it is plain, that the practice of Iufant. Communion being raised
from that place, Except ye eat, -- S. John 6. was held needful; and so it was
held and practiced in the Church of Rome; however the Trent Council condemning
this Error, slubbers it over, saying, it was practiced quibusdam in locis, in
some places, as if not in the Roman Church: and that the Ancients doing so,
held no necessity of it. Thirdly, to show that no point of Faith or Worship,
wherein they and we differ, did so generally prevail in the Church and with so
little contradiction made to it, as those Errors did, for some Ages. It is
true, that Justin Martyr in his Dial. cum Tryiph. insinuates, that many piously
affected, did not entertain the Millenary belief, yet he tells us, (...), That
all who were in all points Orthodox, or of right Judgment held it: and I said
no more, page 58. of the former book; Also, of all that wrote for 300. years
even down to Lactantius inclusively, most of them avouch it, not one of them
(as I can find) contradicting or writing against it. Whereas we can say to the
Errors prevailing in the Roman Church, that there were always many piously
affected, who entertained them not, and that they are upon Record, and their
contradiction to those prevailing Errors more apparent, then was any made to
the Millenary for the first 300. years, or to Infant-Communion, for more Ages.
This is clear by the many Authors yet extant, which (albeit partial for the
most part in the cause of the Church of Rome, yet) tell us of the opposition
made to the prevailing conceit of a transubstantiating of the Elements in the
Eucharist, from Bertram down to Berengarius; and after him how many opposed
that, and other Errors prevailing in the Church of Rome to the time of the
Albigenses, and fromt hence downward to the last Age. All this I say, is upon
Record in many Writers of former times. Lastly, to show, by the prevailing of
those two Errors (of the Millennium and Infant-Communion) without any
contradiction recorded, how Cardinal Perrons two Rules for knowing, who and
what was Catholic, according to antiquity, were vain and inconsistent with
truth; of which Sect. 31. of the sormer book. To these purposes was use made of
those two prevailing Errors against the Church of Rome.

Henry Fern.

Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. I. OF Submission of Judgment, and external peaceable Subjection due to
the Church, National or Universal, from the respective Members thereof. page 1.
Chap. II. Of the Reformation begun under Hen. 8. advanced under King Edward,
perfected under Queen Elizabeth, and of the Warrantableness thereof. page 62.
Chap. III. Of the lawful calling of our English Protestant Bishops, against
Doctor Champny, (Sorbonist) and of the first Prejudice from other reformed
Churches that have not Ordination by Bishops. page 89. Chap. IV. Of the second
Prejudice against the Ordination from the Protestant Opinion of the Pope being
Antichrist, and the Church of Rome Heretical. page 131. Chap. V. Of the third
Prejudice, from the Protestant Opinion of the Romish Orders, that they are
Sacrilegious, and do not give an indelible Character. page 156. Chap. VI. Of
Archhishop Cranmers Ordination, and the pretended defects of it, Bigamy and
Heresy. page 177. Chap. VII. Of Bishops Ordained in King Edwards time, and the
essential Defect pretended to be in the Form of their Ordination, and of other
presumptions against it. page 210. Chap. VIII. Of Archbishop Parkers
Ordination, and the pretended Defects of it from the New Form, and the
Incapacity of his Ordainers. page 246. Chap. IX. Of the other Bishops Ordained
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign; and pretense of special defect in
it, by reason of Intrusion; Where also of the Deprivation of the former
Bishops, and of the Oath of Supremacy as the chief cause of it. page 264. Chap.
X. The Exception against our Bishops, that they were not Priests. Of the
Evangelical Priesthood or Ministry committed to us men, and of the Romish
Presumption in assuming more. page 319.
Errata.
Page 15. l. 6. for that is, r. there is. p. 35. l. 25. for Natures, r.
Natural. p. 37. l. 2. for producit, r. perducit. p. 68. l. 10. for speak, r.
spoke p. 111. l. 9. for fo, r. of. p. 126. l. 24. for perplexity, r. prolixity.
p. 143. l. 25. of given, dele of. p. 144. l. 21. laid, r. is laid. p. 146. l.
16. asserted, r. are asserted. p. 147. l. 14. for an, r. and. p. 191. l. 20.
for wrought, r. wrote. p. 195. l. ult. applied, r. is applied. p. 200. l. 1.
for was, r. were. p. 203. l. 16. for Mat. 15. r. Mat. 5. p. 205. l. 23. for
that, r. then by. p. 208. l. 27. for his, r. this. p. 216. l. 27. for
impertirently, r. impertinent. p. 239. l. 11. for letten, r. let. p. 251. l.
20. for should, r. would. and l. ult. for. is, r. as is. p. 256. l. 1. for
admit, r. omit. p. 264. l. 2. for authority, r. austerity. p. 266. l. 12. for
perished, r. persisted. p. 274 l. 11. for alteration, r. altercation. p, 302.
l. 19. for Subject, r. Submit. p. 325. l. 2. for his, r. it.

Additionals.
PAge 62. l. ult. After King Edward, add, That several Bishops were committed
into several Prisons. page 237. line 26. after 7. Chapter, add, Now to the
former part of the charge, I answer, that by the clause (any Statute, Law, or
Canon notwithstanding) No Law Divine is dispensed with, nor yet any Canon of
the whole Church; for Champny acknowledged above in his second proposition, (
Nu. 5.) that the Matter and Form of Ordination is not expressed determinatly in
Councels; Statutes and Laws, in this clause relate to those of this Land, those
especially that concerned this business --

CHAP. I.
Of submission of judgment, and external peaceable subjection due to the
Church, National or Universal, from the respective Members thereof.
WHat relation this point has to the peace and unity of a Church, in
preserving it from Error, and to the Reformation of a Church when Error has
prevailed upon it, was insinuated in the Preface: and in those respects there
was occasion in the former Treatise, Of the Division of English and Romish
Churches upon the Reformation, Sect. 9, 10, 13. to touch upon it.

1. There, Limits of submission from the Authority to which, and matter in which.
however a possibility of just dissenting from the public could not be denied,
a due Submission, with all peaceable external subjection, was required: and so
it was a Limited, not Absolute submission which we required: the limits of it
arising from the condition and concernment of the Authority to which, and of the
Matter in which this Submission is to be yielded. The Authority is public, and
(though not Infallible, yet) guiding others by an Infallible rule, and most
highly concerned to guide them accordingly, as being answerable for their
souls. The condition of the Matter also was observed to be diverse, according
to the difference of Belief and Practice, and in each kind to be of more or
less concernment, according to the Nature of the things propounded to us, to
be believed or practiced by us. The general result was, that we ought to yield
all the Submission of Judgment, and peaceable subjection, which such Authority
may require, and all that the condition of the matter will admit of. Thus much
was insinuated in the former book.

2. Now to make a supply to that, Difficulty in fixing those Limits.
which was briefly couched there, and to discover more particularly the hounds
and limits of this Submission, which to fix precisely is no easy matter. For
this Submission must be carried even between God and Men, such Men as God
himself has set over us in his Church, and commanded us to hear and obey them:
Yet such as possibly may entrench upon his right, in taking to themselves a
dominion over our Faith, and if we follow them in a blind obedience and
resignation of judgment wholly, we are sure to transgress in giving to them,
what is due to God; So also must this Submission be carried even between Man
and Man, by declining the Romish excess of arrogating too much to the public
Authority, and avoiding the other extreme of giving too much Liberty to Private
Judgment, into which Anabaptists and other Sectaries run, and thereby make void
the Authority and Office of the Pastors of the Church.

3. Therefore that we may better discover the bounds of due Submission, we must
take aim, as abovesaid, from the consideration.

First, General considerations of the Authority, and the Matter.
of the Authority to which the submission is yielded: That we find seated in
the Church National, or Universal, and justly requiring submission from the
respective Members. The Church we hear speaking her judgment by the Bishops and
Pastors of it, either in or out of Council; and whether it do speak either way
secured from possibility of Error, will be considerable in the yielding of our
Submission to it. Secondly, of the Matter or things, in which this Submission
is yielded: These we find as was said to be of several sorts. Some are only
in Opinion or belief, which being inward need not happily discover it self:
Some are in Practice, as Worship, Discipline, Rites, Ceremonies; which being
outward must needs appear. Now in reference to both Authority and Matter, we
shall have occasion to consider the Extent of Submission, from Judgment and
belief (which begin within) to external compliance and conformity of Practice;
and accordingly, in the Manner of performance, this submission either stays
our judgment and belief within, when it dissents, or discovers it without, but
so as not to a disturbance of peace.

4. Judgment and Reason is that Light, which he that lights every one that
comes into the World, Joh. 1.9. puts into the mind of Man, in order to his
yiedling assent and belief to that which is propounded; This light, as it
shines inwardly to the aforesaid purpose, may not be put out, by absolute
submission, or resignation of judgment to Man, or any company of Men; but as it
is a light to shine outward for direction of others, so it may be concealed.
For though a Man does not acquiesce inwardly to that which is propounded, yet
may he be silent in some cases, and forbear to publish his judgment to others.
These things being premised, come we to some conclusions touching this
submission.

5. From the consideration of Authority, to which submission is due, we may say,

I. Pastors of the Church singly taken have a publik Authority.
Seeing the Church speaks her Judgment by the Pastors and teachers in it, every
such Pastor is a Public Person, and by his Office and Commission for teaching,
guiding, and ruling others, has, in regard of all them, Authority and public
Judgment, to which there is a submission due. They sit in Moses chair -- and
He, that despises you, despises me, says our Savior. Submit and obey, says
S. Paul, Heb. 13.17. All which is spoken of the Pastors and Teachers of the
Church, not as joined in Council, but severally taken, and so teaching what the
Church has learnt of Christ, and what it declares and commands agreeable to the
voice of the great Pastor, speaking in the Word. This Conclusion is against
Anabaptists and Sectaries, that make void the Office and Authority of the
Pastors of the Church; and against all others, that, acknowledging the Office,
do too much weaken the Authority, receiving what they teach and declare, with
little or no other respect, then if the same were spoken to them by any other
Men. They of the Romish Church, as they are not behind hand in giving Authority
to their Priests or Pastors, so do they acknowledge it not secured from error;
and the submission due to it not to be absolute but limited. We need not
therefore quarrel with them here. All the business will be, to conclude upon that
submission, which is due to the Pastors of the Church joined or met in Council,
to give out the Judgment of the Church.

6. II. Pastors or Bishops met in Council.
Therefore we cannot but say, If they that meet either in a Provincial or
National (much more in a General) Council, be gathered together in the Name of
Christ, they have the promise of his presence among them, which is by the
assistance of his Spirit, S. Mat. 18.20. This is the only place, as it seems
to me, which delivers a promise immediately appliable to Councels, though not
to them only; other places so much beaten upon by the Romanists; I am with you
to the end -- S. Mat. 28. Tell the Church -- S. Mat. 18. The gates of Hell shall
not prevail -- S. Mat. 16. The spirit of Truth shall guide you into all Truth.
S. Joh. 16. and the like, cannot be drawn to concern Councels, but by many
consequences; and not at all to concern them in such an Infallible guidance as
the Romanists would have.

7. The assistance promised to them that meet in Christ's Name.
Now to know the Importance of this place, the promise and condition must be
considered. The promise of Christ's being in the midst of them, is made as we
see, to two or three, even to the meanest Ecclesiastical meeting or Synod, and
therefore cannot assure that infallible guidance, which among the Romanists is
applied only to General Councels, or to the Pope with his Consistory. What
then? It must needs imply such assistance as is needful and sufficient: Such,
as we acknowledge there can be no danger for any in the Church, in submitting to
her Definitions, when and where such assistance is given.

8. But for that we must look to the Condition required: to be gathered
together in the name of Christ; viz. With due Authority from him, and with
minds answerable to the end and purpose of their meeting, that is, with minds
free from worldly intents and designs, and from all factious engagements,
seeking unfeinedly the glory of God, and the propagation of the true Catholic
faith; and therefore setting before them the only Infallible Rule of Faith and
Truth, Gods Word, attending to it with due heed and submission, and with prayer
(for that is express in the Text, to ask) for assistance. To such, so gathered
in the name of Christ, the promise will be made good, and the issue will be a
declaration of the Truth in all matters of Belief and Worship.

9. Now for our Submission; The submission answerable.
were it certain they so met together in Christ's name, as it is certain the
promise will be made good to them, if so met together, no more would remain for
us to do, but to submit to their Definitions without any fear of danger, or
farther inquiry, whether they be answerable to that Infallible Rule. But we
must needs say

III. It is not certain, that they which meet in Councels are so gathered
together; Sometimes it is certain and notorious, that they are not; as, in the
second Council of Ephesius, a packed faction prevailed to the advancing of the
Entychian Heresy; and in the Romish Councels for these later Ages, the Papal
power and faction has managed and overruled all: so apparently in their
glorious Council of Trent, that it was often and openly complained of, while
the Council was sitting, and the decrees of that Council not received in France
for about 40. years after it was concluded. Can we say such Councels are
gathered in the Name of Christ? or that the promise can belong to such, and the
Infallible assistance of Gods Spirit (which the Romanists pretend) can be given
to such a company of Men, so gathered together, so overswayed with factious
interests? or to a Pope, be he what he will be for person, so he be Pope? For
such to say Visum est Spiritui sancto, and nobi -- It has seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and to us, what wants it of blasphemous arrogance? and what wants
it of Simon Magus his sin, to think the Holy Ghost can be bought with Money? or
bound to a Pope that has bought his Chair and enters Simoniacally? or to a
company of Men, whose Votes in Council are purchased with Gold, or golden hopes
of preferment, as it fared with a great part of them that met at Trent, being
either Titulars, Popes Pensioners, or bound to him upon like worldly
concernments?

10. But at the best, where there is not evident cause of exception, yet can
there not be certainty, that they which meet in Council, are so gathered in the
Name of Christ, with such minds, purposes and endeavors, as above required.
Now the Issue of the promise depends upon performance of the Condition: of
which performance though we may have a great presumption, in regard of their
learning and judgment, and their high concernment, as being answerable for men's
souls, (besides the care and respect that God has toward his Church) yet can
we not have such a certainty, as simply and absolutely to ground submission of
judgment and belief upon it; and therefore we receive their Definitions
concerning Faith, and Worship, not finally or chiefly upon the presumption we
have of their performance, or conformity to the condition of the promise, but
upon the evidence of that conformity, which their Definitions have to the
Infallible Rule. It was the care of S. Paul and of the true Apostles (and so it
should be of all the Pastors of the Church) by the demonstration of the Truth,
to commend themselves to every Man's Conscience, that they have not handled the
word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.2. Upon this evidence or demonstration of
Truth, the Four first general Councels have been so generally submitted to, so
readily received by all good Christians.

11. Submission and belief Conditional, and praevious, or absolute and Final.
But fourthly, lest that which is said of the Evidence and demonstration of
Truth from Gods Word, in order to assent or Faith, be mistaken to a slighting
of public Authority and submission due to it, because it may be also said (and
truly) that such evidence made out of Gods Word by any man whatsoever, requires
and obtains such Assent: we must know, there is an Assent and belief properly
due to the proposals of the Church, or Doctrine of the Pastors and Teachers in
it, and that by virtue of their Office and Commission which they have to teach
and rule others, and that under so great a concernment, as the giving account
for their souls: Only this Assent or belief is not at first absolute but
conditional, not final but previous and preparatory, and so remains in the
learner as a preparation, till that Evidence or Demonstration come and advance
it into a Divine Assent, and final resolution, grounded upon the revelation of
Gods Word: Or else it is Cashired upon the like Evidence to the contrary; for
we ought to submit and obey them, til upon such Evidence we can say, It is more
right to hearken unto God, then unto them. Act. 4. and good reason, seeing our
submission to them stands upon their Authority and Commission which they have to
teach and guide us, therefore we must have a greater Authority against them from
Gods word, and seeing our judgment is not to be compared with theirs, whose
profession is the study or interpretation of Gods Word, and whose lips preserve
knowledge, therefore we must have such Evidence of that greater Authority on
our side; that is apparent to any that can use his reason, before we deny our
submission to them. But some may say, if we cannot yield submission of judgment
and belief, yet ought we to submit so far as not to publish it, not to oppose
Authority: It is true, submission, as above was insinuated, extends it self so
far even to a suffering for our judgment and belief, and such submission is due
to the Pastors and Governors of the Church, by virtue of their public
Authority; but the consideration of submission in the several extent of it much
depends upon the several condition of the Maiter, in which we submit unto
Authority, of which presently; here we are upon the submission of judgment due
unto Authority, as to the unward belief; which submission we affirm to be not
absolute but limited, and may conclude it upon the Apostles warrant, who, in
one place, gives us the precept of it, and the reason of it, Obey, Submit; Why!
they have the rule over you; that is, their Commission and Authority for
teaching and guiding you; and they watch for your souls, and must give account,
(Heb. 13.17.) there is the high concernment. But this Obedience and submission
cannot be absolute, unless they alone were concerned to give account for our
souls: if we must also, then are we also concerned to watch over our own souls,
to see and judge what we do; and therefore the Apostle, as he tells us in this
place, they have the rule over us, so in another place adds the limitation, Not
as having dominion over your faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. and Not as Lords over Gods
heritage, says S. Peter 1.5.3. how then? as Ministers by whom ye believe, 1
Cor. 3.9. as helpers of your joy. 2 Cor. 1.24. Ministers, Helpers, Guides they
are in the way of Salvation; but as it is one thing for a Man to follow a
Guide, til he see apparent danger, another thing to be led by him blindfold: So
is it one thing to follow our spiritual Guides with a conditional belief, or
reservation to Gods-Word, yea and to follow them to a mistrust of our own
judgment, or knowledge we have of the way; another thing to resign up judgment
and belief to them, and put out that light of reason which God has put in us,
in order to our receiving direction for the way of Salvation. The first we
allow and require, the other let the Church of Rome exact, and gain where she
can. Thus far from the consideration of Authority to which Submission is due: We
may receive more particular directions for the extent and manner of performing
this Submission, if we now add the Consideration of the Matter or things, in
which Submission is yielded.

12. Several conditions of the matter in which.
The matters or things wherein the Church declares her judgment, and requires
Submission, are of diverse condition (as was above insinuated;) some are matters
of Opinion or belief only; and these, as they are of different condition from
matters of Practice, and outward exercise, so are they to be distinguished one
from the other in the Declarations of the Church: for it is considerable in our
yiedling of Submission, to know what things are Credenda or matters of belief,
strictly taken for Catholic Faith, such as the prime Articles, Christ God and
Man, and the like, or their immediate and apparent consequences, Two wills in
Christ, Natures distinct and unconfounded: and what things again are
Credibilia; Credible Truths or Matters of Opinion, or belief largely taken.
Also it is considerable, What the Church has declared as Articles of Faith,
and what she has showed her judgment in, as Credible Truths, but not imposing
them as Articles of Catholic Faith: for in case she should mistake in these,
the danger in conforming our judgment to hers is the less; as if a Church upon
mistake should (as many of the Ancients thought) judge it Credible, That the
souls of just men are not admitted into the glorious presence of God, til the
Resurrection, or that there may be some kind of purgatory after this life,
turning S. Augustines Non incredibile, into a Credibile, but not imposing it as
an Article of Faith, as the Church of Rome has boldly done. So likewise
Matters of Practice are of diverse forts, and of greater or less concernment.
Some of Worship and Adoration, some of Discipline, Rites, Cercmony: Under
matters of Discipline, the observing of set Times for Fasting, works and
performances of public Penance, single life of Priests and the like, are
considerable in the Canons or Declarations of the Church concerning them. In
matters of Belief or Opinion, our subjection to a public judgment stands in a
conformity of our judgment and belief to the public, and in the publishing or
not publishing of our judgment. In Matters of practice, our Submission stands
in the conformity of judgment, if we judge of Worship and other matters
determined, as the Church judges, or in the outward exercise, if we do in these
things as the Church does and practices.

13. Having premised thus much, Submission of Judgment answerable.
come we now to more particular directions for the extent or manner of
performing Submission to the judgment of the Church, when she has declared it
in Matters of Belief or Practice. As for the Submission of Private judgment to
the public. 1. To all the determinations of the Church we ow Submission by
assent and belief conditional, and preparatory at the least, which being given
with reservation for evidence out of Gods Word, does both acknowledge the
Authority of our Pastors and Teachers, and withal reserve unto God his due. 2.
In matters of Faith and Religious Worship, we cannot submit to any company of
Men, by resignation of our judgment and belief, or standing bound to receive
for Faith and Worship, all that they shall define and impose for such; for such
resignation gives to Man, what is due to God, and stands excluded by the
condition (as above shown) of the Authority, which is not Infallible, and also
by the condition of the Matter, (Faith and Worship) of high concernment to our
own Souls, and to be accounted for by our selves, who therefore stand bound to
make present and diligent search for that evidence and demonstration from Gods
Word, upon which we may finally and securely stay our judgments and belief in
such matters. 3. In other Matters of Opinion and Credibility, or of Discipline
and Rites, which the Church determins and proposes for such, as there is more
cause for ready conformity of judgment, so is there more security, or less
danger in it; for such Matters are either not determined by Scripture in
particular, or not determinable but by several consequences. Only this
conformity is yielded still with a reservation for any sufficient evidence or
demonstration of Truth to the contrary: else, til that come, our conformity
remains secure; for here is the difference of conforming in the former points of
Catholic faith or worship, and these later of Opinion, Discipline, Rites;
that, when the former are proposed to our belief and practice, we rest not
secure til we have demonstation or evidence that they are so; but in the other
we submit with security, til we have evidence that they are not so, as Authority
has determined. Indeed in matters of Discipline, and Ceremony (though in
themselves of small concernment) great opposition has often been made to the
judgment and determination of Authority: of which I shall speak a little below
under the conformity of Practice in such matters; and, in the mean, let us see
what Cautions may be given in case of Private Judgment justly dissenting from
the Public.

14. Of concealing a dissent of Judgment in peaceable subjection.
If therefore it come to that (as possibly it may) yet for preserving of due
submission, take care, 1. That our dissenting be not upon any comparing, or
equalling our private judgment to the public, and autoritative judgment of the
Church (for this will be absolutely against that conditional and preparatory
belief or assent with which we are to receive all her determinations) but upon
the evidence of a greater Authority on our side, viz. the demonstration of Truth
from Gods Word, or primitive consent of the Catholic Church; either of which
is of more Authority then the present Governors of the Church. 2. That the
dissenting of private judgment be only in order to a man's own believing and
delivering of his own soul, for which he is to give account, not to any
inconsiderate publishing of it to others; for, the light of Reason, though it
may not be put out, yet may, and often ought to be concealed, and a man's private
judgment silenced in submission to the public. 3. If he publish or make known
his dissenting, it ought to be by modest proposal to his Superiors, not by
clamours against the Church, to a disturbance of the peace of it: much less by
force or tumult, as the manner of Sectaries has usually been; for if he cannot
internally acquiesce in the judgment of the Church, yet ought he to submit, as
far as possible, externally, and to suffer for it, if need be.

15. Whether in all Matters or Cases?
But here a question may be made about these matters, in which we were said to
have evidence of Scripture, and Primitive consent; if a Church should so far
err as to judge contrary to these, as for the error of Monothelites or
Eutychians, or for the worshipping of Images, or any Creature with Religious
worship, must a man submit with silence in such a case? I answer; The Ministers
of the Word, being by that Church according to Gods Ordinance called to publish
the Gospel and Counsels of God for salvation, ought to propose their contrary
judgment and belief to their Superiors so erring; if they reform, it is well; if
not, the other ought to declare these Counsels of God; for in this case they
have greater Authority (as was said) on their side, and may say to the
Governors of the Visible Church, as the Apostles did to the great Council,
Whether it be more right to hearken to you or to God, etc. Acts 4. And to this
case I refer that other erroneous principle of belief (the mother of Error and
Apostacy) that all the Members of the Church are bound to receive for Catholic
Faith and Christian Worship all that the Church whereof they are Members
proposes to them for such; herein we had, and all that are still of the Roman
Communion, have cause to complain of that Church, and to declare dissent of
judgment from it, which not only imposes Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and
such novel errors for Articles of the Catholic faith, and commands
Image Worship as lawful and pleasing to God; but also holds all the Members
thereof bound to that former principle of mis-belief, in a blind receiving all
for faith and worship, that shall be so proposed to them.

16. The submiitting of Doctrine and Writings to the censure of the Church.
And this which has been said will also speak the meaning of that submission,
which we profess to yield, when we usually say (and not without cause) We
submit our Judgment, Doctrine, or Writings to the censure of the Church: for 1.
this is not a resignation of judgment in regard of believing, but a submission
in regard of the publishing it, a putting it to the permission of the Church,
whether such Doctrine, or Writings shall stand published or be silenced. 2. And
this not in all things simply; for no Man can submit his Judgment and Doctrine
to any Company of Men, when he believes and teaches the prime Articles of
Catholic Faith, into which all Christians are baptized, or the immediate
consequences of them, which are evident to all that can use Reason and
Judgment, or the express commands of God concerning Religious Worship; but it
is in things more questionable, not plainly determined in Scripture, and though
deducible from some confessed Article, or express Command, yet by diverse
Consequences. As in the first kind, the Church has power to silence and
censure any, that teach contrary to such Articles, or Commandments, but cannot
forbid to teach them. So in the second she has power to silence any, that
teach contrary to her declared Judgment in them. For it cannot be denied that
the Church has power to overruled and restrain the exercise of any man's
Ministry, in order to the common peace and safety, she being answerable for
others, as well as for him, whom she restrains in publishing his private
judgment or belief to others.

17. Submission of Practice, or Conformity in doing.
Thus much of Submission of Judgment in matters of Belief or Practice, either
in conforming to the Judgment and determination of the Church therein declared,
or in a fair and peaceable dissenting. Now come we to Submission of Practice,
in a conformity of doing what the Church does and practices. The Judgment we
have of Matters, either of belief or practice, need not happily discover it
self, may for peace sake be silenced; but in matters of practice determined by
the Church, and commanded to be done by us, our conformity both in Judgment,
and Practice, must needs then appear. It was well and peaceably said of Jo:
Frith (a young Man, but Learned and Moderate) in his Reply to Sir Thomas Moor,
concerning Transubstantiation: Let it not (says he) be Worshipped, and think
what you will, for then is the Peril past. Difference of judgment may be in a
Church without disturbance; In matter of worship.
but difference of practice, because apparent, endangers the peace of it. And
let me here add, Notwithstanding the difference of judgment in the Protestant
Churches de modo presentiae, yet may they well communicate together in the
Sacrament, because neither of them allow or practice that Adoration directed to
the Sacramental Symbols, which the Church of Rome practices and requires of all
her Communicants, or Spectators rather. Now for Submission or Conformity in
matters of practice, we must remember such matters were of different sorts and
concernments, (Worship, Adoration, Discipline, Order, Ceremony) and then we
have a double Caution, 1. According to the indifferency of the matter, or the
greater, but evident concernment of it, either to yield conformity for Peace
sake, or forbear for Conscience sake. 2. That such forbearance of any practice
be an Act of simple and bare Omission without clamor and contempt of Authority,
without tumult or resistance, with a readiness to suffer rather; then is there
peaceable subjection, when private judgment keeps within these bounds. For such
conscionable forbearance of many practices in the Church of Rome, (of high
concernment and very evident) they have good cause, that are within her
Communion; Such practice is the exercise of Religious Worship, many ways
applied in that Church to the Creature; such also are some superstitious Rites
and Ceremonies, having a kind of Sacramental virtue, and real holiness affixed
to them.

18. In Matters of Ceremony or Discipline.
But as for Rites and Ceremonies, in themselves indifferent, and by the Church
enjoined only with respect to Order and Discipline, there is no cause of
inconformity, or forbearance; yet in these has there been great opposition
from private Judgments, that could not keep within their bounds, and those
places of Romans 14. He that doubts is damned, if he eat. and, what is not of
Faith, is sin, have been abused to maintain a dissenting from the Judgment of
the Church, and a forbearance of the Practice. We say therefore, those places
are misapplyed to matters determined by public Authority: against which it is
not doubting or want of Faith ( i.e. persuasion of the Lawfulness or
indifferency of the thing so determined) that can take place, or bear out
disobedience, but evident demonstration of the thing out of Gods Word to the
contrary; and the Reason is plain, the command of Gods Word for Obedience and
Submission to them that are over us is evident, and therefore against them we
must have evidence from Gods Word, to show they are mistaken in their Judgment
or determination of that particular. Now when a Church professes the thing
determined by her to be indifferent in it self, or of a middle Nature, neither
commanded by God nor forbidden, and that she neither affixes any Sacramental or
Spiritual virtue or hollness to it, nor enjoins it as Worship, but only out of
respect to Order and Discipline: no man can have any evident demonstration, but
only a doubting or mixed persuasion of the unlawfulness of such a thing; and
although a Man of doubting of a thing, in it self indifferent, but not
determined, or enjoined by Authority, may by reason of his doubting have cause
to forbear it: yet not in this case of the supposed determination and
injunction of Authority; for he that will then urge [He that doubts is damned]
must remember, that he that disobeyeth is damned too: that former place of
doubting, having many exceptions, of which this predetermination of Authority is
one, but this disobeying of Authority has only one, viz. when there is
sufficient evidence of L. vine Authority against the thing determined by humane,
and so it becomes an Obeying of God rather then Man.

19. Of Priests Celebacie, enjoined by the Church, and how.
But it may be expected, because I referred the injunction of Priests single
life to matter of Discipline, that I should speak particularly to the
conformity of Judgment and Practice to it. I referred it to Discipline, because
anciently enjoined not in a disparagement to Marriage, which the Apostle
concludes Honorable in all men, but in Order to their better discharge of
their Duty and Priestlie or Ministerial function; and I do not now dispute the
difference of that ancient injunction from the now Roman exaction of single
life, nor question with what fullness of Authority it was enjoined, or how far,
or how long binding, (which I shall have more fit occasion to touch a little
Number. 25.26.
below, and more largly against Champny in the sixth Chapter) but only speak to
the point of Submission and conformity to such judgment, or determination of
the Church, supposing it fully concluded, and binding. Therefore I cannot but
say, while it was so binding, every Clergyman had cause to Judge, the
Governors of the Church saw reason to enjoin it, and was bound to endeavor
conformity in Practice, i.e. to use such means by Temperance, Fasting, Prayer,
as conduce to preserve that continency of Single life; but if, after due use,
he found himself not answerable to that state, but in the condition to which S.
Paul prescribes the use of that remedy which God had ordained, ( Marriage
against Burning) he was bound notwithstanding the Church-Ordinance, to take to
it; and this as it has direct Warrant from Gods Word, so is it not a direct
opposition to the Church Ordinance, which was but conditional, as in the
prohibition of Marriage to Fellows of Colleges, under the pain of loss of their
Fellowships. Only in this point of Priests Marriage, the condition is of
greater concernment, the loss of Clergy, or quitting the Ministerial function,
which if happened to him, that has dealt conscionably (as above) in the
business, the Church must answer for it.

20. Thus have I endeavored as near as I can, to discover and fix the bounds
of Submission of Private Judgment and Practice, according to the several
condition of the matter, wherein it is shown, and according to the diverse
extent and manner of performing or showing it; either to a direct conformity
and compliance with the public, or if dissenting, yet to a yiedling of all
possible, peaceable Subjection, and that, if need be, to a suffering under
Authority. If Private Judgment keep it self within the former bounds of
Submission, there can be no harm to the Church.

21. I should now speak the respect, Passages out of 8. Augustine touching
Authority and Reason.
which every National or particular Church ought to bear to the Universal, in
this point of Submission; but before we go farther, it will be worth our pains
to take a short view of some passages of S. Aug. (appliable to the business in
hand) concerning Authority and Reason. (I called them, Authority, and Evidence, or
demonstration of Truth) in his Books, de vera Relig. and de Vtil tate credend.
It is his purpose there, to show how Authority goes before Reason, in our
believing or receiving the Christian Faith, which by the Romanists is sometimes
misapplyed to the purpose of that Church, requiring belief to rest upon her
Authority. We may therefore take notice, that the writing of those books was
occasioned by the Manichees, who reproached the Catholics, for requiring
belief of their Scholars or Auditors, before they showed them reason; and
boasted, Se terribili Autoritate separata, etc. that laying aside all
supercilious Authority, they would by simple and plain reason bring Men to God.
cap. 1. de util. cred. Had this Romish Infallible Authority (which exacts belief
simply and finally) been then pretended to in the Church, they might well have
called it terrible Authority, and S. Augustine could not but have spoken to it.
Whereas it is his only work in both books to show that Men are first moved by
Authority to a belief of things, before they see the Reason of the things
themselves. Now the belief upon this Authority is but previous and preparatory
(as I called it) in order to that which S. Augustine calls Reason, or evident
knowledge of the truth. For he tells us this Authority ( viz. of the Church
proposing the Catholic Faith) stands upon Miracles, confirming that Faith, and
Multitude of believers that have embraced it; and this indeed is the first
motive to induce a Man to seek, and believe he may have the true Faith and
Religion in such a Church, such a company of Relievers. Again, he pleads for
belief due to the Authority of Pastors and Teachers of the Church, whom he calls
Antistites Dei, whom God has set in his Church as Governors and Teachers,
cap. 10. de Vtil Cred. and this is but according to the Rule, common to the
teaching of other Sciences: Oportet discentem credere, He that is taught must
give credit to him that teacher him. Lastly, we find him every where speaking
the end of that Authority and teaching in the Church; it is praecolere,
procurare animum or idoneum facere percipiendae veritati, to mould and fit the
mind for perceiving and embracing the Truth, and preparare illuminaturo Deo, to
prepare it for the enlightening of Gods Spirit; which he calls sometimes the
punging of the mind, ( viz. from Natures ignorance, self-conceit, love of
Worldly pleasures) that it may be fit to behold the clear Truth; and this is it
which he calls Reason, and gives it the chiefest Authority, Summa est ipsius
veritatis jam cognitae and perspicuae Autoritas. (cap. 14. de vera Relig.) this
was called Evidence above, or Demonstration of Truth: and cap. 25. of the same
book, Purgatioris animae rationi quae ad veritatem pervenit, nullo modo
preponitur humana Autoritas. Humane Authority must give way to Reason, and
Evident truth, which a Soul purified by Faith knows and believes* Thus much in
reference to that which had been spoken above of preparatory, conditional
belief due to, and beginning from Authority, but finally resting in the Evidence
and Demonstration of Truth: Like as the belief of the Samaritans given first to
the Testimony of the Woman that had been with Christ, brought them out unto
him, but stayed at last upon A^divimus ipsi, we have heard him our selves, S.
John 4.42.

22. Pride makes men pass the bounds of peaceable subjection.
Now in reference to that which was spoken of Submission of private Judgment,
keeping within bounds of peaceable subjection, hear what S. Augustine subjoyns
immediately upon the former words, cap. 25. de Vera Rel. ad hanc nulla humana
suPerbia producit, To this (viz. the reason and belief of a purified mind)
pride brings no man; quae si non esset nec Haeretici, nec Schismatici essent,
but for this Pride and self-conceit (the cause why private Judgments do not keep
within bounds) there would be no Heretics or Schismatics; for it comes not to
this but when nimia levitate (as he speaks sometimes) through too much
lightness of judgment they are driven tanquam palea vento Superbiae, as chaff
by the puff of their own pride from the Lords floor, or Visible Church.

23. Unjust excommunication and want of the Communion of the Church upon it.
But what if Private Men for a peaceable dissenting in judgment or practice from
the Visible Church, (of which they were Members) in points of high concernment,
for Belief or Worship, be censured and driven from the communion of it? They
are not for all that, driven from the Communion of the Catholic Church, but
their condition is not unlike the case of those good men which S. Augustine
speaks of, cap. 6. de vera Rel. Divine Providence (says he) suffers sometimes
Viros bonos per turbulentas sed tiones carnalium hominum expelli de
Congregatione Christiana, Good men to be cast out of the Communion of the
Visible Church, through the turbulent Seditions of carnal Men; How such, if
private men, must behave themselves.
declaring also, how they ought to behave themselves in that condition,
patiently, constantly, by charity to those to whose Violence they gave way, and
perseverance in the Faith of the Catholic Church, sine Conventiculorum
segregratione, (without making Conventicles apart) and testimonio suo juvantes
eam fidem, quam in Ecclesia -- (and by their witness and profession helping
that Faith, which they know is still taught in the Church.) These, says he,
thus serving God in secret (Pater viaens in occulto coronat) their Father which
sees in secret, crowns and rewards. Observe, he speaks here of private Men, and
so do we hitherto; but he supposes them cast out of the Church, in which the
Catholic Faith is truly professed, with due Christian Worship, and therefore
says, Examples of such expelled good men are rare: Whereas we supose such to
be cast out from the Visible Communion, upon the cause of Faith and Worship,
and those turbulent persons to be the chief Rulers casting them out upon that
account; and therefore with more advantage may conclude, it is well with such
in the sight of God that sees in secret. Indeed the condition of the Catholic
Church being such as it was in S. Augustine his days, it could not but be rare
to find such examples; but if he had seen these latter Ages, and the corruption
of Faith and Worship upheld by pride and Tyranny of the chief Rulers
(especially within the Communion of the Romish Church) he might have seen
examples great store, of good men and pious, for peaceable dissenting or
desiring Reformation, cast out and persecuted.

24. Now in the last place, Submission of National Churches to the Universal.
of the respect which National Churches have and ought to have to the
Universal, as to this point of submission, we need not say much. 1. Several
National Churches being parts (as it were) and Members making one whole Church
called the Catholic, in some proportion ought to bear like respect to the
Definitions and practices of the Catholic Church, as Inferior or private
persons to the particular National Church, of which they are Members: in some
proportion, (I say, as also it was said, Sect. 9. of the former book) but with
advantage to a National Church in this point of Judgment, above what is allowed
proportionable to private persons; for they have only Judgment of discretion in
order to their own believing, whereas a National Church has public Judgment,
both in receiving the Decrees of the Universal Church, or in making some her
self, and in proposing them to others, whom she is to guide and answer for: and
so can make public reformation, when there is cause for it, and constitute a
Visible Church in depending, in point of Government, of any other Visible
Church, or rather can continue a Visible Church, as it was before, but with
this difference from what it was before, that now it stands reformed, or purged
from many errors, and freed from the Tyranny of foreign power, under which it
was before; and so it was with the Church of England Reforming. And all this a
National Church may so much the rather do, when the Universal stands so divided
and distracted (as it has for these latter Ages) that a free General Council
cannot be expected: as was insinuated, Sect. 4. of the former book. 2. But the
Church Universal has heretofore declared her Judgment in General Councels,
free and unquestionable, does not every National Church (by name this of
England) ow submission of Judgment to them? I answer, as for matters of Faith
and Worship, there is no need that any National Church should dissent from any
definition (concerning that matter) made or declared by any of the undoubted
General Councels of the Church, such as have not been justly excepted against;
and let any Romanist show that the Church of England has receded from the
Judgment of such Councels, either in matters of Faith or Worship.

25. In Canons of Discipline Prudentiall Motives considerable.
As for Matters of Practice and Discipline, (under which I named Priests single
life, because they clamor against us as receding therein from the Catholic
Church) I may say generally of such points that the Church in them went upon
prudential Motives and Reasons, with respect to conveniences and inconveniences
in those Times considerable: and therefore we find it sometimes letting loose
the Reins of Discipline, sometimes drawing them streiter according to the
Exigency of Times, or condition of Persons. As in those that enjoin Priests
single life.
Neither could they that made those Canons, intend to bind the Church for ever,
which in after-Ages might have like cause upon experience of inconveniences to
loosen that, which they held stricter: as we find in the point of Penances,
and also in this very point of Single life, if we look into the practice of it
in several Ages and Countries. Nor was it necessary, that this Remission or
relaxation should always expect the like Authority of Councels, to decree it,
but it might be lawfully done by any National Church within it self upon long
experience of the inconveniences; and that especially, when a free General
Council cannot be expected.

26. As to this point of Priests single life, I shall have occasion to speak
more below against Champny, cap. 6. here only I will hint these particulars. I.
It was conformable to the former Reason; that Aeneas Sylvius (afterward Pope)
acknowledged often, As at first they saw cause to forbid Priests Marriage, so
now there was greater cause to leave it free to them again. Plat. in Pio. 2.
II. The sixth General Council in Trullo, held in the seventh Century, was the
first General Council that forbad Bishops to have or retein their Wives. Can.
12. Where they excuse themselves for varying from the 5. Canon of the Apostles
(which forbad Bishops to put them away) by a pretense conformable still to the
former reason, viz. because stricter Discipline was fitter for their times,
then it was for the beginnings of Christianity. III. That General Council does
permit Priests and Deacons to keep their Wives, decreeing those to be deposed,
that cause them to forsake their Wives after ordination. Can. 13. where the
Council expressly and by name sets a black note upon the Roman Church for doing
so: and Can. 55. censures that Church again for their custom of Fasting on
Saturdayes. For this cause some Romanists quarrel at and make exceptions
against this Council as not General or Lawful, yet the more reasonable among
them admit of it; and so we leave them to answer for their dissenting from a
General Council upon a double score, as appears by the 13. and 55. Canons.

27 But what tell we them of answering it to any Council, What submission the
Church of Rome exacts.
that will have the whole Catholic Church bound to submit to the decrees of
their Church? Let us see then what Submission the Church of Rome requires of
all within her Communion, and indeed of all Christians under pain of Damnation.
We may deliver it in general, thus: In all that she defines, she requires, or
exacts rather, absolute Submission of belief and judgment; but then we say, she
cannot make good the ground on which she requires it, viz. Infallible guidance.
In other things not Defined she requires submission of silence, which she
imposes on both parties, as the heat of the controversy between them seems to
require. And this Submission we acknowledge due to Authority in every Church, not
only to the Authority of the chief Pastors in that Church, but also of the
Supreme Civil power: this imposing of silence, being not a Definitive sentence
for determination of Doctrine, but a suspending sentence for ceasing of the
debate, and providing for public peace.

28. In all things defined.
What strict submission of belief the Church of Rome requires to all her
Definitions, we may see by the Oath, set out by Pius 4. to be taken by every
Bishop, wherein, after the recital of the whole Romish Faith, as it is patched
up with the Tridentine Articles, follows that very clause which we find in the
Athanasian Creed subjoyned to the Catholic Faith there expressed, Haec est
fides Catholica, extra quam -- this is the Catholic Faith, without which none
can be saved. So that they which join themselves to that Church stand bound to
believe all, which that Church at present does, or shall hereafter propose to
be believed: Let them place the judgment of that Church where they will, in the
Pope or Council.

29. And absolute Submission.
Card. Bell. who according to the Divinity professed at Rome, and more generally
obtaining in that Church, reduces all to the judgment of the Pope, is very
strict in exacting this submission of belief. In his fourth book, de Pontif
Romans he disputes of the Popes Infallibility, and there c. 3. and 5. We find Non
esse subditorum de hac re dubitare, sed simpliciter ob^dir^ -- It is not for
Subjects or Inferiors to doubt of this matter (viz. Whether the Pope can or
does err) but simply to obey. And to show the strength of this obligation, and
the inconvenience that would fall upon the Church, if the Pope be subject to
err in defining or commanding any thing to the Church, he lets not to express
it thus. Si papa erraret praecipiendo, etc. If the Pope should err, in
commanding Vice and forbidding Virtue, the Church were bound to believe, Vitia
esse bona, and Virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare, that
Vice was good, Virtue evil, unless it would sin against conscience. To
mollify the harshnesse of this he inserts presently (in rebus dubiis) as if
this Submission belonged only to his Commands and Definitions in doubtful
Matters; which as it is not all they say, so is it to little purpose: for if he
please to judge the most apparent thing to be doubtful (as whether our Savior
appointed the Cup to be received by the people) and define against it, then are
all in the Church bound to believe so, or sin against Conscience.

30. And indeed it necessarily follows upon their ground and reason of
believing all things, viz. the Papal Infallibility. Now considering, what Popes
have been, and may be, how readily may all of that persuasion be brought under
the Woe denounced by the Prophet, Isa. 5.20. against those that call Good Evil,
Light Darkness, Truth Error, Virtue Vice. Thus have the people been put off
with half-Communion, contrary to our Saviors institution, and made to believe
it is not so: thus brought to bow down to graven Images and to Worship them,
contrary to the express words of Gods command, and yet bound to believe it is
not so: thus have they been raised here into Rebellions and Treasons against
their Natural Prince, upon Pope Pius 5. his Bulls, and thereupon to believe
Rebellion was good service to God and his Church: thus Princes themselves have
been brought to incestuous Marriages, and to believe them not sinful upon the
Popes dispensation: as our Hen. 8. many years believed, till, upon better
examination, he saw how vain and ungrounded the Judgment and Sentence of the
Pope was.

31. Not all agreed about the chief ground of their belief.
But they are not all agreed about this ground of Belief, (Papal infallibility)
for though it be publicly professed, and maintained in their Schools,
especially where the Jesuits are in the Chair, and none within the Popes reach
dare openly gainsay it; yet is it not every where believed within the Romish
Communion. A fair pretense it carries to advance the work of that Church, or
Court of Rome rather, and the Romish Emissaries make good advantage of it, when
they have to deal with the unwary, and more simple sort of Christians; but when
it falls under conscionable examination, what submission of belief it gains
from those of that Communion, we may see by these examples. Clement the 7. was
resolute in his sentence for the incestuous marriage of Henry the 8. yet both
Universities of this Land, with many abroad, some of Italy it self, declared
against it. Pope Paul 5. was as peremptory in his definitive sentence against
the Venetians, yet was resisted by that whole State and their Subjects, and in
the end forced to recall it. And many now living can remember, what difference
there was among the Romish Catholics here, upon the same Popes Breves sent out
against the Oath of Allegiance; some urging obedience to them, some refusing,
and showing their Reasons for their dissenting; which may be seen drawn up in a
book set out by Mr. William Howard, one of the Romish Communion, and do speak
the reasonableness of what is said by us, for the judgment of discretion
allowed to private persons, or Inferiors.

32. When there comes shame upon any Papal sentence, as in the former examples,
they have excuses from the condition of the Matter defined, or the concernment
of it to the Church, or the intention of the Pope in defining it, with a
distinction of in and out of his Chair, to play fast and loose by; for they can
shift him into it, or out of it, according to the event and success of his
definitive Judgment. But those examples will not admit of such exceptions, for
though in Hypothesi they were in and about particular Actions and Persons, yet
in Thesi they were of general concernment as may be easily made to appear; and
whether the Pope was in his chair or no, when he sent forth such definitive
sentence, I know not; but me thinks, in business of such concernment to the
Church and Christian people, it should have beseemed him to give his judgment
not car elesly as a private Doctor, but as the Pastor, General of the Church,
and it had been worth his pains to go up to his chair for infallible
determination; and if he did it not then, when so much cause, so much time to
do it, when shall any man ever know certainly that the Pope defined or spoke
such or such a thing in his chair, that there may be sure ground for belief and
obedience?

33. Bell. in the place above cited, Difference about Papal Infallibility.
treating of the Popes Infallibility sets down several opinions about it, of
which this is one: That the Pope may be an Heretic and teach Heresy; This
opinion he will not say is fully Heretical, because they are tolerated in the
Church that hold it, but Haeresi proxima, at next door to Heresy: Yet as near
as it is to Heresy, it is the sentence generally of the Popish Church in
France, and other places too: and see their agreement. This may not be taught
at Rome, nor the contrary of it at Paris. Now albeit this Party has
unanswerable reasons and arguments for rejecting the Infallibility of the Papal
judgment, and setting up a General Council above him, which would be good out
of the mouth of a Protestant: Yet they also when they have to deal with
Protestants, tell of the Infallible guidance of the Roman Church, of the Pope
as Vicar of Christ, and the visible Head of his Church, and boast of their
Church as built upon the Rock; in all which they thwart themselves; for what
privilege (of Infallibility or other) can the Roman Church pretend to above
other, but by S. Peter, and then must it be derived by his supposed successors
the Bishops of that Church? or how can they affirm the Pope to be Head, and
deny him the Supremacy, or say a Council is above him? or how apply that
promise of the Rock to their Church, but by allowing S. Peter, and so his
successors to be that Rock, and consequently to give the stability and
infallibility to their Church, if that place prove any to be in it? This Party
indeed will say, they make the Pope but a Ministerial Head to the Church. Which
how it reconciles the premises, or saves all they pretend to by the Pope, I see
not; but surely it sets them at a wide difference with their fellow Catholics
who are of a contrary persuasion. Let them agree it among themselves: yet note
we their disagreement in points of such high concernment, as touch the very
groundwork of their Faith; and consequently their uncertainty where to state
the infallibility: and thereupon their unreasonableness in exacting (upon that
pretense of infallible guidance) absolute submission of belief to all things
defined and propounded by that Church: and lastly, their vanity in thinking to
satisfy us with saying, They all agree in yiedling submission to all, that is
defined by General Councels; and that the Differences we object to them about
Pope and Council are not defined.

34. For first, they must not here put us off with Submission of Silence or
external peaceable subjection (which requires not that infallible guidance the
Church of Rome boasts of, but an Autoritative judgment, or unappealeable
Authority, which we quarrel not, if well stated, as will appear presently) but
they must speak that agreement of theirs in yiedling Submission of belief, and
then it will not serve their turns to tell us, when we charge them with
disagreement in the grounds of their belief, that they all agree in yiedling
Submission, etc. For seeing Infallible judgment is the ground with them of that
submission of belief, and they cannot agree how that infallibility accrews, or
where it is to be stated in Council, Pope, or partly in both (the reasons of
the one part being sufficient to destroy the other) it must needs appear how
much they disagree in and about the very groundwork of their belief. They
would think it strange to hear us say, We and they do not disagree in the
grounds of our belief, because we both agree in these Generals, That all Divine
Revelation is to be believed, yea, All that is revealed in Scripture ought to
be believed; for if we enquire farther into the Means of conveying Divine
Revelation, we cannot admit Tradition in so careless and uncertain a sense, as
they do: or if look into the Meaning of Scripture, we cannot allow of their
pretended Infallible Judge or Interpreter; and they stick not to call us
Heretics for our disagreement with them. So for their Principle in which they
boast of their Universal agreement, (Submission to all that is defined) if we
enquire into the reason and ground of it (Infallible Judgment in their
definitions) we find wide differences and contrary persuasions among them; and
Bell. could find in his heart to make them Heretics, that are against stating
the Infallibility in the Pope, and therefore called their Persuasion Haeresi
Proxima, next door to Heresy, as we heard above: and mark his reason there why
it is not proprie haeretica, fully and properly so, Nam adhuc ab Ecclesia
tolerantur -- They are still tolerated of the Church, that hold it: A reason
why he might not speak as he thought; He thought it Heresy no question, but
might not call it so, for saving the Union of their Church. Union and Agreement
among Christians is to be sought for by all fair means, and to be held upon all
just grounds: and in order to it, Submission unto Authority is necessary, and
Toleration again from Authority may be sometime and in some things needful; But
the Church of Rome boasting of her Unity, and the means she has for it
(Infallible Judgment in her Definitions) and thereupon requiring not only
external or peaceable subjection, but submission of belief, may be ashamed for
preserving of her Unity to tolerat such different persuasions or Doctrines, so
near unto Heresy. And this also shows the Vanity of what they farther say,
that the points they differ in (as whether a Pope be above a Council, whether
Infallible, etc.) are not defined, and therefore general submission of belief,
or uniform agreement is not required: Why then say we, is that Doctrine
tolerated amongst them, that is proxima Haeresi, so near to Heresy, as we
heard above? Why is not that defined and stated, which is the ground of
believing all other things that are defined? The reason is plain; The Pope
knows well enough if those points were defined one way, they would not be
generally believed, and that it is better to have them instilled in private into
the minds of Men by his trusty Emissaries, then to have them publicly defined,
and more for his advantage to have men brought to a persuasion of them in
favoar of his power, then to hazard the peremptory belief of them either way.
Other means there are, the chains of force and policy to hold all together, and
I doubt not, but many are kept from revolting, whose Learning and Conscience
shows them a more excellent way, then that of the Romish Church.

35. Some there are, as I hear, Of unappealable Authority.
of the more moderat sort of Romanists, which will not now seem to contend for
an Infallible Judgment in their Church, but to be content with an unappealable
Authority. This may be good Doctrine at Paris, but not at Rome; and we may
farther say, that such Authority or Autoritative Judgment, being rightly stated
(for it must be placed some where) as it hurts not us, so does it not help them.

For 1. they forsake the groundwork or formal reason of their belief, which is
the Authority and Testimony of their Church; and it must be either Infallible,
or not that thing into which their Faith can beresolved; for albeit such an
anappealable Authority may in some sort provide for External peace, yet can it
not certainly and finally stay belief. 2. There may the same Objections be made
against it, which they usually reproach us with for want of that pretended
Infallibility: viz. That men are so left to their own reason, That there is not
without it sufficient means for Peace and Unity; (of which Sect. 8, 9, 10, 11,
13, 14. of the former book) for although when we dissent from that unappealable
Authority, in matter of Belief and Opinion, we be not happily bound to discover
it, at least to the disturbance of the Peace of the Church as above said: Yet
if the error be in commanding something for Religious Worship (as adoration of
Sacrament or Images) that must needs discover and show it self in outward
practice, the unappealable Authority cannot secure the external Submission or
compliance. In Civil affairs indeed Vnappealable Authority may absolutely
require external Submission, because by submitting to the wrong Judgment or
Sentence of such Authority, the things we recede from for peace sake, are but
Temporals, and in our own power to dispose of; but it is not so in the Matters
of the Soul and Conscience, in the poims of Belief and Worship, in which we
must have the Evidence of that, which is confessedly Infallible, to stay upon.

36. But what if men will be perverse (as we have seen in these days) to
pretend error and superstition in Worship, where there is none? Who shall
judge? Who shall judge?
They that so often put this question to us, cannot well resolve it themselves;
for who shall judge, say we to them? Pope or Council? they cannot agree it
where the Infallibility rests; and if either or both of them must judge, shall
their judgment be taken for Infallible? Neither are they here resolved, some
contending for Infallible, some content with Vnappealable Authority. As for us,
we answer Unanimously: The Church shall judge (be it National or Universal) and
take order with such persons; by the Church here we mean the Guides and
Governors that have public Judgment and Authority in every National Church, or
in the Catholic assembled in a General Council; and by Judging, we mean their
defining or demonstrating the Truth, according to the Infallible Rule of Gods
Word, and their Sentencing of Persons refractory, to due punishment. So the
Church shall judge, either to the convincing and satisfying, or to the censuring
and punishing of such Persons: who are to answer unto God also for their
disobedience. For the Church or Public Authority, as it has the advantage of
Judgment above all Inferior or private persons, so of Power too, to proceed
according to that Judgment against the obstinate. No other means of restraint
had the Ancient Church, as was insinuated, Sect. 13. of the former book.

To conclude. This Vnappealable and not Infallible Authority, as it cannot
consist with the main Principle of Romish belief, so may it well enough stand
with any thing asserted by us: and were it stated aright (not in the Pope, but
in every National Church immediately, and in a General Council finally) I
suppose, there needed not be any matter of difference about it. And hitherto of
Submission of Judgment and Practice to the Definitions and Constitutions of a
Church.

CHAP. II.
Of Reformation begun under Hen. 8. advanced under King Edward, perfected under
Queen Elizabeth, and the warrantableness of it.
THat the English Reformation was not regular and warrantable, but carried
against the consent of the Bishops of this Land, is the usual reproach of the
Romanists. It was infinuated in the 4. Section of the former book, That the
Reformation was begun under Hen. and perfected under Q. Elizabeth, not without
a just National Synod; and that in the Reformation under Hen. 8. there was no
displacing of Bishops, but all was passed by general consent. That late Romish
Convert, as he pretends himself to be, that wrote the reproachful Pamphlet,
Entitled, The Obit of Prelatic Protestancie, took notice of what I had said,
and returns the reproach double upon us, saying: All the Bishops of this Nation
were excluded and imprisoned when the Doctors party first decreed the breach --
so that they had no more a National Synod, then Those, that could congregate
when they pleased, as many of their own party, and style it a Synod, as the
Presbyterians did. So he. page 136.

We will consider then, how the Reformation was begun, carried on and
perfected; which will appear to be so done as the Romanist can have no just
cause to reprove, nor the Presbyterian or any Sectaries to pretend to the like.

1. Reformation begun under Hen. 8.
The First Reformation began under Hen. 8. in the ejection of Papal
jurisdiction with some superstitious abuses. And here I must first say, and
desire the Reader to take notice, that to this first and main point of
Reformation, the ejecting of that foreign Jurisdiction, there needed no vote of
National Synod, or consent of Bishops: the King himself being a sufficient and
competent Judge in that cause of Vindicating his own Rights, upon which that
Papal jurisdiction was a plain Usurpation. And therefore the like had been
often done by Kings of this Realm, before Hen. Not without the Vote of a
National Synod.
8. putting their Subjects under Praemunire, that did acknowledge such an usurped
power, or had recourse to Rome in any cause or matter of Jurisdiction. But
Secondly, we can say, and that most truly, that it was carried with the general
consent of the Bishops of this Land in full Synod, decreeing not a breach, but
the casting off and renouncing of Papal supremacy, upon which the first breach
followed; and so Saunders calls it Schisma Henricianum, King Henry's Schism.

2. Now if Romanists will say; Those Bishops and the rest of the Clergy
assembled in that Synod were of their party, because most of the Romish
Doctrine was still retained; then let them say, that their Party first made the
Breach, and cease to lay any imputation upon us for it, or for doing the like
upon greater cause under Queen Elizabeth: however, their Party or Ours, they
must confess the first-breach was then made, and the Reformation then begun,
and that by full consent of the Bishops of this Nation, in full Synod.

3. If again they say, as usually it is said by them of the Romish party, That
Synod was not free, the Bishops and the rest being compelled by fear, to vote
that, which they after repented of and retracted under Queen Mary. To say
nothing of the liberty of Papal Councels, where none can speak freely, without
note of Heresy or danger of Inquisition; it is apparent, they voted the like
again three years after, and it is strange that the Passion of Fear should
continue so long, or that so many learned men should not in 16. years more see
their error and retract it, till there came a Queen that discovered her self to
be of another mind. But if they were compelled through fear so to Vote, what
compelled them so to write, and to make good by such forcible Arguments what
they had Voted, as the most learned of them did? what compelled them, I say,
but the Evidence of Truth? and if they voluntarily retracted what they Voted in
Synod, why did they not as voluntarily answer their own Arguments? They are yet
to be seen, and will remain as a clear Evidence of the warrantableness of that
Synodicall Vote, upon which the first Breach followed.

4. Reformation under K Edward.
Proceed we now to King Edwards Time, under whom the Reformation was carried
on, and the Breach continued. And here, if we make enquiry, how it stood with
the Bishops of this Land, we find the two Archbishops, Bishops at Liberty.
Cranmer and Holdgate, together with Thirlby and diverse other Bishops made in
King Henry's time, continuing in their places unmolested all King Edwards
reign; As for those few, who at last were removed (viz. Boner, Gardener, Heath.
Day, Vessey) None of them were imprisoned till the third year of the King,
except Gardener and Boner, who for some Misdemeanors felt a short restraint,
from which upon Submission being released, they enjoyed their Bishoprics, till
the end of the Kings third year. Neither can I find that any of them, during
that time, was excluded from sitting in Parliament, there being indeed no cause
for it; for They had all taken the Oath of Supremacy, to the renouncing of
Papal power and Jurisdiction, the form of which Oath is set down in Fox his
Acts and Monuments. They did also generally receive those few injunctions, sent
out for Reformation, as we shall hear presently. I find in the first and second
Parliaments in King Edwards Time, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal sitting and
enacting: and John Stow gives us a Copy of Stephen Gardiners letter sent out of
the Tower, (in the third year of the King, for then he was imprisoned) to the
Lords of the Council; Sitting in Parliament.
wherein he sues for his Liberty, that he might do his duty in Parliament then
sitting, being a Member of the same. This plainly shows, the only hinderance of
his sitting there, was want of Liberty, and that he only of all the Bishops was
kept from thence. That which Master Fox says in the beginning of his story of
King Edward, that several prisons, is spoken by Anticipation, as other things
also there insinuated, that were after done throughout the following course of
the Kings reign.

5. National Synod.
If now it be asked, where is the judgment of a National Synod to warrant. King
Edwards Reformation? I have many things to say. I. What I speak of the English
Reformation, that it was not done without the judgment of a National Synod, did
chiefly relate to the Synod under King Henry, which, as I said, began the
Reformation, and to the Synod under Queen Elizabeth which perfected it. In the
first was the main Annoyance, and cause of Corruption in the Church, removed by
casting out the usurped Papal Jurisdiction, with some dependances of it; but in
the latter Synod, the whole work (carried on under King Edw: according to the
difficulties and shortness of his reign) was completed, showing it self in an
Uniform body of Doctrine, voted and published in the 39. Articles of this
Church.

6. II. Title of Supreme Head.
For the work done in King Edwards time, if any thing did run out of Square,
through the swelling Title of Supreme Head, stretched a little, perchance, by
some beyond his Line, the thanks are first due to Those, whom they of the
Popish party account theirs: I mean those Bishops and Clergy under Hen. 8. who
may seem at least in words and expression to have over-done their work, not in
that part which they denied to the Pope, (for none could have written better
against that usurped Papal Supremacy then Bishop Gardener, Tonstal and others)
but in that which they attributed to the King. And therefore the Parliament
declaring for the Crown in this point of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, did
relate to the Vote and Acknowledgment of the Clergy, [Seeing that all Authority
of Jurisdiction is derived from the Kings Highness, as Supreme Head, and so
acknowledged by the Clergy of this Realm: Be it therefore Enacted, etc. 1 EDW:
6. c. 2.] that if they of the Parliament went too far in their attributions and
expressions, we may see whom they followed.

7. Whether abused in this business of Reformation.
Now considering what was already granted under Henr. 8. and sworn to again
under Edw: 6. by the Bishops and Clergy of this Nation; considering also, the
King (although of admirable piety and understanding beyond his years, yet)
being under age, and so under Protection, it could be no marvel if the power of
those Lay-persons, who ruled in chief had thereby the greater influence upon
the Affairs of the Time. And however the Kings Authority, under pretense of that
Title and Jurisdiction, as it seems, was abused in disposing of Church-means,
and diverting them to private gain, yet I cannot find it to have been abused in
this Reformation, as to the point of Gods Worship and Religion it self; but
must acknowledge the great and good Providence of God in it, that
notwithstanding the difficulties and prejudices of the time, the business of
Religion was fairly carried on; and that is the third thing I have to say, That
the Reformation under King Edward (to the abolishing of Image Worship, the
restoring of the Liturgy in a known Tongue, and Communion in both kinds, with
that which followed thereupon, the abolishing of Romish Massings; for herein
was the main of K. Edwards Reformation) was warrantably advanced, and carried
on. For the clearing of which, as to the Authority that did it, I have these
things to say.

8. First, Synodical Vote how necessary in this bufiness.
Reformation of Gods Worship may be warrantably done without a foregoing
Synodical Vote. Synods indeed are the most prudential and safe way of
determining Church Affairs, where there is not just and apparent cause of
fearing more danger from the persons which are to be convocated, and the times
in which they are to assemble. To this purpose sounds that known complaint of
Greg. Nazianzen, That he saw no good end of Councels, which he spoke not
absolutely, but with respect to the Times and Persons as they stood then
affected, by reason of the prevailing faction of the Arrians, who by their
number and cunning made advantage often of the Councels held in those times.
Now seeing the office of Bishops and Pastors of the Church, as to this point of
Reformation, is directive, either in or out of Synod, and the more convenient
way of the two for giving out that direction, is by their meeting and
consulting in Synod, therefore the Prince, whose power or office is Imperative
and Coactive for establishing by Laws and Penalties, what is evidenced to Him,
has great reason to receive his direction from the Pastors of the Church
assembled in Synod. But he is not simply and always bound, to take his
direction thus, by any Law of God or Man; for if by the Law of God he stand
bound to establish within his own Dominions, whatsoever is evidenced to him by
faithful Bishops, and learned men of the Church, to be the Law of Christ (such
as were the forementioned points of Reformation, apparently consonant to
Scripture and primitive Antiquity) shall he not perform his known duty, till
the Vote of a Major part of a Synod give him leave to do it? The change of
Religion for the worse is still charged upon the evil Kings in the Old
Testament, and the Reforming it again is recorded to the praise of good Kings:
which shows this Obligation of Duty upon every Prince, and the examples of
Hezekiah and Josiah, who were more forward in the Reformation of Gods Worship
then the Priests, do warrant the forward piety of our young Josiah, K. Edward.
And this is also approved by that, which many Christian Emperors, and Kings
have, to their great praise, done in the business of Religion, without or
before the calling of a Council, though not without the counsel and advice of
faithful Bishops, and learned Men. Of this point more below, when to speak of
Regal Supremacy in Ecclesiastical things.

Neither can we say, the Sovereign Prince is bound in the way of Prudence
always to receive his direction from a Vote in Synod, especially when there is
just cause of fear, as above said; but he may have greater reason to take
advice from persons free from the exceptions of Factions Interests, to which
the most of them, that should meet, are apparently obnoxious. And how far this
was considerable in the beginning of King Edwards reign, or whether such fear
made them forbear to put it at first to a Synodical vote I cannot say; but this
I have farther to say --

9. Injunctions sent out at first by the King.
Secondly, In Reformation of Religion we must put a difference between
provisional Injunctions sent out for the public exercise of Religion or
Worship, and the Body or comprehension of Doctrine, or Uniformity in points of
Religion. In order to the latter (a Body of Doctrine) I find there was a Synod
held under King Edward. The Acts of it I have not seen, but it appears to have
provided for Doctrinals: for it is spoken of in the Convocation held 1. Mariae.
Where in the Act of the second day (as Fox in his Acts and Monuments has
related) a dispute arises about a Catechism published in the name of the Synod
under King Edward: the Popish party renouncing it, and on the Protestant part
John Philpot, Archdeacon of Winchester, maintaining it to be Synodical, because
compiled by Authority and Commission from the Synod; for, says he, this House
granted Authority to make Ecclesiastical and spiritual Laws, unto certain
persons to be appointed by the Kings Majesty -- and concludes, that the
Catechism and such Laws were truly said to be done by the Synod, since they
had, says he, our Synodal Authority unto them committed. Now as all Catechisms
do, so this did contein the Body of Doctrine answerable to the Articles of
Reformation, which no doubt were agreed on in that Synod, and therefore
rejected by the Popish party.

10. This Synod, as I suppose, was not held till the fifth of King Edward. But
the Injunctions, that went out in the first year, were provisional for the
public exercise of Religion and Worship, (which was necessarily to be provided
for in present) and went no farther then those evident points above mentioned.
Like Injunctions we find sent out by Queen Mary in her own name and Authority;
for, having suddenly dissolved the Convocation by her peremptory Mandate to
Bishop Boner for that purpose, in December, She sent out, the March following,
Injunctions (not upon any Vote of the former Convocation) touching Papal
Supremacy, Sacraments, Priests-Marriage, etc. as we have them in Fox his Acts
and Monuments, 1. Mariae. If it be said, as usually they reply, that she did
but restore what was before established in the Church; so we may say, by the
Injunctions of King Edward was restored the due Worship of God, accordingly as
it was established and used in the Ancient Church, in a known tongue, with
Communion in both kinds, without Image Worship, -- all which were ruled cases
in the Ancient Church. And of those few Injunctions we may say farther for the
warrant of them;

11. Those Injunctions sent out by advice of Bishops, and were generally
received of all the Bishops.
Thirdly, They were sent out by the Kings Authority, upon the advice of sundry
Bishops and other Learned men of this Land; and generally received and put in
practice by the Bishops in their several Diocesses. Both these things are
avouched expressly in the charge given in against Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, (extant in Fox his Acts and Monuments) to show that he was the only
Bishop, that did not so readily conform as the rest did. This also appears by
the Letters of the Archbishop Cranmer to Boner Bishop of London, to whom he
sent the said Injunctions, and by the letters of Boner to the Bishop of
Westminster (who then was Thirlby, twice promoted in King Edwards days) to
other Bishops, for the execution of the same. Which Letters are to be seen also
in Fox his Acts.

12. And so the Vniformimity of Public prayer.
If we look on farther to the Parliament held in the second and third year of
the King, we find in the first Chapter, a Law for the Uniformity of Public
prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments expressing thus much, That for the
drawing up such an Order and Form, the King appointed the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and certain of the most Learned and discreet Bishops, and other
learned men of this Realm (there is the fitness of the Persons for the Work)
having respect to the pure and sincere Christian Religion taught in the
Scriptures, and to the Vsages in the Primitive Church (there is the fitness of
the rule they went by) The which at this time, by the aid of the Holy Ghost,
and with one Uniform agreement, is by them concluded. Wherefore the Lords
Spiritual (note that) and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, considering the godly travel of the King and the Lord Protector, in
gathering the said Archbishop and Bishops and Learned men together, the godly
Prayers, Orders, and Rites in the said Book, and the considerations of altering
those things that be altered, and reteining those things which be retained in
the said book, and also the honor of God, and the great quietness which is
like to ensue upon the same: do give his Highness most lowly thanks for the
same, and humbly pray it may be enacted, etc. What could be more sweetly begun
by the King, carried on by the Bishops, received by all the Estates, then this
work was? Now if there wanted a formal Synodical Vote, yet was there in effect
that which is equivalent to it, the general reception of the thing done; yea
the Bishops not only received and put in practice what was commanded, but did
actually in Parliament give their consent; there we find them all sitting, and
if all did not consent (which is more then any can say) yet the major part by
far did undoubtedly, for they continued, as I observed above ( Number. 4.) in
their places unmolested all King Edwards days. Neither can it make any real
difference, as to the justness of a Reformation, whether it begin from a Vote
of Bishops in Synod, and so proceeding to the Sovereign Prince be by him
received and established: or take beginning from the Piety of the Prince, moved
by advice of faithful Bishops, and so proceeding to the whole body of the
Clergy, or Pastors of the Church, be by them generally received and put in
practice, according to the command of the Sovereign Authority. It is true indeed
that some of the Bishops were deprived: but, as I insinuated before, their
number was inconsiderable to the other, and their deprivation was not till the
end of the Kings third year at soonest, which shows their compliance at first.

13. Council of Trents Rule for Reformation.
Now after all this it will be worth our observing, what the Council of Trent
some years after in their Canons of Reformation, (in the Decree de celebrat.
Missae. Sess. 6. sub Pio 4.) did confess, and thought fit to redress. Multa jam
sive temporum vitio, sive hominum incuria and improbitate irrepsisse, aliena a
tanti sacrificii dignitate -- many things (say they) either through the
iniquity of the Times, or the carelessness and wickedness of Men have crept in,
far unmeet for the worthiness of so great a sacrifice: and what were those
things? quae Avaritia vel superstitio induxit, which covetousness or
superstition has brought in. Then they give order for redress, That the
ordinary Bishops of the Place should de medio tollere, take them clean away.
This was well spoken, had they done it thoroughly.

Now what they thought fit to be done, and did it but slightly, was done fully
in the Protestant Reformation, and particularly in that under King Edward; for
the shameful nundination of Masses, which Covetousness had brought in, was
clean taken away, by taking away the manner and Trade of Romish Massings, and
reducing the free Ministration of the Sacrament: and the many abuses, which
Superstition had brought in, were removed by restoring the public Liturgy in a
known Tongue, and the celebration of the Communion in both kinds, and by taking
clean away the Worship of Images; And all this was done by the advice and
travel of Bishops and chief Pastors of the Church, under a Pious King. What
exception then can there be? It may perchance be said, that, in the close of
that Decree, this power of reforming is allowed to the Bishops of the place, ut
Delegatis sedis Apostolicae, as to the Delegates of the Apostolic See: Yea,
there is still the mischief, and hinderance of all good Reformation in the
Christian Church. Deus non erit Deus, etc. God shall not be God except man
please, as Tertul. said in his Apol. and Truth shall not be Truth except the
Pope please, nor God Worshipped after his own Will, unless the Pope will too.

14. The warrantableness of K. Edwards Reformation.
To conclude. Lay now the Premises together, and see the Warrantableness of
the Reformation under King Edward, both for the Thing done, and the Authority by
which it was done. The Thing done was for the general what the Council of Trent
thought fit to be done; the removing of some things, which were crept in by the
corruption of the Times, by the carelessness and iniquity of Men; Things, which
Covetousness and Superstition (the two Breeders of all Popish abuses) had
brought in: Things for the particular so evident by Scripture, and usage of
Primative Church (the warrantable Rule of Reformation, which they went by as
above noted in the statute of Parliament, Number. 12.) that nothing can be more.
So for the Authority, by which this was done. It was begun by a good and
gracious King, upon the advice and direction of sundry learned and discreet
Bishops; was carried on and managed by diverse Bishops and other learned Men of
this Realm (as was also said in the forementioned Statute) and generally
received by all the Estates of the Land, and accordingly confirmed and
Established by King and Parliament. Such was the Condition and Warrant of that
Reformation, which as no Romanist can justly reprove, Sectaries cannot pretend
to the like.
so no Sectaries can pretend to the like, whether we consider the evidence of
the Things or Abuses reformed, according to Scripture and usage of Antiquity,
or the Authority by which that Reformation was begun, carried on, and managed,
and lastly confirmed and established; Of all which there is a great failing in
the pretended Reformations of Sectaries; yea in that which the Presbyterians
undertook, who of all other pretend most to regularity, and Order.

15. Reformation under Q Eliz.
We are at last come down to Queen Elizabeth's reign; under whom we said the
Reformation was perfected. And here we are to enquire too of the Imprisoning of
Bishops, and look after a National Synod. We acknowledge that diverse Bishops
were Imprisoned, and, which is more, deprived too, and justly both, as will
appear hereafter upon consideration of their offense. Here we must first note,
that there was no design in the Imprisoning or depriving them, to make way for
the holding of a Synod, nor any necessity was there of it in order to that end;
for if we reckon that on the one part there were six Bishops remaining (to whom
the Queens Letters for the consecration of Matthew Parker were directed) and
many Bishoprics actually void at Queen Mary's death, which being supplied,
there was no fear that the Popish Bishops (who were very suddenly reduced to
Nine, by death or quitting the Land) should make the Major part, had the
business of Reformation been put at first to a Synodical Vote.

16. Her Injunctions.
As for the Injunctions sent out before it came to a Synod, they were the same
for substance with those of King Edward upon the Evidence and Warrant, as we
heard above. Yet such was her tender care that all Persons doubtful should have
satisfaction, and be brought to some good and charitable agreement (as in her
Declaration, set down in Stow) that for this very purpose, before any thing of
Religion should be established by Parliament, she appointed a Conference to be
held publicly at Westminster, between learned Persons of both sides: as more
amply will be shown below, against Champny, cap. 9.) Again, those Injunctions
were but provisional Orders (as I may call them) for the present exercise of
Religion: the whole Doctrine being after concluded and drawn up in a just and
Lawful Synod.

17. A Synod,
A Lawful National Synod it was, in and by which, whatever belongs to the
Uniformity of Doctrine and Religion was defined, drawn up and published in 39.
Articles. The great difference twixt this Synod and the Presbyterian Assembly
(however the reproaching Romanists rank them together) will appear upon these
considerations. Presbyterians cannot pretend to the like.
I. They that took upon them to exclude or remove our Bishops, had not power
either to call a Synod, or to deprive a Bishop, and that is the first
irregularity, viz. Usurpation of Power. II. The cause pretended for the
removing of our Bishops was not any offense against their Duty, as Subjects, or
against their Office, as Bishops; but merely for their very Office, because
they were Bishops; and that was purely Schismatical. III. The Persons taken in
to make up their Assembly, did not pretend to succeed our Bishops so removed,
in their Power and Office; and so it was a Synod clean out of the way of the
Church, sitting and concluding by a power taken to themselves, and therefore
also plainly Schismatical. Every one of these irregularities nulls the
lawfulness of an Ecclesiastical Synod. But none of these can be charged upon
us; for the Popish Bishops, that remained obstinate, were removed by due
Authority, upon just cause, viz. their offense against the duty of Subjects, and
of their own Office, (as will appear below, where their deprivation shall be
examined, against Champny, c. 9.) Lastly, the places void either by deprivation
of these, or death of others, were supplied by Bishops lawfully ordained, as is
also maintained against Champny) who together with the old Bishops remaining
after King Edwards days, and the rest of the Clergy of the Land, made up a due
and Lawful Ecclesiastical Synod.

18. Of Regal Supremacy in order to Reformation, and Church affairs.
Having thus far spoken of the care and travel of our Kings, and Queen in this
work of reforming Religion and Gods Worship within this Land, it might seem
convenient to say something more of the Supremacy, or of the power, which by
virtue of their Supremacy Princes have: and to show how in this business of
Reformation and Church Affairs, it may be so bounded that it entrench not upon,
or infringe the power and office of the Bishops and chief Pastors of the
Church. But seeing we found the Power and Office of the one, and the other
severed and distinct throughout the Reformations spoken of in this Chapter (for
we found Bishops advising, counselling, and the Prince commanding, appointing,
convocating them to the work: then again Bishops with other learned Men, (so
appointed and convocated) managing the business, and concluding what was to be
done in it, and the sovereign Prince, with Parliament, confirming and giving
public establishment to that which was so concluded, and agreed upon by them;)
Seeing also Champny does largely insist upon this point of the Supremacy (in
his 15, 16. Cha.) upon occasion of deprivation of Popish Bishops for refusing
the Oath of Supremacy under Q. Elizabeth; we will defer farther prosecution of
this point, til we meet with him below.

CAP. III.
Of the lawful calling of our English Protestant Bishops, against Doctor
Champny a Sorbonist; and of the first prejudice from other Reformed Churches,
that have not Bishops.
1. THis Writer having spent 8. Chap. of his book, against the Vocation of
Ministers in the Reformed Churches which want Bishops, advances in the 9.
against our English Protestant Bishops, and labors what he can (more indeed
then all his fellows beside) to make their Vocation or Ordination unlawful. To
that end, Defects in Ordination how arising.
he lays this as the groundwork on which his whole discourse must proceed.
That Ordination, which gives lawful calling to the Pastors of the Church, must
be valid and right, in respect of the Ordainer, of the Ordained, and of the
Ordination it self, or Form of it: and that a defect in any of these renders
the Ordination, and so the calling of the Party Ordained unlawful, cap. 9. page
308.

We admit the consideration of those three respects as proper and pertinent to
the business in hand: and do grant that there may be such a defect in any of
them, as will render the ordination either Unlawful for the use, or plainly Void
or Null for the substance of it.

2. Our English Bishops receiving Ordination from the Romish.
He begins to examine the calling and ordination of our Bishops and Priests
according to the first respect of their Ordainers, viz. those of the Church of
Rome. For from thence the English Church received her Bishops and Pastors
together with the Christian Faith in the time of Gregory the first (this we
acknowledge of the English, though the Britains had the Christian faith and
their Bishops before) and has continued that ordination and calling of Bishops
with uninterrupted succession down from those first Christian Bishops to
Cranmer, and our first reformed Bishops.

The Romish Ordainers he (as he must needs) allows of and approves the Orders
given by them, as good and lawful, but would make our plea from thence void, by
our own judgment, and according to the Protestant doctrine concerning them and
the Orders received from them. The sum of his Reasonings is briefly this, 1.
From the judgment and practice of other Reformed Churches, which renounce
Ordination by Bishops, especially from Rome, pleading their vocation upon other
grounds; and therefore either they or we can have no lawful Pastors, no Church.
2. From the judgment and doctrine generally of all English Protestants; by whom
the Pope is held to be Antichrist, or Antichristian: therefore we must
acknowledge we received our Ordination and calling (if from Rome) from the
Ministers of Antichrist; by whom also they of the Church of Rome are accounted
Heretics; therefore we can have no lawful calling from such; by whom also the
Orders there given are accounted Antichristian, abominable, Sacrilegious, and
therefore cannot be lawfully received by us; Lastly, by whom the Sacramental
Character is exploded, and therefore no power of Order can be received by us.
All this he will have follow upon Protestant doctrine, to defeat us of our plea
from Romish Ordainers. This is the sum of his Reasonings in the 9. and 10.
Chapt. We shall examine them in order as briefly as we can.

3. The seeming prejudice from other Reformed Churches.
First for the judgment and practice of other Reformed Churches. He urges, That
they renounce our plea of having Ordination by Bishops, and of receiving any
orders from the Church of Rome, esteeming them Antichristian, and pleading
extraordinary Vocation; from whence he concludes against them, that they have
no lawful Pastors, therefore no Church: and consequently against us, that we
are bound by our plea of Ordinations by Bishops, and those derived from Rome,
to renounce the fellowship of those Churches, which hitherto we accounted of as
Sisters; and to stand alone, divided from all other Churches, as we are from
the Roman; and to hold the Church of England the only true Church, thereby
confining the Catholic Church within the bounds of that Kingdom, which
(considering the Number of Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists, all which defy
these Ordinations, and that plea) will be too too narrow. To this purpose he,
cap. 9. page 315, 316. etc.

4. Now although the different condition of some Reformed Churches does not
immediately concern us, who have retained the regular way of Ordination by
Bishops, yet because the Romanists make it a matter of reproach to us, and some
in these Times (who covenanted the extirpation of Episcopal Government) sought
a defense in it for such Schismatical attempts; we will answer to the former
charge, and try what may be duly concluded upon the judgment and practice of
other Reformed Churches.

First therefore we may say in general; However it stands with the Reformed
Churches, which want Ordination by Bishops, and whatever be concluded on them
by Champny and others, as to the point of having lawful Pastors, or being
Churches; yet his last inference of our restraining the Catholic Church within
such narrow compass as this Kingdom, is altogether inconsequent; for we do not
exclude the Roman Church out of the bounds of the Catholic Church, neither does
it follow upon our division, or want of external Communion between us, that
either it or we should be wholly severed from the Catholic. Much less do we
exclude the Greek and Eastern Churches, who have their Ordination and
Succession of Pastors from the Apostles, as well as the Romish Church. Yea and
we may add here; We cannot exclude those Reformed, which want the regular way
of Ordination, from belonging to the Catholic Church.

5. All Reformed Churches not without Ordination by Bishops.
But 2. All Reformed Churches ( i.e. such as have purged themselves of Romish
Error and Superstition) besides the English, are not without Government and
Ordination by Bishops. Those Churches, which are the Remains of the ancient
reformed Bohemians, and are now in and about Poland or those parts, do still
retain Bishops; as appears by their Book set out 1626. containing the substance
of their Doctrine, the manner of their Government, Synods, etc. Neither are
Denmark, and Sweden without their Bishops; and therefore Champny's other
inference, That in this plea of Ordination by Bishops, and that derived from
the Romish Church, we of England stand alone, is also false.

6. Now 3. The judgment of other Reformed Churches of our Bishops.
As for reformed Churches in a stricter sense, such as those of France, Geneva,
Germany, which Champny names c. 9. what their judgment was of our Bishops and
Ordination by them (though derived to us from the Church of Rome) appears
sufficiently by Bucer, Peter Martyr, and other Protestants being here in
England, and assisting our Bishops in the work of Reformation; also by the
Letters of the chief and best Learned in those Churches, Calvin, Zanchy, etc.
to our Bishops, and to others concerning them; whose Testimonies, collected by
the Bishop of Durham, were published in these Times, and opposed to our
Covenanters, and all other Sectaries that attempted the extirpation of
Episcopacy as Antichristian.

7. As for the sayings which Champny gives us out of Luther, Calvin, Mornaeus
-- to whom he adds Fulk and Whitaker, rejecting and condemning the Romish
Ordinations, as Antichristian, corrupt and unlawful; he might remember, that
elsewhere he tells us of their pleading by them, their alleging, that Luther,
Bucer. Oecolampad, etc. were ordained in the Church of Rome, c. 4. and 9. and
he could not but know, that Fulk, and Whitaker allowed of Bishops here, and
were ordained by them.

But hence he concludes them all to be taken in a contrary tale, and put to a
miserable shift; For ask them, says he, Whence came ye? who sent you? they
will tell us they came from the same stock and original as the Pastors of the
Catholic (Roman) Church did; for their first Doctors, Luther, Bucer, Zuinglius,
were by them ordained Priests; ask them again, how can they account that to be
a lawful calling, which is derived from the Ministers of Antichrist? they will
not stick to defy those Orders and Ordinations, and presently fly to an
extraordinary vocation. So he c. 9. p. 323. 324. And yet this seeming
contradiction is very reconcilable. For when they reject the Ordinations
received from Romish Bishops as corrupt and Antichristian, they do it not
simply, as if they were Null or none at all; but in regard of the additionall
abuses, especially that great and sacrilegious depravation of giving such a
sacrificing power, and placing the Priestly function chiefly in it. Therefore
so far as the Romish Ordinations pretend to give that power (with other
superadded abuses) they are justly condemned and rejected: but in as much as
they retain withal the words of the Evangelicall commisson, Receive the holy
Ghost, whose sins ye remit, etc (which give the power of the Ministry of
reconciliation, in the dispensing of the Word and Sacraments of the Gospel)
they are valid and good, and not to be reiterated where they are given.

8. By this power of Order received in the Roman Church, Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolamp. and others had lawful calling to preach the Word; yea, to preach
against the very Errors of that Church; which (considering the condition of
that Church and the Errors of it) they might do (and for any thing I know, they
did) lawfully, without transgressing the bounds and limits of submission due to
a Church, which I endeavored to fix at the beginning of this Treatise.

9. Plea of ^extraordinary Vocation.
Now what is spoken by some of extraordinary Vocation, as that implies a
renouncing of Orders received from Rome, must not be taken as the general plea
or judgment of those Churches, for we heard them pleading Orders received in
the Roman Church, and Luther wrote very well (as Champny cites him, chap. 8.)
against Munster and others that pretended to extraordinary Vocation, bidding
them prove it by Signs and Miracles. Again, that extraordinary calling, which
some in the Reformed Churches have alleged, sounds not any new office, they
pretend to be called to, but that of Pastors and Teachers, and according to the
end it was instituted for; nor other way of coming to that office, but by
external vocation from men: but it implies some difference from or failing in
the ordinary and usual way of ordaining to that office, ( viz. by Bishops) for
which they plead their case and concernment was extraordinary, which rests upon
them to demonstrate.

10. Hitherto of their judgment in the point; from whence we infer, that the
present Reformed Churches, if they follow the judgment of the first Reformers,
and of the most sober and learned men that have been in them, since must allow
of our plea of Ordinations by Bishops, and those derived from the Church of
Rome; and Champny must acknowledge an agreement so far between us. Now for their
Practice not conformable to that Judgment, as we cannot approve of it, so are
we ready to excuse their failing so far, as the necessity, they plead, will
bear: leaving it to the Romanists desperately to cut off Nations and People from
the Church for failings and wants in such things, as do not immediately touch
the very life and being of a Church, or of the Members of it.

11. Two things in the constitution and continuance of the Church.
To this purpose there are two things considerable in the constitution and
continuance of the Church, both necessary, though not equally. 1. The Doctrine
of Faith and Life, the due profession of which makes a man a Member of the
Visible Catholic Church, and the true belief and practice of which makes him a
lively Member of the true Symbolical Catholic Church, that which we believe in
the Creed, that which is the true mystical body of Christ. 2. The order of
Ministry and Government in the Church, for bringing of Men to that due
profession of Doctrine, and so on to be true and lively Members of the body of
Christ, and for holding them in the Unity of faith. To this end Pastors and
Teachers (in whom that Ministry and Government rests) are given by our
Savior, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

12. Concerning these, two things are clear. First, that although Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists there mentioned, and taken in a stricter sense, were only
then given and for those Times, yet Pastors and Teachers were given, to
continue to the worlds end. The purpose for which he gave them, expressed Ephesians.
4.1. does imply so much, and so does his Commission given to them, As my Father
sent me, so I send you, S. Jo. 20. by virtue whereof they were to send others;
and so does his promise given them imply as much, I am with you to the end of
the world. S. Math. 28. Secondly, That this giving or sending. of Pastors, was
to be continued by such as our Savior appointed, and his Apostles after him; I
send you, says he: and accordingly they committed this power, of sending or
ordaining Pastors, unto the hands of special men, such as Timothy, Titus,
Sylvanus, Sosthenes, Clemens, Epaphroditus, etc. Whom we find either written to
by the Apostle, or joined with him in the inscription of his Epistles to the
Churches, or honorably mentiond for special labor and care in the affairs of
the Church; whom Antiquity also witnesses to have been chief Pastors or
Bishops in governing the Churches planted by the Apostles. Such also and no
other could be the Angels of the Asian Churches written to by S. John, or by
our Savior rather.

12. The concernment and necessity of (...)
But as it is clear, that the having of Pastors duly sent and lawfully ordained
does highly concern the Church; so is it most clear that the first concernment
(of the Doctrine of faith and life) is the chief and simply necessary to all
the Members of the Church; and that the latter (Order of Ministry and
Government by Pastors and Teachers) is to serve unto it. The Apostle shows us
this by two similitudes he uses to set out the Constitution of the Church. One
Ephesians. 4. of a Body fitly joined together, etc. That which joins the body of the
Church to Christ the head, and knits one joint or part to another, is Faith,
mentioned ver. 13. and Love or charity ver. 16. and He gave Apostles, Pastors,
Teachers, for the perfecting and edifying of this body, ver. 12, 13. and that
not carried away with every wind of doctrine, ver. 14. The other similitude is
of a Building, 1. Cor. 3. The Foundation is Christ, that which joins us to it
is Faith, and knits us as stones, to one another, is Charity, the builders are
Pastors and Teachers, who lay us upon the Foundation by bringing us to the
Faith, Ministers by whom ye believed, ver. 9. So then Faith and Charity join
men formally, intrinsecally to Christ the Head, and Foundation: Pastors and
Teachers serve to that end, and do that work ministerially and extrinsecally.
The first is the chief, and the doctrine that contains it necessarily concerns
all the Members of that body in particular, as to their being such; concerns
them, I say, simply and indispensably, as to the holding of the the Foundation,
or Doctrines immediately fundamental, and also necessarily, as to the consectary
doctrines according to the revelation or means they have of knowing them; but
the latter, viz. the having of Pastors so sent and ordained, serves unto the
former; yet so, as the Order left and established in the Church for the
perfecting of it, is strictly to be observed, where it can possibly be had and
kept; for wilful omission, or rejection of it is not only a great sin and
Sacrilege committed against the commandment, and appointment of Christ and his
Apostles, but also such a breach of charity in them who are guilty of it, that
it renders them Schismatical, and so far disjoined from the body of Christ,
which is his Church, as they stand guilty of it.

14. Of Churches without due Ordination of Pastors by Bishops.
And now to come to some issue, by application to the Churches in question. I.
Where the first ( viz. the doctrine of faith and life) is truly and
sufficiently professed and held, we cannot think that a bare Want there, or
unavoidable defect and irregularity in the second ( viz. the Order of sending
or Ordaining Pastors) does exclude such professed Christians from belonging to
the Church. Which unavoidable and necessary defect may arise, either because
they cannot have Ordination from Bishops abroad, or because the sovereign Power
(being adverse) will not suffer them either to have Bishops among them, or to
receive ordinations from foreign Bishops, that would give them. II. We must
look at those, who are in such a condition, without Pastors regularly ordained,
as at Churches defective, and not completely framed, but in a capacity or
expectation of receiving their completion, when that necessity, which enforces
the defect, is removed: and so continuing, as well as they may, rather then to
give up that Truth and purity of Christian Doctrine they have attained to.

15. Whether of choice, or of necessity.
Let me here add what Doctor Moulin, Son of Peter Moulin says in behalf of the
French Churches, and I add it chiefly for their sakes, that gave him the
occasion; they were the Soottish and English Presbyterians, who, at the
beginning of these Troubles, rejected Bishops, and Ordination by them, and
sought to justify themselves by the example of the French Churches. He
therefore shows them, in his book then set out, what judgment and desire the
best in those Churches have expressed concerning Bishops, and that their not
having them, was not of choice, but necessity: which he endeavors to
demonstrat by several reasons drawn from the consideration of that Kingdom,
and of their condition under the Sovereign Power there. And to show, if they
might have their choice, they would willingly have Bishops, he tells us, that
the Bishop of Troyes, having abjured Popery, began to preach the pure Word of
God, and sent for the Elders of the Reformed Church, to know, whether they
would confirm and acknowledge him for their Bishop: which they all with one
consent did, submitting themselves to his obedience. And then adds: There is
none I dare say, of all the Churches of France, but would do as much in the
like case. None but would obey Bishops, if Bishops would reform and obey God.
Till God extend so much mercy upon that Kingdom, the poor Churches will stay
for the leisure of the Bishops (viz. which now possess the Sees, and are not
Reformed) keeping themselves in an estate fit for Obedience. Or, as he had said
before, The Church of France, being under the Cross, and without Bishops, is a
body prepared for Obedience, whenever the Popish Bishops shall reform, in the
25. and 26. page of his book. But for those that reject Bishops when they may
have them, he shows how they fall under the severe censures of Zanchy and
Calvin, Testor me coram Deo -- says Zanchy, I protest before God and in my
Conscience, that I hold them no better then Schismatics, that account or make
it a part of Reformation of the Church to have no Bishops, etc. Yea, they are
worthy (says Calvin) of any execration that will not submit themselves unto
that Hierarchy, that submits it self unto the Lord -- These censures he
cites (in his 13. page.) out of their Tracts De Reform. Eccles. for both wrote
of that Argument.

16. Now to Champny's Argument (A true Church is not without true Pastors, for
(as Cyprian says) Ecclesia est populus Pastori conjunctus; and again, Ecclesia
est in Episcopo, and Episcopus in Ecclesia. But those Reformed Churches have
not true Pastors lawfully called, but only pretended Elders, which are made by
those that have no power to ordain or send others, therefore they are no
Churches.) Moulin would answer, and first grant with Calvin, That the World may
be as well without the Sun, as the Church without true Pastors. l. 4. Inst. c.
3. And farther, take the word True Pastors, (that there be no ambiguity in it)
for such as are called lawfully, after the original and ordinary way of the
Church, viz. for Bishops, and those that are ordained by Bishops; He will grant
the proposition true, of the whole Church, which is never without such; and
also true of particular Churches, completed, perfected, and regularly formed.
Such Churches he acknowledges the French are not, but in a state imperfect,
yet capable of a regular completion, and as it were, expecting of it. And
therefore will deny, that they are concluded by the former argument, to be no
Churches, or not to belong to the Church of Christ, because of that want or
defect in the Vocation or Ordination of their Pastors.

17. Those companies indeed of Christians, who believed in India upon the
preaching of Frumentius, belonged to the Church of Christ, before they received
Pastors from the Bishop of Alexandria: and that multitude which believed in
Samaria upon the preaching of Philip, and were baptized by him, were indeed of
the Church, and a Church of Christ, though not completed, til Peter and John
went down with due Authority, to set all in order there. Accordingly we may
account of those Reformed Churches (which have not their Pastors sent and
ordained as from the beginning) as of Congregations not regularly formed, as
Churches not completed: not indeed without Pastors altogether, as those of
India and Samaria at the first were, but having such as they can, viz. such as
have (if we will speak properly) the Vocation on Election of their respective
Churches, (which is one thing in the calling of Pastors) but not due
Ordination, (which is the main thing in impowering them to the exercise of the
office,) and so are Pastors by a moral designation to the Office, rather then
any real or due consecration, which only is by those hands, that have received
the power of sending or Ordaining Pastors, from the Apostles.

18. It must be granted, that the Vocation of such Pastors is deficient, and
their Ordination irregular, and that not only by the Ecclesiastical Canons in
that behalf, but also by Apostolical Order and practice: Yet, because they hold
the Faith which is the chief point in the constitution of the Church, and have
not wilfully departed from that Apostolical Order, and way of the Church, by
the breach of Charity, in condemning and rejecting it, but do approve of it
where it may be had, we cannot say that irregularity, or deficiency infers a
plain Nullity in their Pastors and Churches (as Champny will have it) but
stands in a condition of receiving a supply or completion, and is in the mean
time so far excusable, as the want or not having of that Supply is of
Necessity, and not of Choice.

19. But Champny will admit of no excuse, either of irregularity confessed in
the calling so their Pastors, or of Necessity pleaded as the cause enforcing
it. But proceeds to prove such a nullity in their Ordinations, that it
concludes them to have no Pastors at all, and no Church. This argument he
pursues chiefly against Doctor Field, Distinction of the power of Bishops and
Presbyters as to Ordination.
who (in the 3. book of the Church, cap. 39.) had endeavored in behalf of the
Reformed Churches that have not Bishops, to show that their Ordinations though
not regular according to the way of the Church, yet were not simply invalid;
and that by the Doctrine of the best Schoolmen, who held the Office of a Bishop
to be not a distinct Order, or to imprint a distinct Character, from that of
the Priestly function; which also they proved by this instance: A Bishop
Ordained, per saltum, (i. e. who was not first made Presbyter) cannot either
consecrate the Sacrament, or Ordain others; but a Priest, or Presbyter ordained
per saltum, may execute the office of the Deacon, by reason that the Superior
Order conteins in it self the Inferior; whence Doctor Field would have it
concluded, That Bishop and Presbyter differ not in Order, or in the very power
of Order, but in eminency and dignity of an Office to which Ordination and
other performances, as Confirmation, public absolution, etc. are reserved: also
that, when the ancient Church declared Ordination by Presbyters to be void and
null, it is to be understood according to the rigor of the Canons; not that
all such Ordinations were simply null, ex natura rei, and in themselves, or not
to be born with in any Case.

20. See we now what Champny replies to all this, and then consider what may be
reasonably allowed, and said as to this point. His answer is to this purpose,
That those Schoolmen, if they hold not Episcopacy to be a distinct Order, yet
say it is a distinct power; if not a different Character, yet a new Extension
of the former Sacerdotal Character; and that the Argument from Ordination per
saltum does not disprove the latter way. Lastly that such Presbyterian
Ordinations were, in the judgment of the Ancient Church, Null ex natura rei,
and not by the Ecclesiastical Canons only; for that judgment or sentence of the
Church was not a Constitutive decree (for then the beginning of it would appear
in the Canons of the Ancient Councels) but only Declarative of what was so in
it self from the beginning of the Church. This he in his 7. Chap.

21. Here something is doubtful and questionable, something clear and apparent.
That Bishops had a power or faculty to do something which Presbyters could not
(namely to ordain) is clear in Schoolmen and Fathers; but whether that power
make the Episcopal function a distinct Order from the Priestly, or imprint a
different sacramental character, we leave it to the Schoolmen to dispute. Also
we grant that Bishops receive and exercise that power (as Champny says truly)
not by a Moral designation only (as Judges and Officers in a State do for the
time of their office, or as those among the Presbyters seem to do, who are
assigned to ordain others) but by Real consecration, or sacred devoting them to
that office or work of ordaining and sending others. Which consecration, though
it imprint not a Sacramental Character on the Soul (as the Romanists express
it) yet it gives to the Person so ordained and devoted such a faculty or
habitude to that action or work, as cannot be taken from him; the reason of
which we shall enquire below, where occasion is given to speak more of that
which the Romanists call Character indelible, in this point of Holy Orders.
Furthermore, whether this office of Ordaining imply a power wholly superadded
to the Priestly function, Two ways of conceiving the power of Ordination in
Bishops.
Ordaining imply a power wholly superadded to the Priestly function, which is
one way of conceiving it; or a faculty of exercising that power, supposed to be
radicated or founded in the Priestly Order, and diffused with it, by
restraining it to certain persons consecrated for that performance, it may be
questioned. Doctor Field seem plainly to conceive it this latter way, and so
do the Schoolmen alleged by him: and Champny's expression of their sense by
extention of the Sacerdotal Character, if it have any sense, speaks as much,
viz. the dilating of that which was before in the Sacerdotal Order radically,
by extending that Radical power unto a proxima potentia, or immediate faculty in
certain persons consecrated to the exercise of it, and keeping it restrained in
all others of that Order, who are not so consecrated and devoted to that great
work of Ordaining and sending others. Lastly, whether we conceive of it as a
power wholly superadded, or as the restraint of a power diffused, it is clear
that the exercise of that power, the performance of Ordination was settled upon
certain and special persons (who were properly Bishops and Chief Pastors) by
Apostolical appointment and practice. Of which there are so clear footsteps in
Scripture, suchapparent Monuments and Records in Antiquity, that it is no less
then a wonder, any Learned Judicious Man should think it could be otherwise: or
conceive (as the Presbyterians generally) that this Order was afterward set in
the Church, as an humane (though prudent) invention to avoid Schism and
preserve Unity, and not withal conceive it reasonable to think the Apostles
did foresee that Reason, and provide against it, when as we hear Saint Paul
complaining of it, 1 Cor. 1. and Saint Hierom refers that Order of setting
Bishops over Presbyters to that very cause, pointing out that very time, when
some said, I am of Paul, I of Cephas. --

22. If therefore Doctor Field, when he answered that Ordinations without
Bishops were void according to the rigor of the ancient Canons, did mean that
such Ordinations offended only against Ecclesiastical Constitutions, we grant
that Champny duly proves it otherwise, and do acknowledge them transgressions
not only of Ecclesiastical but Apostolical Constitution and Practice; but we
are not therefore bound to yield an utter nullity of them in all cases, and ex
natura rei (as he contends) unless he can clearly demonstrat this faculty or
office of ordaining to stand in a distinct power wholly superadded, and not in
the extension of the Priestly Order, or limiting of the exercise of that power,
conceived to be radically diffused with it. Thus indeed Doctor Field, as I
said, seems to conceive it, and thereupon to deny such Ordination to be Null in
themselves, ex natura rei, yet withal to hold, as may be gathered out of his 5.
book, cap. 27. that this Order or limiting of the Power in the exercise of it
to certain special persons, was by Apostolical appointment.

23. And no question the ancient Church had respect to that Apostolical
constitution, when she pronounced such Ordinations without Bishops, to be void
and Null, as repugnant to that constitution; not defining whether they were
void, ex natura rei, but declaring she had good cause to account them void, and
not to admit any to officiate, that did so wilfully transgress against
Apostolical order and practice, and could have (there being Bishops then at
hand in every Nation, where Christian Faith was professed) no pretense of
necessity or of loosing the band, by which the Apostles had restrained the
exercise of that power to certain persons thereunto consecrated. And if any
Presbyter should have heretofore presumed to ordain within the Church of
England, their Ordinations had deserved to be accounted of no otherwise then as
void. And so within every Church completed, and regularly formed according to
Apostolical Order, ought they to be accounted.

24. Now that I may draw to a Conclusion, and freely speak what I think of the
two forementioned ways of conceiving the Ordaining power to be estated by the
Apostles upon special and select men, properly called Bishops or chief Pastors;
I suppose the first way, (which conceives it superadded as a distinct power to
their Priestly function) to be the clearer for securing the Episcopal function,
and distinguishing it from the other: but the second way (which conceives that
power radically diffused, and communicated in the very order of the Priestly
function, and restrained to such select persons in the exercise of it, the
faculty or immediate power whereof they received by consecration) I suppose to
be more easy and expedient for a peaceable accord of the difference in hand,
and yet safe enough for Episcopal Ordination.

25. The first way conceives the Apostles, who had the whole power given them
by Christ, (both the extraordinary Apostolical power, and that which was
ordinary and to continue in the Church) did communicate this power severally:
That, which belonged to the office of Deacons, to persons chosen for that
purpose: That, which belonged to the Ministry of reconciliation, to all
Pastors or Presbyters: So likewise, That power of sending and ordaining others
to these Offices was communicated entirely unto special persons, appointed and
consecrated to that work. This, as I said, is more clear in the distinguishing
of the several Functions of holy Order. But the second way, which estates the
power or faculty of Ordaining upon special persons, by restraining the exercise
of it to them, seems (as above said) to be more fair and easy for the making
up this business of the Reformed Churches, which have Ordination without
Bishops; and yet to afford safety enough to Episcopal function and Ordination.
For it first supposes that to be established and secured by Apostolical Order,
which none can transgress wilfully without Sacrilege: and consequently it
acknowledges such Ordinations without Bishops to be irregular and deficient in
regard of Apostolical order and constitution, and that they ought to receive a
supply, completion, and confirmation by the imposing of Bishops hands, before
the persons so Ordained can be admitted to officiat in a Church completed, and
regularly formed. Lastly, by this way, whatsoever is spoken by S. Hierom in
appearance favorable to the Presbyterian pretense, may be cleared and
reconciled to Truth: and by it may be answered also whatever is brought by
Champny or others, to prove such Ordinations utterly or ex natura rei null, and
void in all cases.

26. I will not trouble the Reader to hear any long Scholastic contest with
Champny in the business; only I shall show by one instance how well he has
acquitted himself in the defense of his assertion against the former argument,
of a Bishop ordained per saltum, and therefore not having power to ordain
others, or consecrate the Sacrament, because he wants the Priestly Order.

That which he replies to it returns more forcibly upon himself: A Bishop per
saltum cannot ordain, and why.
Sicut ex eo, etc. Even as, says he, because the Priestly function is
exercised both about the Mystical body of Christ, in absolving and binding, and
also about the Natural body of Christ in consecrating of it, it does not
therefore follow there is a diverse Order, but a diverse power of the same
Order. So the power of Ordaining, though it make not a distinct Order from that
of the Priestly Function, yet is it a distinct power of Order -- To this
purpose he, cap. 7. page 183, 184. But this comes not home to Ordination, per
saltum, where it is supposed that the power of Ordaining is not given at all;
because the Priestly Order is wanting. This also returns more forcibly upon him
by applying it thus according to his reasoning: Even as the Powers of absolving
and consecrating are distinct, yet both contained within one Order of the
Priestly function, so may the power of Ordaining, though distinct from the
other, be formally and immediately contained within the Priestly function; and
this is more then is required, more then is true; but thus much at least he
must by his own reasoning allow, that it may be radically founded in that
Order; and for want of that foundation it may be, that a Bishop ordained per
saltum cannot ordain others.

27. Again, The reason says he, why a Bishop so ordained cannot Ordain or
Consecrate, is not quia Episcopatus non sit distincta potestas a sacerdotio,
sed quia essentialiter illud praesupponit, ut potestas absolvendi necessario
praesupponit potestatem consecrandi: not because Episcopacy is not a distinct
power from the Priesthood, but because that does essentially pre-suppose this
(which is very near to the founding of the power of Ordination in the Priestly
Order) even as the power of absolving does necessarily praesuppose the power of
consecrating. So he, ibid. page 184. Now albeit this latter assertion be false
(as being grounded upon their placing the whole perfection of the Priestly
Order (so Champny there) in the Sacrificing of the Body of Christ, when as the
power of Absolving is as immediate to that Order or Function, as the power of
Consecrating can be; yea, the Ministry of reconciliation does express the
whole power of that function in Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.18. to which this fancy
of Romish Sacrificing is a stranger: Albeit, I say, that instance speaks what
is false, yet still it returns in the application more forcibly upon him, if we
reason thus; As the power of Absolution necessarily supposes the power of
consecrating (which he lays down for a Truth) and yet are contained in the
same Order of the Priestly Function, so (for any thing that he says) may the
power of Ordaining which necessarily and essentially presupposes, as he says,
the power of Consecrating, be contained also with it in the Priestly Order;
though not formally and immediately as the power of Absolution is, for that is
still more then is required or can be maintained, yet radically founded in it,
and diffused with it.

28. The true reason, as I conceive, why Ordination of a Bishop per saltum does
not give him power to consecrate the Sacrament, or to absolve or to ordain
others to those Offices, is because the Power of the Keys, which includes all
those Powers and Offices, is received in the Priestly Function; which made me
say, it is the more peaceable way, and may probably be defended, that the power
of Ordaining is diffused with the Priestly Office, or founded in it: and is in
it, not immediately and formally as a power ready for Act and exercise (as the
power of Absolving and Ministering Sacraments is in it, to which the Priest has
particular and express Ordination) but radically, and as in prima potentia, the
remote power; so as the faculty of exercising it, or the proxima potentia of
it, is given to special men by Consecration to the work, and that by
Apostolical constitution. And in this sense the extension of the Sacerdotal
Character, (which Champny allows) may stand. Now that first and radical power
can never be lawfully reduced to Act or exercise in them that have not lawful
consecration to it, but by extreme necessity, through the utter failing of them
that have; which whether it be possible I leave it to Champny to dispute.

29. As for the necessity, which those Reformed Churches have pleaded in excuse
of this irregularity in their Ordinations, I shall not now enquire into it;
Only I wish heartily, that they which have chief rule in those Churches, did
not think themselves so far engaged to continue where they are; but that they
would entertain a stronger apprehension of the necessary concernment of that
Order, which was left in the Church by the Apostles, and continued always and
in all places, where the Christian faith was received, till the last Age.

30. As for those false Inferences which either Papist or Sectarie has made
from the different condition of those Churches, to the seeming prejudice of the
English Church, it was my work to discover them; and now I shall give the Reader
a brief of what has been said against them, in recompense of the trouble he
has been hitherto put to by a tedious perplexity. I. That we Protestants of
the English Church stand not alone in this point of Ordination by Bishops,
received at first from Rome; Other Churches, severed from the Romish Communion,
have retained Bishops, and Ordination by them, and that derived from Rome; and
those Reformed Churches that have not, yet approve it in us, and have
acknowledged their own deficiency, joining with us in judgment, but differing
in practice, for which necessity is alleged. II. We must not for that
deficiency quit all fellowship with them or disclaim them as no Churches,
because of Consanguinit as Doctrine (as Tertul. phrases it) the Kindred and
alliance of Doctrine which is between us; for the bond or agreement in Faith
and Charity binds the body of Christ together, Ephesians. 4.16. and that is the main
in the constitution of the Church. And although the other point of Order, as it
concerns the sending and ordaining of those that should teach and publish that
Doctrine, and build up the body of the Church, ought most carefully to be
observed according to Apostolical practice, which fixed that office upon
special Select Persons, called Bishops, yet because it is not so clear, whether
it was fixed to their Persons as a superadded power, or as the faculty of
exercising that power, which, being contained in the power of the Keys, might
with them be radically received in their Priestly Order; we cannot pronounce
absolute Nullity upon their Ordinations, especially the case standing with them
as they plead. And because it does not appear that a bare want, or Deficiency,
in the appointed Order of the Church, should forfeit their belonging to the
Church, where the main ( viz. the Doctrine of Faith and Life) is preserved, and
the other of Order not wilfully perverted to a breach of Charity with those
Churches that have preserved it: therefore we cannot judge them to be no
Churches or Congregations of Christians; but we look upon them as Churches not
completed or regularly formed, and excuse their defects so far as they are
enforced on them by necessity, and conclude them bound to seek their
Completion, and a supply of their defects from those that have Bishops, and
hold the ancient Apostolic way of the Church. Lastly seeing their judgment
concerning Bishops and Ordination by them, where it may be had, is such, and
their excuse of the want of it pleaded by necessity, their example can in no
wise be alleged in defense of those, who of late have rejected Bishops and
Ordination by them, nay ejected them, when they had them. We bless God, that we
had the happy means of a regular Reformation; the more they have to answer for,
that disturbed our established Order; but as for those Churches which approve
of that Order where it is, and want it by necessity, rather then choice, we
leave it to Champny and other Romanists to conclude desperately upon them, and
all that are not in their way, enclosing the whole Church within their
Communion; and judge of Christians not so much by their Union to Christ by the
bands of faith and charity, Ephesians. 4.13.16. as to his pretended Vicar by
subjection to him; for so they conceive of the Church of Christ as of a Society
joined together under one Pastor, the Pope or Bishop of Rome, and do
accordingly define it, and acknowledge the Members of it, making themselves
thereby Papists rather then Christians, and cutting off from the Church, not
only for defects in ritu Apostolico the Order left by our Savior and his
Apostles (which is the charge they have against the Reformed Churches that are
without Bishops) but also for failing ritu Romano, the not observing in this
point of Ordination, the additional Rites and Papal Inventions used there;
which is the charge they have against us, and for which they conclude we have
no Bishops nor lawful Pastors: as will appear below.

CHAP. IV.
Of the second Prejudice, From the Protestants Opinion of the Pope being
Antichrist, and the Church of Rome Heretical.
1. NOw proceed we to his second Argument, against our pleading of Ordination
derived from the Church of Rome. It is grounded upon the Judgment of our own
Writers, and amongst them some Bishops, that hold the Pope is Antichrist, and
therefore that we fall by our own sentence and doctrine; For how can the
Ministers of Christ, says he, receive due and lawful Ordination from the
Ministers of Antichrist? Or how can we think, that Christ should leave the
power of Ordaining Pastors for the feeding of his Church, which he bought with
his precious blood, and for the dispensing of his holy Word and Sacraments, in
the hand of his sworn Enemy? c. 9. p. 320. etc.

To this Argument I answer the more willingly, because I see how Presbyterians
generally, with those of other Sects, suffer themselves by such inconsequencies
and mistakes to be abused into many inconveniences, to the great disturbance
of the Church. Here are two points to be spoken to. 1. The Judgment of the
Popes being Antichrist. 2. The Inference against our Ordinations.

2. Of the opinion of the Pope being Antichrist.
To the first, That there is much Antichristian doctrine taught in the Church
of Rome, invented, broached, maintained by the Popes and others, that have
been, and are chief in that Church, is most evident to any man that has any
reasonable insight into Christianity: and that they which hold and maintein
such doctrine are, and may be called Antichrists, is not to be denied, for so
there are many Antichrists, as St. John tells us of his time. But that the Pope
is the Antichrist, is no point of our faith, none of the Articles of our
Religion. Prophecies indeed are matter of Faith, and ought to be believed, that
they shall be fulfilled, before they come to pass, and that they are fulfilled
when the Scripture assures us they are; but when it leaves us to gather the
event, by signs delivered in Prophetic expressions, and more general terms,
such as is the description of Antichrists coming; then to say such a prophecy
is now fulfilled, or such a State or Person is that Antichrist, is not the act
of Faith, but the work of Reason, making a Conclusion or Inference, upon
application of the signs and marks, describing him in the prophecy, to such or
such a Person or State.

3. Which admits several senses.
Now as King James in his Praemonition to Christian Princes falling upon this
point (by occasion of Heresy laid to his charge by those of Rome, and the Oath
of Allegiance declared by Pope Paul to be against the Catholic Faith) pursues
it indeed eagerly, and with a long discourse, not as an Article of his Faith,
but as a Problematical persuasion, to show he could better and with more
appearance of Truth prove the Pope to be Antichrist, then the Pope could prove
him to be Heretic, or himself to have such superiority over Kings. So we must
take that Assertion of our Writers (de Papa Antichristo) comparatively, not
only in regard of our selves, whom they call and hold to be Heretics, to say
Antichristianism agrees more properly to them, then Heresy to us: but also in
regard of all other Persons or States, that have fallen under the suspicion of
being Antichrist, to say, Of all that yet appeared in the World, the signs and
marks of Antichrist agree most plainly to the Pope and Popedom. I cannot but
say I am much inclined to think, as learned Zanchy seems to do in his Tract de
fine Seculi, that, whatever is done already in the working of the Mystery of
Iniquity, the Antichrist will be revealed in that Seat, and sit in that Papal
Chair.

4. Many Antichrists, in a large and more remiss sense, there have been, and
will go before the appearing of that great One; and a great appearance of such
there has been in the Popedom already. Bernard and many other that lived
within the Communion of the Roman Church, discovered the appearance of
Antichrist in the Papal Court and spoke it. Indeed the Spirit of Antichrist,
which Saint John says, did work in the Heretics of his time, (1. Ep. c. 4. v.
3.) who by Tertul. are called Praecursores illius Antichristi Spiritus, the
forerunners of that great Antichrist, advers. Marc. l. 5. c. 16. that Spirit, I
say, of Antichrist, has long wrought in the chief Rulers of the Romish Church;
not only by reason of Heretical and Antichristian doctrine there taught,
(especially that Principle of mis-belief, Papal Infallibility, the ground of
their faith or believing, then which no one can better fit the turn of
Antichrist, or be a readier way to Apostasy from Christ) but also by reason of
exorbitant power there challenged and usurped, first over all Bishops in the
Church of Christ (for which by Saint Gregory's warrant we may style the Pope
the forerunner of Antichrist) then, over Kings and all that are called Gods.

5. Now in the second place, The seeming prejudice.
consider the Inference made from this. Champny, as we insinuated above, draws
it ad impossible, or to this Absurdity: Therefore Christ left his Church in
the hand of his sworn Enemy, giving him the power of Ordaining, or providing
Pastors for his Church -- and tells us, The Reformed Churches do therefore abhor
the Orders, and reject all things else, that come from Rome.

Answ. First supposing the Popes to be such Antichrists or Antichristian
Rulers, it was but part of the Christian Church, that they ruled in; and why
should it seem so strange to any, that Christ should leave part of his Church
under Antichristian Tyranny, when it is foretold plainly, that Antichrist must
sit in the Temple of God? or why should it seem so strange and impossible to
Champny, that Christ should suffer his sworn Enemy to sit as chief Pastor in
the Roman Chair, Many Monsters of Men have sat as Popes in the Romans Chair.
when as it is certain in History that many Popes have sat there, who have
been as vile Monsters, and as great Enemies to Christ, and all godliness, as we
need suppose those Antichrists to be, which we say are to be found in that
Seat, if any where yet in the World? Such Popes as Champny himself must needs
acknowledge to have been, not so much Christ's Vicars, as the Devils Chaplans,
preferred by him, advanced to that Chair by all Divellish means, Murders,
Whoredoms, Sorceries, and by the like Arts and Divellish Practices holding it,
and ruling in it; as Platina and other of their own Historians testify.
Genebrard, who is not forward to acknowledge such disparagements to that Seat,
yet complains of almost 50. Popes together in the 9. and 10. Centuries, calling
them Apostaticos potius quam Apostolicos, and saying they came not in by the
door. Baronius, who always employed the utmost of his skill to excuse, is here
forced to confess the Papal impieties, and to lament the condition of the
Church under such Heads, particularly Joh. 12. and some other Popes notoriously
abominable about the 10. Century.

6. Bell. in his Praephatique Oration to his books de Pontif. Romans could not
pass this by in filence or deny it; but sets a good countenance on it, and by
the fineness of a Jesuit Wit (which it seems Baronius, Genebrard, and Champny
had not learnt within their Societies) turns all to the advantage of that Seat,
as testifying the Sanctity and perpetuity of it, notwithstanding the iniquity
of them that sat in it. Nihil est quod Haeretici, etc. It is to no purpose for
the Heretics to take so much pains in searching out the Vices of Popes, for we
confess they were not few. But, Tantum abest, etc. This is so far from
diminishing the glory of this Seat, that it is thereby exceedingly amplified;
for thereby we may perceive it consists by the special providence of God.
What Bell. speaks of the Seat, i.e. the Papal Authority and power, had he spoken
it of the Church of God oppressed under that usurped power, it had been a very
sober, rational, and Christian-like acknowledgment of Gods special providence,
which did preserve a Church under such confusion and iniquity of Antichristian
Rulers.

7. This does not invalidate Ordination.
And as in regard of the preservation of a Church, so in respect of the
continuance of Ordination in particular, Champny must give us leave to say with
much more Reason, Tantum abest, etc. It is so far from seeming impossible or
absurd that Christ should permit the power of Ordaining Pastors to the hand of
his Enemy, that it makes more for the glory of his Power and special providence
over his Church, that notwithstanding such Wolves, that entered, He preserved
his sheep; notwithstanding such Antichristian Rulers, He continued and
propagated a saving Truth, by transmitting down his Word and Scriptures, and a
succession of Teachers and Pastors by Ordination still continued; Yea his
special providence farther, in as much as by that Word of Truth transmitted and
received from them that had the chief Rule, many have discovered their Errors
and Tyranny, and cast them of: and by Ordination derived and received by their
hands, have a lawful succession of Pastors to declare that Truth, and to
continue the Church so purged and Reformed, without running still to them for
Ordination or confirmation in the Pastoral charge.

8. Let us hear what S. Augustine says appliable to this point, in his 165.
Ep. Etiamsi quisquam Traditor subrepsisset, although some Traitor had crept
into that Chair, (he means the Roman, and after-Ages have seen many Judasses or
Traitors in it as above said) nihil praejudicaret Ecclesiae and innocentibus
Christianis, quibus providens Deus, etc. He should nothing hurt the Church or
innocent Christians, for whom our Lord has provided, saying of Evil Prelates,
What they say, do ye. Mat. 23. as if he had said, be their Persons what they
will it does not prejudice the work of their Function or Ministry, no more then
it did in those to whom our Savior there relates, viz. the Scribes and
Pharisees, professed enemies to Christ, yet in Moses chair, and to be heard and
obeyed. The Leper also is sent to the Priests, because they were in place,
though generally Enemies to Christ. Yea the Ministerial Acts of Judas himself,
who was Traditor (...), a Traitor and a Devil, were good and valid when he was
sent, as were other Disciples, abroad to perform them. If then the Iniquity of
Rulers or Pastors do not prejudice the Church in the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, which are of nearer concernment to the Salvation of Christians,
much less does it in the transmitting of Orders.

9. Lastly, We first derived Ordination from Rome before any suspicion of
Antichrist there.
We begin the succession of our English Bishops, derived from the Church of
Rome, in the time of Gregory the first, (when as no such Traitor or
Antichristian Ruler had crept into that seat) and the power of Ordination, then
received, has ever since continued without interruption among us. And although
after some Ages we see, that many Popes proved Monsters and enemies to Christ,
from whose Tyranny this Land and Church were not free: yet find we many of our
Bishops not willingly bearing, but complaining under that Yoke, as Grosthead,
and others. And as for those that Ordained Cranmer, and Latimer, they had
ejured the supposed Antichrist, and cast out the Papal Authority. So that,
whatever Protestants judge now of the Pope, it cannot prejudice the Ordination,
either of our first English Bishops by Gregory the Great (who mainly resisted
the beginnings of Papal Antichristianisme in John of Constantinople) or of our
first Reformed Bishops, Cranmer, Latimer or others, for the Pope was then
ejected and the Ordainers of those Bishops sworn against him: and so not to be
accounted Ministers of the supposed Antichrist.

To conclude; considering what was said above of the ministerial acts of Judas,
and others that were in place and office, the charge of Antichristianisme
(taken in any sense, strictly or remisly) cannot prejudice our judgment of the
now Romish Ordinations, which we allow to be valid still, as to the substance
of the Order appointed and settled in the Church by our Savior and his
Apostles. And I wish, the pretended Reformers of these later Times had not been
so strong in their Zeal against the Church of Rome, and so weak in their
reasoning, as out of fear of such seeming prejudices, to decline and reject not
only Ordination thence derived, but even many Truths there professed, and from
that Church received.

10. The seeming prejudice from our charging them with Heresy.
His next Argument is from the charge of Heresy laid by Protestants upon those
of the Romish Church, from which he concludes our plea, of receiving Ordination
by them, must fall by our own judgment; for Orders cannot lawfully be received
from Heretics c. 9. 326. etc.

11. That we may more fairly proceed in the clearing of this difficulty, we
must premise, that we admit the distinction here between Legitimum and
Legitime, between Lawful or valid Orders, and Orders Lawfully given or
received: the first implies the power of given, which Romanists acknowledge to
remain in Heretics and Schismatics, the other speaks the due and lawful use
of that power, which is denied to be in those, that are in Heresy or Schism.
The reason is, because Heretics and Schismatics being actually divided from
the Unity of the Church must needs lose the lawful use of that power, and all
other Ecclesiastical ministration, but not the power it self, which follows a
Character that is indelible, as the Romanists express it; We admit though not a
Sacramental character stamped upon the Soul of the Ordained, as they will have
it, yet such a disposition or power, cleaving to his person, for the doing of
that he is ordained to, that it is not lost by Heresy or Schism, nor to be
reiterated upon the return, or restoring of that Person.

12. This premised we have two points to speak to; First, how the charge of
Heresies laid on those of the Church of Rome; then how the lawful use of Orders
may be supplied by the restoring of the Person, though at first they were not
lawfully given: and so by both these, we shall have a double answer to the
Argument above.

For the first, we must note, that Heresy is considered in regard of the
Matter, What sort of Heresy takes away lawful use of Ordination.
or of the Declaration of the Church: and this according to the Apostles
speech, to Tit. c. 3.10. A man that is an Heretic -- is so first, before he be
rejected, or declared so. Heresies also much differ in regard of the Matter, by
which some may be so immediately fundamental, as the Heresy of the Arrians and
some other, that it does ipso facto, before any sentence or declaration of the
Church, cut off or divide the Person so Heretical from the Union of the true
Catholic Church, (because it divides him from the Foundation) and from being
actual Member of the Visible Church, upon the Notoriety of such Heresy, so
contrary to the Foundation; and also long since declared against by the Ancient
Church in the four first General Councels: and therefore the lawful exercise of
that power he had to administer Sacraments or Orders in the Church, ceases upon
such discovery, or as I may say, Self-condemnation. We need not stand here to
dispute, when or how soon it ceases upon such Heresy: for we do not charge
such Heresy upon those of Rome, i.e. Heresy immediately Fundamental, or those
main Heresies declared against by the first General Councels; but then we must
say, that many of their New Articles of Belief and Practice, are in themselves
Heretical, and as much or more, then were many Tenets of former Heretics,
declared against by the Ancient Church; whether we consider the matter, and
concernment of those Romish Articles, or the Obstinacy and Tyranny with which
they asserted and imposed; so that, if there could be a full General Council of
the whole Catholic Church, they would undoubtedly be declared many of them
Heretical.

13. From whence it follows, that Heresy thus lying upon them, might give us
just cause to renounce their Errors, and quit their Communion so far, as it was
necessitated by renouncing their Errors: though not just cause to condemn or
renounce the Orders given by them or received from them.

This may give answer to all the Places alleged by Doctor Champny (in his ninth
cap. page 335, 336.) out of the Fathers, against Orders given by Heretics; for
they concern either Heretics in fundamentals, or such as were declared so, and
actually separated from the Unity of the Church.

14. It is to be noted farther, that, when our first reformed Bishops were
ordained by them, the grand Heresy and mother of their other Errors, as to the
obstinate an heretical defending of them, I mean the Papal Power and Authority,
was abjured: and therefore their Ordainers, however yet in Romish Errors could
not be properly heretical, or peremptorily engaged to defend the same, as
afterward they were: especially since the Council of Trent has made them
Errors established, and sworn to. But, after that, we went not to them for
Orders, yet do acknowledge they have Ordination still substantially valid, and
therefore we do not re-ordain Priests that return from them to us, because the
substance or Evangelical institution is by those words (Receive the holy Ghost,
whose sins ye remit, etc.) retained still in the Roman Ordination, though
clogged and depressed by additional corruptions; but cause them to renounce
those additionals and other Romish Errors.

So then the sum of our first answer is, We do account them to be in Heresy,
and deeper then when we received Ordination from them; yet so, as not actually
and wholly cut off from the Catholic Church, either by the nature of the
Heresy it self casting off from the foundation, or by declaration of the
Catholic Church, casting them out of the Unity of it: and therefore it does not
follow upon our accounting them Heretics, that we could not lawfully receive
Orders from them.

15. A supply of defect in Ordination through Heresy.
Our second answer is from the supply of any defect in our Ordination received
from them: that supposing them Heretics in such a condition, as made them
forfeit their Union which the Catholic Church, and consequently the due and
lawful use of the power of Ordaining, yet does it not follow, that we cannot
have it: but on the contrary, that we recover it by leaving them in that, which
hindered the due and lawful use of it in them. And so the Romanists answer for
the Bishops, which they own, and yet were ordained by Cranmer in the time of
the Schism, as they call it, saying: they recovered the lawful use by returning
from Schism and Heresy in Queen Mary's time, when they were reconciled to the
Church of Rome. So if, upon our charging them with Heresy, we must suppose
they could not lawfully ordain, nor we lawfully receive Orders from them, then
must it conformably be supposed, that we having deposed their Heresy and left
their Communion, and by no other Heresy forfeiting our Union with the Catholic
Church, do recover the due and lawful use of Orders, and may lawfully
administer them to others, and now do it in the Unity of the Church.

16. Champny did foresee this might be answered by us, and therefore seeks to
cut us off from this plea, by replying: That defect of lawful Ordination and
Vocation, which was in Cranmer by supposed Heresy in his Ordainers, could not
be supplied, but by his reunion to the true Church and Pastors thereof; but,
besides the Church of Rome, there was no other Church or Lawful Pastors, by
reconciliation to which, he could have that defect supplied: Not other Reformed
Churches, for they can less prove themselves to be Churches, or to have Lawful
Vocation of Pastors, then the Church of England can: Not the Grecian, Russian,
or Ethiopic Churches, for they also are in Schism and Heresy, and our English
Reformers pretend not to receive their calling from them, or to have it
supplied by them; therefore they can no ways have their defect supplied or
recover the Lawful use of Ordination. So he, p. 337. etc.

Thus having argued against our Vocation, upon our supposal of Heresy in those
we acknowledge our Ordainers, and boasted of it as an indissoluble Argument,
page 335. he is now fain to take away the supposal it self, by affirming them
to be the only lawful Pastors, and that none else in all the Christian world
could give lawful Ordination, or make a supply of what was wanting. The issue
indeed of this point of Heresy, either charged by us upon them, that gave
Orders, or by them on us who received them, (which will be his Argument below)
comes to this, Whether the Church of Rome be the only Church, in whose
Communion the Unity of the Church is confined, and Ordination to be had, and
therefore we and all other out of it, are in Schism and Heresy, and can have
no lawful Ordination? To this hold, after all the Velitation and light
skirmishing upon our supposals, it was necessary he should retire himself.

17. Now the strength of this Hold stands but upon their unreasonable phansying
of the whole Church, as of one society in subjection to the Bishop of Rome, as
Pastor General, or Vicar of Christ, by which they judge of Heresy and Schism,
and admit none, as returning from it, but by actual reconciliation and
submission to the Bishop of Rome, as in Queen Mary's time. What he says of our
not pretending to receive our calling from other Churches, Reconciliation of
Schismatics and Heretics.
or to have the defect of our Ordinations supplied by them, is true, but to no
purpose; for the supposed defect in the Romish Ordination (which we received)
does, as above said, cease upon our leaving off or quitting that, which is
supposed to cause that defect in the Romish Church. Nor was it needful, either
for the supplying of any such defect, or for the stating us in the Union of the
Catholic Church, that we, being a National Church and independing on any
foreign Jurisdiction, should upon our disagreement with Rome be bound to apply
our selves to other Churches by actual reconciliation, or full agreement in
what they held or practiced. Of which in 16. Sect. of former book.

For private men indeed and particular companies of men returning from Heresy
or Schism, actual reconciliation to the Church of which they were Members, or
from which they departed is necessary: but not so for a National and
independing Church. Such actual reconciliation, when it has been performed,
was but of the Solemnity of the business, and may be to good purpose done, when
the whole body of the Catholic Church stands entire in a condition fit to
receive it, but the soul of Unity with the Church, is in the deposing of
Heresy, and professing the true Faith, and consequently Communion with all
others that do it, not perhaps with a full agreement in all things with us, yet
with a charitable compliance, in not condemning us therefore, as no Church.

18. What he says of the Roman Church, as the only true Church, to the
concluding of all other Churches under Schism and Heresy, is only said, and
not proved; being but the product of the forementioned Fancy, that the whole
Church of Christ is one society bound together in subjection to the Bishop of
Rome, as Head and general Pastor, and therefore Heretics and Schismatics
cannot be restored but by reconciliation to him. This he urges more properly
(though to as little purpose) below, cap. 11. where he strives to fasten
Heresy upon us, because divided from that Church, and not yet reconciled to
it: telling us, the Ancient Councels of Nice, Sardica, and others did so esteem
and conclude of Heretical Bishops of the Arrians, Donatists and Novatians, as
no Bishops till received, and reconciled to the Church. It will be sufficient
in this place to say, I. That this comes not home to their purpose: for those
Councels did not appoint reconciliation to Rome, and for some time of the
Arrian Heresy, reconciliation to that Church could not be good; when as
Liberius the ejected Bishop had subscribed to that Heresy for the recovering
of his See, and Faelix that possessed it, was advanced by compliance with the
Arrian faction, which then prevailed every where. II. Although such actual and
solemn reconciliation of a National Church, with the Bishops thereof, to the
body of the Catholic Church, was fit to be performed, whilst that body stood
still conspicuously in good proportion, as it did in the beginning of the Arian
Heresy, yet when once that Heresy had overborn all, and almost all Bishops
with their flocks turned Arrian, in so much that Constantius the Emperor told
Liberius, (as the Romanists do usually reproach us) that the whole world was
against Athanasius, and Liberius, as yet Catholic, answered for their paucity.
Time was when three only stood for the true Worship of God against the King.
Dan. 3. (as appears in 1. Tom. Council.) when, I say, it was thus with the
Church, how could such actual and solemn reconciliation of any Arian Bishops,
or Nation, returning from Heresy, be well made? enough it was for such to
depose their Heresy, and profess communion with all Christians wheresoever
that held the true faith. So was it enough for our Bishops and this Nation to
forsake the Heresy, and profess communion with all other Churches not guilty
of the Romish error, and not imposing the belief or practice of that we differ
in, as the condition of their Communion. And thus far in answer to his
Inferences from our charging Antichristianisme or Heresy upon the Church of
Rome.

CHAP. V.
Of the third prejudice, from our Judgment of their Orders, that they are
sacrilegious -- and do not give an indelible Character.
1. HIs next Argument is drawn from our Doctrine or Judgment touching their
Orders, which we hold Sacrilegious, abominable, unlawful, and therefore cannot
be lawful in us, who confess we received Orders from them. This is the Title
and Work of his 10. Chapter: and here he begins his contest with M. Mason, whom
he chiefly undertakes, through the remainder of his book, to refute. Touching
the Argument we must note by the way, that the charge of Sacrilege and
abomination laid upon their Ordinations by Protestants, How Protestants call
their Orders Sacrilegious.
does immediately concern their Order of Priests, by reason of the Sacrificing
power given them, but the argument thereupon proceeds also against their
Bishops, who were such Priests, and from whom, being such, we derived our
Orders, and Cranmer and others were made by them such Priests, before they were
Ordained Bishops.

Mason had framed the like Argument by way of Objection to himself, and given
this Answer, That their Order consisted of two parts; The one expressed in
these words, Take thee power to offer sacrifice -- The other in these, And in
what respect allow them.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou remittest, etc. The first part, which
stands in offering up Chrift gain, is altogether abominable; The second, which
is in the Ministry of reconciliation, is good for the substance, though
depraved by the Abuse of Auricular Confession. To this purpose he.

2. Champny replies. I. By cavilling at his making the Order to have two parts,
and runs into a needless disputation, to show that the Order being simple and
like the Soul standing in indivisibili, has not Parts but several Powers from
one character in the Soul. But seeing he will be so subtle, he should remember,
how he allowed above, an Extension of the Character, which, now he telsus,
stands in indivisibili: Well, let him enjoy his Philosophical notions and
Sholastick terms, and let him call the different offices of Sacrificing and
Absolving, not Parts but Powers: this we say still, that the first power they
give to their Priests of offering again (really and properly) the body and
blood of Christ, is Sacrilegious, without any warrant from Scripture; nay
against it plainly, and exceedingly derogatory to the Sacrifice of the Cross,
and therefore abominable, unlawful altogether: The other power of
reconciliation, or ministering the Word and Sacraments, they give for the
substance of it according to the Evangelical institution; but deal not so
sincerely in it as they should.

3. II. He replies. The Protestants, though they hold Order no Sacrament, Form
of Ordination certain, how.
yet must grant that a certain form is required to every Order, and that such a
depravation, as they charge the Romish Ordination with, must needs so change
the Form as to make all void and null; and so, by their own doctrine, they
received no Order at all from the Romish Church. This he endeavors to make
good by the Form of Baptism, which if depraved and changed [as to say, I
Baptize thee in the name of the Father who is greater then the Son, or the
like] the Baptism is null. Answ. It is true, that unto lawful Ordination,
though not a Sacrament properly, a lawful and certain form is required, such as
may express the institution of the Order, and the function and power of it,
with application to the person receiving it. Now if it be so changed and
depraved, that it does not in a sufficient manner express so much, it renders
the Ordination invalid; but if the Form be preserved, as to the substance of
it, and only other Additions made to it by way of aggregation: they however
unlawful do not void what is given according to the right form retained; as in
Baptism, where the due Element and Form are retained, though there be
additionals, of marking the child with fire too, as the Ethiopian Christians
are said to do, or of Salt, Spitle, and other trumperies, with forms of words
belonging to them, as in the Church of Rome, the Baptism, notwithstanding, is
valid, and good. So in this of Orders, that which we call abominable and
unlawful is an addition of man's invention; yet seeing the words of Christ are
retained (receive the holy Ghost, and whose sins ye remit; etc.) in which the
lawful and certain form of conveying the power of the Ministry of
reconciliation is contained, we say the Ordination is so far valid and good,
and may stand without the corrupt additionals wherewith it is clogged in the
Romish Church; yea does stand the clearer being freed from them, as it is in
the Church of England. And therefore we do not re-ordain those Priests that
come from them, but cause them to renounce the corrupt additionals, and confirm
what was validly received in their Ordination. We may say in this point as Aug.
answered Potil. concerning Baptism administered by the Donatists, Non vestrum
est quod destruere metuimus, sed Christi, quod and Sacrilegis per se Sanctum
est; nam venientes a vobis recipere non possumus nisi quod vestrum est
destruamus. We fear to destroy the Baptism given by you, not as yours, but as
it is Christ's, which is holy even among them that are Sacrilegious; for we
could not else receive those that come from you except we destroyed that which
is yours: Contra lit. Petil. lib. 2. So of Romish Orders, we destroy what is
theirs, not what is Christ's in them, for that is yet holy and good,
notwithstanding their Sacrilegious additions; and when we receive any that come
from them, it is necessary we destroy and cause them to renounce what is
theirs, but admit what they have retained of Christ's institution.

4. Romish Priests fuffering here, and for what.
III. He replies, as to that part of their Ordination which we admit of, viz.
that which includes the ministry of reconciliation: That we confess it to be of
Christ's institution, and yet make their Priests guilty of Treason and execute
them, for exercising of it: So is it decreed, 23. Eliz. ^ -- to reconcile to
the Church of Rome, etc. cap. 10.355. Answ. It is not for that very work of the
ministry, as it is a reconciling of Penitents to God, no more then for
Baptizing, which is another work of the ministry of reconciliation: which if a
Romish Priest do, he is not therefore obnoxious to the Law. But because one of
these is abused to Treasonable attempts, and made very fit for it, by their
kind of practicing Sacramental confession; the other is not, neither can be so
abused, being admmistred to Infants: therefore it comes to pass, that the
former is forbidden to be practiced within this Land, not directly, but so far
as it is a reconcileing to the Bishop or Church of Rome; So the Statute
expresses it, and what that reconciliation means, our State before it made that
Statute had learnt experimentally, viz. the instilling of many Treasonable
Principles into the Party reconciled, and moving them upon all occasions to
answerable practices by virtue of the Obligation that was upon them by their
reconciliation to the Pope.

5. All this is most plain in the Story of those Times, wherein we may see the
beginning and progress of the boldness of Romish Priests in their Treasonable
Practices, and accordingly the first rise and advance of the severity of Laws
made against them. Til the thirteenth year of the Queen, there was no Law, that
touched them in this point of their Priestly function; They did baptize and
absolve, and both unpunished, because it was supposed they did only exercise
their function in absolving people from their sins, not in absolving Subjects
from obedience to their Sovereign. But after Pius Quintus sent out his Bulls of
Excommunication against the Queen, pronouncing her deprived of all rule and
dignity, and her Subjects absolved from the Oath of their Subjection, and from
all manner of Obedience; (So the Sentence ran) and the Romish Priests began to
stickle and work busily thereupon: then was it high time for the Queen and
State to look to themselves, and therefore An. 13. made it Treason to disperse
such Bulls, and to reconcile or be reconciled upon them.

6. Reconciling to the Bishop of Rome.
But we must note here, 1. This reconciling there forbidden, was not practiced
upon the power of their Priestly function, but upon the Authority and by virtue
of such Bulls, which is plain by the words of the Statute; If any person shall
by color of such Bull, or Instrument, or Authority take upon him to absolve or
reconcile any person, etc. and therefore they are called Bulls of absolution
and reconciliation in that Statute. 2. This reconciling or absolving was so far
from the ministry of reconciliation, which we acknowledge to pertein to the
Prieftly function by our Saviors institution, that the very intent. and
purpose of it was formally Treason; which also is plain by the same Statute in
these words, The effect whereof (viz. of those Bulls and Instruments from Rome)
has been, and is, to absolve and reconcile all those, that will be content to
forsake their due Obedience to our Sovereign Lady, the Queen, and to yield and
subject themselves to the usurped Authority of the Bishop of Rome. Is this
Evangelical or Priestly reconciliation of Penitents to God? Had the Apostles
preached such Gospel, or practiced such Reconciliation, admitting none into the
Christian Church, but such as would be willing to forsake their Obedience to
their Heathen Princes, unless they also would embrace the Christian Religion,
had they not deserved to be forbidden entrance into their Kingdoms, or to be
cast out of them? The Romish Priests then are justly ejected, punished, whose
absolving of Penitents from sin is proved a pretense of absolving Subjects from
their due obedience; whose reconciling men to God or his Church, a cloak for
their Reconciling to a foreign jurisdiction of Papal usurped Authority; and what
that brings after it, who knows not? If we go on in our story we shall see what
were the Consequents of it; Seditions, stirring up the People (which S. Paul
was most careful to clear himself and the Gospel of, Act. 24.12. and throughout
his Epistles) thence Insurrections, Rebellions, and, because these suceeded
not, secret attempts upon the life of the Prince, by Pystoes, Poysonings, and
what not? Therefore came out, after ten years more, the Statute which Champny
cites out of An. 23. Eliz. This in the preamble thus reflects upon the former
Statute, An. 12. Whereas, sithence the Statute made in the 13. year of the
Queen -- diverse evil affected persons have practiced by other means, then by
Bulls or Instruments Written or Printed, to withdraw her Majesty's Subjects
from their Natural Obedience, to obey the said usurped Authority of Rome: For
Reformation whereof, be it enacted; That all persons, who shall pretend to have
power, or by any means shall put in practice (though by pretense of Priestly
function) to absolve, persuade or withdraw, any of her Majesty's Subjects, from
their Natural Obedience, or shall to that intent (that is noted still in the
drift of Romish practices, and the ground of the Laws provision against them)
withdraw them from the Religion established, to the Romish Religion --

7. The frequent seditious practices of Romish Priests.
The Law looks at the consequents of reconciliation to the Pope or Romish
Church, for they, that made it, were not ignorant of the consectary Doctrines
to it, and by experience found what had been the practices following upon them:
and therefore in justice and prudence were bound to prevent them. Now if this
seem to entrench upon their Religion, or expose it to Infamy, let them discard
such Doctrines for the credit of it: if upon their Priestly Function (which
indeed has the Ministry of Reconciliation annexed to it) let them blame
themselves, who have abused that Evangelical power, to cloak and advance such
hellish attempts: If to the disparagement of private Confession, thanks to them,
that have abused it to the searching out fit instruments for treasonable
designs, by seeing into the thoughts and inclinations of persons confessed.

8. Some secular Priests were so ingenuous, as to confess and complain of the
Seditious practices, which those of the Society advanced, and acknowledge the
just provocation which the State had against Romish Priests, in their book set
out in the latter end of the Queens Reign; thus page 10. Amongst many things,
that give her Majesty and the State very just cause to think more hardly of us
all, this is one, that the pretended Brethren of that Society (Jesuits) and
such as follow their steps do calumniate the Actions of the State, etc. and
afterward entering upon the story of Father Parsons his Seditious practices,
which he, together with the rest of his society, set on foot, they thus write,
page 56. He inveighs bitterly (in a seditious book set out by him) against the
cruelty of her Highness Laws, which we wish had been more mild; but he never
mentions, that he and his fellows have been the occasion of them by their
traitorous courses against her Crown and Life. Again, page 57. If these things
(viz. their endeavors to advance the Infanta's Title to this Crown) should
come to the knowledge of the State, who will blame the same, if such Priests as
come either from Spain or Rome, be not well entertained here? Thus they, truly
and ingenuously, of the practices of Romish Emissaries, and of the justness of
the Laws against them.

9. I will not say, nor do I think, that all their Priests, which suffer here,
were Politicians, or acquainted with all the devices of their Superiors; I
believe the forementioned Seculars were not such, and do suppose there are
some, who in the simplicity of their hearts, and out of mere Conscience of
Religion, do labor the propagation of it, whilst others more directly are
guilty of Seditious and Treasonable Practices. It is my wish there could be a
distinction made between the one and the other, that the punishment (which the
Law adjudges all Priests to, that are found within the Land) might only fall
upon them, who are indeed guilty of such practices, which being so frequently
found in their predecessors (and the State being not able to distinguish
between them, who are all Missionaries of Rome) caused those Laws to be made
for the security of Prince and State. And if they that come into the Land,
without any treasonable intent, do suffer for it, they must thank their
Fellows, (as the above mentioned Seculars do the Jesuits) whose restless
attempts forced the State to forbid them all entrance into the Land under pain
of Treason. Doctor Champny, one would think, should not be a stranger in
France, by the wisdom of which State, the whole Order of the Jesuits was upon
this score banished, 1594. as Corrupters of Youth, troublers of the public
quiet, and as Enemies to the Kings state; and not to return under pain of
High Treason; so the Sentence ran. In like manner they were not long after
driven out of the Territories of the Venetian Republic, and never since
received in.

To conclude; It is not Religion, nor the Function, nor any ministerial Act
belonging to it, that is punished in Romish Priests, but Treason and Seditious
Practices, to which Religion, Sacraments, Ministry of Reconciliation, and all
that is reputed Holy, are made to serve; and all this to advance and secure the
Papal Usurpation. And thus much in answer to Champny's reasonings against our
condemning their Orders, and yet pleading by them -- also against our
condemning them in one part, and admitting them in another.

10. Of the indelible Character.
There remains one Argument more against our pleading Ordinations from them,
and that is drawn from our Doctrine about the Indelible character; which seeing
we deny, we consequently must hold, we receive no Order from them, no power to
ordain; it being not possible (says he) to conceive how a Heretic declared,
(in whom the designation of the Church cease, and all lawful use of Order)
still has the power and the Act, if done, is valid, but only by reason of the
Indelible character remaining in him. This Argument he does not insist on, but
hints it several times, cap. 9. and elsewhere, and in courtesy passes it over,
suffering us to help our selves by the Catholic Doctrine (as he says) of the
Character, when we are put to show, how those of the Church of Rome being fallen
into Heresy could give us Orders, or why the Ancient Church received Bishops
returning from Heresy, and restored them without Ordination. To this purpose
he.

11. Orders not to be reiterated.
But we can answer them. We need not the help of their Doctrine touching the
indelible Character, of which, as they phansy it, they can give no solid
reason: yea, we can help them with a better reason, why the power of Ordination
remains, notwithstanding Heresy or other irregularity. Their Character (as
they fancy it, to be a Sacramental effect, and real quality imprinted upon
the soul) we have cause to deny; but we grant, as was above insinuated, there
remains in the person such a disposition or habitude to the End or Office, he
is ordained to, which is not by Heresy or Schism so lost or broken off, but
that still he has a power to the work or Ministerial Acts of that office. And
this if any will call a Character or mark remaining, he may: Only, it is not a
Sacramental effect properly, a or real quality impressed on the soul, as they
will have it, but a (...) or habitude consisting in respect and relation, as
Dur. in 4. Distin. 4. seems plainly to acknowledge.

12. Now if we put them to give a reason of their indelible Character, either
in Baptism or Orders, they use very poor shifts, catching at the word, Seal
and Sealing, wherever they meet with it, as 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.
which is most plainly meant of the graces of the spirit; and as we see the
impertinency, so the unreasonableness of it: They hold the graces of the spirit
(which are real infused qualities, and do seal indeed) may be blotted out or
lost, yet the supposed Character, they would prove by them, is indelible. Again
they set it out, rather then prove it, by the indelible mark that Circumcision
left upon the Person receiving it: but here are many impertinencies, for
Circumcision was a mark in the flesh only, and imprinted none upon the soul, as
the Romanists must hold of the Sacraments of the Old Testament; but this mark
of theirs is only in the soul, and only marks a man out in respect of Gods
knowledge, who only can look into the Soul. Besides, that of Circumcision was
not indelible, but by Art they could recover the praeputium, as we read some
Apostate Jews did; to which device the Apostle relates, and gives us the word
for it, (...), Let him not become uncircumcised. 1 Cor. 7.18. Lastly, Women had
not that mark in the flesh; yet as they were born to God, Ezekiel. 16.20. so they
remained his, notwithstanding the Idolatry in which their Parents lived, and
brought them up in: and this not by reason of any such Character or stamp set
upon them, but because of the Covenant of God, into which that people were
entered, and caused a relation, that could not wholly be broken off.

13. Well we may help them from hence with a reason of that, which so remains of
Baptism, that it need not be reiterated, and that is the entering of Covenant
with God, a Covenant indeed of Salt (as that which is so called, 2 Chronicles. 12.)
upon which such a relation arises, as cannot be quite lost, as appears by the
forenamed place of Ezekiel. where God speaks to the Idolatrous Israelites, the
Sons and Daughters, thou bear to me. Also we know, what is consecrate to
holy use may not be alienated; Now Baptism is a consecrating, a devoting of the
party to God, and so is Ordination too; That according to the general
profession and service of a Christian: This according to the special vocation
or calling of a Minister of the Gospel; and in both, he that puts his hand to
the plough, i. e. admitted to be a Disciple generally or specially taken must
not look back.

We may see then a reason, why the power received in Ordination remains: not
because of the designation or deputation of the Church, (which cease in
Heretics actually broken off from the Unity of the Church, and so does the
lawful use of that power so long as they continue in Heresy, for the Church
intends not to make use, or allow of the ministry of such) but by virtue of
their consecration to God and his service, and that in such an office, as by
our Saviors institution may not be cast off by him, that is once admitted into
it. Thus far in answer to Champneys several Arguments against our Ordinations,
or the Lawful calling of our Pastors or Bishops, in regard of supposed Defects
in the Ordainers (viz. those of the Church of Rome) according to our Doctrine
and judgment of them, and the Orders given by them. Now proceed to his other
general Heads, Defects in the Ordained, or in the Form of Ordination.

CHAP. VI.
Of Archbishop Cranmers Ordination, and the pretended defects of it, Bigamie,
and Heresy.
DOcter Champny, examining the Ordination of the Reformed Bishops, begins with
the Archbishop and Metropolitan Cranmer, and it is the work of his 11. Chapter.
With the Form of his Ordination he quarrels not, it being done ritu Romano,
though with some protestation interposed on Cranmers part: but he charges him
with these Personal irregularities or Defects, Bigamie, Heresy, Schism. So
that however by virtue of his Ordination he received the substance and power of
the Order, yet by reason of those defects in his person, he did not receive the
Lawful use or exercise of that power, nor could he lawfully Ordain others. This
is the sum of what he says. Of Bigamie, or Digamie.


1. We begin with that of Bigamie: of which M. Mason took no notice in his
defense of Bishop Cranmers Ordination; and Doctor Champny only proves he was
twice married, which is not denied; but brings nothing to prove, that such
Bigamie, or Digamie rather, infers such an irregularitie, as deprives a Bishop
of the lawful use of his power of Ordaining. To this charge it may be said, I.
That the Bigamy which the Apostle speaks of in his Canon, 1 Timothy 3.2. and
implicitly forbids, when he says, Let a Bishop be the Husband of one Wife, was
a superinduction of a Second Wife upon the former, either kept still or put
away; a Polygamy both ways, either direct by cohabitation with two Wives, or
that which followed upon unjust Divorce, and was indeed the having of two Wives
at once, a licentious Custom frequent among Jews and Gentiles. Now such a
person that had done so, before his Conversion to Christianity or after, was
justly debarred by the Apostle from Holy Orders, but of this Cranmer was not
guilty. As for that Digamy, which is the taking of a second Wife after the
first being dead; or the taking of a Widow to wife at first, we acknowledge it
forbidden by some Canons of the Church, and that for the most part the former
place of the Apostle was by the Ancients applied to this Digamy; for no marvel
if being earnest in the commendation of single life, they should so readily
receive the Apostles words in that sense which most answered to their purpose.
But some of the Ancients better considering it, do acknowledge the meaning of
the Apostle to be according to the former interpretation: amongst whom are
reckoned Justin Martyr, Chrysostom, and Theodoret. Yea that parallel place, 1 Timothy 5.9. of a Widow, having been the Wife of one Man, does most reasonably
receive the like interpretation: notwithstanding that the Romanists cry out of
it as a thing unheard of, that a Woman should have two Husbands at once; which
is true of two by cohabitation, not by desertion; for so it was often seen that
the Woman either forsaking her Husband or forsaken of him, married another, the
first being yet alive. Such a Widow the Apostle rejects as one of ill fame; and
thus Theodoret, and Theophylact are known to interpret the Apostle of a Widow
that has been coupled but to one Husband at once. Lastly, it is well known how
Tertullian after he was Montanist reproached the Catholics with their twice
married Bishops, in his book de Monogam. cap. 12. Quot apud vos praesident
Digami? How many that have been twice married preside among you? Yet does that
practice tell us, the Apostles words were not taken to be against Digamy, but
that which is properly Bigamy. He that would see more of this phrase ( the
Husband of one Wife, and the Wife of one Husband) he may please to look the
places in Fulkes Rhemish Testament, where the meaning is debated, and Antiquity
consulted.

2. II. Therefore we may say, That Digamy forbidden by Eccles. Canon, and found
in Cranmer, does not make a Bishop so far irregular, as to spoil him of the
lawful use of his Order. This rests upon the consideration of the purpose and
binding force of such Canons. And here it need not much trouble us in our
proceeding that we meet with this Canon against Digamy among those which bear
the name of the Apostles. Whatever may be thought of some of them, this seems
plainly crept into that number (if we consider the liberty of those firster
Ages in this point of Marriage) from Aftertimes, and so of no other Authority,
then are after-Ecclesiastical Canons. But let that be what it will for the
present, the Church of Rome stands bound to answer to the Authority of them, as
well as we, and has transgressed against them, especially the sixth Canon, in a
matter forbidden not only by these Canons, but by the Law of God, and the
Judgment of the Apostle indeed: and that is the putting away of Wife, or
forcing a Man to put her away, in pretense of Religion, or holy Orders. As for
Canons Ecclesiastical, they deserve to have their due respect and obedience,
answerable to the Authority by which made, Provincial, National, General; and
according to the Matter in which, and the Purpose to which they are decreed.
The Canons which concern Digamy, Marriage, Single life, Penance and the like,
are for Discipline, and of such we may say,

3. What is said to the Canons forbidding it.
First, Though they forbid men so or so qualified to be admitted into the
Clergy, or command them to be deposed, if after admittance and receiving of
Orders, they transgress, yet does not such transgression, ipso facto, take away
lawful use, till the Canon has his effect by actual deposing of such a person.
This is plain by transgressions of higher nature; Heresy it self does not take
away the Lawful use of Order, till it be notorious, and the person so declared
by the Church. Concubinage also and Simony, (not only against the Canon but
Gods Law too, which they cannot say of Marriage) do not ipso facto make such an
irregularity: for if all the Ordinations made by such Bishops were unlawful, it
would make a wide gap in the succession of their Romish Bishops, and calling of
their Priests, who have received their several Orders from Concubinaries, and
Fornicators, and Simoniacks, all deposable by the Ecclesiastical Canons. If
they say (which is all they can say) that it was not notorious in those
Ordainers: this approves what I said, that the transgression of such Canons
against Marriage and Digamy, cannot ipso facto take away lawful use of the
power of Order; and I can say as much for Bishop Cranmer, who married in
Germany the Kinswoman of Osiander, before he was made Bishop, and it was not
known here all the time of Hen. 8. in which he ordained many Bishops. But again
we say the Whoredoms, Incests, Simony of many of the Popes, Bishops, Cardinals,
were notorious to the age they lived in, and stand upon Record still, -- so
notorious and visible in the ninth and tenth Ages, that Baronius cries out,
Quae facies Ecclesiae Rom.? Those abominable misdemeanors were openly known,
and apparent in the face of the Church then: and not only then, but after too,
especially in Alexander the sixth most abhominably notorious. They had need to
look home and make up their own breaches, before they charge us with such
defects or irregularities, as Marriage, which is Honorable in all Men.

4. Secondly, we must tell them, the same Canons which forbid Marriage or
Digamy, forbid also Concubinage under the like punishment or irregularity; and
though there be a wide difference between Fornication and Marriage, yet we
appeal to them, whether these be equally dealt with in the Church of Rome?
whether the like severity be used against the Concubinary, as against the
Married Man? Marriage in their Priests or Bishops causes deprivation
indispensably, but if a Priest that is accused of having a wife, plead she is
his Concubine, i. e. his Whore, does he not escape deposing by it? it was the
plea of the Priest of Placentia, as P. Moulin tells it for a known story in his
book of Purgatory. And seeing in most Ages, since Marriage was restrained, we
meet with sad complaints of the frequent incontinency of their Clergy, let them
tell us how many in so many Ages have been deposed, or made irregular for it?
If we look into the constitutions of Otho the Popes Legate in England, which are
as severe against Concubines as any they have, yet see much difference in the
proceeding against the Concubinary and the Married Clergy, The constitution
against the Married runs, Si clam vel palam Matrimonium contraxerint, omnino
sunt amovendi, if contracted Marriage secretly or openly, they are by all means
to be removed, that is peremptory, and though the Marriage be secretly carried;
but the Constitution against the Concubinary, si public Concubinas detinent,
if they keep Concubines publicly, they are to be admonisht, and after a Month
to put them away, or else to be suspended -- And in the comment or gloss upon
it, ob simplicem Fornicationem de Canonica benignitate Clericus non debet
deponi, licet secus forte de Canonis rigore; for simple Fornication a
Clergyman is not deposeable through the Courteste, but Rigor of the Canons.
Thus have they extended the Courtesy of the Canons to Concubinage and
Fornication, but reserved the Rigor of them for Marriage. As for Penances,
which their Canons adjudge Concubinaries to, who knows not how easily that may
be satisfied, and in extremity it is no other censure then a Layman incurs
upon the like offense, does not imply or carry with it Deposition, or such an
irregularity, as they charge upon Marriage or Digamy. Nor will it boot to say
(as they will be ready to reply) that if the Married Clergy put away their
Wives, they are not deposed, and accordingly it is required of Concubinaries
that they put away their Concubines; for as Marriage and Fornication stand not
upon equal terms in themselves, the first being an indissoluble Conjunction, so
neither are they with equal severity entertained by the Romanists, as appears
by their practice, hinted in the premises.

5. Lastly, we can answer to those Canons in behalf of Marriage or Digamy, what
they cannot say in regard of Concubinage or Harlo^ry: that in respect of the
first, those Canons were only disciplinary, as was said above, grounded on
prudential motives, that seemed reasonable in those times, and therefore in
time might, through the exigencie of contrary experience, cease to bind: which
cannot be said of them, as they forbid and censure Harlotry. And accordingly we
find, that however those prudential motives of the restraint of Marriage for
the advancement of Discipline and stricter attendance upon the holy Function,
seemed reasonable to Them that made the Canons, yet did they not to all or most
in the Church, which was to receive them: for if we look to the reception of
the Catholic Church (which is very considerable in the approbation of such
Canons) we meet with a general dislike of them, and reluctance against them: So
that where they did obtain, they were rather forcibly imposed, then willingly
received; as is apparent in the passages of History, which concerns the Western
Church, in which those Canons were violently prosecuted. After-ages still found
less cause to receive, or continue them, where received: and now long
experience of many and great inconveniences and mischiefs by the exacting of
them, persuades and enforces the restoring of the Clergy to that liberty of
Marriage, which is left them by the Law of God, yea to the use of that Remedy,
which is prescribed them by that Law, when need requires it.

If we look into the History of this Church and Kingdom, we find that before
the times of Lanfrank and Anselm, the Clergy were free, and enjoyed the liberty
of Marriage; but when they were compelled by those hot Italians to forgo that
freedom, what success had it, but the begetting of a licentious uncleanness,
even unto Sodomy? which in few years grew so notorious, that the same Anselm
who by Synod in London had severely forbidden Marriage, and caused those that
had wives to put them away, was forced to call another Synod, before he dyed,
for the repressing of that filthy uncleanness, as it is observed in story.

6. The Councels therefore, that made those Canons anciently (be they General
or National) could not in reason intend to bind the Church for all Ages, at
least could not in justice do it: when experience found those Canons served not
to the end, for which they were intended, but occasioned far more mischiefs and
inconveniences; and that this is no pretended plea (which is not fit to be made
against Ecclesiastical Canons) the complaint and sad trial of many Ages does
sufficiently prove. To conclude, seeing those of the Roman Church, think they
have reason to be favorable to Concubinage, and connive at it, and plead such
excuse for it, as we find in the Glosses of their Canon Law, -- Such Canons
are not exacted, quia onerosi sunt, because they are burdensome, and quia
corpora hodie fragiliora sunt, because our bodies now more frail, and as the
Gloss upon the forementioned Constitution of Otho (which it seems appeared too
quick in putting the Concubinary to give satisfaction) says, quod nimis esset
rigorosum attenta fragilitate nostri Temporis, it is too rigorous considering
the frailty of our times; If they, I say, can think it reasonable thus to plead
against the Rigor of the Canons in behalf of Harlotry, how much more have we
cause to plead for the necessity of using that Remedy of Honest Marriage, which
God has allowed and prescribed?

7. Of Heresy charged upon Cranmer and the Reformers.
We now proceed to the next Defect wherewith he charges our Archbishop Cranmer,
and concludes him not lawfully ordained, or to have received the Lawful use of
his Order; and that is Heresy and Schism. Master Mason, in reference to the
breach with Rome in Hen. 8: his days, spent one chapter upon the proof of this
Truth, That to renounce the Pope is not Schism or Heresy: All this is
neglected by Champny, who sets himself to prove, that Heresy deprives a Bishop
of the lawful use of his power, because the lawful use of it requires union
with the Catholic Church; which is but what he insisted upon in his 9. Chap. as
we heard above, and yielded it to him. But now for the application of it to
Crunmer.

8. His first Argument to prove him Heretic, is from his own recantation, and
renouncing the Protestant Doctrine as Heretical; But this Champny stands not
much upon, knowing it was not the confession of Cranmers Faith, but of his
Frailty; and that recantation made in expectance of life, he recanted and
repented of in the sight of Death; That hand, that wrought it, first felt and
was consumed in the flames, which yet could not seize upon his heart which
consented not to it. Therefore being dead he yet spoke, God himself by that
miracle (which had sufficient attestation) bearing witness to him, and to the
Faith wherein he dyed: and giving the Lie to all the reproaches, wherewith
Champny in this 11. Chap. and other Romanists upon all occasions load the
memory of that learned, humble sober, and godly Bishop, known so to be unto
all, that knew him living.

9. Protestant Doctrine not condemned by a lawful Council.
His second Argument drawn into form stands thus. That Doctrine which was
condemned as Heretical by due Authority, and due form of judgment is Heretical;
but the Doctrine which Cranmer after his departure from Rome professed, was so
-- That it was so condemned by due Authority, he thus endeavors to prove. That
which was condemned by the same Authority and judgment, by which the Arrian and
other Heresies were in the General Councels of the Church is condemned by due
Authority: But the Protestant Doctrine, which Cranmer and the rest embraced, was
so condemned, viz. by the Council of Trent; against which (says he) nothing
can be objected by the Protestants, which might not as well been said against
the Nicene; Nothing be said by them for their doctrine condemned at Trent,
which might not as well by the Arrians, for their Heresy condemned at Nice.
Thus he, cap. 11. page 384, 385.

Answ. to the Prosyllogisme; If by due Authority and form of Judgment, be meant
not only lawful Authority, but Authority also lawfully and duly used, (that is,
that in such Councels the judgment be passed or given by those that have
Authority, and do use it accordingly, giving their Judgment, according to the
rule of Gods Word, which is the Chief Authority in such Judgments) then we
grant, that whatever is so condemned of Heresy to be Heretical, but deny the
Protestant Doctrine to be ever so condemned. And therefore we say, the
Assumption or second proposition in the second Syllogism is false, For the
Protestant Doctrine was not condemned at all in Trent Council, when Cranmer
forsook the Romish error, which was before any Council held at Trent: Nor yet
so condemned there (when that Council was held) as the Arrian Heresy was in
the Nicene Council.

19. Council of Trent not such as the Nicene.
What can we find alike in these two, either for the Authority, or due use of
it? Were they assembled at Trent by the same Authority Imperial, as at Nice? Had
they which were assembled in both these Councels, the same or like Authority?
Were all the Patriarchs or chief Bishops of the Catholic Church at Trent, as
they were at Nice? Was the number of Bishops at Nice, made up of Titulars and
Popes Pensioners, as at Trent? Or did they proceed by the same Authority and due
form of Judgment? Did they set the Holy Scriptures in the midst before them to
judge by at Trent, as they did at Nice? Did they not set up unwritten Traditions
in equal Authority with Scriptures, and are not most of their Decrees grounded
only upon such Tradition? Did they at Nice receive their Determinations from
the Popes Consistory, as at Trent by weekly Curriers? Did they at Nice threaten
and drive away any of their Bishops for speaking his judgment freely, as they
did at Trent?

This and much more we can say against that Council, wherefore it should not
have the like Authority with that of Nice or any lawful General Council: but
stand in the same rank with the second of Ephesus, with that of Syrmium, and
the like factious Heretical Councels. So that we may justly retort his argument
thus: That Doctrine which was condemned by no better Authority, then was the
Catholic Doctrine in the Syrmian Council by the Arrians, or in the second of
Ephesus by the Eutychians, cannot be therefore Heretical; but the Protestant
Doctrine was condemned by no better Authority in Trent -- for what can they
object against those factious Councels, but may as well against that of Trent?
Or what can they say for their Doctrine (I mean the main points of direct
Popery) but those Heretics might for theirs? Saying, that the Romish Doctrines
are not so immediately against the Foundation, and may plead a longer
continuance, then the other could; which yet is no prescription against Truth,
that was before them.

Lastly, by Champnyes Argument, so far as it applied to the Church of Rome, may
be concluded, that our Savior and his Doctrine was as rightly condemned, as
Judas of Galile or any false Prophet, that went before him; for he was
condemned by the same Authority of the great Council or Consistory, by which
that Judas and other false Prophets were before condemned. Let Champny or any
other Romanist answer this (which must be by requiring (as above said) not only
the same Authority, but also the lawful use of it, according to the Rule they
are to judge by) and he may have an answer to the like Argument, proceeding in
behalf of the Church of Romes Sentence and Judgment against Protestants, and
Protestant Doctrine.

11. His third Argument runs thus. He that forsakes or goes out of that Church,
in which he received Baptism, and knowingly opposes it, is an Heretic, unless
he can show that Church to have gone out of a more ancient Church; for to go
out of the Church is the Character set upon all Heretics by S. John, 1. Ep.
2.19. But Cranmer and the rest that followed him, went out of the Church, in
which they were Baptized, and cannot show that Church to have gone out of a
more ancient one --

Answer, Going out of a Church how makes Heretic.
Seeing the force of this Argument rests upon the truth, or falsehood of that
proposition, which affirms us gone out of the Roman, and not able to show that
Church to have gone out of a more ancient. We must note, that the going out
from a Church takes in the consideration of Jurisdiction which that Church has
over the other; and of Doctrine or Faith, which one Church professethin
Communion with another. Now the Romanists phansying the Catholic Church as one
society under the subjection of the Bishop of Rome, and measuring the
continuance and identity of that Church by local succession rather then the
Doctrine of faith, do accordingly judge of communion with it or opposition to
it, of going out from or staying in it: and easily conclude, but fallaciously,
of Heresy and Schism. Whereas we conceiving of the Church as of one Society in
subjection to Christ, and not withal to any one pretended Vicat General, and
measuring the Union and Communion of it by that of Christian Faith and
Doctrine, rather then of Local succession, and yiedling our subjection to the
lawful Pastors of the Church (succeeding one the other) but with subordination
to the Doctrine of Faith once delivered by our Savior and his Apostles, must
affirm, that going out from the Communion of a Church determined to such a
place or succession, is not always a going out of the Church (for that Church
may happily usurp a Jurisdiction, and require an unlawful subjection, and
pervert the Doctrine of Faith) and that a Church continuing the same for place
and succession, may yet go out from it self, i. e. from what it was anciently,
by taking to it self a new unwarrantable power of Jurisdiction, and forsaking
the Doctrine it anciently professed.

12. For a Church to go out of it self, and return to it self, needs not seem
any strange thing or phrase: it is what we see in every Penitent Sinner, and
read of that unthrifty Son, S. Luke 15.17. that he came to himself; he was gone
out of himself before. But to clear it in regard of the Church by instances.
When the Arrians possessed all the Bishops Sees, and ruled the whole Church, as
to the more Visible state of it, the true Catholics driven into corners, and
so few or so little seen, that the Emperor Constantius thought he had cause to
say the whole Christian World was against Athanasius: What could be judged of
Heresy and Schism then, according to this Argument, without taking in the
Doctrine of Faith? For first, Champny will not say, that they which were
Baptized in the Communion of the Arrian Church were bound to continue in it;
nor will he judge them Heretics or Schismatics for going out of it. If he say,
they could show the Arrian Church gone out of a more Ancient: it is very true,
but they could not show this by local succession, but by forsaking of ancient
Doctrine. For the same Bishops for the most part, which before was Catholic,
did with their flocks turn Arrian, and so the place and persons were the same,
only the Doctrine or Faith was changed; by reason of which, they might truly be
said to go out of the more Ancient Church, not by change of place and persons,
(in regard of which the face and visible Communion of the Arrian Churches was
still the same) but of Christian Faith and Doctrine. It was elegantly said of
Nazianzen, Orat. 21. in the case of Athanasius, that he was (...) and (...),
agreeing both in Seat and Doctrine with the Catholic Bishops that went before
him; but not so with the Arrian Bishops who (though no intruders, as those that
of Catholics turned Arrian) held the same Seats with those that sat before
them, but not the same Doctrine.

13. Of our going out of the Church of Rome.
This premised, it is easy to answer, I. That although we received Baptism and
Christianity at first, from the Church of Rome in the time of Gregory the
Great, (which we thankfully acknowledge) yet are we not therefore bound to
receive or continue in the accrewing errors of that Church: and although
Cranmer and those of his time were Baptized in the Communion of that Church,
yet not bound therefore to continue in it; as neither were they, whom the
Arrians, Eutychians, or Monothelites, converted and Baptized, bound to continue
in those prevailing Heresies, when once brought to a knowledge of them. II. That
our going out from the Church of Rome was a going out (in regard of the Papal
Jurisdiction) from under a yoke and Tyranny, which that Church had usurped over
this Nation, greater and heavier, then any of the former Heretics laid upon
Christian people, over whom they prevailed: and in regard of the Doctrine, it
was a going out of that Church, no otherwise then we went out of our selves,
i.e. out of our errors in which we were before: a going out of that Church, so
far as it had gone out from it self, what anciently it was, by Errors and
Superstition in the Belief, and Worship, which it required of all within her
Communion.

14. And thus Cranmer showed, that the Church of Rome was so gone out, when for
three days together he boldly and learnedly argued before the whole Parliament
against the six Articles: to the admiration, but grief of his Adversaries;
showing plainly how the Church of Rome, in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
Half Communion, Priests Marriage, Image Worship, was departed or gone out of it
self. Which also, as to the main point of Papal Jurisdiction or Supremacy,
Gardener, Tunstal, Stokesly, and the most learned of that party, did
demonstrate by Scripture, Fathers, Councels, Reasons. Here is all the
difference, that when the Arrian or Eutychian Heresy prevailed, it was more
clear and notorious, because it was a change of Doctrine by one singular
Heresy; whereas the Romish change of Doctrine, was not by one, or so immediate
to the foundation, or at once coming in, but by many errors creeping in
successively and by degrees; also the continuance of the other Heresies in
their prevailing condition, was not so long, but Men could remember it had been
otherwise: whereas the Errors of the Church of Rome, have had the happiness (or
unluckiness rather) in these Western parts, to continue longer, and, to be
upheld and propagated with more Policy and force, though complained of and
professed against more or less in all Ages since they became Notorious. But
this continuance of Time is only the Pharisees Dictum Antiquis, it was said by
them of old, (S. Mat. 25.) No prescription against Truth that was before the
Error, or against our Saviors caution, Non sic ab initio, it was not so from
the beginning.

15. He adds a fourth Argument. He that joins himself to that Society, which
cannot show it self Christian, but by the Tradition and Succession of that
Church which he has forsaken and Opposed, is an Heretic. But Cranmer joined
himself to that Society or Congregation, which cannot show it self to be
Christian, but by -- etc. Answer, How we may prove our Christianity by the
Romish Church, how not.
For a Man or Nation to prove their Christianity by another Church (for example
the Roman) may be taken in several respects: either because such a Man or
Nation were converted to the Christian faith, or received Baptism, or
Ordination in and by that Church: In all these respects we grant the
Assumption, that Cranmer and the first Reformed English could not prove they
received the Christian Faith, or Baptism, or Ordination in any other Church
then the Roman: but we say the Proposition is false, and does not make them
Heretics in forsaking a Church wherein they have received these, or joining
themselves to those that have had them from thence also. For instance: If of
two Gottish Nations (which the Arrians by their Bishop Vlfilas and others
converted from Heathenisme to Christianity, and Baptized them, and ordained
them Pastors, but infected with their Heresy) one of them renouncing the
Heresy, and forsaking the Communion of them that they were made Christians by,
the other Nation also should see and forsake the Error and join with the
former: were then the Argument good against this latter Nation to prove it
Heretical, for renouncing the Doctrine and Communion of that Church by which it
received Christianity, and joining it self to that, which could not prove it
self Christian, ( i.e. to have received Baptism any where) but by those whom it
had forsaken?

16. But if the proving of our Christianity, be meant of proving the Truth of
it, as that the Faith we profess, and the Baptism we received is Catholic, and
truly Christian; or that the Ordination which our Pastors have is good and
Apostolical; then we deny the Assumption, for Cranmer and the English Church
were able to prove all this by other, and better means, that the Lineal (that
is Champny's word) succession of that Church which they had forsaken, viz. by
the written Word of God, and the Uniform consent of Antiquity. Lineal or local
succession is but an empty conveiance of Christianity without truth of Doctrine
assured by Gods Word; for were Lineal succession the only or a good argument to
prove a Man or Nation truly Christian, then the Arrian or other Heretics,
whose Bishops were not intruders but of Catholics turned Heretics, might have
passed for good Christians and true Catholics.

17. The former charges retorted.
After these Arguments by which he would fasten Heresy upon our Archbishop
Cranmer and the other first Reformers, he adds a vain boast, let the Adversary
retort all or any of these Arguments upon the Ordainers of Cranmer (viz. those
of the Romish Church) and I will confess them Heretics. But it is clear, that
as all his Arguments as directed against Cranmer are too weak to prove what he
would have, so they return more forcibly upon themselves. For their charge of
irregularity upon Marriage we retort their irregularity by Concubinage, and for
that of Digamy we appeal to them whether they suffer not a Priest or Bishop to
have one or mo Concubines rather then to be married once or twice. For Cranmers
recantation or condemning the Protestant Doctrine, we retort the example of
Liberius Bishop of Rome subscribing to Arrianism: and it is strange that
Champny should not remember that the Ordainers of Bishop Cranmer subscribed and
swore the condemnation and ejection of Papal Authority: and if some of them
lived to repent it in Qu. Mary's days, so did Cranmer revoke his condemnation
of the Protestant doctrine, and sealed it with his Blood. For his Argument from
the Authority condemning our Doctrine, it was retorted upon them when we
answered it: For that of our going out from that Church, it was shown how it
concerns them, who keeping the same Place and Seat, yet going out of the
Doctrine of the Ancient Church are thereby concluded Heretical. The last also
falls back upon themselves, who have nothing to prove their New Faith (wherein
they differ from other Churches) but Lineal Succession from those first
Catholic Roman Bishops, from whom they have departed, only keeping the same
Place and Seat which they held.

Having concluded, as he thinks, by the former Arguments that Cranmer and the
rest were in Heresy and Schism, and therefore could not receive or lawfully
use the power of Ordination: he then excludes them from receiving all supply of
that defect; for, says he, that must be by reconciliation to the Church, and
confirmation by it, as we see in the practice of the Ancient Church, restoring
Bishops that returned from Heresy. But Granmer cannot show any such
reconciliation -- which indeed (says he) was impossible; there being no other
Church in the World to which he could be reconciled, but only that which he had
forsaken, viz. the Roman, so he.

Answ. This is nothing else but what he said above in his ninth cap.
endeavoring to reduce our English Bishops to his impossibility of having the
defect of their Ordination supplied, which he said they were under by being
ordained by those we account Heretics, viz. Romish Bishops: and the Answer to
it was given Cap. 4. Number. 16, 17, 18.
above. The sum of it was this, That Cranmer if he contracted that Defect by
being Ordained of Heretics, then he recovered the due use of his Orders by
deposing the Heresy of his Ordainers: That Cranmer was not alone but with him
a whole National Church; and that the actual and solemn reconciliation of such
a Church with the Bishops of it, to the whole body of the Catholic Church was
fitting, and of good use and example, when the Catholic Church remained in such
entire body and condition, as was fit to receive such reconciliation. But when
it is otherwise with the state of the Catholic Church, as it was when Arrians
prevailed, and now in the distracted condition of the whole Church such
reconciliation is, as not well feizable, so not so necessary for a National
Church. Only it is necessary such a Church depose the Errors or Heresy it had
contracted, and profess Communion with all that do hold the Catholic Faith
undefiled, in such a measure as is needful, not imposing any different doctrine
they hold, as condition of Communion with them.

CHAP. VII.
Of Bishops ordained under King Edward, and the essential defect pretended to
be in the form of their ordination, and of presumption against it.
HIs 12. Chapter proceeds against those Bishops that were ordained in K.
Edwards days: whom he charges not only with the same Heresy, he did Bishop
Cranmer, (as true indeed of the one, as the other) but with a special, and that
an essential defect in their Ordination; what is that? The Form of their
Ordination, by which they were consecrated, was new, and invented by certain
Commissioners appointed by the King: and therefore the Ordination was
altogether null and invalid. We grant the Form was altered, and different from
that, which before was used in the Roman Church; but not new or changed, as to
that which concerned the substance of the Order.

1. The Form of Ordination altered under K. Edward, how.
For the work of those Commissioners was not to devise and invent a direct new
Form, but to purge it from Popish corruptions, casting out what appeared to be
either needless or superstitious additions, and reteining what imported the
substance of the Order, or adding withal something to express more fully the
purpose of the Order then collated, according to the institution of it,
declared in the Word of God. To such a work fitting Commissioners were
appointed, for number Twelve, for quality, Six Prelates; and Six other learned
in Gods Law: as we find them in the Statute of 3.4. Edward 6. c. 12. It is too
light, that Champny lays hold on the word devise in their Commission, and bids
the Reader mark it, as if they had power or went about to devise or invent a
new Form on their own heads: their work being to devise and consult, what
Romish additionals might be cut off, what depravations purged out, that so we
might have a pure and just Form expressing more simply the substance, and
purpose, and collation of the Order given.

2. Mr. Mason having set down the Form, together with the Prayers used,
challenges them to show what they can except against it: Unless (says he) it
be, because we retained not your Oil, Pall, Staff, etc. which we account as
humane inventions, and not to belong to the substance or Essence of Ordination,
unless you can show us them by the Word of God. -- Champny answering the
challenge, first gives him a note in the Margent, Scipsum jugulat, He cuts his
own throat; and then tells us why: because (says he) Mason requires Scripture
for these and all other things of us, and yet cannot show us their Forms in
Scripture; for where has he in Scripture the words of their Ordering of
Deacons, Take thee power of executing the Office of a Deacon in the Church of
God, and so recites something of the Forms of the other two Orders. p. 40^. etc.

Answ. Our requiring of them Scripture for their whole Form, does not give us,
but them only the wound; for they that make Order a Sacrament of the New
Testament are bound to show both the Matter and Form of their Sacrament in the
writing of that Testament. As for us, it is enough to prove our Forms by
Scripture, to be answerable to the institution and purpose of the Order
conferred: either reteining the very Form of words delivered in Scripture, as,
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit, -- or applying from thence what
may fitly express the intention and purpose of the Office, and the designation
of the Person Ordained to it; as in the ordering of a Bishop, after Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum -- is added out of Saint Paul, Remember to stir up the grace
which is in thee by imposition, etc.

3. We grant, What was of the substance of Ordination, is retained.
there is a certain Ceremony to be used (according to the constant practice of
the Apostles) Imposition of hands, and that a certain Form is to be used; not
certain for Words and Syllables (it being not necessary to have it, in all
places and all times, so certainly the same) but for substance and meaning;
that, in the conferring of Orders, such Words be used as do aptly express the
Institution, purpose and intention of the Office, and the designation of the
person to it, and such prayers withal, as do expressly concern that sacred
action, in the imploring of help and grace. And thus we maintain our Forms of
Ordination to be conformable to Scripture, and the Ancient Church; Neither has
Champny showed, nor can it be shown, that any thing is said or done in the
whole action of our Ordinations, not allowable by Scripture and purer
Antiquity. All that he can except is, that we cannot show our Words and Forms
wholly set down in Scripture, or punctually so used by Antiquity, (which as we
heard, we are not bound to show, or that we have left off their Unction and
other Ceremonies, which (what Antiquity soever some of them may pretend to) we
say belong not to the substance of Ordination, and therefore we stand not bound
to use them for making our Orders valid; but are at liberty, for other good
reasons to omit them, as also many other things, which being anciently well and
conveniently used, were after abused by Popish innovation. And let them show us
if they can, either that the Ceremonies they have clogged Baptism with, were
used by the Ancient Church, or that they now use all those which the Ancient
Church did: Or let them say, if they dare, that either their Baptism is invalid
because it has not those Ceremonies the Ancient Church used, or that our
Baptism is invalid, because freed from many of the Romish Ceremonies; Till
then, we may take leave to use the like freedom in refusing their Ceremonies in
and about Ordination, they being not of the essence and substance of it.

4. Uncertainty of Romish Doctrine about Matter and Form of Sacraments and
Ordination.
But Champny attempts to prove our Ordinations essentially deficient, by
wanting what is used in theirs; and why? because the whole Matter and Form of
Ordination does not, says he, consist in the Imposition of hands, and the
Words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. which is all that we use. This is the Brief
of his 13. Chap. But foreseeing, that he must acknowledge their own Authors
agree not among themselves about the Matter and Form wherein their Sacrament of
Order does consist essentially, he therefore first seeks to clear his way by
laying down two Propositions.

First, That the determinate Matter and Form of the Sacraments, is not fully
expressed in Scripture. So page 412. Which how false it is of Baptism and the
Eucharist, who sees not? yet he instances in both; In Baptism, says he, the
Form of the Western Church is, I Baptize thee in the name -- but of the Eastern
Church thus, Let the Servant of the Lord be Baptized in the name -- how
impertinently this is, who sees not? for, that difference touches not that
part of the Form, which concerns the Essence of the Sacrament, viz. Baptized in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which as it is fully expressed in
Scripture, so retained in both Churches. So, says he, about the Form required
in the Eucharist, several questions have and may be moved. What then, if men
will be either obstinatly perverse to question what is most plain in the
Institution, as the Romanists are in giving Bread only for the whole Matter of
that Sacrament? it makes not his proposition true. Or what if some use several
Words for the Form in delivering that Sacrament, so they amount to no greater
difference then the several expressions of it in the several Evangelists? (
This is my blood of the New Testament, Mat. 26. and, This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood, Luke 22.) they touch not that which concerns the essence
of the Sacrament.

5. His second Proposition. The Determinat Matter and Form of some Sacraments
(for example, of Order) is not so clearly delivered in Councels, or the
Monuments and Writings of the Fathers, but that diverse Opinions may arise about
them, and be defended with probability. This whether true or false does not
greatly concern us. But see we, how he will make it concern us. His Inference
from it is this: Therefore we must trust the Tradition of the Church (he means
the present Church of Rome) for the whole Matter and Form; and because we know
not certainly in or by which Words or Actions the Sacrament is essentially
perfected, therefore we must not omit any of those words, things, or actions,
which the Church uses, and in the whole comprehension of which, their Authors
all agree the whole Matter and Form of that Sacrament to consist, page 413, 414.

But first, This does not prove, that our Ordinations are certainly null and
invalid, (as he pretended) because we omit some things and Words which they
use, (for they are not agreed, whether it essentially consists in those we use,
or in those we omit) but only concludes, we cannot (in their judgment) be
certain that our Ordinations are full and perfect; For having acknowledged, that
Vasques with others hold the immediate Matter of Ordination to be Imposition of
Hands, and the Form to be in those Words, Receive the Holy Ghost (which is to
confess the Substance or Essence, and so the Validity of Ordination to consist
in that which we retein and use) he makes but a Scholastic dispute of it, the
issue whereof is, that Vasques his opinion can but amount to a probability, and
therefore we are not certainly but probably ordained, page 423. etc. Let it be
so in his opinion, (which yet comes short of a certainly Null) it is enough for
us that we certainly know, that our way of Ordination is according to, and
warrantable by Scripture, and can give reason (as a little below) why we omit
many things that they use.

6. Secondly, Seeing the Inference he made, and the resolution he gave
concerning their compounded Ordinations, comes but to a juncta juvant, such as
the advice of a friend to use all the ingredients of a Recipe not being able to
tell, which gives force to the Medicine: we may spare surely some of their
Mixtures, when we have better directions to tell us they are superfluous, and
noxious to the purpose they are used for. But we would advise them to follow
this resolution or advise in using the whole Matter of the undoubted Sacrament
of the Eucharist: Scrupulous in Ceremonials, careless and presumptuous in
substantials.
and not think it enough to consecrate it in Bread and Wine, but also to
distribute it (which is the purpose of the Sacrament) in both kinds to the
Communicants. Dare they say of this Sacrament it is not certain, that our
Savior did appoint it in the determinate Matter of Bread and Wine? If they
durst, yet were it wisdom, according to Champny's former resolution and advise
in point of Ordinations, not to omit either part, which our Savior has
appointed, and the Ancient Church constantly administered to the People.

7. Of their Unction in Ordination.
Now for our omission of their Unction (which is the main of those Ceremonies
we use not) we say, they cannot prove it Apostolical, or that it was used in
Ordination by the Greek Church. But admit it was used anciently in the Western
Church, we say it was but a tolerable or convenient Rite or Ceremony, as were
many other anciently used, but not now seen in the Roman Church. And reason
there was, wherefore we should not continue some ancient Ceremonies after the
infection of Popish corruptions: as in this particular; They had made Order a
Sacrament, and annexed to this ceremony of Unction a Sacramental virtue. We
dare not be so bold; and, certainly, the Church ought to be very wary and
sparing in Ceremonies to be used in and about any Sacrament.

In Sacraments we are to look at that which is signified, or conferred; Of
significant Ceremonies.
Grace, which is the sole act of God, is the thing conferred, and also
signified; but there is and may be also a signification of the Duty of Man, who
receives the Sacrament. Now Ceremonies added, do either signify the Duty of
man receiving, and these are the most innocent, and to this sort may refer the
sign of the Cross in Baptism; which was used not to give any virtue any way,
but to signify the duty of the baptized (not to be ashamed of Christ
crucified, but manfully to fight under his banner) and to mind him of it. A
second sort are such, as signify Gods act in the Sacrament, his imparting of
Grace; and to this purpose, it is like they that first used Chrism in Baptism
and so in Ordination meant it, to signify (not confer) that Charisma Spiritus,
of which the Fathers often: This sort comes very near to intrenching upon Gods
institution who appoints his Sacramental Symbols to signify his grace, as also
to confer it; Lastly therefore, when Ceremonies are added by man, not only to
signify, but with a kind of Sacramental virtue to confer or derive the grace
or work of God upon us, it is high presumption. And to this sort perteins the
Romish Unction, which makes the most of them so earnestly contend to have it
the very Matter of their Sacrament of Order, and made us in the Reformation of
Popish abuses, to leave it off: and we retained the sign of the Cross in
Baptism, though abused in some measure by Popish Superstition, because the
native importance of it is the innocent and useful signification (as I said) of
duty in the party baptized: the like whereof cannot be said of Unction.

8. No invalidity in our Ordination by omitting some of their Ceremonies.
And for the Validity of our Ordinations, notwithstanding the omission of
diverse of their Ceremonies and Rites, which burden rather then strengthen the
work, I would know of Champny, whether our Baptism be not good and valid
notwithstanding our omission of their Chrism there too? There are but two
things can be said; either that our Baptism is not valid and good, which I
suppose he dare not say: or that there is not the like reason of Baptism and
Ordination, which he cannot say, as to this point; For though he may put a
difference between them in regard of validity that depends upon the Minister,
who in Ordination is precisely determined, yet in regard of Validity by reason
of Matter and Form (which is the present consideration) he must say that
Baptism and Order are both alike; for to him as One is a Sacrament, so is the
Other, and from the One he sometimes argues to prove the like in the Other; as
from the Form of Baptism, to the Form of Ordination, as we saw above, in his
10. chap. and may below in his 14. page 480. which, because it makes for better
clearing this business of the Form of Ordination, we will here insert.

9. There he thus argues. Quemadmodum si alia forma and ritu, etc. Even as if
Parker (for there he disputes against his Ordination from the Form of it) had
been baptized after any other form or manner then Augustine delivered, he had
not received true Baptism: so neither true Ordination, being ordained by
another Form, then Austin was ordained and did ordein by. -- And page 483. he
thus again argues against our Answering, that we retein in our Form of
Ordination what is essential, and according to Scripture, Si nihil aliud ad
essentiam, etc. If nothing else pertein to the Essence of Baptism or Holy
Order, but what is expressed in Scripture, then the Form both of Baptism and
Ordination used in the Church of England is to be rejected, because no where
expressed in Scripture. How false this (no where expressed in Scripture) is of
the Form of Baptism I noted above, under his first proposition; and how the
Form of Ordination is in Scripture either expressly contained, or deducible and
approveable by it, was also there declared. But by both these reasonings it
appears, that to him Baptism and Order are of like consideration, and
therefore I would require a Reason, why they pronounce not our Baptism null,
because not after their manner, as well as our Orders. A man would think that
Champny in both these reasonings did imply we had not true Baptism, but durst
not say it positively; for that had directly contradicted the practice of their
Church, which does not re-baptize those, that are baptized after our Form; yea,
the doctrine and practice of the Catholic Church, which required no more to the
Essential Form, then what is expressly in Scripture, Baptize in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and therefore did not re-baptize Heretics that
used the Form. It is enough for us (notwithstanding any thing that Champny has
said) to Baptize as our Savior appointed, and to Ordein, as we find the
Apostles (whom he sent, as his Father had sent him) to have done and taught,
though not altogether Ritu Romano, as the Church of Rome does, and teaches most
imperiously.

10. But we must here take leave to look back to that he said above of Parker
being not ordained as Augustine (the first Archbishop) was, which, if taken
with the occasion of it, may at first sight appear a seeming prejudice. The
occasion of it was from Mr. Masons saying, That Mat. Parker, the 79.
Archbishop after Austin, had the happiness to be the first of that Number,
that was consecrated without the Popes Bull, Pall, and other superfluous
accoutrements. Hence Champny to the seeming disparagement of our Reformation
infers, Therefore his Ordination (and so theirs that followed him) cannot be
derived from the Apostles if not the same, that Austin delivered together with
the Christian Faith to this Nation, above a thousand years ago -- and as well,
says he, they may cast off Baptism, which the same Austin delivered, etc. p.
479, 480.

But we may answer, That the Popes Bull, and Pall, and other superfluities which
Mason reflected on, were of later date, then Austins time; for long it was
after that, ere the Popes Bulls and wild Beasts roared within this Land, viz.
after Gregory the 7. for then began the contention with Princes about
investiture of Bishops; from which time those Bulls also began to rage, and did
very much trouble this Land in that one particular of appointing the
Archbishop of Canterbury: in which regard we may well say with Mr. Mason, it
was a happiness to Matthew Parker to be the first that was consecrated without
the Popes Bull, not implying that all from Austin were so invested by the Pope,
but of all in that number, who were consecrated after that usurped Papal
investiture began, he was the first that was clearly without it.

11. As for that which Austin delivered, (either Baptism or Ordination) we
retein fully for substance, and do thankfully acknowledge the benefit; indeed
some Ceremonies (as in that Age the Church of Rome began to abound in them)
which he brought in and delivered in both, we happily omit to use, not because
he delivered or used them, but because the Church of Rome has since abused
them, as above said. This shows the vanity of Champny's inference, that our
Baptism and Ordination is not good, or derived from the Apostles, because not
after the same form and manner (peradventure according to some additional
Ceremonies) that Austin delivered to this Nation together with the Christian
Faith. Yea by virtue of that Ordination received, which he delivered to us, we
can better prove our Ordination Apostolical, then they can theirs; for the
Succession of Lawful Romish Bishops was much broken by unlawful intrusion of
many Popes about the 9. and 10. Ages, and after (as appeared above, when we
spoke of Papal Antichristianism) whereas our succession of Bishops being by
Gregory the first derived to us from the Apostles, (before that unlawful
usurpation, and intrusion of many of their Popes together) has been continued
among us without interruption.

12. Presumptions from stories against the Ordination of our Bishops.
And now Champny goes on in his 13, Chap. to invalidate their Ordination by
seeming probabilities, or presumptions of the Nullity of it, which the
Romanists have sought all corners for, and examined all passages of Stories,
Statutes, clauses of Letters Patents, which may concern the making or
consecrating of our Bishops: and this he calls his demonstration a posteriori,
beginning at page 428. -- Let us fee what weight there is in such not
Demonstrations, but Presumptions. I should abuse the Reader too much to repeat
and answer them all; blowing therefore away the lightest, I shall speak to
those, that may seem to carry any show of probability.

And first, he will prove it, such is the strength of his presumption, by the
Judgment of Protestants themselves. Ridley, says he, at the stake humbly
begged, the Queen would be pleased to confirm the Leases, he had letten as
Bishop of London, therefore he held himself not Lawful Bishop. True: it was his
humble supplication to the Lord Williams of Them, that he would be a means to
the Queen to do it; and this was a Demonstration of his charity, and
conscionable respect to the Tenants, not of his thinking himself not lawful
Bishop; he knew what they thought and judged of him, not only that no Bishop,
but also no Bishop of London because of Boner then living, and thereupon would
be ready to quarrel at those Leases demised by him. And so the Words which
Champny cites out of Brook his reports, do not contein the Sentence of judgment
in this case, but the plea that was pretended against such Leases, because the
Bishops that let them, were not Ordained.

13. His next Demonstration, Boners plea.
or Presumption is drawn from a story of Boner the ejected Bishop of London,
who for refusing the Oath of Supremacy tendered to him by Horn Bishop of
Winchester, was cited into the Kings Bench, and answered, that he refused the
Oath, because he that tendered it, had no power to do it, being no Bishop. The
Judges thereupon consulted, whether they should admit Boner to traverse it, and
concluded, he ought to have leave to do it, and to be acquitted the Court, if
he could prove Horn to be no Bishop then. This out of Dier; But, says he,
Boner was never after called to plead it; whence he concludes they judged Horn
to be indeed no Bishop. Answer, This is no Demonstration of the invalidity of
his Ordination, but of the Moderation and justice of those Judges, that
contained themselves within the compass of their own profession, not
undertaking to determine whether the Form of Ordination was good or no; and of
their equity in allowing Boner the liberty of his plea, how false soever his
allegation was in it self: and it was an argument of their prudence, or of the
Queens wisdom, that held it more convenient to silence such a Bedlam Actor,
then suffer him to come upon the Stage, who had more then once in King Edwards
time so irreverently behaved himself with clamors and reproaches before the
Kings Commissioners. But this reward he had of his many misdemeanors, that he
was confined to perpetual imprisonment, whereas his fellow Bishops, that denied
the Oath, as well as he, enjoyed their Liberty, or else a pleasing and free
Confinement to some Friends house.

14. The former presumption he enforces from the statute of Parliament the year
following, which provided indemnity for all that had refused the Oath tendered
by Archbishop or Bishop till that time, Anno 8. Eli. cap. 1. Which, says he,
evidently proves Boners plea to be good, that they were not Bishops indeed and
that the Parliament so judged of them. This is still the fallacy, a non causa;
for the cause or reason of this was not because the Parliament, of which the
Bishops themselves were a good part, doubted of their lawful Ordination (for
how could that be after so many years practice of it, as had run in King
Edwards and this Queens reign?) but because they had respect to the doubtings,
which others had of it. For considering the condition of the Kingdom, some
years before turned from Popery, they had reason to think (and so they had
found it by the reproaches of some, and the surmises of others, as they plainly
signify in that Statute) that many were not satisfied concerning the Canonical
and lawful Ordination of our Bishops and Priests, measuring it by the way of
the Romish Church, and as they had seen it performed in Queen Mary's days: or
thinking it not provided for by the Law of this Land since Queen Mary's repeal;
and therefore the Parliament in respect to such as offended upon such scruple,
decreed Indemnity for the seven years past, notwithstanding that such were
punishable by the Statute of the first year of Queen Elizabeth for refusing
the Oath so tendered. And this is a Demonstration of the great equity of our
Protestant Reformers, which Champny is loath to allow them in this decree,
judging of them, it seems, by the Romish severity against all offenders.

15. A Statute of Parliament, and Queens Dispensation.
Next he urges this Statute of Parliament, 8. Eliz. I. as purposely made to
make good the Form of Ordination, and the Queens letters patents given out to
dispense with all Defects in that Ordination of the first Bishops made in her
days. This Mason had objected to himself out of Sanders, and answered to this
purpose; That the Parliament made them not Bishops, or their Ordination good,
but they being Bishops indeed by Lawful Ordination, that Honorable Court
declared them so to be. Also that the Queens Letters for their consecration
concerned not any defects in Essentials, but in Accidentals, such as might be
charged on their Ordination by pretense of any Statute or Canon. Champney, in
replying to this, tortures that Statute, to force it to speak a Constituting
rather then a declaring of them Bishops; a making of their Ordination by the
new Form valid, rather then a pronouncing of it to be so; Whereas it is most
plain, that the end of that Statute was only to declare so much, against the
slanders and reproaches, that some cast upon their Ordination, and to provide
against them for the future: and to that very purpose the preamble to that
Statute runs; and then follows, And to the intent that every Man, that is
willing to know the Truth, may understand plainly, that the same evil speech
and talk is not grounded upon any just Matter or Cause, It is thought fit to
touch such Authorities as do allow and approve the making and consecrating of
the same Archbishops, and Bishops: and then is repeated, what was ordained in
25. Hen. 8. touching the Election of Bishops, and in 5. of Edw. 6. touching the
book of Common Prayer, with the Order and Form of Consecration annexed to it;
Lastly in 1 Eliz. c. 2. touching the Authorizing of that book again, after
Queen Mary's Repeal. Then it follows in that Statute, Wherefore, for the plain
Declaration of all the premises, to the intent the same may be better known to
all her Majesty's Subjects, whereby such evil speech, as heretofore has been
used against the High State of Prelacy, may hereafter cease; Be it declared and
enacted; etc. Can any thing be more clearly spoken? And this the very place
also, which Champney cites out of Cambden, does plainly speak, In hos Ordinum
conventu (says he) declaratum est unanimi consensu, legitimam esse
Consecrationem -- In that Parliament was unanimously declared, that their
consecration was Lawful. And why so declared? because Nonnulli calumniando in
quaestionem vocarunt -- and after, Pontificii illis tanquam pseudo-Episcopis
obtrectarunt. The Papists reproached them as no Bishops.

16. Nay but the peremptory decree of that Parliament, which no Law humane or
divine (for it says, any Statute Law, Canon, notwithstanding) can hinder,
sounds more then a declaration; such a singular Authority or power of an English
Parliament, greater then that of the whole Church, was necessary, not to
declare, but make that Ordination good. So he, p. 443. and then p. 444. Are
they not truly called Parliament Bishops? for take away this Statute of Q.
Elizab. and that other of K. Edward, which first authorized the New invented
Form of their Ordination, and I do not see, whence or from what institution
Mason can derive their Ordinations; or by what Authority, Divine or humane, he
can possibly prove them good and lawful. So he. To answer this latter charge
first; It stands upon a false supposal that they invented and made a New Form,
which they did not, as to any thing that concerned the substance of Ordination;
See above Number 1, 2, 3, 4. of this 7. Chap. this business in Queen Mary's days,
when King Edward's Statutes were repealed; and Canon there also mentioned,
relates to the Popes Canon Law, which not long before was wholly in force, and
was still retained with limitation: from the supposed binding of which, arose,
as it seems, the scruples and doubtings, which many had in those days of the
Validity of our Ordinations; And to this cause must be referred the reason of
the clause of dispensation in the Queens Letters: not implying any essential
defect, which she knew was not in her, or the Parliaments power to supply, but
such as might accrue by some point or nicety of Canon Law not expressly and in
particular provided against.

17. The Queens Dispensation.
But such a full dispensation (says he) had been needless, had there been no
defects of moment indeed; For no prudent Prince will spend his Authority in
dispensing aforehand with imaginary and possible defects. -- Such it seems was
the importunity of Popish slanderers, that the Queen in prudence thought best
to take away the occasion, by taking away the ground on which any suspicion
might be vaised, viz. the supposed force of any such pretended Canon, that
might be thought to concern their Consecration. Thus Champny trifles again and
again with his furmises and seeming probabilities of real and essential defect
in the Ordination of our Bishops; I will not trouble the ingenuous Reader any
farther with them. Only one thing I must take notice of, which he speaks
positively, That the Queen had no power to dispense in rebus Ecclesiasticis,
and after sets it on thus: She had no more power to dispense in such things,
then her Subjects had to dispense with her Laws, page 451.455. And there he
requires One approved example for 1500. years, to justify such a power. Though
we extend not this power to all Ecclesiastical things or Canons, yet say we
truly that a Sovereign Prince has power to dispense in and about
Ecclesiastical things: yea, has power to forbid the Popes Law to be received
or obeyed within his Dominions. If Champny, as he shows himself in the next
Chap. to be well acquainted with Tortus or Bellarm. so had looked into the
Answer to Tortus, he might have seen examples brought there by B. Andrews of
Councels submitting their decrees to the Emperors Authority, that he would be
pleased, ea corrigere, supplere, perficere; to correct or supply them. Now what
power the Emp. had in Orb Romano, that every Sovereign Prince has in his own
Dominions. But Champny, me thinks, should not be such a stranger in France as
not to hear, or so forgetful, as not to remember, how many years the King kept
out the decrees of the Trent Council; and when the Clergy by the mouth of the
Archbishop of Tours petitioned the King 1598. to admit them, they did it with
restriction and modification of them. to the privileges and Laws of the Land;
and what did that want of a dispensation? It need not therefore seem strange
that the Qu. should use her power in dispensing against any Papal Canon, that
(however hitherto obteining) should any way contrary the Laws established
concerning Ordinations.

18. Presumption against the racords weak.
One Argument more he adds upon the strength of presumption, not only against
the Validity of the Form of Ordination, but against the Truth of the Tables or
Records, that witness the Ordination of our Bishops. This presumption he raises
chiefly upon Bishop Jewels silence in answering of Harding, when he put him to
it, to make good his Ordination. Of this from page 457. to the end of his 13.
Chap. Harding in his first reply had told the Bishop, that he was neither
Bishop nor Priest, and put diverse interrogatories to him concerning his
Ordination. The Bishop briefly answered his impertinent Adversary as he saw
fitting; Harding replies again with the like or greater importunity; and
because the Bishop did not enter here a dispute with him and satisfy all his
questions in particular, and withal produce the Records; therefore Champny,
according to his wonted presumption concludes the Ordination of our Bishops
could not be maintained, and the Records were justly suspected, for who could
better defend the lawfulness of their Ordination, or better know those Records
(if any such had been) then Jewel, who was one of those pretended Bishops? To
this purpose he.

There is a time when, as the wise man tells us, some men are not to be
answered in their folly. Half of M. Hardings importunity came to this, why
Jewel being no Priest meddled in Holy things? and how could he be a Priest that
could not offer Sacrifice? This the Bishop well knew to be fully answered, in
disproving their Sacrifice of the Mass; which he largely and solidly did: and
consequently evinced that we may be Priests in the Gospel sense, without taking
to our selves such a power, and that they are no Priests indeed, but
Sacrilegious Impostors in assuming to themselves such a power. The rest of M.
Hardings importunity questioned his being Bishop; and because he enters not a
dispute about the Form by which he was consecrated, why should Champny conclude
he could not defend it, when as Harding said not so much against it, as Champny
himself has done to invalidate it? and what that was we heard above, and found
it too weak to disprove this our Assertion, That the form we retained does
contein all that essentially belongs to Ordination, and that which we cast out,
was either superfluous addition, or superstitious abuse. Lastly, as for
producing the Records to justify his consecration, he knew it was to little
purpose, having to deal with Master Harding, who had often in this Reply called
him a Forger and Falsary, and would certainly have accounted him so in
producing the Records.

19. But he tells us farther; Not only Master Harding, but many other English
Catholics, objected to those pretended Bishops, the defect of Lawful calling
and Ordination, and yet were not the Records produced by any of them, nor by
any other in their behalf, till Mason now after 50. years gave us a view of
them; So he, p. 47^. Naming their Catholic Writers, that objected this, Bristo,
Sanders, Stapleton, Rainolds -- The objections of those Writers, and generally
of those Times, chiefly touched the Form of Ordination; to the answering of
which, the producing of the Records had not been proper. But Champny, as he
brought Rainolds objecting, so he might have met with Rainolds answering as to
that point, if he had thought fit to take notice of that which Mason in the
conclusion of his third book relates, from Doctor Rainolds himself, who told
him, that in his conference with Heart, he satisfied him concerning our Bishops
by Authentic Records, in so much that Heart would needs have that whole point
(viz. touching the Ordination of our Bishops) left out of the Conference,
confessing he thought no such thing could be shown, and that he had been born
in hand otherwise. Born in hand by such Objectors as these, whom Champny named.
Now had the Romanists that Candor and Conscience, which Heart showed (who indeed
seemed to be one of the most ingenuous of that Society, as appears by many
passages of the Conference) they would also receive satisfaction, and not thus
contend to make good such foolish reports, by opposing such far-fetcht surmises
and presumptions against public Records. Champny also, might have taken
notice, how in that very Statute of 8. Eliz. which he so narrowly sifted, there
are Records spoken of, that declare the due consecration of the Bishops made in
her Time. Every thing requisite and material for that purpose (viz. the
Elections, Confirmations, and Consecrations of Bishops) has been done as
precisely and with as much care and diligence, as ever before her Majesty's
time, (i. e. since the time the Papal Authority was cast out) as the Records of
her Majesty's Father, and Brothers time, and also of her own time will plainly
testify and declare. These are the Words of that Statute, and do expressly, as
we see, witness there were Public Acts, which did show the Elections and
Consecrations of the Bishops made from the beginning of the Queens reign, as of
those Bishops, which were made before.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Archbishop Parkers Ordination, and of the pretended defects from the New
Form, and the incapacity of his Ordainers.
IN his 14. Chapter, he begins with Archbishop Parkers Ordination, where his
first exception is against the Form as new, and so acknowledged by Mason,
saying that Matthew Parker had the happiness to be the first of so many Bishops
since Austin, that received consecration without Popes Bull, Pall, etc. p. 478.
479. But this, because it belonged to the form of Ordination, I referred it
thither, and answered to it above in the former Chapter.

1. Presumptions against the Ordainers.
Next he excepts against the Ordainers, that they were not such as was
pretended. And here we must again trouble the Patience of the Reader, with the
importunity of their presumptions and conjectures alleged against public
Records; which though it little serve to the end they intended, the disproving
of the Ordination of our Bishops, yet will it make to this good purpose, the
proving of the restless importunity of these Men in their calumniando fortiter,
ut aliquid adhaereat, their custom in raising and nourishing any manner of
Reports to discredit their Adversary.

That I may not be thought to slander them in so weighty a business, hear what
they say, The Popish Art of belying Evident Truth.
that knew it very well: Those secular Priests of whom above, Chap. 5.8. in
their book there mentioned, complain much of this unconscionable dealing in the
Jesuits and their followers, acknowledging the Queens Majesty had very just
cause to think more hardly of them all for it. The pretended brethren (say
they) of that Society, and such as follow their steps, do in their Writings so
calumniat the Actions and Doings of the State, be they never so judicially and
publicly proceeded in, never so apparently proved true, and known of many to
be most certain -- and after of Father Parsons that he was a great Master in
this Art. I find also Jo: Copley, sometime Priest among them, but returning to
the Church of England in King James his time, to acknowledge this to be usual
among their Priests, and that it was one Motive to him of forsaking them; This
he spoke upon occasion of lying reports raised by their Priests, and spread
among their Proselytes, to make them believe the whole carriage of that fearful
plot was but a Trick of State, Of Gunpowder Treason.
to make the Catholics odious. Lastly, John Go Master of Arts, returning from
them upon the downfall of the Black Friars, in acknowledgment (as he says in
his Preface) of Gods mercy, by which he escaped with life, discovers the
several and close practices, damnable dissimulations and Artifices of their
Priests about London (naming the persons and place) to ensnare and delude
unwary Protestants, or hold on their credulous disciples; and this is one;
Their confident denying, or misreporting and discrediting of evident Truth. At
the end of his book he gives in a Catalogue of near 200. Priests in and about
London, their Names, and the Characters and Lodgings of most of them; in which
Number this Doctor Champny was one, and then trading for Rome. Now let us see
how well he plays this part against the evident Truth of public Records; So
passionately, that he will not abate us the fond story of the Naggs head in
Cheapside, but strives all he can to make it probable, as we shall see
presently.

2. His first conjecture or presumption against Matthew Parkers Ordination is,
because according to Masons Records (says he) the Ordainers here are set down
with their bare Names, whereas in all other consecrations the Ordainers are
named with the Titles of their Bishoprics; Now what reason can there be of
this difference, but that his Ordainers were not indeed Bishops consecrated,
but Elect only? But Champny might have seen them set down in the Queens Letters
Patents with the Titles of those Bishops Se^s they before held, and also of
those they now were elected to; and the Registers of those Sees show their
enstalment, as Godwin has set them down.

His second, Consecration of Bishop Barlo:
That Barlo one of the Ordainers was never, as it appears, consecrated himself;
for Mason could not give us the Record of his Consecration as of the rest.
Answer, Mason. though he found not his Consecration, yet he found him a
Consecrator of Arthur Buckley Bishop of Bangor in King Hen. 8. his time, which
evidently shows he was himself consecrated, or could not else been admitted to
assist in that Action. Champny excepts, that is alike, as if a man should thus
reason, Such a man has a woman and children, therefore he is a Lawful Husband
and Father. That is not alike, but thus: Such a man in all public Actions,
Deeds, Instruments, was by Law permitted to do toward that Woman and those
Children unquestionably, as a Lawful Husband and Father, she accordingly
enjoying her Dowry, and they their inheritance so demised by him, therefore he
was a Lawful Husband, and Father; so it follows evidently that Barlo being
without question admitted to that public Action, was a Lawful consecrated
Bishop: Whereas Champnies Negative Argument against him runs thus weakly,
according to the former instance, such a Man's Marriage cannot be found in the
Register of the Parish Church, therefore he is no Lawful Husband. But Godwin a
diligent searcher of the Registers of Bishops, finds him consecrated Bishop of
Asaph, Feb. 22. 1535. and the next year translated to S. David's where he sat
ten years in King Henry's reign, besides the time of King Edward. Now what
reason can be imaginable, why he should continue Bishop, doing all the Offices
and duties of a Bishop, so long without consecration, or that he should be
suffered so to do?

Furthermore, that he may say something rather then nothing, he observes, page
494. that Landaff, who was consecrated some years after Barlo, is pretended to
be set before him in the Queens Letters Patent for the Consecration of Mat.
Parker; and why, (says he) but that Landaff was consecrated indeed, and Barlo
only Elect? Also at the solemnizing of the Funerals of Henry the second of
France, related by Stow, he finds Parker, Barlo, Scory, assisting as Bishops,
and Parker in the first place, who then was but Elect, which ought not to have
been so, if the other two had been Bishops consecrated. They are goodly doubts,
fit for a Doctor of the Sorbon to dispute, but to solve them if they fall not
in pieces of themselves, we leave to Heralds or the Master of the Ceremonies to
do it at their Leisure.

3. The shameless story of the Nagshead Tavern.
And now we are come to that shameless tale which has more of impudency in it,
then the former Instances had of weakness, That our first Bishops in the Queens
time were made at the Naggs-head Tavern in Cheapside. That Scory alone (Landaff
failing) Ordained Parker, Grindal, etc. and after this manner, They kneeled
down before him, and he laying the Bible upon their heads severally, said,
Receive the power of Preaching Gods Word sincerely, and so they all rose up
Bishops, page 497. and this he says, he received from Father Bluet, and Bluet
from Master Neale, and Master Neale from I know not whom, nor he neither: Only
he tells us that one Master Constable received it from Stow himself, who
acknowledged so much in private, but durst not publish it. Be it on Master
Constables account, whether he wrongs Stow or no; We know what advantage they
make of such stories confidently reported to entertain and confirm their
Proselytes withal.

But setting aside the public Records that show the place and manner of their
Ordination and how they were at several times Ordained: this story betrays it
self many ways; First, in that it pretends Scory alone to have Ordained them,
for as Master Mason here noted, who can imagine that the other three, Barlo,
Coverdale, and Hodskinson, who desired the advancement of the cause, should
decline the Action, especially when the Penalty was a Praemunire according to
the 25. of Hen. 8. cap. 20. or that Parker an Archbishop Elect would have been
Ordained by one, when the other three were in the Queens Letters for his
Consecration, as well as Scory, and as willing, and at hand? Secondly, that
they should make choice of such a place, a Tavern for so sacred an Action,
which would show them to be Madmen, and fitter for Bedlam, then Bishoprics,
when as Churches and Chapels were open to them, as Mason noted Champny
pretends, they knew Landaff would not be brought to their Churches; Very like,
when he notwithstanding continued in the Church of England, all his life time
after, and held his Bishopric to his death: but if he scrupled to come into
our Churches, why should they think he would meet them at a Tavern? or why make
choice of a Tavern rather then some other private, though common place? The
question then is, whether Landaff was so good a fellow to approve of a meeting
there? or whether Champney was in Wine, when he wrote this? or the Reader will
be such a Fool as to believe it? As for Parker, Grindal, and the other, who are
thus defamed, their lives and manner of Conversation before and after, did
sufficiently recommend them to all men, for persons Learned, Grave, Sober,
Temperat. Lastly, let me observe, how this story betrays it self in the strange
Form of their Ordination, and must either conclude those grave Personages to be
Madmen again, that having the Form of Ordination used in King Edwards days,
and commanded by the Law, would or durst use any other, especially so
ridiculous one, as is here reported: or else condemn the raisers of this report,
of senseless impudency, and the believers of it, of notorious folly.

4. But we are yet again called back to answer a Negative argument from John
Stow, who has omitted to speak any thing of the consecration of this
Archbishop. And why should that be so strange? Because Stow does not usually
admit any memorable thing done at London, and all Chroniclers use to be very
diligent in Recording all Innovations in States -- and this Stow was punctual
in describing the reception, consecration and enstalment of Card. Pool, which
yet was but after the wonted manner; it is then very strange he should say
nothing of the Consecrating of this new Archbishop after the New Fashion; not
seen in England before; and the more strange this, because Stow is known to
have born great respect to Mat. Parker. There must needs be other cause of such
wilful silence, besides forgetfulness, to this purpose he, page 503, etc. As
for Card. Pools reception, and consecration, Stow does not fuse describere,
describe it at large, as Champny says, but only mentions it as done; and
considering that Chroniclers use to be punctual in describing all the Pageants
that are shown at the entrance or entertainment of Princes, I marvel he did not
enlarge himself in relating the manner how this great Cardinal (such a special
person, coming upon such a special errand, with Legatine power to reconcile
and bring back the whole Kingdom to the Chu. of Rome) was received,
consecrated and enstalled, which no question was set off with all the holy
Pageantry of the Romish pomp. Whereas the Consecration of Protestant Bishops,
being now more simply and homely (though more Apostolical) with few, but
innocent Ceremonies, did not afford matter so much for a Chronicle, as a
Register. One thing more was special in the Cardinals entrance, which Stow
notes: The same day (says he) that Docter Cranmer (his predecessor) was
burnt, the Cardinal sang his first Mass. A good beginning! One was burning, the
other singing.

But what if Stow professed so much respect to Archbishop Parker? was this the
only kindness he could do his friend, to tell the Kingdom what it knew, that he
was Archbishop? That respect and honor he bore the Archbishop, if he had meant
to show it, would have rather invited him to be copious in setting out his
personal virtues and endowments, which seeing he has not once mentioned, why
should we marvel at his silence in the other? And could there be done any
thing at London, more memorable, and of more concernment in the way of the
Church, (or a greater innovation in Champney's judgment) then the first Synod
held in the Queens reign, where Uniformity of Doctrine and Religion drawn up in
39. Articles, was concluded and published; yet is it not once mentioned by
Stow. It is the business of State, not of the Church, which affords work for
this and other Chroniclers.

5. The Consecration of Bishop Scory and Coverdale.
Next he endeavors to prove that Scory and Coverdale two other Ordainers of
Parker, were not consecrated themselves, either after the old Roman or new
English way, and thinks he convinces it evidently, thus. The Ordinals (says
he) or old way of consecration, were abolished by the Parliament, of 2. and 3.
of King Edward; The new Form, established by the Parliament of the 5. and 6. of
the same King; but the two former Ordainers were consecrated according to
Masons records, Aug. 30. 1551. that is, five months before the new Form was set
out, and therefore by no Form in force, even according to the Laws of this
Realm. So he, page 510. This argument at the first appearance seems pressing,
and Champny does not a little set by it, By what Form.
From hence (says he) inevitably it is concluded, that those two were never
consecrated indeed, and therefore not Parker, as is pretended; whereupon he
concludes Masonum protervum and inverecundum, that Mason was obstinately
shameless in avouching Parkers due consecration, page 511. But I shall easily
make appear the weakness of this argument as raised upon a mere mistake, either
through his inadvertency of what he might have observed in the Statutes, or his
wilful concealment of what he did see. The case stands thus. It is true that
the Ordinals are named with other superstitious books, and with them abolished
in the Parliament of 2. and 3. of Edward 6. and true also, that the form of
Ordination, after agreed on was confirmed in the Parliament of the 5. and 6. of
Edward 6. but here is the mistake. That form was not then first published, or
then received the first Authority, but was in force before, by virtue of a
provisionall Ordinance, of the former Parliament which abolished the old
Ordinals. For look into the 12. Chap. of that Parliament and see it there
ordained, that 12 Commissioners, six Prelates and six other learned in Gods Law,
should be chosen by the King to draw up such a Form, and that to be set out
under the Great-Seale before April next following; and that it should be used
and no other. So that from that time it was in force, and accordingly was used
in the consecration of the forementioned Bishops, ( Scory and Coverdal) Aug.
30. which followed that April, and went before the Parliament of the 5. and 6.
of Edward. In which Parliament, that Form was again confirmed, by adjoining it
to the book of Uniformity of Divine Service or public Prayer, under the like
provisions, exceptions, penalties, and with the same clauses, as that book Of
Uniformity of public Prayer, was Provided for in the 2. of Edw. 6. This was
the purpose of that Parliament, as by the express words of the Statute appears;
not to give the first force to Authority of that Form which it received by the
Act (as I said) of the former Parliament, as soon as it was set forth under the
Great-Seal) but to secure it by like provisions and penalties, as the book of
public prayer was, to which they annexed it. This is the issue of Champneys
confidence, who, out of the strength thereof, often overshoots his Mark.

6. The Records publikly shown to Romish Priests.
When he had thus far proceeded, and with great assurance discredited Parkers
Consecration, and the public Records, he meets with a true story that dasheth
all; and that is the satisfaction given to 4. Romish Priests by Archbishop
Abbot in this business. But Champny must set a good face and encounter it
boldly. He tells us, as he was writing this (of the Consecration of Mat:
Parker) there comes to his hand Bishop Godwins book de praesul. Angl. of the
English Bishops; Where, in the life of Matthew Parker, that story is set down;
The particulars of it stand thus; Upon occasion of Thomas Fitzherberts speech,
who seeing Masons Tables of our Bishops, gave out, he would thank that man,
that could certainly inform him, there were such Records indeed: Wherefore
Archbishop Abbot taking to him 4. Bishops, London, Ely, Lincoln, Rochester (who
then were King, Andrews, Neil, and Buckridge) sent for 4. Priests out of
Prison, whose names are set down in Godwin, and caused the Records to be
produced, showing them the consecration of Archbishop Parker, suffering them to
look farther, and as long as was convenient for the purpose, they were sent
for, and wishing them to write what they saw to Fitzherbert; which they also
did.

Champny would not take notice (as I observed above) of that satisfaction,
which Doctor Reinolds had given Heart the Jesuit, touching these Records, and
related by Mason upon his own knowledge; but this other was so home, that he
could neither overlook it, nor deny it. Only he says, they had a slight view
of such a book, but not permitted to peruse it as it was requisite, and when
those Priests by letter to the Archbishop, begged leave to have a farther sight
of it, they could not obtein it, page, 527. If saying, or unsaying can blemish
so public an Action, there will never want some among the Romish Priests to do
it confidently. But is it likely, that so many Prelates, Persons of great
severity and gravity, should in so solemn an action, play boys play with their
Adversaries, to give them a sight of the Records, and then presently withdraw
them? to put the book into their hands, and then presently snatch it from them?
Or that such Prelates should meet to act a part in countenancing forged Records?
To say nothing of the severe gravity of all those Bishops, Bishop Andrews of
all men living was least, fit to do it, who I dare say, would have cast off his
Bishopric, rather then held it by such a pretended warrant, and so will all
those think and say, that either know the authority of that learned man, or read
his Epistles to Molinaeus touching the Episcopal Order. And thus much, if not
too much to the trouble of the Reader, in refutation of Doctor Champney's
presumptions against the due ordination of Archbishop Parker and the truth of
the public Records.

CHAP. IX.
Of the other Bishops ordained in the beginning of the Queens reign; and the
pretense of special defect by reason of Intrusion. Where, of the Deprivation of
the former Bishops, and the Oath of Supremacy as a cause of it.
HIs 15. and 16. Chap. proceed against the rest of the Bishops in the beginning
of the Queens reign, whom he charges with a special defect or failance, the
want of lawful succession, in regard, of their places and Sees not void: and
therefore, entering by intrusion and usurpation, could not be Lawful Pastors or
Bishops.

1. The Charge of Intrusion.
This charge concerns not all the Bishops made then, for there were many Sees
actually void, but only those that entered upon the ejection, or deprivation of
some Popish Bishops, fourteen in number; and of them some were dead, some
voluntarily had quitted the Land, before the Queen caused others to be placed
in their Sees. Now the force of this charge, so far as it concerns our Bishops,
rests upon this proof, that the Deprivation of the other was unjust and
unlawful. This is that which Doctor Champny endeavors to make good, by
returning some answer to the crimes laid against them, and by making some proof
that the Queen was no competent Judge in such a business. Begin we then, with
the consideration of that, which was laid to the charge of the Popish Bishops;
whereby it may appear that they were deservedly deprived, and that the Queen
had power to do what she did therein.

2. The causes of depriving the Popish Bishops.
I find those deprived Bishops charged with 3. things, which make them
offenders against the Crown, and against their own Office. First, their
refusing the Oath of Supremacy; Second, their joint refusing to crown the
Queen, in which they all perished save one; Thirdly, their unreasonable
perverseness in not standing to any Order, which was agreed on, in the
Conference or public disputation holden at Westminster, for evidencing of the
truth to the whole Kingdom; and therein their obstinat opposition to the
Reformation of Gods Worship and Religion. Our Chronicles generally refer the
cause of their deprivation, to the refusal of the Oath, and that is chiefly
insisted on, by M. Mason, lib. 3, and by Docter Champny in answer to him; but I
find not, that they were imprisoned, much less deprived till after they had
declared their obstinacy in all three particulars, and must conclude, the two
latter did add much to the cause of their deprivation, and rendered them high
offenders against the Queens Majesty, and their own Office.

3. Their refusing to Crown the Queen.
For if it be the Office of the Bishops of this Land to crown the undoubted
Prince, what do they deserve, who having acknowledged Her Right in Parliament,
declared by the mouth of the Archbishop of York then Chancellor, and at Her
coming to London, been all of them (except Boner) graciously received by Her,
and admitted to kiss her hand, do after upon pretense of Religion refuse to set
the Crown upon Her head? Again, when it was Her desire and purpose to have the
exercise of Religion settled, as it was in King Edwards days, and might have
done it upon the same Evidence and Warrant (of which above, cap. 2.) yet she
caused a Conference between the best learned on both sides to be held at
Westminster, A Conference appointed.
the Parliament then sitting, for the satisfying of persons doubtful, and for
the knowledge of the Truth in matters of difference, that so there might be some
good and charitable agreement: These are the words of the Queens Declaration:
Also that Conference was to be held before the Lords and other Members of
Parliament; for the better satisfying their judgments in concluding such Laws
as might depend thereupon: as it is there also specified.

4. The Popish Party thought it at first reasonable, and by the Archbishop of
York gave their answer, that they were ready to render an account of their
faith, and did accordingly choose some Bishops with other Doctors to be Actors
in the Conference, Their obstinat perverseness.
and agreed to the Orders set down for the more quiet and effectual managing of
the business. But the very first day it appeared, they meant not to stand to
the Order first agreed on, (which was to give in writing to the other party
what reasons and proofs they had for each point) whereof being fairly
admonished by the Lord Keeper (who was appointed Moderator of the Action, not
to judge of the Controversy, but to see to the orderly proceeding) and by other
Lords, they promised to give in the next day what was said by Doctor Cole in
their behalf, and what they had farther to say: but that day being come, they
would neither one way nor other, neither by writing nor speech declare what
they had to say, but only returned them this answer, The Catholic Faith is not
to be called in question. And this was the issue of that Conference; the
passages of which are punctually set down in Stow.

5. Now if it be the Office of Bishops to teach all things commanded by Christ,
(as we find Champny arguing for them, out of S. Mat. 28.20. against the Regal
Supremacy, in his 6. chap.) and to show us, that he has commanded them: If a
Bishop must be by Saint Paul's Canon (1 Timothy 3.2.) (...) apt to teach, which
implies not only Ability, of which other Bishops, who ordain him, must judge,
but also Readiness to teach, of which the Queen and whole Parliament who in
vain expected it from them might very well judge: what then should we conclude
of those Bishops who were not ready, nay obstinately refused to do it, when
their Sovereign Prince and the Estates of the Realm were ready, and desirous to
hear, For the satisfying of their judgments and consciences, and for the
bringing about some good and charitable agreement? What can we (I say) conclude
of them, but that they highly offended against the Queen and whole Kingdom,
and against the duty of their own Office, being also self-condemned in wilful
receding from the Orders they had agreed to as most reasonable? The Protestant
party were ready to say with Saint Paul, we commend our selves to every man's
conscience by the manifestation of the Truth, 2. Cor. 4.7. But the Popish party
did in effect say with the proud Pharisees, This people know not the Law, are
cursed, S. Jo. 7.49. and so leave them in their ignorance.

6. Add to this their obstinate opposition to all reforming of Worship and
Religion, from such evidenced Errors and corruptions, as Image Worship, Prayers
in an unknown tongue, Communion under one kind. If any of the Priests had
withstood the reforming and purging of the Temple undertaken by Hezekiah and
Josiah, and not consented to the restoring of the due worship of God, or to
serve in the Temple according to that Form of Worship, had it been just to
continue them in the Priests Office, or to remove them? And was there any
reason that the Queen, according to the power given Her of God, undertaking the
reformation of Religion and Worship, should continue those as Pastors in the
Church, which refused to teach or give a reason of their Doctrine, or to accord
to any reformation of the known abuses in Gods Worship, or to serve in the
Church according to the form of Worship duly established?

7. Now lest any should think, the like might be answered by those that some
years ago cast out our Bishops as opposers of their Reformation, I must still
remember the Reader, they cannot make the like defense for their pretended
Reformation; whether we consider the Abuses to be Reformed, or the Authority by
which; in neither of these was their attempt answerable to that just
Reformation that cast out Popery, and some of the Popish Bishops; as above
seen, c. 2.

To these two particulars of their not Crowning the Queen and nor holding the
Conference, Champny in his 15. Chap. page 534. replies, 1. That neither of
these was objected to them, and therefore no cause of their deprivation. But
this is more then he can affirm, and altogether improbable, considering their
presumptuous disobedience: and I find in Stow, that upon their abrupt breaking
up the Conference, White, and Watson, the two Bishops of Winchester and
Lincoln, were immediately sent to the Tower for their extraordinary
peremptoriness, and all the rest bound daily to attend the pleasure of the
Queens Council, save Feckenham Abbot of Westminster, who only showed himself
reasonable, and very willing to have the Conference go orderly and peaceably
on: and therefore had his Liberty. Neither is the question here what was
objected to them, but what they deserved. The objecting of their refusal of the
Oath was enough for their deprivation by the Statute newly Enacted: yet their
presumptuous demeanor in the other particulars was no small aggravation of
their offense, and might be too of the Queens just displeasure against them 2.
Champny allegeth two examples, the One in relation to the Conference, the Other
to the Crowning; the first is of Saint Ambrose, that refused to dispute with
the Arrians. But this is far wide from the business in hand; whether we look at
the Subject Matter of the dispute, which with Saint Ambrose was a chief
fundamental point, the Deity of our Savior Christ, and newly declared in a
General Council: with us the Subject of the Conference were certain points;
which as held by Protestants are so far from being against the definition of
any General Council, that they are most clearly according to the judgment of
the Ancient Church. Or look we at the End or purpose of the dispute, which with
us was public satisfaction to all persons doubting, and to bring about a good
and charitable agreement; and this upon the command of the Prince, the desire
and expectation of the whole Kingdom; but no such good purpose, intent, or
expectation, in the dispute or alteration unto which Saint Ambrose was provoked.

8. His other Example relates to their not Crowning of the Queen; Euphemius
(says he) Patriarch of Constantinople, refused to acknowledge Anastasius for
Emperor, but repelled him as an Heretic, till he promised to admit the
Council of Chalcedon. Here again is another fundamental point, and the
Declaration of an undoubted General Council: which notwithstanding could not
give Euphemius warrant to do any more then: express his judgment of the
unworthiness of the Emperor. But what is this to their refusal of Crowning the
Queen, whose right they had acknowledged, whose faith they could not question,
as contrary to any approved Council? For what are the Novel Articles of Romish
faith to the Fundamental Christian Faith declared in the Ancient Councels? And
yet must Princes, by the judgment (it seems) of Romanists, not have their
Crowns, if they will not first admit that faith; or else lose them, if after by
due Reformation they cast it off. Thus far of the offense of those Bishops, as
to the business of Crowning and Conference, of which offense the Queen might
well be a competent judge, it being so apparent for the fact, and against so
known a duty.

9. Their refusal of the Oath of Supremacy.
Now to the other offense charged on them, the Refusal of the Oath of
Supremacy, the chief cause of their deprivation. Upon this Doctor Champny
spends his 15. and 16. chap. and, that he may prove that Deprivation unjust,
states the question thus, Whether Queen Elizabeth with her Council or
Parliament could deprive those. Bishops, because they refused to swear, that
she was the Supreme Head of the Church of England, page 536. and thereupon
makes his Argument thus. That Judgment is unjust, which is given by an
incompetent Judge. -- Now to prove the Queen and Parliament were not competent
Judges, he supposes it as clear, that this was a Cause ad fidem and Religionem
direct pertinentem, directly perteining to Faith and Religion -- and then
assumes, that neither the Queen nor any Lay-persons could be competent Judges
of Bishops in such a Cause. -- This he largely pursues, by places of Scripture
which show that Bishops and Pastors are set in the Church to teach all others
(of what degree and rank soever) in matters of Faith and Religion, and
therefore cannot be judged by them in such matters. Luke 16.16. He that hears
you, hears me, and Heb. 13.17. Obey those that have the rule over you and
submit -- and the like. Also by the Testimony of Emperors, Constantine,
Valentinian, Theodosius, professing the judgment of such matters did not belong
to them. Also of Bishops, Athanasius, Hosius, Ambrose, plainly telling other
Emperors, as much. Yea calls King James himself to witness, citing out of his
Declaration against Card. Perrouns Oration, these words: It is true that
Emperors did not bear themselves, as Supreme Judges in matters of Faith and
Doctrine. Lastly, adds the testimony of Calvin, Kemnitius and the Centurists,
against that title of Supreme Head. Then in his 16. Chapter undertakes to
answer what Master Mason had brought for Regal Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
things and Causes.

10. The Title of Supreme Head of the Church.
But to his whole Argument in his 15. Chapter, we may return this general
answer. There are thus many failings in it. I. The question wrong stated; for
those Bishops were not put to swear the Q. was Supreme Head of the Church of
England; there are no such words in the Oath of Supremacy, but, that the Q. was
Supreme Governor of the Realm of England and all other her Majesty's Dominions
in spiritual and ecclesiastical things and Causes -- For upon notice of offense
taken at the title of Supreme Head of the Church, which her Father and Brother
had used, the Queen was graciously pleased to wave it, and put it, as above
said, Supreme Governor of the Realm, etc. But Champny wittingly reteins the
former Title, as obnoxious to more reproach and Envy. II. His Argument touches
not the whole cause, or the main part of it, which concerned the renouncing of
foreign Jurisdiction. III. The cause rightly stated is not a matter directly
perteining to faith and religion, as he takes for granted. IV. Albeit such a
Judgment of matters perteining to Faith and Religion, as those Emperors denied,
does not indeed belong unto them or any Lay-Persons, yet may Kings and Emperors
have such a judgment, as is necessary for the due exercising their supreme
power in and about matters and causes of Faith and Religion.

11. Two things considerable in the Oath, and accordingly two mistake^.
That all this may the better appear, We must observe there are two things
considerable in the Oath of Supremacy: What is attributed to the Sovereign
Prince, and then what is denied to the Pope or any foreign Potentate; and
accordingly there is commonly a double mistake which the Adversaries and
reproachers of this Oath, (this Docter Champny in particular) do run upon. The
First is the overlooking of the main thing aimed at in this Oath, which is not
so much the affirming or attributing a Supremacy to the Prince, as the denying
and renouncing of the Papal Supremacy and Jurisdiction, and the excluding it
out of this Land. For it is security which the Prince seeks here, and that
stands not so much in receiving acknowledgments of Titles, and bare assertions
from Subjects, as in their renouncing of all adverse power, and promising not
to obey it: In special, that known usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
mentioned and branded as unsufferable in all the Statutes that concern the
Supremacy of the Crown; and so indeed it deserved to be, both for the
intolerable burdens and exactions it laid upon the Subjects of this Land, and
for the dangerous positions and Doctrines it draws after it, to the
unsufferable prejudice of the Prince, his Crown and dignity; as, The exemption
of all Ecclesiastical Persons, which in effect makes them none or but half
Subjects, The deposing of Kings, and disposing of their Kingdoms upon
Excommunication, which makes them no Kings, or but at the Popes pleasure: and
according to the same Doctrine, the Oath of Allegiance is pronounced by Pope
Paul V. in his first Breve, to contein many things flat contrary to the
Catholic Faith, and to the salvation of Souls, and therefore by no means to be
taken by any of his Catholics. And have not Princes good cause to look to
themselves upon this point of Supremacy, to the excluding of such foreign
Jurisdiction, so dangerous, so injurious?

12. Now that Security from this usurped power and jurisdiction is chiefly
sought and aimed at in this Oath, appears by the Oaths which all the Bishops
under King Henr. 8. and King Edw: 6. made, in which the first main thing is
their renouncing of the Papal Jurisdiction, and their swearing never to admit
it again within this Land: and by the Statutes under. Queen Eliz. enforcing
this Oath; in which the end is expressed, wherefore the Oath is required, and
former Acts concerning the Supremacy revived. For repressing the said usurped
power. 1. Eliz: 1. For preservation of the Queens Highness, and dignity of this
imperial Crown, and for avoiding such Hurts, Perils, dishonours, and
inconveniences, as have befaln to the Queens Noble Progenitors, the Kings and
Queens of this Realm, and to the whole estate thereof, by means of the
Jurisdiction and power of the Sea of Rome, unjustly claimed and usurped within
this Land. 5. Eliz. 1.

13. Papal Supremacy no cause or point of Faith.
This therefore being the main point of the Oath, as that wherein the Prince is
mainly concerned, it tells us, how their offense arises, and what they deserve,
that by denying this Oath refuse to renounce such foreign Jurisdiction: and how
the Kings and Queens of this Realm, if they could well understand their own
power and right, and properly judge of it, might also understand and judge of
what was so contrary to it, and be competent judges in this cause, of all those
that offended against such their known right and power. Therefore Champny
bending all his forces against the Title of Supremacy attributed to the Queen,
Princes are competent Judges in the cause.
and nothing against the renouncing of Papal jurisdiction, has not (by this
mistake) once touched the main point of the Oath, or of their offense who were
deprived: which if he had considered, he would not have taken it for granted,
as he does, that this cause directly pertained to Faith and Religion. Neither
can he or any Romanist ever prove, that Princes are bound to receive for points
of faith, what ever Popish Bishops or Priests, according to their own and the
Popes Interests, shall tell them, are Points of Faith, (however prejudicial to
their Crowns and Dignities) such as is the Papal Jurisdiction, with all the
branches of Hildebrandine doctrine depending thereupon.

14. All those sayings of Emperors and Bishops cited before by Champny, were
well and piously spoken, and may well stand with that knowledge, judgment, or
Supremacy which we attribute to the Prince in and about matters of Faith and
Religion, as we shall see presently; but as to this Papal Supremacy and
Jurisdiction, which we renounce, they speak nothing that may confirm it. For
had there risen up a Bishop in the days of those Pious and Moderat Emperors,
and made such an Oration, as Card Perroun did before all the Estates of France
(which King James declared against, and refuted) for the Papal Supremacy; or
told those Emperors, that it belonged not to them to convocate Synods, and
command Bishops to assemble, or to confirm their Decrees, but all this and much
more belonged to the Bishop of Rome to do, to whom their Crowns in order to
Spiritual things were subject, and Bishops exempt from their Judicature: those
Emperors would have told such Bishops another tale, and not suffered such
spiritual persons under pretense of preaching Heaven, to win upon them in the
Earth (as the Pope has done for diverse Ages upon Christian Princes) or under
show of teaching the Faith to disoblige their Subjects from their fidelity, as
Pope Paul V. did by his Breve against the Oath of Allegiance.

15. Second mistake, is of what we attribute to the Prince.
The second mistake is in that, which by this Oath of Supremacy is attributed
to the Prince, as if, by this Supreme power in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
things, He were made Supreme Judge of Faith, and decider of all controversies
thereunto belonging, and might ordain what he thought fit in matters of
Religion. This mistaken sense of the Kings Supremacy was first broached in
Germany by the cunning of Stephen Gardener, who being there among the
Protestants, and challenged by them for the Six Articles, to decline the Odium
of them from himself upon the Regal Supremacy, told them the King might Ordain
so, and what he thought fit being Supreme Head of the Church. Calvin speaks of
this, upon Amos 7. as Bishop Bilson in his book of Subjection has noted: and
it is clear, that all, which he or Kemnitius or others, cited above by Champny,
spoke against that Title of Supreme Head, they spoke it against that mistaken
sense.

16. Expressions of the Supremacy attributed at first very large.
But that we may better understand what is indeed attributed to the Sovereign
Prince, look we first to the Statutes, which declare this Supremacy; where we
find the expressions very large and general. Seeing all Authority and
Jurisdiction is derived from the Kings Highness, as Supreme Head, and so
acknowledged by the Clergy of this Realm -- 1. Edw. 6. cap. 2. Also
Jurisdiction for Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State, and Persons, and for
Reformation and correction of the same, and of all manner of errors, Heresies,
Schisms, -- 1. Eliz. 1. Now see what has been declared for the explaining and
bounding this Supremacy. The Queen upon knowledge of offense taken at the Title
of Supreme Head of the Church, waved it, Explication of the former Attributions.
as was said above, and declared in Her Admonition annexed to her Injunctions,
that nothing else was challenged by that Supremacy, but to have a Sovereignty
and Rule, under God, over all Persons born within her Realms of what Estate
soever, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, so as no other foreign power shall or ought
to have Superiority over them: and that nothing else was, is, or shall be
intended by the Oath. So Article 37. of our Church, is thus declared, We give
to our Princes that Prerogative which we see in Scripture always given to all
godly Princes by God himself, to rule all states and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and to restrain with
the Sword all stubborn and evil doers. So then we see by these Declarations,
what is meant by this Supremacy: viz. a Sovereignty over all persons and
estates (though Ecclesiastical) to rule them, etc. If it be said the Supremacy
is not only over all Persons, but also in all Causes and Things Ecclesiastical,
we bound this latter by the former, saying, that Kings have and necessarily
must have a Supreme power in and about Causes and things Ecclesiastical, so far
as is necessary to the ruling all Persons of what estate soever, moving and
commanding them to act according to their several stations and offices for the
service of God and his Church, keeping them to their known duty, and, as
occasion may require, punishing them for transgressing against it.

17. In Causes Ecclesiastical, In causes Ecclesiastical.
which are of suit and instance, and all other of judicial process, the Regal
Supremacy or Jurisdiction is more apparent. It was therefore declared 24. Hen.
8. cap. 12. That in the Kings Highness there was full power to render justice
and final Determination in all Debates, Contentions, etc. and upon this ground
were made many and sundry Laws before Hen. 8. in the time of Edw. 1. Edw. 3.
Rich. 2. Hen. 4. and of other Kings for the entire and sure conservation of the
prerogatives and preeminencies of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of the
Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal of the same; to keep it from the annoyance
of the Sea of Rome. ibid. Accordingly King James, in his Premonition to
Christian Princes against the Usurped power of the Pope, gives us many examples
of former Kings punishing Clergymen for citing others to Rome, in
Ecclesiastical causes; Yea we have stories of Ecclesiastical causes wherein the
Bishops of Rome have been Parties, judged and determined by Emperors and Kings.
In that great contention twixt Symmachus and Laurence about the Place (which
made the fourth Schism in the Roman Church) King Theodorick, who then ruled in
Italy, took the cause into his own cognizance, and judged it for Symmachus.
Afterward, in that contention twixt John of Constantinople and Gregory the
first of Rome, about the Title of Universal Bishop, Gregory himself refers the
cause to the Emperor (as appears in his Epistle to Mauritius,) to put end to
it, by repressing the ambition of John, and nothing more known in History then
the Elections of the Bishops of Rome, frequently ordered, judged and determined
by the Emperors.

18. Furthermore all that Judicial process of the Outward Court, with which
Bishops were enabled for the better and more powerful exercise of their
spiritual Censures, was derived from the Supremacy of the Regal power; and to
this sense was it said, All Authority and Jurisdiction is derived from the Kings
Highness, -- Edw. 6. cap. 2. that is, All external Jurisdiction, or Coactive,
which indeed is properly Jurisdiction, when there is not only a power and
ability to declare what is Law and just, but force also to procure execution:
and therefore in that very Statute, and as an acknowledgment of all such
Jurisdiction derived from the King, All process Ecclesiastical is ordained to
go forth in the Kings Name, and the Test in the Bishops name: also the Kings
Arms to be graven upon the Seal of the Bishops Office.

19. In things Ecclesiastical pertaining to Doctrine.
But in Things Ecclesiastical pertaining to Doctrine, or correction of Error
and Heresy, the bounds of this Supremacy of Princes are not so apparent: Yet
may they be so set, as the power and judgment we yield to Princes in and about
such Things, do not entrench upon, but fortify the Power and Office of Bishops
and chief Pastors of the Church. For we acknowledge the Power and Office of
Bishops to be both Directive, in defining and declaring what the Laws of
Christ be for Doctrine and Discipline, of which things they are the immediate,
proper and ordinary Judges: and also Coercive, in a spiritual restraint of
those that obstinatly gainsay, and that as far as the power of the Keys, put
into their hands by Christ, for spiritual binding and loosing, will reach.
What also proper to Bishops and Pastors of the Church.
This power is Coercive or binding, upon all such as are willing to be
Christian and continue in the Society of the Church, but not coactive or
forcing; for all such Jurisdiction, together with all judicial process of the
outward Court, is, as I said, derived to them for the more forcible effect of
their spiritual censures, from the Jurisdiction of the Sovereign Priner. His
Powea we acknowledge to be Imperative, in commanding by Laws the public
establishment of that which is evidenced to him by the Pastors of the Church to
be the Law of Christ, and also Coactive in restreining and correcting by
temporal pains those that are disobedient, yea in punishing and correcting
Ecclesiastical persons for not doing their known duty, according to their
forementioned Office. To this purpose it is declared, 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12. that
it belongs to Spiritual Prelates, Pastors, and Curats, to Minister, do, or cause
to be done all Sacraments, Sacramentals, and divine services to the people
(that for their Office) but if for any censure from Rome, or any such cause,
they refuse to Minister as before, they are liable to Fine and Imprisonment
during the Kings pleasure: that for his Supremacy over all Estates to rule
them, and cause them to do their duty, and punish them, when there is cause,
for not doing it.

20. If we consider the Defining of Matters of Doctrine, we said the Pastors of
the Church are the proper and ordinary judges there, though called to the work
by the Prince, and accountable to him how they do it: and therefore the judging
of Heresy is restrained to the Declaration of the first General Councels, for
Heresies past: and for such as shall arise, to the Assent of the Clergy in
their ^onvocation. 1. Eliz. 1. The defining of Doctrine, demonstration of
Truth, and the Evidencing of it, is the Office and work of the Pastors of the
Church, but the Authority which at first commands them to the work, and after
gives public establishment to it, when so done and evidenced, is of the
Sovereign Prince: Which establishment is not in order to our believing, (as the
Romanists use fondly to reproach us, in saying our belief follows the State,
and our Religion is Parliamentary) but to our secure and free profession and
exercise of Religion. For Kings and Princes are not Ministers, by whom we
believe, as the Pastors of the Church are. 1 Cor. 3.9. but Ministers of God for
good or evil, Romans 13.4. i.e. for reward or punishment according to our doing
or not doing duty: and therefore they bear the Sword; Jurisdiction of Princes
is extrinsic:
Wherefore their jurisdiction is wholly Extrinsick, as is their Sword, not
intrinsic or spiritual as is the power of the Keys, or the Sword of the Spirit
in the hand of Ecclesiastical Governors or Pastors. Princes have not the
conduct of Souls, but government of men, as making a Visible Society to be kept
in order for Gods service and glory, and for the good of the whole Community.

21. But Princes and Sovereign Powers are not mere Executioners (as the
Romanists would have them) of the Determinations and Decrees of the Church
Pastors: nor bound blindly or peremptorily to receive and establish as matter
of Faith and Religion, what ever they define and propound for such. For the
Power of the Sovereign is not Ministerial, but Autoritative, commanding and
calling together the Clergy to the work of Religion or Reformation, which
command it is their duty to execute, by meeting and doing the work so, as it
may by the demonstration of Truth be evidenced to the Sovereign power, and
receive again the Authority of the same power for public establishment. Princes
have their judgment about Matters of Doctrine defined.
And in order to the due using of that supreme and Sovereign Power, we must
allow him (that he go not blindly to work) Judgment in receiving of the
evidence: not only a private Judgment of discretion, which we must allow every
man, in order to his own believing, but also a public Judgment, answerable to
the public care and office he bears; Yet is it not that immediate and ordinary
Judgment of Matters of Religion, which belongs to Bishops and Pastors of the
Church, in order to our believing, but that secundary Judgment (as I may call
it) which is necessary in the Sovereign, for his establishing by Laws, that
which is evidenced to him upon the Judgment and advise of the Pastors of the
Church. This Judgment in matters of Religion in order to public establishment,
the Sovereign ought to have upon a double reason: I. In respect of his duty to
God, whose Laws and worship He is bound to establish by his own Laws within
his Dominions, and is accountable for it, if he do it amiss, as the Kings of
Israel and Juda were. II. In respect of his own and his peoples security, to
judge that nothing be concluded or broached prejudicial thereunto, under
pretense of Religion and Ecclesiastical Authority, as many points of Popery are.
Now for this reason of the Princes concernment, I suppose the Clergy under Hen.
8. saw there was cause, they should bind themselves, as they did in their
convocation, by promise, in verbo sacerdotis, Not to Enact or promulge or
execute any New Canons or Constitutions without the Kings Assent.

But if it be asked, What if the Sovereign be wilful in following his own
judgment, rather then the evidence of Truth given in by the Pastors of the
Church? That will not concern our belief or Religion, but the free and safe
profession and exercise of it. For the establishment of Princes is not as I
said, in order to our believing, but our free and public exercise of Religion;
we must attend to the evidence of Truth given in or propounded by the Pastors
of the Church, who have commission to do it in order to our believing; and
yield obedience to the establishment or Law of the Sovereign, either by doing
and conforming thereunto, or by suffering for not doing accordingly.

22. Princes truly said to reform Errors by their Supremacy.
By all this, which I have said to rectify the mistaken sense of this
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical things, it may appear how the Sovereign Prince may
have and use his Supreme Power, and his Judgment, in and about such things,
without invading that spiritual power, and that immediate and ordinary judgment,
which belongs to the Pastors of the Church; how also he may be said truly to
Reform and Correct Errors, Heresies, etc. without taking to himself the office
of those Pastors; For when he does it by them, commanding them to the work, and
taking account of them, he does it truly, and does it by a Supremacy of power.
So did Hezekiah and Josiah truly reform all the errors and abuses about Gods
Worship, when they called and commanded the Priests to that work of purging the
Temple and Ministering again in it, according to the right way of Gods service.
Justinian in his Epistle to the 5. Council, reckons up what his predecessors
had done for the preservation of the true Faith. Semper studium fuit, etc. it
was always their care and endeavor, Exortas haereses amputare -- to cut off
Heresy as it sprung up. How? or by whom? per Congregationem -- by gathering
together Religious Bishops -- and causing them to preach the right faith. Then
having instanced in those Emperors that called the 4. General Councels, he
concludes, Nos sequentes -- and Volentes -- We following their examples, and
willing the right Faith be preached, do, etc. Nothing is more obvious in
Antiquity then the care and pains, which good Emperors and Kings have used in
employing their Sovereign power and Authority, for repressing and reforming
Errors and Heresies. One of Justinians predecessors was Theodosius the second,
who did repress the Heresy of Eutyches then prevailing, and newly advanced by
the factious Council of Ephesus; and how did he do it? by nulling or forbidding
the decrees of that Council to be received, -- and to do this, he was advised
and entreated by Leo Bishop of Rome and other Bishops. But of this example more
largely below, when we shall examine Champneys answer to it; to whom it is now
high time to return.

23. His Arguments, above insinuated, are easily solved by what is already
said, to rectify the mistakes about the Oath of Supremacy. His Testimonies
from the acknowledgments of Emperors, and sayings of Bishops, telling them
their duty, as he borrows them from Tortus or Bellarmine, so he might have seen
particular answers to the chiefest of them in the Bishops Tortura; But these,
and the places of Scripture which he brought, and King James his saying, and
the Testimonies of other Protestants, which he alleged, do all fall to the
ground, as impertinent and of no force, through those failings I noted at the
beginning, and were made more apparent by what is said since, that they touch
not the main part of the Oath of Supremacy, and cause of the deprivation of
the Popish Bishops, viz. their refusing to renounce the foreign jurisdidiction
and Supremacy of the Papal usurped power; also that those Arguments and
Testimonies proceed only against the mistaken sense of the other part of the
Oath, viz. of that Supremacy which is attributed to the Sovereign Prince: and
are easily satisfied by distinguishing the spiritual power of Bishops and
Pastors from the Sovereign power of Princes in and about Ecclesiastical
matters; which powers though they have the same objects sometimes, yet their
manner of proceeding about them is different; so by distinguishing the
immediate and ordinary cognizance or judgment of matters of Religion, which
belongs to the Pastors of the Church, defining and proposing them in order to
our believing, from that secundary judgment of the Sovereign Power in order to
public Establishment, and free exercise of what we believe and receive upon
the former evidence.

The judgment requisite to make the demonstration of truth out of Gods Word,
and to give out the Evidence, belongs to the Ecclesiastic Pastors; but the
judgment requisite in receiving the Evidence is needful in all: especially and
upon a public concernment in Princes, that they may discern that nothing is
propounded prejudicial to their just Rights, or hurtful to their Subjects. Also
that they may be satisfied, what is propounded as Faith and Worship to be
according to the Law of Christ before they use or apply their Authority to the
public establishment of it. This Judgment of the Prince I called Secundarie,
not to the prejudice of his Supremacy, but to the acknowledgment of the
immediate and ordinary judgment in matters of Religion belonging to the Pastors
of the Church. Secundary in the consideration of Direction, which it supposes
to be received from the Pastors of the Church, not Secundary in consideration
of Authority, which commands them first to the work, requires an account of it,
and confirms publicly what is evidenced by them to be according to Christ's law.

24. We should now see what he answers to Masons instances of Emperors and
Kings dealing in Ecclesiastical matters; but first examine we a reasoning of
his in the latter part of his 16. Chapter, which he falls upon by occasion of
an objection, that Mason had made to himself, and improves so far, in his own
conceit, that he challenges any Protestant to return him an answer: which
notwithstanding may well be answered out of that which has been said already.

Out of the Objection, which Mason had made, Supremacy makes not the Princes
will the Rule of our Faith.
he frames his first reasoning thus. If Princes be Supreme in spiritual
things, then are their Subjects bound to obey their command in all matters of
Faith and Religion: for as S. Paul says, every soul must be subject to the
higher (or Supreme) Powers; and bound to obey in all things in which they are
supreme -- who sees not the absurdity that would follow? But it is easy to
answer, by distinguishing active and passive obedience -- for should we make
them as supreme in Ecclesiastical things (which we do not) as they are (and as
Champny will acknowledge them to be) in civil matters, we could no more be bound
to obey them in all their commands about matters of Religion, then we are in
all their commands in and about Civil things; but in these if they should
command a Subject to bear false witness, that Subject is not bound to obey
actively, but to subject passively.

25. Much to this purpose had Master Mason solved the like Objection: and
Champny goes on to improve his Reasoning, and replies; So to answer is
altogether impertinent, because the Protestants cannot give any certain Rule,
whereby Subjects may know whether the Prince, in rebus Controversis, in
controverted points of Religion, command, according to Truth or no. For
example, The King of England forbids the Mass, etc. The King of France commands
it. How shall the Subjects of either know, whether of the two commands for the
Truth? and how could the Protestants know, that Hen. 8. commanded against
Truth, when he enjoined the Six Articles? If they say, as usually, his Commands
are according to Truth, that are conformable to the holy Seriptures, they still
stick in the same dirt, as not able to give any certain Rule, whereby to know,
which Commands are conformable to Scripture. Answer; Rule of our Faith^
All this proceeds upon the former mistake of that Supremacy which we attribute
to the Sovereign Prince in matters of Faith and Religion, as if we gave him
what properly belongs to the Pastors of the Church: Whereas in asserting his
Supremacy, we suppose it their office to evidence what is Truth, and what is
conformable to Scripture: and that in Order both to our and his believing. And
the Means of it.
But more particularly; We acknowledge a certain Rule, more certain then the
Papists can or will do, and that is Scripture; Now if still we be asked for a
Rule, whereby to know what is conformable to Scripture: We say that having a
certain Rule, as before, there remains no more to do, but to have evidence of
it; and for that we have (not so much a Rule, as) Means: The same that the
Church always had, the Doctrine of foregoing Ages, and of our present
Teachers. The same that the Jews had, the Teaching and direction of those that
sat in Moses Chair: S. Mat. 23. those whose Lips were to preserve knowledge, and
at whose Mouth they were to seek the Law. Mal. c. 7. The same, that our Savior
left in his Church for that purpose, Pastors and Teachers, that we should not
be carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 3.4. The same, that Champny
and the Romanists pretend to contend for in this business. These we say are not
the Rule, but the Means, or Ministers by which we believe, Cor. 3.9. according
to the demonstration of Truth, commending themselves to every man's Conscience.
2 Cor. 4.2.

26. Now seeing our Savior bids them do what those which sat in Moses Chair
said unto them. S. Mat. 23. and it is certain they did not teach infallibly or
truly in all things, for which Stella, and Maldonate on the Gospel, and
Espensaeus once a Docter of the Sorbon, on Mal. 2.7. give us this limitation,
Eatenuus audiendi, quatenus legem Mosis docent, They were so far to be heard
and obeyed, as they taught what indeed was the Law of Moses: I would ask of
Champny, what Rule then had men to know whether the Scribes and Pharisees
taught that, or their own Traditions, but the evidence they made of the thing
taught, out of the Law? He must answer according to the Romish way, The
Doctrine of the Church was their Rule; But then the forementioned Authors
should have said, quatenus docent secundum doctrinam Ecclesiae, so far forth,
as they teach according to the Doctrine of the Church, and not have limited the
matter, as we Protestants do, quatenus legem Mosis docent, so far forth as they
teach according to the Law of Moses: Also those teachers (Scribes and
Pharisees) could say, they taught according to the Doctrine then obteining in
the Church, yea and could say, Dictum Antiquis, it was so said by them of old,
S. Mat. 5. as well as any Romanist can; yet our Savior did not admit that
Rule, but refuted their corrupt Doctrines by Evidencing the true meaning of the
Law, S. Mat. 5.

27. What certain Rule the Romanists can pretend to.
Again, Champny tells us not what certain Rule they have, but it must be such
as I insinuated, the Judgment or Doctrine of their Church. Now seeing their
Church must speak her Judgment by her Pastors, and supremely by Pope or
Council, We ask in which they place this certain Rule? He and his fellow
Sorbonists are for a general Council which they set above the Pope, with power
to judge and depose him; we leave them to answer this to the Jesuits and other
more devoted Creatures of the Pope; but let him answer us how he and his
Sorbonists can attribute that to a Council, and yet with the Jesuits make the
Pope Supreme Head of the Church (as he often insinuates in this discourse)
which should imply the Supreme judgment in him, according to Champney's arguing
against that Title here attributed to the Kings of this Realm. Let them place
their supposed certain Rule, where they please, we find those of the Romish
Communion following the evidence they had of Truth against the Popes judgment
or any pretended Hildebrandine Doctrine or determination of their Church. The
Venetians stood out resolutely against the Interdict of Pope Paul 5.
maintaining their right in that cause, (though Ecclesiastical) which was a
branch of the Supremacy belonging to Sovereign Princes and States; And what
Rule had they to go by, in disobeying the Pope, or their Subjects in obeying
them, but the Evidence of the Truth of the thing manifested to them by learned
men, Bishops and Pastors among them? So when the same Pope by his several
Breves forbad the taking of the Oath of Allegiance, as contrary to the Catholic
faith, and many Priests notwithstanding, with most of the Romish Catholics in
this Land held it Lawful, and accordingly took it; What Rule had they to go by
in obeying their Prince against the Pope, but the evidence of the thing or
duty, they naturally owed to their Sovereign? which evidence, with all the
reasons of it, is drawn up by Master William Howard, an English Catholic (as he
styles himself) and published, An. 1634.

28. Now for a general Council, when it can be had indeed, we grant it to be
the greatest and highest means of direction, which Kings, or any other can have
in matters of Religion; but still the limitation before mentioned, Quatonus
docent, etc. takes hold of the Pastors of the Church gathered in Council, it
being possible the major part should be swayed by factious or worldly interests
(as above in the first Chapter, n. 9.) and so give Kings and Emperors, upon
evidence of things unduly carried, cause to use their Supreme power, not for
the confirming but forbidding of the Decrees, as we shall presently see done by
Theodosius against the second Council of Ephesus; and as Champny could not but
know the Kings of France did against the Conventicle of Trent (so Hen. called
it) forbidding the Decrees of it to be received for the space of 40. years; For
Anno 1598. we find the Clergy assembled at Paris (as the French History
relates) and the Archbishop of Tours, in their name petitioning the King ( Hen.
4.) to reform several disorders in the Church, and that he would be pleased,
the Council of Trent might be received and published in France, with certain
qualifications. This was not at that time granted: the King answering them in
brief to this purpose; that by the help of God he would settle the Church,
admonishing them in the mean time to look to their duty, and he would study
his. In all this we have an evident demonstration of Regal Supremacy, and that
allowed by the French Clergy; and this done upon no other Rule, then the
evidence of the thing, that packing and faction, which was apparent in that
Council. There may be then Exceptions against the Romanists certain Rule. And
much was spoken tending to this pupose, above cap. 1. Of Submission due to the
Church.

29. How Emperors showed their Supremacy in matters of the Church and of
Religion.
In the last place let us see what is answered to Master Masons Instances of
godly Emperors making Laws, and taking Order in matters of Religion, and of
the Church. To these Champny answers in his 16. Chapter. First, None of them
ever excluded the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome out of their Realms, as
this Oath does. page 557. True, that none of them denied him his Patriarchal
Primacy known and bounded by the first general Councels, neither would it have
been denied him in this Realm, could he have contained himself within the due
bounds thereof; but such a Papal Jurisdiction, as was usurped by the Bishop of
Rome for some Ages past, those good Emperors never knew, never would have
endured. If he can show us they admitted such Jurisdiction, or that the General
Councels acknowledged it, we will also acknowledge the Popish Bishops were
unjustly deprived as to that point.

Secondly, Those Emperors by their Laws did but confirm, and in their doings
about Church Affairs, did but follow the Canons and judgment of former
Councels. This is the sum of his second answer. And this is true of many of
them: but derogats nothing from their Supremacy; for it only implies Direction
received, which we acknowledge Kings and Emperors ought in Ecclesiastical
matters to receive from the Pastors of the Church, in or out of Council: It
does not infringe the Authority which they have both in commanding the Pastors
of the Church to meet in Council, in taking an account of what is done, and
how; and lastly in confirming their decrees and Canons; as was before
insinuated.

30. Again, That answer is not true of all the Laws and Actions of pious and
good Emperors in and about matters of Religion or the Church, as may appear by
that which is cited by Mr. Mason, by Bishop Bilson, in his book of true
subjection, by Bishop Andrews against Tortus, and by other Writers. To instance
in one, which being urged by Mason, Champny thought himself concerned to labor
in the solving it. The second Council of Ephesus had, by the prevalency of a
stirring faction in it, passed judgment for deposing the good Bishop Flavianus,
and advanced the Eutychian Error. Hereupon Leo Bishop of Rome, with other
Bishops, humbly supplicated the Emperor Theodosius, that all things might
stand in the same condition in which they were before any of those judgments,
till a greater number of Bishops could be gathered out of the whole World, Ep.
43. and in another Epistle, he thus bespeaks the Emperor, The second Council of
Ephesus, which cannot be called a Council (because held to the subversion of
the Faith,) You most glorious Emperor, aliud statuendo cassabis, will make
void or null by a contrary Decree, for the love you bear the Truth, etc. In all
this, Three things are evident, I. That a King or Emperor may and ought (as he
tenders the Truth of God) reform or extirpate an Error or Heresy prevailing,
when it is made manifest to him by the information and advice of godly Bishops,
as here by Leo Bishop of Rome, and other his fellow-Bishops, who as he said
joined with him in the supplication, although there be no foregoing Synodical
judgment against the same Error, as there had not yet been against the
Eutychian Heresy. II. That He may Null and make void the Judgment or Decree (
i. e. forbid it to be received) of a Synod when manifested to him, that it was
carried by faction to the subversion of the Faith; as this of Ephesus was; upon
which reason the Kings of France, as was said, refused to receive the Decrees
of Trent: III. That the Emperor might and ought to call a greater number of
Bishops together for the confirmation of the Truth, and so the Council of
Calcedon was gathered by the Emperor Martianus.

Now see we how Champny bestirs himself to get through the passages of this
story. Leo says, he, did Pattern hortari, fatherly exhort the Emperor to
defend the Truth, as every good Prince should -- page 568. This (though short
of an humble supplication made to the Emperor) is fair, and we desire no more,
then that it be granted, Princes may and should do so much within their Realms,
as the Emperor is here supplicated or exhorted to do. And accordingly (says
he) this good Emperor did, praescriptum Leonis secutus, following the
praescript of Leo. page 565. Now he makes the good Bishop speak and take upon
him like one of the later Popes. Well this agrees not with the humble
supplication made to the Emperor; but what says he to the thing supplicated
for, that the Emperor would make void that Council by a Decree to the
contrary? I cannot find any thing in Champney that answers to it, but that Leo
desired a suspension of the Decree and Judgment of the former Council -- Which,
(though short of that which is desired) is enough to establish that Authority
which we desire to vindicate to Kings and Emperors in matters of the Church,
without wronging or invading the Office of the Pastors of the Church: for both
the Emperor and they had their parts in this Action. Champny in stead of
giving us a good account of the former point, thinks to cross us with another
passage of the story: Flavianus, says he, the deposed Bishop, appeals from the
unjust sentence, not to the Emperor but the Bishop of Rome, and delivers his
appellation to his Legates, which was an acknowledgment of his being supreme
Judge, page 561. But this cannot be concluded in Champnys sense of Supreem Judge,
for it sounds nothing but the primacy of Order among the Patriarchs. Flavianus
delivered his appellation to the Popes Legates, because they were present, the
Emperor was not, because in order the Bishop of Rome was the first, and
because he knew that Leo was truly favorable to his cause, and would commend
it to the Emperor; which he did, and did it so, as appealing himself to the
next general Council, which the Emperor should gahter; as we heard in his
supplication to Theodosius. Neither had the Bishops of Rome, though chief
Patriarchs, the only or chief presidence in all the General Councels, but
according as the Emperor saw fit, as appears by the acts of those Councels.

But to conclude. In replication to that common answer of Romanists, that Kings
and Emperors in commanding about Church affairs did but follow the
determinations of foregoing Councels, Mason had told them, that Queen
Elizabeth, for this power and Supremacy had the determination of a Synod under
Hen. 8. by unanimous assent acknowledging it. To this Champny replies, What
Authority had that Synod, where the Bishops were compelled by fear to consent
to that, which they after voluntarily revoked under Queen Mary? Or what
Authority could a Snyod of the Bishops of one Kingdom have against the consent
of the whole world -- p. 549. 550. But this of the consent of the whole world
is only a brag, and it is yet to be proved that the late usurped Jurisdiction
of the Pope was ever known to the Ancient Church, or ever received since,
through all the Christian world. As for compulsion and defect of freedom, which
he notes for the nulling of the Autorty of a Synod, we acknowledge the Doctrine
good, and say he gives us a just way of exception to the Council of Trent, and
all or most of the Romish Councels that have been held under that usurped Papal
Supremacy since Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh his time. But we deny the
application of it to the Synods under Hen. 8. See above, cap. 2. Number. 3.
concerning this allegation of fear and compulsion, where there was cause to
think, the evidence of Truth compelled them, considering what the most learned
amongst them did voluntarily write against the Papal Usurpation. And I cannot
but here acknowledge the Providence of God, so disposing of this business, that
the Papal supremacy or usurped Jurisdiction should be voted out of this Land,
first by the Popish party, as I may call them, and that they which had twice
been sworn against the admitting of it again into this Land, as many of the
deprived Bishops had been under King Henry and King Edward, and then
voluntarily broken their double Oath under Queen Mary, should be deposed under
Queen Elizabeth, for that very cause of asserting the Papal Supremacy.

CHAP. X.
The Exception against our Bishops, that they were not Priests. Of the
Evangelical Priesthood or Ministry committed to us men, and of the Romish
Presumption in assuming more.
HIs last exception against the Calling of our Bishops, ever since the
beginning of the queens time, is, because they were not Very Sacerdotes, truly
made Priests: Which, says he, is such an Essential defect, that it renders
their Episcopal Ordination altogether invalid. cap. 17. We grant it of Very
Presbyteri; those that are not truly made Presbyters first, cannot be true and
complete Bishops. But for his Very Sacerdotes, we say, as there are no such
Priests under the Gospel, so is there no need, that Bishops should first be
made such; for Priests in the Romish sense are such as in their Ordination
receive a power of Sacrificing for the quick and the dead, i. e. a real
offering up again the Son of God to his Father. And because we presume not to
take this power, therefore they usually reproach us, that we have no Priests,
none that can consecrate or make the Lords body, none that can absolve or
reconcile Penitents.

As for our selves, Our warrant for our Gospel Ministry.
we have sufficient warrant and Commission for the power we take and use in the
Gospel Ministry. To Teach and Baptize, S. Mat. 28. to Bind, and to Loose, S.
Mat. 18. or, to Remit and retain Sins, S. John 20. and, he has given or
committed to us, (says Saint Paul 2 Cor. 5.18.) the Ministry of
reconciliation, which stands in the dispensation of the Word and Sacraments.
What the Romanists pretend for their Priesthood.
Now if we ask them, to show their Commission for that power of Sacrificing,
they cannot direct us to any express Word of God, but lead us about, to seek it
in the figurative and hyperbolical expressons of the Fathers; from which they
would force these two Propositions, That there is such a real and external
Sacrifice under the Gospel; and, That our Savior Christ did really and truly
offer himself up to his Father in his last Supper; from whence they conclude,
If there be such a Sacrifice, then are there Sacrificers and Priests? If Christ
offered up himself in his last Supper, then so it is still, for he bad Do this,
S. Luke 22.19. I do not mean to follow Champny here step by step, for the runs
into the controversy of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, heaping up the
sayings of the Fathers, usually alleged by their Writers, and as often answered
and cleared by ours. I shall not examine those savings particularly, but stay
upon some Generals, which may in brief show the meaning of that manner of
speech, the fathers commonly used in and about the celebration of the
Eucharist: The high presumption of the Romanists in taking to themselves such a
power of Sacraficing; and Their Vanity in reproaching us, for not assuming it.

3. Whether Christ offered himself up in the Iast Supper.
First, It is true that some Fathers seem to say, Christ offered himself up in
his Last Supper; but it is evident they meant it not really and properly (for
how could it be so, where there was no real effusion of his blood, no real
occision or death) but mystically, or as Saint Augustine sometimes expresses
it, significante mysterio, in a Mystery or Sacrament, signifying or
representing his Sa ifice or Offering on the Cross presently to follow: that
Sacramentum Dominici Saerificii, Sacrament of the Lords Sacrifice, as Saint
Cyprian calls it, Ep. 63. ad Cacil. The Sacrament then, at his Last Supper,
showing the Lords death, that should be, or the Sacrifice that should be
offered on the Cross: and the Sacrament now showing the Lords death that was,
and the Sacrifice that was Offered. All the wit the Romanists have, cannot make
the Offering up of himself in the Last Supper (as they phansy it) and after
upon the Cross, to consist upon any reasonable terms; for as they may not say,
there were two several Offerings up of the Son of God, so they cannot make them
really the same. The Apostle tells us often in his Epistle to the Hebrews, cap.
7. cap. 9. cap. 10. He offered once to take away Sin: and the Romanists dare
not say he offered himself twice for the sins of the World; Yet saying that he
offered himself really in the Supper, and on the Cross, (where the Time and
Place was several, and the Manner of Offering, as to the very nature of a real
external Sacrifice, quite diverse: for it was without bloodshed and death in
the Supper, but with both on the Cross) they must needs say, He twice Offered
himself; and all the cunning they have, cannot make once and twice here to be
really the same, or to consist upon any terms free from contradiction. Relation
of the Eucharist, to this Sacrifice of the Cross. 5.


4. Champny endeavoring to clear the relation, which the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist, has to that of the Cross, is forced to make a wide difference
between them, and indeed to come to that, which we allow in the Eucharist, as
it is a Sacrament, without placing such a Sacrifice in it as they vainly
contend for. The Sacrifice of the Cross (says he, page 704.) is absolute and
independent, which has his effect, ex propria sua efficacia, valor and
virtute, from his own Efficacy, Value and Virtue: but the sacrifice of
Eucharist, is respectivum dependens and applicativum, relative to that
Sacrifice on the Cross, depending on it, and borrowing totamsuam propitiandi
Vim a Sacrificio crucis, all the propitiatory force it has, from that on the
Cross; Lastly, it is applicative of the Sacrifice of the Cross, applicando nob
is crucis merita and Valorem, it applies, says he, unto us the merits of that
Sacrifice. Again, for the dependencie of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist upon
that of the Cross, he acknowledges there, in effectu suo non minu quam ^lim
Judeorum sacrifisia ab eo dependere, that it depends no less upon it, as to his
effect and force, then the Judaical Sacrifices did. And page 707. he makes the
effect of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, in and by the virtue of the Sacrifice
of the Cross, to be as the Working of the Second Cause, by the cooperation of
the First. And endeavoring to show how the propitiatory virtue, attributed to
the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, does not derogat from the sufficiency of the
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Cross, he cannot do it, but by making the one
medium applicationis, a means appointed to apply the other unto us; and this he
proves by the Acts of Faith and Repentance, which besides the Sacrifice of the
Cross are required in us, to make it effectual to us: and by Baptism Ordained
of God to apply his blood to us; and neither of these derogatory to the
sufficiency of the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Cross. Thus he, page
714.723.7^6.

5. Now in all this we may observe what a wide difference is made between the
Sacrifice in the Eucharist, and on the Cross, and thereupon how impossible it
is to make them one and the same; also how senseless it is, to affirm this of
Christ offering himself up in the Eucharist, whether we consider the dependency
acknowledged, to say Christ's offering himself up in the Eucharist had not
efficacy of it self but dependently of an other offering up of himself: or
whether we consider the application spoken of, to say that Christ offered
himself up in the Eucharist, to apply the merit of his Cross unto us; But to
let pass these and many more Absurdities which follow upon their saying, Christ
offered himself up in the Last Supper, we may farther observe, how the
Romanists, after all their contending for a real, proper, and propitiatory
sacrifice, are fain to make it but applicative, and that is it which we ascribe
to the Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament appointed for this end and purpose, that
by it the Sacrifice of the Cross may be applied to us. The greater is their
presumption, that have taken off this applicative virtue from the Eucharist, as
a Sacrament appointed of God to that end, and ascribe it to the Eucharist under
the notion of a Sacrifice of their own devising; have drawn off the people from
seeking it in the Eucharist, of which they are made partakers, to expect it
from the Mass, which is performed by the Priest alone. Romish vain pretense
from Do this.
So finely do they plead for this their Sacrifice by our Saviors bidding us Do
this, and so plainly practice against it; for whereas our Savior saying, Do
this, commands the whole Action of the Sacrament, viz. Consecration and
participation, that which belongs to the Priest to do, to bless, consecrate,
distribute, and that which belongs to Priest and people to do, to take, eat,
and drink, as the Apostle plainly shows, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. the Romanists
will not do this accordingly, but in the Eucharist suffer not the people to
drink of the Cup, denying them therein the application of Christ's blood shed on
the Cross; and in the Sacrifice of their Mass, they restrain, [ do this] to
that only which the Priest does, as in their daily private Masses.

6. Of the Fathers placing a acrifice in the Eucharish.
Secondly. It is true, that the Fathers often speak of the Eucharist as of a
Sacrifice, and that they say Melchisedech's Bread and Wine prefigured it, and
that they often apply the words of Malachy, cap. 1.11. a pure offering to it:
and a great noise is made by the Romanists of the sayings of Fathers upon these
places, and all to no purpose. For what if some Fathers thought, Melchisedech
sacrificed not in Beasts as the Aaronical Priests did, Of Melchisedechs Bread
and Wine applied thereunto.
but in Bread and Wine, and out of that Bread and Wine, so presanctified and
offered before to God, he refreshed Abraham and his company? and what if they
make application of this to the Eucharist? it will but amount to this at the
most: that He, who was Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedech, should
likewise take of Gods creatures, (as Ireneus speaks) Bread and Wine, and
consecrate them into the Sacrament of his body and blood, to be offered up in
Sacrifice unto God, and to be communicated, as spiritual refection, to them
that come to receive it. And so the Eucharist (whether considered as first
celebrated by our Savior, or as after by us) is the representation and showing
of that Sacrifice, 1 Cor. 11.26. and the participation or Communion of it, 1
Cor. 10.16, 17. That this was prefigured in Melchisedechs Bread and Wine, as
offered to God, and brought forth to Abraham, is all that by any force of
reason can be driven out of the expressions of the Fathers.

And for that other place of Malachi, Of Malachi his pure offering applied
thereto.
of Incense and a pure offering diverse Fathers give us the immediate and direct
sense: Tertullian says, It is Oration simplex de conscientia pura, unfeined
prayer from a pure Conscience, lib. 4. contra Marcionem, cap. 1. Eusebius in
his first book de demonstr. Evangel. cap. 6. makes it the same with that
worship, our Savior speaks of, S. John 4.23. in spiritu and veritate, puroque
obsequio, a Worshipping of God in Spirit and in Truth, and with pure obedience.
Hierom also tells us it is here foretold that the prayers of the Saints were to
be offered to God, not in one place or province, but every where. Now the
usual exception of Romanists (which Champny also pleads here) is, that such
prayer, and spiritual Offerings were required under the Law, and therefore some
Other external Offering, and diverse from all that was before, must be meant by
the Prophet. But this Exception has no force for sure our Savior spoke
pertinently, when he opposed the Worship in spirit and Truth, (S. John 4.23.)
to the Jewish manner of Worshipping, notwithstanding that it was required of the
Jews to Worship in Spirit and Truth. For there is a double difference of this
Christian Worship from that under the Law; One in the Manner of performance of
it among the Gentiles, purely without mixture of external Sacrifices, or Legal
performances, in respect to which Saint Paul calls it (...), reasonable
service, Romans 12.1. and Eusebius, lib. 1. de Demonstr. Evang. gives us this
reason, why Malachi calls it, sacrificium mundum, a pure offering; because, the
Gentiles were to offer to the high God, non per cruores, not with the blood of
Beasts as under the Law, but per pias actiones by holy spiritual Acts and
Duties: Another difference was in the place; The whole Worship and offerings of
the Gentiles were to be performed to God in every place: Our Savior tells us
it was not to be bound either to Jerusalem, or to Samaria, S. John 4.22. and
Saint Paul tells us of lifting up pure hands in every place, 2 Timothy 2. and
Eusebius in the place forecited, showing how the Religion of the Patriarchs
before the Law agreed with the Christians, makes this one Instance, because
they did in omni loco adorare, Worship in all places, and then proves it by
this place of Malchi, that the Christians should do so. As for the Fathers that
applied this pure Offering to the Eucharist, they might well do it upon the
former account: the Eucharist having his name, from the Sacrifice of praise,
and being that great and solemn performance, wherein the pure Offering of
Prayer and Praise, and the devoting of our selves to Gods service is specially
made. But it will be said, the Fathers apply this Pure Offering of Malachi to
the Eucharist, in respect of the body and blood of Christ there offered up: It
is true, that some of them so express it, and it is no more, then what they
often say, without relation to that place of Malachi, according to their usual
manner of speech: but far from the Romish sense or purpose; as it remains to
show in the next place.

7. The meaning of the Fathers speaking of a Sacrifice in the Eucharist.
Thirdly. However the Fathers used for the most part to speak of this Mystery
of the Eucharist Mystically and obscurely, under the properties of the things
signified, rather then of the external Symbols, and therefore seeming to imply
a real Conversion of Transubstantiation of the Symbols into the Body and blood
of Christ, and a real Sacrifice, or Offering up of that Body and blood again in
the Eucharist, yet do they sometimes punctually, and positively express their
meaning by the Memorial, Representation, and showing in the Sacrament what was
done upon the Cross; and this they learnt from Saint Paul, who tells us, 1 Cor.
11.26. to do this is to remember, and to show the Lords death. And for their
mystical and figurative manner of speech they had his his example too, Gal.
3.1. Crucified amongst you; Was Christ really and properly crucified amongst
the Galatians? No, but by description, setting forth, or representation of his
Death and Passion often made among them in the Word and Sacraments. Now for
this explication of this manner of speech used by the Fathers, I shall instance
only in three of them. First, in Chrysostom, who of all the Fathers speaks
most high and Hyperbolically in this matter of the Eucharist; and the place
shall be that which Champny here cites, as advantageous to his cause; Homil.
17. in Hebr. he puts these questions: Do we not offer daily? Offerimus quidem,
(says he) sed mortem ejus in memoriam revocamus, we offer, but it is by making
a remembrance of his death. Again, because we offer often, quomodo una est and
non multae? how is his death or offering up but one and not many? Hoc est,
says he, figura illius, what we do is the figure of that. And because, he is
offered in many places, Multine sunt Christi? are there many Christ's? No, hoc
fit in recordationem ejus quod tunc factum: What we do, is done in remembrance
of what was then done by him. Lastly, We offer not aliam Hostiam, another
Sacrifice, but Eandem semper facimus, vel potius hostiae, seu sacrificii
recordationem facimus, we offer always the same that Christ did, or rather
(mark this correcting of himself) we make a remembrance of his oblation or
Sacrifice. He would be accounted a Lutheran or Heretic in the Church of Rome
that should so answer to these questions. Next, S. Augustine, Ep. 23. solves
the like question. Christ (says he) was once immolatus in semetipso, offered
up or sacrificed in himself, but is he not also daily in the Sacrament? Non
Mentitur qui interrogatus respondet, immolari: he should not lie, that being
asked that question, should answer, He is offered up: and what is his reason?
quia Similitudinem, because of that near similitude, which Sacraments have of
those things, of which they are Sacraments. But Champny and the Romanists do
lie, when they say, Immolatur, He is offered up in their sense ( i. e. really,
properly) and when they say, the Priest has power so to offer him up. But we
do not lie, if we say (as the Fathers did) Christ is offered in the Eucharist,
or that the Eucharist is his Death and Passion, or that the Bread and Wine is
his Body and Blood, or that he is truly present in the Sacrament. Yea in such
attributions of the thing signified to the Sacrament, Questions made by
Sacramental attributions to be answered affirmatively, rather then negatively.
we ought to answer affirmatively; and that because of the similitude and near
union between the Sacrament and the thing signified; but especially because of
the effect to which God has ordained the Sacrament, that it should be so
really to us, in the true application of the Sacrifices of the Cross to us, in
our real Communion and participation of his body and blood, in our real
conjunction unto Christ. Many other places there are of the same Father to the
like purpose, as lib. 20. contra Faustum, cap. 21. speaking of the respect
which the Sacrifice before, and the Eucharist after, had to the Sacrifice of
the Cross, in those says he, promittebatur, it was promised: in his Passion
the flesh and blood of Christ's Sacrifice per ipsam veritatem reddebatur; was
truly and really exhibited; but after his ascension per sacramentune memoriae
celebratur, it is celebrated by the Sacrament of Remembrance: And as he is
cited by Gratian, de Consecr. Did. 2. Vocatur immolatio -- that offering that
is made by the hands of the Priest is called the Sacrifice, the Passion and
Crucifixion of Christ, non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio, not that it
is so in truth and very deed, but in a mystery signifying and representing it.
Lastly, let Eusebius speak, who in his first book de Demonstr. Evang. cap. 10.
accurately sets down and clears this whole business of the Eucharist; There he
shows why Christians do not offer Beasts in Sacrifice as the Patriarchs did
before the Law: because all such are taken away in Christ's Sacrifice, which
they did prefigure; also, because Christians have Spiritual Sacrifices now to
offer unto God, but foretold in the Psalms, and the Prophets; and thereupon he
tells us the relation of the Eucharist to the Sacrifice on the Cross; Christ
says he, offered a wonderful Sacrifice, for our Salvation to his Father, and
instituted ((...)) the memory thereof to be offered by us to God, for or in
stead of a Sacrifice. Again, Hujus Sacrificii memoriam in mensa per Symbola
corporis and sanguinis ipsius -- The remembrance of this his Sacrifice at the
Holy Table by the Symbols of his body and blood we have received according to
the institution of the New Testament, and thereupon Incruentas and rationales
Victimas, we offer to God unbloudy and reasonable Sacrifices by the most
eminent High Priest; (whereas the Romanists will have us offer up the High
Priest himself.) And what are those unbloody Sacrifices, The unbloody
Evangelical Sacrifices.
which we offer up at the Lords Table, as he calls it, or at the Altar, as the
Fathers commonly speak? He there numbers them punctually, Sacrificamus,
memoriam magni illius Sacrificii celebrantes, etc. We Sacrifice by celebrating
the Memory of that great Sacrifice on the Cross; by giving thanks to God for
our Redemption; by offering up holy prayers and Religious Hymns; Lastly, by
dedicating our selves wholly to him in Word, body and Soul. So that Ancient
and learned Father.

8. Vain exception or Reply of the Romanists.
All that the Romanists have to reply unto the Evidence of these and other
Fathers, speaking properly of that respect and relation the Eucharist has to
the Sacrifice on the Cross, comes to this; that the placing of a remembrance or
representation of the Sacrifice of the Cross in the Eucharist, does not hinder
it to be a true and proper Sacrifice also: no more, says Champny, page 699.
then the respect, which the Sacrifices of the Law had to Christ's Sacrifice
hindered them to be true and real Sacrifices. But all this is very impertinent;
for if the Fathers had barely said, there was a remembrance in the Eucharist of
Christ's Sacrifice, it had not excluded a real Sacrifice; but when in explaining
themselves (why they call the Eucharist a Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ, and why they say Christ is there offered up,) they give it for the
reason of their so speaking, because that Sacrifice once offered by our Savior
is there remembered, shown, and represented, it is most plain they did not think
that which is done in the Eucharist to be a real Sacrificing of Christ. Their
Instance also of the Legal Sacrifices is as impertinent, for they were real
Sacrifices in regard of the Beasts really slain, and offered: Now if the
Romanists will have the Bread and Wine (which represent the Body and Blood
which was really offered) to be the real Sacrifice in the Eucharist, then
indeed the remembrance or representation of Christ's Sacrifice there does not
hinder but there may be also an external oblation (and so many Fathers
accounted the Bread and Wine to be, as they were brought and offered to that
Holy use and service) But the Romanists will not say the Bread and Wine is the
Sacrifice, they contend for, but that it is the very Body and Blood which is
offered up; Which Body and Blood being the same, that was offered up upon the
Cross, their Real Sacrifice cannot have help by their instance of the Legal
Sacrifices of the Bodies and blood of Beasts, but stands excluded by the
Fathers, saying, Christ is offered up in the Eucharist by a Mystical
signification, by a remembrance, by representation, as above said. It is very
remarkable what Peter Lombard says to this purpose. The Question he puts is
the same we have in hand, and his Resolution the same we give to it; Si quod
gerit Sacerdos, etc. Whether that, which the Priest does be properly called a
Sacrifice or offering up? and whether Christ is daily offered up, or was but
once? To the first he answers, It is called a Sacrifice, quia memoria est and
representatio very Sacrificii in ara crucis -- because it is the remembrance
and representation of that true Sacrifice on the Cross; To the second, Christ
once died on the Cross, ibique immolatus est in Semetipso, and there was
offered up in himself, or offered up himself indeed, but he is daily offered up
in the Sacrament, quia in Sacramento fit recordatio illins quod factum est
Semel, because in the Sacrament, there is made a remembrance of that, which was
done once upon the Cross. Bellarmines answer here is a miserable shift; That
the Master of the Sentences by this does not deny a real Sacrifice in the
Sacrament, Another vain exception,
but a real Occision or killing of Christ. For as this is plainly impertinent
to Lombards resolution of the question, so is it to that which Bellarmine and
all of them do and must grant, that in a real Sacrifice there must be a real
destruction or consumption of the thing Sacrificed: and they are as hard put to
it, to show this destruction or consumption of the Body and Blood of Christ, as
to show his Occision; for at last it comes to this with them, that the Species
of Bread and Wine under which they will have his body and blood to be, are
destroyed, and not his body indeed. A fair reckoning. This place of Lambard was
cited by Mason, and Champny perceiving, as it seems, the weakness of
Bellarmines answer, does wisely take no notice of it, altogether omitting to
speak any thing to it. But to my apprehension it is very considerable, 1.
Because it was the purpose and work of the Master of the Sentences to gather a
body of Theology, or Resolutions to all Theological Doubts, out of the
Sentences of the Fathers: and to this Quare of a Real Sacrifice, he could draw
out of them no other resolution then what we have heard. 2. Because it is a
clear evidence, how this present Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching a
real Sacrifice, was not formed or believed so long after the age of those
Fathers, they so much boast of. The sum of all is this. The Fathers usually
expressed the Celebration or work of the Eucharist by the Words of Sacrifice,
or offering up the Body of Christ for themselves and others, because there was
a Representing of the real Sacrifice of the Cross, and a Presenting (as we may
say) of it again to God for the impetration or obtaining of the benefits
thereof for themselves, and for all those, they remembered in the Celebration of
the Eucharist.

9. Fourthly, Of prayer and Offering for the Dead.
It is true, that the Ancient Fathers speak of offering this Sacrifice for the
dead, but far from the Popish sense, according to which, Romish Priests in
their Ordination are said to receive Power to offer Sacrifice for the Quick and
Dead: For that offering for the Dead, which the Ancients speak of, in the
Celebration of the Eucharist, had the same extent, purpose and meaning, that
their prayers there for the dead had; and these anciently were made for those,
whom they judged to be in bliss; Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Holy Bishops,
etc. and the purposes of the Church, in remembering those in her public
prayers, were many: as we find in the Ancient Writers, especially Epiphanius,
Haer. 75. I may reduce them to these heads. First, They were Acknowledgments of
the honor and pre-eminence of Christ above all men, that all they stood in need
of mercy, and that he only was not to be prayed for, but to be prayed to; (note
all Invocation of Saints stood excluded then by these prayers for the Dead) of
the happy estate of those they prayed for, that they lived with God; Of their
own hope, that they trusted to attain to the same state of bliss. Secondly,
they were Thanksgivings for their sleeping in the Lord. Thirdly, Petitions for
that which was yet behind, for their consummation: that which Saint Paul calls
the Redemption of the body, Romans 8.23. the Crown of Righteousness to be given
in the last day, 2 Timothy 4.8. the Mercy, which he prays Onesiphorus may find
in that day, 2. Tim. 1.18. The Arcient Prayer, which is yet retained in the
Canon of the Mass, sounds to this purpose; Remember O Lord, the Souls of thy
Servants, which rest in the sleep of Peace, -- This prayer indeed seems to be
framed with respect to that opinion, which anciently was very common in the
Church, that the Souls of just men were not admitted into the sight and
presence of God till the Resurrection, but kept in Receptacles of Rest, Peace
and Light, of blessed comfort and refreshment: yet it tells us, that which they
prayed for them, was in regard of all the mercy and glory that was behind; And
it is plain by the Writers of those times, that this remembering of the Dead,
thus in the Celebration of the Eucharist (which was the representation of
Christ's Sacrifice) was that which the Ancients called Offering for them, or as in
Saint Augustines time, Offering the Sacrifice of the Altar, or the Sacrifice of
our Savior for them, i.e. an acknowledging of, and thanksgiving for their
sleeping ( pro dormitione, as Saint Cypr. and others) in the Lord, and their
saving by the merits of his death: and an Impetration (by his Sacrifice then
represented) of all that mercy, redemption and glory which was yet behind. Thus
Saint Augustine in his Confessions speaks of Offering for his Mother Monica,
(whom he doubted not to be in bliss) i. e. remembering her upon the like
respects.

The Romanists have applied all prayers and Offering for the Dead to the Souls
in Purgatory: Romish misapplication of all to the Souls in Purgatory.
Bellarmine tells us, the Mass may be said in honor of Saints, and with
invocation of them, lib. 2. de Mis. cap. 8. so contrary does the Church of Rome
now run to Antiquity, which offered for and prayed for the Saints, and both in
the honor of Christ and his Sacrifice -- Now the Offering of their Mass, and
the prayers for the dead are made for the souls in purgatory: and in regard of
them only it is, that the Romish Priests receive power to offer Sacrifice for
the Dead. And accordingly they are bound to apply the aforementioned prayer, (
Remember O Lord, etc.) to the Souls in Purgatory: but so untowardly, that
Bellarmine, answering for the Canon of the Mass, could not with all his wit
come off any better then thus; They rest (says he) from the works of sin,
though not from Torment. So then to lie in Torment, is to rest in the sleep of
peace.

10. Indeed in the fourth Century, they began to inquire, what benefit of the
prayers and oblations of the Church might redound to them, which were not in
requie, in rest and sleep of peace, but in aerumna, in trouble and grief after
this life. The second Quaere ad Dulcitium, is to that purpose; where Saint
Augustine says, that Paulinus had also consulted him about it. Now to this
Quaere, they spoke their private opinions, such as their compassion to the dead
suggested: Saint Augustine delivers his in that place, ad Dulcitium; in his
Enchirid c. 109. and in his book de cura pro Mortuis -- Which book was also
occasioned by a like quaere put to him by Paulinus out of like curiosity:
Private conceits about a Purging fire.
Whether it was any help to the dead, to have their bodies buried near the
Memories or Tombs of Martyrs? Then also was enquiry made after some kind of
purging fire to help such as held the Foundation, dying in the profession of
Christian Faith, but whose lives were not answerable: as we may see by Saint
Augustine, Lib. de fide and oper, (where cap. 1. and 15. he confutes them, who
conceived, by mistake of the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 3.15. that those which
dyed, professed of the Christian says, might be purged from all their evil
works by some fire, and so come to salvation, merito fundamenti, by reason of
the foundation held) also in his Enchirid: cap. 109. and in 1. quest. ad
Dulcitium, and in his 20. and 21. books, de Civ. Dei. Now though they differed
in their conceits about this fire, whether it was immediately after death, or at
last day commonly called Ignis conflagrationis; and about the Persons to be
purged and helped by it; yet all of them seem to conceive it to be a fire of
Passage only for souls to go through to their appointed receptacles; not a fire
of Durance, for souls to lie in, as in a receptacle till the day of judgment,
as the Romanists believe it. All that Augustine concludes upon it, is nothing
but uncertainty: Tale aliquid, some such thing may be after this life; and
quaeri potest -- it may be put to the question, and non est incredibile, it is
not incredible, and forsitan verum est, perchance it may be true, so he of it,
in the forementioned places. We see by this how from the curiosity of some of
the Ancients enquiring after relief and help for those Dead, whose state was of
more uncertain condition, Romish superstition has taken her rise: and how from
the private opinions, and uncertain conceits of some of the Ancients, length of
Time and strength of Romish presumption has framed Articles of Faith: this of
Purgatory for one; in respect to which and relief of the Souls tormented
therein, their Priests receive power to offer Sacrifice, even the body and
blood of our Savior.

11. Now to conclude. By all that has been said, it appears how groundless,
unwarrantable, and presumptuous this power is, which the Romish Priests pretend
to; and how that power which our Priests or Presbyters receive in ordination,
and use in celebrating the Eucharist, is warranted by the express Word, and
does the whole work of the Sacrament sufficiently, according to all purposes
that our Savior intended it for, when he said, do this: and according to the
true and proper meaning of the Fathers, speaking usually of a Sacrifice in it.
And this is so much more considerable, because the Romanists place the highest
and chiefest act of Worship Evangelicall in this Sacrifice of the Mass, and
account the chief power and perfection of Evangelicall Priesthood or
ministration, ( totam vel maximam perfectionem sacri Ordinis, says Champny,
page 184.) to be in this real Sacrificing, or offering up the body and blood
of Christ. And therefore it is most strange that in all the Evangelicall
Writings, there should be no Precept for such a Worship, no institution of such
a Sacrifice, no commission for using such a power: and that seeing the Apostle
had often just occasion to speak of such a Sacrifice and Priesthood in his
Epistle to the Hebrews; nay, had all the reason that could be to have
acquainted them with it, had there been any such; whereas we show express
commands for that way of Worship we retein, (which with the Romanists is
nothing in comparison of their Mass.) We show direct commission for that power
we use, of Preaching, Binding, Loosing, consecrating and celebrating the
Sacraments, which they account but dependent, and subservient to the power of
making the body of Christ and offering it up. As for their pretense by our
Saviors command Do this, we found them thereby engaged to affirm that Christ
offered himself up to his Father for the sins of the world in the Sacrament,
flat contrary to the tenor of the Gospel which yields that only to the Cross:
and expressly contrary to Saint Paul who affirms, he offered himself but once
for sin, Heb. cap. 7. and cap. 9. see above Number. 3. And when they have
persuaded themselves of this untruth, that Christ offered himself up in the
Eucharist, how can they assure themselves that do this warrants them to do all
they suppose he did, i.e. to offer him up, as he did himself? It is enough for
us men to do this, as a Sacramental action, blessing, distributing, eating,
drinking; and by adding to it in remembrance of me, he plainly shows he meant
no real Sacrifical action, by offering him up again, but the Sacramental only,
by representing and remembering his once offering up himself to death, and so
the Apostle tells us, Do this imports, 1 Cor. 11. How great presumption is this
for Mortal man to take upon him thus to offer up the Son of God? Bell lib. 3.
Bellarm. vain exception to excuse the Romish presumption.
de Pontif. To.c. 19. writing of Antichrist, and answering to this, as a piece
of Antichristianisme charged upon the Church of Rome, dare not simply affirm
that the Priest offers up Christ, but that Christ offers up himself, per manus
Sacerdotis, by the hands of the Priest. Whether Bellarmine mend or mar his
business here, its hard to say; This, we know, that Christ our High Priest
(according to the Apostle, Heb. 7.25. and 9.24.) is in Heaven at Gods right
hand, executing his eternal Priesthood, by interceding for us, and in that
representing still what he has done and suffered for us: And we know, we have
warrant and his appointment, to do the like Sacramentally here below, i.e. in
the celebration of the Eucharist to remember his Death, and Passion, and to
represent his own Oblation upon the Cross, and by it to beg and impetrate, what
we or the Church stand in need of: We know also, that as He gives His Ministers
Commission and Authority to do this, so he assists them here below by his power
and grace; But that Christ should daily here below offer himself up personally
(for this Bellarmine must affirm in his qualifying of the Romis^ presumption)
by the hands of the Priest, is inconsistent with that once offering of himself
on the Cross, and with the present performance of his Priesthood in Heaven,
where he is ever to intercede for us, Heb. 7.25. and to appear in the sight of
God for us, Heb. 9.24. This also would turn our Saviors command Do this in
remembrance of me (by which the Romanists pretend to take thus much upon them)
into a promise, I will do this in remembrance of my self, by your hands: A
meaning of our Saviors words, which the Apostle knew not, when he told the
Corinthians, what it was to do this; so often as ye eat -- and drink this -- 1
Cor. 11. Yea, the Priest says directly in order of their Mass: Suscipe Pater
-- hanc Hostiam -- quam ego indignus servus tuus offero tibi -- Receive, O
Father, this Sacrifice -- which I thine unworthy servant do offer up unto thee
-- They that composed this prayer knew not that Christ (as the Cardinal
contrives it) offered up himself there by the hands of the Priest, or rather
knew not that Christ was there really offered; but by the ( Hanc Hostiam, this
Sacrifice) meant as the ancient Fathers did, as shown above. Furthermore it is
considerable, that to maintain this presumptuously assumed power the Romanists
have nothing but words and Figurative speeches, used by the Fathers in this
mystery, which as was noted above, N. 7. cannot bear the real and proper
Sacrificing asserted by the Church of Rome. Lastly, it is considerable, when
they are pressed to the point to show how this offering in the Eucharist and on
the Cross can consist, and how his daily Offering up in their Mass (which they
make propitiatory) can stand without derogation to his propitiatory Sacrifice
on the Cross, they are fain to make the one absolute, the other but relative
and depending wholly on the other, and to acknowledge this their real and
propitiatory Sacrifice to be but a means of applying the benefit, and that
Sacrifice on the Cross. And this comes home to that we say of the Sacrament,
for God has appointed the Sacraments to that purpose, of the applying the
benefit of Christ's passion and Sacrifice, and to that purpose we use them as is
noted above, N. 4.5.

All this considered, We see how needless, unwarrantable and presumptuous a
thing this their Sacrifice of the Mass, and that such also is the power of
Sacrificing given to their Priests, and how vainly they reproach us for not
assuming, and as vainly question the lawful calling of our Bishops.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, LONDON.
A Collection of all the several Tracts and Sermons formerly published, by
Henry Fern, D. D.
1. THe Resolving of the Conscience, etc.

2. Conscience satisfied, etc.

3. A Reply to several Treatises, etc.

4. Of the Division between the English and Romish Church upon the Reformation.

5 Episcopacy and Presbytery considered, etc.

6. A Sermon preached at the public Fast, the 12. day of April, at St.
Mary's Oxford, etc.

7. A Sermon preached before his Majesty at Newport in the Isle of Wight, etc.

1. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the books of the New Testament, briefly
explaining all difficult places thereof, by H^ury Hammond, D. D. in fol.

2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of H. Hammond,
D. D in two volumes in 4o.

3. Dissertiones quatuor, quibus Episcopacus Jura ex S. Scripturis and primaeva
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and altorum. Authore
Henrico Ham nond, in 4o.

4. A Letter of Resolution of fix Quaere's, in 12o.

By Jer: Tailor, D. D.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays in the Year; Fitted to the
great Necessities, and for the supplying the wants of Preaching in many parts
of this Nation. Together with a Discourse of the Divine Institution. Necessity,
Sacredness, and Separation of the Office Ministerial, in fol.

2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4o.

3. The History of the Life and Death of the Everblessed Jesus Christ, 2d.
Edit: in fol.

4. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o.

5. An Apology for authorized and Set-forms of Liturgy; in 4o.

6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon all Believers in
4o.

7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12o.

8. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12o.

9. A short Catechism for institution of young persons in the Christian
Religion, in 12o.

Certamen Religiosum, or, a Conference between the late King of England, and
the Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle; Together
with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Christopher Cartwright, in 4o.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Christopher Hatton, in 12o.

Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted
souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12o.

The Life of Faith in Dead Times, by Chr: Hudson, in 12o.

Motives for prayer upon the seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker
Knight, in 12o.

The Guide unto true blessedness, or a body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
directing man to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in 12o.

Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions, preached by Edward Willan Vicar
of Hoxne, in 4o.

The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by
Daniel Featly, D. D. in 4o.

Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury: new descants upon old Records, by
Theoph. Wodnote, in 12o.

Philosophical Elements, concerning Government and Civil society: by Tho:
Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o.

A Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir George Strode Knight, in 12o.

The Saints Hony-Combe full of Divine Truths, by Richard Gove Preacher of
Henton Saint George in Somersetshire, in 8o.

Directions for the profitable reading of Scriptures, by John White M. A. in 8o.

The Exemplary Lives and Memorable Acts of 9. the most worthy women of the
world, 3. Jews, 3. Gentiles, 3. Christians, by Thomas Haywood, in 4o.

The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of Promises out of the Word of God, in
12o.

Judicium Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solenni Liga^ and Foedere, Juramente
Negative, etc. in 8o.

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversaries of our times, by Jasper Main, D. D. in 4o.

Ianua Linguarum Reserata, five omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarum,
Auctore Cl. Viro I. A. Comenio, in 8o.

A Treatise concerning Divine Providence, very seasonable for all Ages, by
Thomas Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8o.

Animadversions upon M. Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observations upon Sir
Walter I. ^leighs History of the World, by Alexander Rosse in 12o.

Fifty Sermons preached by that learned and reverend Divine, John Done, in fol.

Wits Commonwealth, in 12o.

The Banquet of Jests new and old, in 12o.

Balzal's Letters the 4th part, in 8o.

Quarles Virgin Widow, a Play, in 4o.

Solomon's Recantation, in 4o.

Amesii Antisynodalia, in 12o.

Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by John Tombs in 12o.

Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountaine's Letter, in 4.

A Tract of Fortifications, with 22 brass cuts, in 8.

Dr. Griffith's Sermon Preached at S. Paul's, in 4.

Blessed birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o.

A Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical, in 4.

An Account of the Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation, by
Edw: Boughen D D in 4.

An Advertisement to the Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the
Author of the Observations upon Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4.

The Commoners Liberty or the English man's Birthright in 4.

An Expedient for co^posing differences in Religion, in 4.

The holy life and death of the late Vi countess Falkland, in 12.

Englands faithful Reprover and Monitour. Directed,

1. To the Church of England.

2. To the inferior Ministers of the Gospel.

3. To the Nobility and Gentry.

4. To the expulsed Members of the University, and to those now abiding therein.

5. To the Judges, Lawyers, etc.

6. To the City of London.

7. To the seduced of this Nation, and to as many as have separated themselves
from the Communion of our Church.

8. To the whole body of this Nation.

9. A Post script to the Reader,

The Author a Sequestered Divine.

FINIS.

