A Few PROPOSALS Offered In humility and in the spirit of meekness, to the
Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

Holding forth A MEDIUM or ESSAY FOR The Removing of TITHES, and establishing a
Maintenance for A Godly Ministry in the Nation: Such as may be satisfying to
the Consciences of all Sober-minded Men, and injurious to no Man's just
Propriety or Interest.

Which were some time since presented to the Parliament, by several
well-affected People in the County of Suffolk;

And now published By a Well-wisher to England's Peace, and the Gospels
Prosperity.

London, Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1659.

A Few PROPOSALS Offered In Humility and in the Spirit of Meekness, TO THE
Supreme Authority, the Parliament OF The COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND.
1. THat all the Tithes within this Commonwealth, be exposed to sale at so many
years purchase, as in the wisdom of the Parliament shall be thought meet; that
so every man may by buying in his own Tithes, free his Estate from that
Encumbrance: and in case any shall refuse to purchase his own Tithes, liberty
be given for any other man to buy them. 2. That all Glebe-Lands,
Parsonage-Houses, Deans and Chapters lands, and all other Revenues whatsoever
belonging to the Ministry, be sold, except such only where a preaching
Minister is to be settled. 3. That a survey be taken of the number and
convenience of all the public meeting-places or Churches in this Commonwealth,
that so supernumeraries may be abolished; and where there is a deficiency,
supply may be made according to a rule of proportion in that case to be
provided. 4. That with the Moneys arising out of the said Sales, Lands may be
purchased in or near every such Town where a preaching Minister is to be
settled; which together with the Glebes and other Lands and Revenues before
reserved for that end, may make up a competent maintenance for every such
Minister; as suppose 80 l. per annum for every Minister in the Country, and 100
li. per annum for the Minister in every Market Town. 5. That these Lands so
Purchased and set apart by Authority for the Maintenance of the Ministry, may
be in the posfession, and at the dispose of every such Minister, to be by him
improved to the best Advantage for the maintenance of him and his Family, and
not brought into a public Treasury. 6. That in case there shall be a
redundancy or overplus by the Sales of the former, more then will pay the
purchase of the later, (as it is humbly conceived there may be) the same may be
put into a public Treasury, and improved (the stock and principal being always
preserved) for the relief of such Ministers as may possibly by this alteration
be laid aside, and have no other way of Livelihood; and also for the Widows and
Orphans of such Ministers as may without their Sin, and abuse of Mercy, be left
in a Poor and Necessitous Condition; that so good Ministers may be delivered
from the Fear, and their Wives and Children from the Reproach and Misery of
unavoydable Poverty. 7. That in case there should not be sufficient by the
Sales of the one, to discharge and pay for the purchase of the other, a
voluntary Contribution be made by all persons within this Commonwealth, who are
well-affected to so good a work; that so the defect may be supplied, and the
redundancy (if any be) employed to the aforesaid ends. 8. Lastly, that persons
of known fidelity, and good affection to the work, be employed in the
management of this Affair, and a convenient space of time given wherein the
same may be effected, and a set time fixed for the receiving and paying of all
such Moneys as shall be due either to or from the State upon such Contracts:
that so at one and the same time the one may be removed, and the other
introduced, and all inconveniences avoided, which otherwise might happen by
fraud and delay in such Transactions.
FINIS.

