GOOD NEWS FROM Lincolne-Shire.

BEING A true Relation of the apprehention of Sir William Ballaudine, (Master
of the Horse to the Prince Paltsgrave) Sarjeant Major Killaway, Sarjeant Major
D^lman, and diverse other Commanders who were going to assist the King against
the Parliament; and are now ordered to be brought up to LONDON.

ALSO The Abstract of an Oath of Association (or Confederacy) of diverse
ill-affected persons in the County of York: with some of the neighboring
Counties, for the raising an Army of Horse and foot, under the Command of the
Earl of Cumberland.

Printed for William Gifford. September. 5. 1642.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM LINCOLNE-SHIRE: Being a true Relation of the apprehending
of Sir William Ballaudine, (Master of the Horse to the Prince Paltsgrave)
Serieant Mayor Killaway, Serieant Mayor Dolman, and diverse other Commanders,
who are ordered to be brought up to London.
Also the Oath of Association of diverse ill-affected persons in Yorkshire with
the neighboring Countries, for the raising of an Army of Horse and Foot under
the command of the Earl of Cumberland.
Upon Thursday morning last, being the first of September, when the Committee
for the defense of the Kingdom sat in the usual place, in the Court of Wards,
information was given to them of a ship, that lately struck in at a Creek in
Lincolnshire, where it has not been known that any ship has landed
heretofore, and there landed out of the ship eleven men, and many trunks of a
great weight, but the ship was lanched forth again to the sea, and the Country
rose and had taken ten of the men, but the eleventh being (as is reported)
Gentleman of the Prince Paltsgraves Horse was escaped away for the present, but
was afterward apprehended: for upon Friday following the second of September,
the Parliament received information by certain men that came out of
Lincolnshire, that Sir William Ballaudine, together with Serieant Mayor
Killaway, and Serieant Mayor Dolman, with diverse other Commanders are taken in
Lincolnshire, and commanded to be brought upon, because it is conceived they
were going to the King to assist him against the Parliament. Many out of every
Country (espeically those that are well-affected to the good of the Kingdom)
are willing and forward to manifest their courage for maintaining the peace
thereof against the disturbers of the same. One M. Hill the Under-Sheriffe of
Glourestershire, having ten more with him, met with Sir Ralph Dutton and ten
Cavaliers, who were raising of men against the Parliament in that country,
whereupon the said M. Hill, with the rest of his company, fell upon Sir Ralph
Dutton and his Cavaliers, who so valiantly pursued them, that Sir Ralph Dutton
was forced to swim the river Severne, and took two of the Cavaliers and
brought them up to the Parliament, who had thanks returned them for their
fidelity and pains, with further encouragement to send up all the malignant
Cavaliers, and all those who should endeavor to put in execution the illegal
Commission of Array, if they appear in that Country, and that all Countries
shall do the like.

Since Sir Ralph Dutton fled out of Gloucestershire, he has been very lately
in Hereford-shire, where he thought to have raised five men for the Kings
service against the Parliament: and that he might the better effect his
intended purpose, he has employed several agents to assist him in the raising
of them: but staying there in hopes of men till they could not raise money to
defray ordinary expenses, they were forced to fly from thence without either.

A thousand soldiers being lately sent from London into Hampshire, did pillage
diverse Papists houses by the way, and after they came thither: so that the
Papists in those parts begin to fly, finding their plotting with Col. Goring
to betray Portsmouth, is like to ruin the contrivers of that revolt, since all
the Isle of Wight stands wholly for the King and Parliament.

The Parliaments Forces by the assistance of the trained bands in Hampshire
having besieged Colonel Goring in the town, and seized upon all his
fortifications and other out works, daily plying him with then Ordnance, the
town being divided, and keeping garrison one upon the other, insomuch that
Colonel Goring finding small hope offecurity in the town, and seeing His
Majesty's expected aid intercepted, has thought it most requisite to make the
best of a hard bargain, and having lost all but the last stake, well to
husband it, lest in losing that he become a bankerupt.

Wherefore he has humbly presented his desires to the Commanders of the
Parliaments Forces, wherein are contained these particulars.

That although it were in his own power to keep the town against them, yet so
far he did pity the distressed estate of the town, that to prevent the
effusion of blood he was willing to resign up the town, upon this condition,
that upon the delivery of the said town, his life might be secured, and have
free recourse to his Majesty.

But they knowing that this request made by the Colonel was more for his own
ends, then any intention of good service to the State, still proceed in making
of works, the Pioners being very active in their designs. The soldiers
likewise are very forward, and make several assaults, thinking to draw them
out of the town: but they play least in sight, only playing with their
Ordnance; but, the besiegers being intrencht, they do little hurt, only now
and then a bullet lights in the trenches.

I he Cavaliers made an attempt to salley out of the town upon some forces of
ours came with provision, but being resisted, they were forced to fly, some of
them taking the river, were forced to swim for it, being glad they could so esc
ape away.

Certain letters were taken which were opened, wherein there was a discovery
of the intention of the Cavaliers to give an alarm by night from Chichester
side, by that means to draw our Forces from before Portsmouth, thinking by
that means to give the Colonel and his soldiers opportunity to escape: but
their project being discovered, the Colonel remains our fast-friend, without
any hope of deliverance. There is now a parley between those of the town and
the Committee for the Parliament, and it is thought the town will yield
without shedding of blood, if they agree not upon conditions, the soldiers are
to fall presently upon the town. This is witnessed by William Jorden.

There came Letters from Yorkshire to the Parliament on Thursday, signifying
that the ill affected party of that county have entered into an Oath of
Association with neighboring Countries, and imposing upon the County,
contrary to their consents, a charge to maintain an army of Horse and Foot
under the command of the Earl of Cumberland, with an intent to disarme all
well-affected persons in the Country that will not consent to their illegal
actions, and endeavor the having of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer in His
Majesty's absence, and a Council of War to be continually kept there, to
keep the country in subjection.

FINIS.

