The Good Catholic no Bad Subject.

Or, A LETTER FROM A CATHOLLCK GENTLEMAN TO Mr. RICHARD BAXTER.

Modestly accepting the Challenge by him made in his Sermon of Repentance,
Preached before the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, 30 April, 1660.

GAL. 5.26. Non efficiamur inanis gloriae cupidi, invicem provocantes, invicem
invidentes.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

The Good Catholic no Bad Subject. OR, A Letter from a Catholic Gentleman to
Mr. Richard Baxter.
SIR,
SInce, I presume, you desire an Adversary, who use the diligence of a public
Challenge to procure one, and that none will think it strange, you should be
solicited to perform what you have so solemnly undertaken; All I have to do,
is, in few words, to acquaint my Reader, (who, I think, will see it reasonable
you should be opposed,) why you are opposed by me.

I am a person, by the infinite Grace of God, bred up in the Catholic
Religion, from which I have learned, my Duty to God cannot be complied with,
without an exact performance of my Duty to my Sovereign: To obey him, not for
advantage, or temporal concerns, but out of conscience; and because such is the
known will of him, the obedience to whose commands is Religion, has always made
a part of mine, being a point, as all other which belong to my Faith, preached
by he Apostles, and from them derived to me by the ministry of those persons
his sacred wisdom has appointed to succeed them.

This Doctrine instilled into my youth by Catechisms, confirmed to my riper
years by Sermons and Conferences, and possessing my soul with so settled a
belief, that I did not think any body could pretend to know what Catholic
Doctrine is, and not know that this is a part of it, occasioned a strange
surprise in me, when Chance seconding my Curiosity, in giving me a fight of
your Sermon preached before the Honorable House of Commons, Apr. 30. 1660. of
which I had heard something before, I found in it a plain Challenge, and
undertaking to prove against any Adversary, That a Papist must cease to be a
Papist, if he will be truly or fully loyal to his Sovereign. Had you said
only, Loyalty were no part of his Religion, and that he performed his
Allegiance by the help of some other Virtue, (though an indifferent Judge would
wonder you should have better intelligence of their Religion, then themselves,
who certainly know, and from the certain knowledge profess it teaches Loyalty
to be a Divine indispensable Command) the Assertion, however it would have been
altogether as false, would perhaps have appeared not altogether so exotic. But
to deny Loyalty not only an admittance into, but a consistence with his
Religion, and put an unavoidable necessity upon him, of being eihter a Traitor
to God, by renouncing his Faith, or a Traitor to his Sovereign, by renouncing
his Allegiance, is a Paradox of that wonderful excess, that I know not whether
is greater, the confidence to assert, or impossibility to maintain it. How,
Sir, will you undertake to prove, A Catholic must necessarily desert either
God, or his King, who, I think, cannot, I am sure, should not be ignorant, that
to render what is Caesar's to Caesar, does as truly belong to his Religion, as
to render what is Gods to God! That he makes not distinct Duties of these, but
believes his Obedience to Caesar is so much a part of his Obedience to God;
that the later cannot be performed without the former? In fine, you, who, with
that strong judgment Fame, and I think Desert, gives you to be Master of,
cannot but see, were there nothing to intercept the prospect, that a Papist,
who is not truly loyal, is not truly a Papist, if the not being faithfully
obedient to what is taught by a Religion, make a man cease to be of it.

But, as it is not for me, to pry into what it was that moved you to assert
this Paradox, so your care in publishing it, suffers none to be ignorant that
you have asserted it, and by doing so cast an aspersion upon a sort of people,
whose tried Loyalty in all vicissitudes of dangerous troubles, as it should
have altered your judgment, so their long and grievous sufferings, whereof
their Loyalty was one, and perhaps the only cause, should, from the charity of
your profession, have found, rather pity for their afflictions, then aspersions
upon their innocence.

And yet, in the small Sphere of my acquaintance, I find very little
forwardness to use any other defense, then silent patience, hitherto their
only shield, against the many, and heavy blows, which (to borrow the mildest
expression the condescendence of charity affords me,) mistaken Zeal has so long
given their Fames and Fortunes; and a greater disposition to have recourse to
heaven for an increase of strengh, as the blow grows heavier, then to endeavor
to lighten the burden they groan under. But for my part, I must confess the
value I set upon Religion and Allegiance, makes me not endure to be deprived of
either of them at any rate; and however I may be reconciled to all other
miseries, I am not able to bear that of deserving to be miserable.

Besides, I apprehend silence in this case would amount, or at least be
mis-interpreted to a confession; and that a Charge accompanied with such
circumstances, would, if not cleared, be looked upon as a Sentence, and the
world take it for granted, nothing could be pleaded to it, but Guilty. I know I
am Minimus inter Tribus Israel, little known even among those of my own
Religion; but as loyal as any, and as certain of my Obligation to be so. I know
also the concern is general, and greater then to be trusted to any one man's
ability, especially such a one as is truly conscious of his own insufficiency;
Neither do I undertake this Demand of Satisfaction vainly, or without just
occasion offered, but as I have my share in the injury, I have also a title to
be righted; and; since no better Champion appears to defend me, think, I both
may and ought to defend my self.

In the face of the world therefore, I require you to perform your undertaking,
and desire you to reflect, and every body take notice, That if you prove not
what you profess you are ready to do, viz. That a Papist must cease to be a
Papist, if he will be truly and fully loyal to his Sovereign, you are guilty of
the breach of charity to your Neighbor, in as great a height as circumstances
can improve a sin to. For to say nothing of the time, when the joyful and long
prayed for Victory of Right over Ambition and Tyranny fills the Kingdom with
comfortable hopes, That the privileges of Birthright shall no more be
forfeited, but by real and really proved misdemeanors: to say nothing of the
Great Auditory before whom you preached, persons, of whose wisdom the Nation has
given so signal a Testimony, and of whose Counsels his Majesty has expressed so
tender a regard: Be pleased to consider, it is no one you asperse, but many, and
those, who, of all that lay claim to so regarded a Title, give the best
evidence of being truly tender Consciences, since for them they suffer so
generally, so constantly, so deeply. Neither is it a small fault you charge
them with, but that Monster of sins, Treason, and that not only by the
violence of passion once committed, but such as is impossible not to be always
committed. And all this with so notorious a publickness, that none can be
ignorant of your charge, as I hope none will be ignorant of our innocence.

Now I beseech you join all these together, and see (if yours do prove an
offense) whether Chance could light upon, or Industry contrive greater
aggravations. Consider therefore, Sir, what you have done, and what you are to
do; and either prove what you have so solemnly undertaken, or practice what you
have as solemnly taught; give an example to the world of that serious and true
Repentance you so excellently delivered to your Auditory. But prove it
effectually, and let not the Question, when we come to grasp it, vanish away by
the artifice of some deceitful word. You have raised in the hearts and thoughts
of as many as have either heard or read your Sermon, I conceive, an
uncharitable, and unjust apprehension: If it prove so, I hope the reparation
you will make, shall not be by the fallacy of some term, to which your Art may
perhaps give another sense, then you have caused by it in others, to save your
self from the obligation of making any.

And yet, to deal plainly, I cannot but be jealous of the expressions you use.
For why do you call us Papists? You know we have another name, and are not
perhaps such men as you make us pass for by that Term: We ow no blind servile
obedience to any upon earth, that can ensnare our Judgments to any thing
contrary to those Divine Truths brought from Heaven by our Savior, to bring us
up to Heaven, planted by his Apostles, and preserved by his Spouse the Church.
I presume you intend by it a Name of Religion, not Opinion; for it is the Faith
of Christ I am to lay down my life for, but know no Obligation to lose a Pins
head for the fancies of any private man.

The again what mean you by a true and full Loyalty? Those Epithetes seem to me
no more then the issue of a fruitful fancy; since a Loyalty which is not a true
one, is truly no Loyalty: as false money is no money; and as half a pint is not
a pint; so if any thing want of full Loyalty, how near soever you approach it
is not Loyalty. I do not therefore see any necessity of those terms; Loyalty
in the natural acception of words, saying both true and full Loyalty: as a
shilling signifies both Twelve pence and good Silver.

Under your term of Loyalty too, I conceive you do not comprehend any
obligations contradictory to the great one to which all others ought to be
subservient; neither of us being, I hope, guilty of that impious flattery, to
imagine any duty can be a duty, which is inconsistent with that first and
chiefest duty we owe to our Maker and Preserver. I beseech you therefore let
all these Terms be defined, that the Question may not vanish from us in the
mist of the words we use in treating it. That which I, and I think every one
else, apprehends by your words, is that this Kingdom holds a sort of people,
whose Birthright indeed gives them a title to the Protection of the Laws and
privileges of Community, but whose Religion, by misteaching them in their duty
to their King and Country, renders them unworthy of those advantages. This is
what I apprehend, and what you are to prove.

Now if you should man by Papist something which I am not; by True and Full
Loyalty, something which I either do pay, or which none are bound to pay: Your
words indeed would be innocent, but the artifice of wresting them to oppose
innocence, little suitable to your Condition. And that, as I desire not to be
mistaken in your meaning, none may be so in my sentiments, I conceive my self
comprehended in your assertion, but know no reason why I should deserve the
name you express it in, more then that I am of the Communion of those men whose
Faith and Government was taught and instituted by Christ and his Apostles, and
by their successors conveyed in an uninterrupted Delivery down to us. I
believe, and what I profess to you in the face of the world, I am ready by Oath
to confirm to all men in the face of heaven, That my Loyalty to my Sovereign is
an indispensable duty from which no power Spiritual, or Temporal, Domestic or
Foreign, under any pretense of Excommunication, Deposition, or any other
whatsoever, can free me either wholly or in part; and till I am called upon to
do it more solemnly, I here do in the mean time renounce heartily all
Dispensations, Absolutions, and whatsoever to the contrary which may raise
jealousy in my Sovereign, or dissatisfaction in my fellow Subjects, professing
that notwithstanding any such pretext, if any should happen to be, I will by
the grace of God, perform my Allegiance truly and fully as every good Subject
is bound to do. This is my Religion; this is what I have been taught in It
concerning Loyalty; and what the occasion has prompted me to digress into:
since however the Confession I make be impertinent to the business I have in
hand (my task being to oppose what you say, not to say all I know my self) it
will not I hope be unwelcome to the Reader, at least to such an one as desires
his judgment should be built upon the unmovable foundation of Truth, of which
in things of this nature, there is no greater evidence then the testimony of
such as certainly know what they say, and faithfully say what they know.

But to return to our work; I utterly deny your Assertion, professing to all
the world it is not true, That a Papist must cease to be a Papist, if he will be
truly and fully Loyal to his Sovereign; and before all the world demand of you
to prove it, as you have undertaken. If you show me disloyal, I acknowledge I
ought, and seriously profess I will repent: if you cannot, lay your hand on
your heart, and consider what it is to make an innocent man, nay, so many
innocent men pass for guilty, and guilty of so execrable a crime as Treason; in
which case I hope you will need no admonition to repent your self.

FINIS.

