TWO LETTERS Of great Consequence To the House of COMMONS: THE ONE From
Alisbury in Buckinghamshire* Dated March 22. 1642. And signed by Col: Arthur
Goodwyn: Col: Bulstrode: Col: Hampden: Esquire Tho: Terrill: Esquire


THE OTHER From Sir William Brereton to a Member of the House of COMMONS, OF A
GREAT VICTORY he obtained the 15. of March, at a Town called Middlewich in
Cheshire; and took prisoners, Col: Ellis, Sergeant Major Gilner, Sir Edward
Moseley, with ten Captains, diverse Officers, and Five hundred others, with
great store of Ammunition and Ordnance.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cl. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. March 24. 1642.

A Letter from Sir William Brereton to a Member of the House of COMMONS, 1642.
Worthy Sir,
THis day is deservedly set apart to be a day of Thanksgiving for that complete
and great victory which the Lord has given us on Monday last, even then when
the enemy came out Armed with power (of flesh) and resolution to destroy and
overrun all the rest of the Country; In which design they were so hopeful
and confident, as that they took the boldness to encampe themselves in
Middlewich, a Town between Namptwich and Northwich, where I was, and where we
had begun to fortify and place our Garrison: we conceive this attempt of most
dangerous consequence, and therefore thought fit to allow them no rest, nor to
give them time to Fortify. To this end, there was a strong party of Horse went
out from Northwich upon Satturday night last, upon their first coming there,
who gave them an Alarm. The next day being the Sabbath, could not be observed,
it being the work of the whole day to prepare for our defense, and how to
annoy our enemy; toward whom I went out upon Sunday in the afternoon, with
betwixt two and three Troops of horse, and betwixt two and three Companies of
Dragooners, who went near to Middlewich and gave them an Alarm there; but
without any intention to assault them in their quarters, they being very strong
in Foot, and well armed, and we had no Foot at all then there, our greatest
care being to preserve the Country from plundring, and let the enemy know we
durst look them in the face, and come even to the very door. This evening,
March the 13. being Sunday, we resolved and concluded to meet the Namptwich
Forces the next morning, who were appointed to come unto us by six of the clock
in the morning: But we were in skirmishing and fight near four hours before
they came in to our assistance; during which time they played full upon us with
their Cannon, but without any success at all, there being only one or two men
hurt, but not mortal. During which time our Musketeers (whereof we had not
above 200 Musketeers, our greatest force of Foot being at Namptwich) behaved
themselves very gallantly, and made good three passages, and kept the enemy in
play, till the Namptwich Forces came in to our assistance, who came on so
resolutely, and with such undauntednesse of spirit, even to the amazement and
admiration of the enemy, whom they beat from their works, and from their
Cannon. And as they entered one end of the Town, our Soldiers entered the other
end with no less courage and resolution. Colonel Ellis, Sergeant Major
Gilner, Sir Edward Moseley, and ten Captains more, besides all other Officers
(a list of whose names you shall find here enclosed) who betook themselves to
the Church and steeple, from whence they did much annoy us for some short time;
but within an hour after, the Lord was pleased to make us possessors of the
Church and steeple, and of the Commanders and soldiers that were therein; and
of their Ordnance, Magazine, and great store of Arms, so as I believe since the
beginning of this unnatural war, God has not given many more compleater
victories, nor has there been many more Prisoners taken, there being not many
fewer than 500 prisoners, and very many of them Commanders and considerable
persons (a list of whose names is here enclosed.) I desire the whole praise and
glory may be attributed to Almighty God, who infused courage into them that
stood for his Cause, and struck the enemy with terror and amazement. For
farther particulars I must refer you to other and further relations.

We hear nothing from London how things go there, but our confidence is in the
Lord of heaven; to the protection of whose Providence, I desire to commend you,
and so conclude, and Rest,

NAMPTVVICH 15 March, 1642. Your very faithful friend WILL. BRERETON.

A Letter of great Consequence from Alisbury in Buckinghamshire.
SIR,
WE hold it convenient to give you a true Relation of the passages concerning
the Kings Forces, and their appearing against the Town. On Saturday last they
marched from Oxford and those parts, and on Sunday the greatest part of them
came to Them: on Monday all their forces were drawn near to this Town, within
one mile and two miles of the place, and showed as if they would have fallen
upon us that day, but they spent that day in viewing of the Town, where to make
their best assault, and interposing betwixt us and the Chiltein parts of our
Country, to hinder their assistance of us, where we had several skirmishes
without any loss; The Earl of Carnarvan commanded a great body of horse, and
marched all Sunday night to Wendover, where he hoped to have taken one of our
Troops of horse, which we had drawn thence some few hours before, but they
plundered that Town, and the adjacent towns, and committed many outrages
besides as we are informed. On Monday night the whole forces quartered within a
mile or two of this Town, and the next morning their horse drew toward us,
almost within Cannon-shott, and we expected every hour when they would fall
upon the Town, and our horse drew into the field toward them, and the forlorn
hopes fired one upon another often, but they being much too strong in horse for
us, we drew our horse into the Town, preparing for their assault, but whilst we
looked for their approach, they drew away toward evening on Tuesday, and in
stead of Soldiers turned Sheep-stealers, for they have plundered all the Towns
hereabouts, of all their goods and housholdstuff; they have taken and driven
away all their Horses, Beasts and Sheep, and in this iniquity have herein only
dealt equally, that they have not spared those who are accounted their own
friends: they spoiled and tore in pieces the inside of diverse fair houses, and
besides the corn they spent upon their Horses, they spoiled and spilt very much
upon the ground, and threw it about the fields, and what goods they could not
carry away, they cut in pieces, and threw about the fields and highways as
they went; they have not only taken away the Horses which should now plow our
grounds for seed, but they have cut in pieces their Horse-harnesses, and things
belonging to the plough, as if they meant to bring the Kingdom to destruction
in an instant. And we must be bold to signify unto you that these cruelties
are not acted by mean ones; for the Commanders herein, as we are informed,
were, General Ruthin, the Princes Rupert and Maurice, the Earl of Carnarvan,
Lord Grandison, Lord Wentworth, and Colonel Gerrard, with many others of their
great ones; the Forces they came with, were all they could get together, not
leaving men enough to relieve their Guard in Oxford; their Forces were, as we
collect by all our discoveries, about Six thousand, who had devoured us in
their thoughts before they came near us; but God discouraged them from
assaulting us, which if they had done, they would have found it a hot service;
for our soldiers and Countrymen within the Town were very bravely resolved
to defend the place, though much inferior to them in number, besides the great
addition of strength sent unto us by his Excellency the Earl of Essex; whose
care of us, and consideration of the State, in securing this place, is never to
be forgotten; for his Forces came to us much sooner than we could expect; and
had the enemy stayed but few hours longer, we had given them battle in the
field: But it was not Gods pleasure the troubles of the time should so end, as
yet we must expect his further pleasure. This is all they have to inform you,
(and if you shall think fit to impart unto the House) who are

Alisbury, 22. of March, 1642. Your most faithful Servants, Arth: Goodwyn.
Henry Bulstrode. John Hampden. Tho: Terrill.


FINIS.

