Good NEWS for England, OR THE Heads of a PEACE PROPOSED by the FRENCH KING.
THE Kings of Sweden and Denmark have lately had a Project of Peace presented
them by the French Envoys at their Courts, Monsieur D'Avaux, and Monsieur
Bowrepos: And to show the world that their Master is in earnest they tell the
Northern Kings it is their Honor and Interest to press the Allies to accept it.
They are almost angry with, tho they don't threaten those Princes, but tell 'em
it behooves 'em to procure this Peace, or else to join with one of the two
Parties.

The French charge the Dutch with being the occasion of this War; but how
fairly every common Eye can see: however they are willing to re-establish Peace
and Traffic with the States General, as they were agreed on before this war
begun.

And the Most Christian King desires only the Restitution of what England has
taken from him in the Islands and Continent of America, viz. St. Christophers,
etc. and then he will restore and confirm the Treaties that have been broken by
this war.

France pretends to be kind to Spain, tho she does not deserve it at her hands;
for she declared war against France. Mons and Namur, (which last is theirs
already) shall be theirs again. They will keep Luxembourgh, which is a City and
Province; a Dukedom of very large extent, and advantageously seated to assist
them to carry their Arms into Germany. The French King is kind to the young
Duke of Lorrain, and offers him very largely, and says, he cannot but return
Thanks for his generous manner of dealing with him upon this occasion.

France demands that the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimiguen may remain in
their full force; and that which was concluded at Ratisbon in the year 1684
under the name of a Truce for Twenty years, may be changed into a definitive
Treaty of Peace.

They would fain keep Strasburgh? which cannot be permitted, the States of
Swabia and Franconia having prayed His Imperial Majesty by no means to agree to
that; and add, they will rather make a new Levy of Ten Thousand Men against the
next Spring to carry on the war; and they are much in the right, for if
Strasburgh remain in the French hands, the Empire will always be the stage of
war.

Next the most Christian King offers to restore the Palatinate, and its
dependences to the Duke of Newbourgh.

In compensation for the City of Strasburgh, and the Forts, of which the Most
Christian King is in Possession, and which he will hold immutnably both for
himself and his Successors: first Montroyal, and Tarback, shall be demolished,
and restored to the Prince to whom they belong, never to be Fortified again,
during the Peace. Secondly, that all the Works of Fort Lewis, and Hunninghen
that lie beyond the Rhine, in respect of France, shall be demolished: Thirdly,
Philipsburgh with the Fort shall be surrendered, Fortified as they are; and
Friburgh in the same condition it is.

As for the Duchy of Deux Ponts, the French King to resign it to the King of
Sweden in the same condition now it is, and never to lay claim to it for the
future, tho by the Deeds and Evidences it appears that that same Duchy depends
upon the Bishopric of Ments.

The Emperor having signified, that he is not willing the French should remain
in Possession of Strasburgh, many reasons are offered by the French, but
nothing will do, for that City is too considerable to be quitted by the Empire.

The Most Christian King declares, that he has a cordial desire to establish a
Peace that may maintain France, and the Empire in a lasting repose; that his
Majesty chooses rather to preserve one City, viz. Strasburgh that lies next to
France, and surrender up two, viz. Philipsburgh and Friburgh that lie next to
Germany, to demolish so many strong Fortresses, and restore so large an extent
of Country.

He is resolved inviolably to observe the Peace, and hopes the Emperor will do
the same, to prevent the effusion of Christian Blood.

His Majesty offers to restore to restore to Spain all the Places without any
exception which he has won from that Crown.

The French are very unwilling to revive infinite Disputes, which might supply
matter for a new War, rather than a means to end this; they are not for cutting
out Negotiations that might last long, or take up too much time, they are for
Demolishings and Restitutions, to reconcile all matters contained in former
Treaties, and provide for the diuturnal security of the Empire, as well as that
of France, and consequently for a perpetual endurance of a firm and perfect
Correspondence.

LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1695.


