Fire from Heaven, Falling upon the Present Army and Churches: OR, TWO WORDS
FROM THE LORD To Both. Held forth to the Understanding of those, that make not
flesh their arm, and whose hope the Lord is, that cease from Man (a piece of
earth) whose breath is in his nostrils. As also to the terror and astonishment
of all those, who lean upon the broken staff of Egypt, and trust in Horses, and
strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and joy in the shadow of men;
and cry to themselves, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord.

By a MAN of their COUNCIL.

Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
mountains: Truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

Jer. 3.23. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first Love.

Revel. 2.4. LONDON, Printed in the day of Battle, and year of Slaughter. 1649.

To his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, With all the Officers and Soldiers of
the ARMY; And to all the Churches, visible and outward, whatsoever.
May it please your Excellency, with you all,
WHat I have heard, seen, and understood, is presented to you in this book; it
craves your attention, because it relates to you: It has the boldness to cry
aloud, and not to spare, to show the Lords Host their transgression, and the
house of Jacob their sin: It breaks the order and custom of the world in
courting you, and, clothing it self with the spirit of Truth and burning,
judges you. Peradventure it may be a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense
to you, yea, to both the houses of Israel: The Spirit would have it so; for you
must fall, that you may rise; dye, that you may live; be nothing, that you may
be all. You have much glory to lose, some of you the Glory, Rule, and
Government of the World; others of you the Glory and Rule of the Church, and
yet many of you have a greater Glory to possess: Your wood, hay, and stubble,
shall be burnt up, you shall suffer loss, but ye shall be saved, yet so, as by
fire: Your loss shall be your gain, and your shame, your praise; yet for the
present you will be so shameful as to cover the glory of the Lord, rather then
you will lie in the dust, and part with what you have by strength obtained.

(...) The Epistle general, To all the Kings Party, with the Bishops, Priests,
Presbyters, Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, etc. To men of all sects, of
all degrees, of all conditions where and whatsoever.
Dear Hearts,
IF the Lord rend that vail of flesh, wherewith you are covered, what is herein
spoken shall be plain and easy to you; it shall be yours, as well as mine: It
contains in it a fire that will try every man's work, it refines and purifies
the Sons of Levi, that all their offerings may be in Righteousness: You may
behold in it the voice that cries, All flesh is as grass, and all the
goodliness of man as the flower of the field. It preaches forth the Love of
God, and drives poor creatures to an abhorring of themselves in their
murdering, destroying and revengeful way, That the Wolf may lie down with the
Lamb, and the Lion eat straw with the Ox, and no hurting in all the holy
Mountain. I have to do in this book with the Army and Churches, which contains
a great part of the Nation, and the Sentence of the Lord passed against both,
and Judgment begun at the House of God. I have presented it to your view, that
you may know the design of God in these latter days, viz. to plead with all
flesh, and thoroughly to purge his floor. Ye that are men of several forms,
dressed with several attire, different and various in Religion, may yet unite,
and be one in the Spirit and Power of Jesus, when he shall come stealing upon
you, and plunder you of all that you now, or have, gathered to your selves, and
lead you from one dispensation to another, from strength to strength, and from
glory to glory, until you eat bread, and drink wine now in the Kingdom of God.
The Lord is in your darkness, and provides for you in the wilderness.
Therefore, first, to you that are the Royal Party, know this, The King is an
Image of God, a lively figure of the King of Kings; but you in your darkness
are enthralled to the Idea and outward form, yea to the weakness and
imperfection of it, and thereby kept from that truly Noble and Royal Spirit,
that freely flows from the Lord (the represented) to all the Royal Priesthood.
You so much deifie the sovereignty of a man, that only bears forth what of God
is given in, that you rob the Lord, the mighty, not giving and bowing to that
All-might, though the curse is threatened, and before you executed on those that
make flesh their arm: Yea, this Power, when sometime exercised against the
Child Jesus, is by you justified, and no room in the Inn when he is brought
forth among you. And to you the Bishops and Priests, who are a dark figuring
out of the true Bishop and over-seer of the soul, yet you feed your selves, and
not the Flock, preaching and praying in a formal customary way. stinting your
selves and others in all your duties, going not in your selves, nor suffering
those that will, endeavoring to quench the spirit that rises up in opposition
to those ties and bonds that leads it captive. And to you the Presbyterian
Party, that, to be more excellent then your fathers, make long prayers, having
great shows of Reformation, and greater zeal, and larger actings for God, then
those before you; yet sit down satisfied with your selves, having thus painted
over the Sepulchers of your fathers, and with them assemble your power and
authority to stop that River of God which flows to the sons of men, if not
running in your channel. Yea, you of the Independent Party, to write a fairer
Copy then all these, separate from their society, as unclean and unholy, and
yet assuming to your selves the privilege of an outward holy seed, and all that
spring from your unholy holy loins, to be interessed with your selves in these
promises, though the Lord has pronounced Judgment against all outward and
carnal marks and distinctions, as thereby differencing the Lords People,
disclaiming all right not derived from that truth and glory within you, which
is truth, and needs not that any man teach you. And you the Anabaptists, to
make a stricter separation then these before you, begin from and of your selves
to set up that carnal and outward way which God has thrown down, and to set up
John the Baptist in the room of Christ, though he tells you his Ministry and
Doctrine must decrease, and Christ's increase; yet will you sit down under the
cloudiness and twilight of John, and not assemble to the Day and Morning,
Christ, who is risen upon the earth: Yea, though the Spirit, by the
forementioned Messenger, tells you, This is not the Reformation, but a figure
of it, and after him comes he whose san is in his hand, and thoroughly purge
his floor; yet do you sit down on this side Reformation, not approaching to
that House made without hands eternal in the Heavens: Yea, others of you,
passing through all these, arrive at a seeking what has been, and not reaching
forth to that which is before. Some of you are content with the borders of
Canaan, and think not of entering in and possessing the good Land, expecting
Moses, that angered the Lord at the waters of strife, a Minister of weakness,
to lead you to your Rest; and not Jesus, who is a Savior and Deliverer from
being captive to any thing below God whatsoever: and therefore stay on this
side Jordan, not believing the waters shall divide, and be cut off before the
Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, born by the Melchisedec of God: Therefore all
of you whatsoever that are working in your six days under sundry and several
dispensations, tiring and wearing out your selves in your own vanities, shall
lie down in sorrow, and be bitten by the Serpents in the Wilderness, until you
pass over into the Lord your Canaan, and Day of Rest, where you shall all of
you rest from your labors, and your works follow: And this Day of the Lord is
coming upon you, it is near at hand, even at the doors; the fullness of the
Gentiles coming in, and all Israel shall be saved. And in this Day, who so will
not come up of all the families of the earth to Jerusalem, to worship the King,
the Lord of Hosts, upon them shall be no rain, there shall be a famine in all
their dwellings, a drying up of all their gifts, parts, excellencies,
righteousness, praying, reading, preaching; yea all that they have be taken
away: For the Day of the Lord is upon all the proud, and upon all that are
lifted up, and upon all that being taken up into this high Mountain, a figure
of the true, say, Come, let us build three Tabernacles, let us never move from
this station, let us never go beyond Moses his legal and carnal
administrations, let us retain what we have, and seek not to attain what we
have not. O let not this mind be in any of you, lest the Day of the Lord come
upon you, and your oil being out of your lamps, and you not ready, are shut out
of doors, and cast into the fire that burns, and never goes out. The sinners
in Zion are afraid, Who shall dwell with devouring fire? Who shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? The clean hands and upright heart: Therefore cease from
man, whose breath is in his nostrils; wait under your dispensations, enquire
under your old fabric, and in the desolations thereof for him that shall make
all things new, and then shall I be

Yours, new in the Kingdom.

Fire from Heaven, Falling upon the present ARMY and CHVRCHES; OR, TWO WORDS
from the LORD To Both.
First, to the Army.
YOu have had many words from the Lord, many sweet invitations, tenders,
embraces, and kisses from the God of the whole earth: You have been dandled
upon his knees, and gently led by his right hand; but yet, with Jesurun, have
you waxed sat, and kicked. They have been to you either words of contempt and
reproach, or of momentary excellency and good, like the morning dew, that by
the glorious sun of outward good and prosperity, have wasted and consumed away.
Yet behold one kiss more, one cord of love more, drawing you; peradventure the
last word of good you shall have. I am at first to rebuke you, then to advise
you. In the reprehension of you, I shall tell you what you are, viz. The
executioners of Gods wrath and vengeance; you are men conversant in the
lower-most parts of the earth, in hell, the place of Gods wrath; You are Gods
sword, and it is in your hand to execute wrath upon the Heathens: You are
skilled in the wasting Kingdoms, burning Cities, Towns and Villages, but not in
the repairing the breaches that are broken down, nor closing the gaps that are
made, nor raising up it ruins. The way of peace you have not known, you have
declined the steps that lead to that blessed center, the foundations of love
and peace are not founded and bottomed in your hearts, therefore no marvel the
buildings appear not: Love and goodness, meekness and gentleness, cross your
designs of greatness, pomp, glory, safety and security: You cannot make
salvation your walls and bulwarks; You cannot sing (the Day of the Lord is not
yet come upon you) we have a strong City, and yet without gates: You cannot see
Jerusalem inhabited as a Town without walls; You cannot march forth like the
virgins of Zion in their dances; nor, with Noah's dove, return with an olive
leaf in your mouth. You have, for many years, faced the Nation, with a sharp
glittering sword in your hands, executing vengeance, but have not appeared in
the majesty and brightness of God, and thereby gathered them up into him.

Object. But you may object, and say, Why, what can we do? have we a Will of
our own thus to act forth that glory and brightness of God?

Answ. No, in no wise; It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs,
but in God that shows mercy. But you pretend it is God that acts you, and
carries you forth to act for the People, and to be a wall between them and
ruin, and upon this account you break through all opposition, and answer what
ever is objected against your actions, being in themselves (as you your selves
confess) unlawful: You pretend you are not mercenary and servile in the work
you do, but free and volunteer, and all is for God and the People, otherwise
you would leave off. A company of hypocrites, and carnal Christians, you are,
that plainly act the contrary. Has not God, by a mighty hand of his own and
through an unexpected way, made you this day the lords and rulers of the
Nation, that all freely or forcedly pay tribute unto you, serve and bow to you?
Is not the great Council of the Nation your Council, your Election? Are not all
their actings, and what ever is by them brought to the birth, that which has
been first begotten, and bred within you? Have not you prescribed a pattern for
the removal of the King, and judgment upon his party, and the house of Lords to
be useless, and they oppressing creatures? and have not the great Council writ
after it? Nay, are not you soared so high, that now we may truly say, If any of
the people of the Nation are in captivity, if any Saint afficted, it is you
that afflict and oppress them? either because you will have it so, or neglect
the relieving of them, though you may and can. All your pretenses, Oaths and
Covenants have preached forth thus much to us; if the Lord should ever set us
up in authority, O how would we relieve the oppressed, and help the fatherless!
What a joy would we be to the righteous, and terror to the wicked? How would we
have separated between the precious and the vi^e? And this have the people long
expected from your hands, but behold oppression, ernesty and revenge, slaying
the innocent and righteous ones, whom God would have kept alive. You have
discovered the covering of Judah, and treacherously slain your friend and
brethren, and given up Judah to the sword, and Israel to captivity: And in that
day did the Lord of hoasts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness,
and to girding with sackcloth, and behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen and
killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine, giving gifts and taking rewards;
and thus your are feasted with the blood of the righteous, and drunk with their
blood, until you fall and never rise again. Behold, Tithes, the great
oppression of the Nation, with its treble damages recoverable of the People, if
refused, though you rule, and your own consciences, with others, are against
it, yet will you have it so: Who would have thought that you would have
maintained such a company of Priests, whom God (as you know and say) has spued
cut of his mouth, and yet that you should support their Diana, and nourish
those dark places of the Land, called and reputed of many the two eyes of the
Land, the fountain and seed-plots of all good learning, and become Doctors,
Masters and Fellows in Babels arts and sciences, bringing stone, timber, and
mortar to the building that City and Tower, whose top may reach to Heaven. But
this is a fruit of the blood of the Saints which you have shed, and a return of
praise to the Holy One, who, in his descension upon men, was crucified by you:
Nay, how can you suffer faithful members to be excluded the House, for
professing and asserting the pure Divinity of God, no way mixed or compounded?
That God is not three, but one, and not many gods, as you in your imaginations
think: That there is no such thing in God (though to men) as Father, Son, and
Spirit, but all one in God, though not in man, and is thereby only distinct to
men, and that to the darkness of men, not to the light of God within them,
which reads God under another notion; for that Soul beholds him all love,
excellency, and goodness, and this in all his ways, to all, in all, upon all,
and that this God neither is or can be divided, not admitting a seam in his
garment: Nay, what enmity is there in your spirits, or at least in your actions
to Papists, not suffering them, or men in gross darkness, viz. the Prelates,
who, being in the dark, and under cloudy dispensations of God, should therefore
have the going forth of the morning among them, that they might be brought out
of darkness into light, and won by that love and meekness, that is or should be
in you, to them; yea, I say, not admitting them into the liberty and freedom
with your selves: I know your hearts, you could many of you tolerate Papists
and Prelates among you, but that the Nation look upon them under such a gross
notion, that you, to please men, dare not do it, thinking hereby your repute
and credit among men will fall to the ground, and be esteemed by many such your
selves. And therefore, to retain and keep up your glory among men, will you
break the rules of love, mercy, and goodness, and make shipwreck of your own
and others consciences: Yea, you can command the People to fast, and restrain
the Nation from working on those days, annexing penalties (as formerly) to the
breach thereof, thereby bringing in those legal and Mosaical Fastings, Jewish
and National, which Christ, by a more pure and glorious ministration, has
abolished: Nay, let me discover what I know of you, viz. That many, if not the
most of you, are wholly dead in your selves to fastings of that nature, your
souls loathing it, but only that the Nation may judge you to be religious, and
zealous to make every one your proselite, and not deem you to be for such an
universal toleration of all sects and sorts of men in their religion, until the
day and pure glory of God break forth, causing all darkness to sly before it,
yea, turning the Sun into darkness, and the Moon into blood, not admitting any
thing, save this pure light, then to be, and converse among men: I say, for
this cause do you thus dissemble with the Nation, and seem as if you accounted
the peoples fastings a sacrifice that God accepts.

Object. But you may peradventure say (through the hardness and obduracy of
your hearts,) This is sedition, and a stirring up, and enraging the people
against you.

Answ. Though I might, or could by means procure it, I would not lift up, or
have a sword lifted up against you, nor a hand in wrath and indignation; The
worst mischief I would do you, were it in my power, would be to create a heart
of love and peace among you, to engrave upon all your hearts, and upon the
hearts of the whole Nation, an entire perfect union and agreement in God, and a
beating of your swords into plow shares, and your spears into pruning hooks,
and to learn war no more. I am for peace, but you are for war, and in times of
peace shed blood; therefore has the Lord prepared you a cup to drink, and you
shall drink deep of it: Death shall swallow you up alive; and the grave shall
open for you, and hell shall be your portion, because they that have killed
with the sword, shall be killed by the sword, and they that have led into
captivity, shall go into captivity: This is a sweet word, wait for the
fulfilling of it. The Lord will destroy you all, the Lord will give you blood
to drink, you shall drink and be drunken with your own blood. It is a mystery,
and you, it may be, understand it not, and therefore admire it; Remember you
not the voice of the Church of old, In the way of thy judgments have we waited
for thee, O Lord? Great is the mystery of godliness, thus it is:

You have shed the blood of thousands, thousands, you have have wasted Cities,
Countries, etc, God has provided a double portion for you, and both of
judgment and destruction; The one is to destroy your flesh, to give it up to
the sword: A second, to cut off two parts of you out of the land of the living.

First, The Lord will destroy your flesh, and make a great slaughter among you,
even of your reason, wisdom, judgment, credit, glory, repute, and all that is
flesh in you, to lay your glory in the dust, to turn your wisdom into folly, to
burn up your righteousness, holiness, to give you a new heart, to destroy that
warlike, envious, and bloody spirit that is in you, to create peace in all your
dwellings, and love in all your hearts, not suffering any thing of the earth to
have a being among you, in no wise admitting flesh and blood entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven. God is coming upon you as a thief, in the night of your
beating your fellow servants, eating and drinking until you are drunk, and will
plunder you of all you have, and cast you into outer darkness; you have a will
within, and among you, that rules and reigns, this will the Lord steal from you
in the night, and leave you none at all, but his will shall do all, and carry
on all, and be in you all: And thus does the Kingdom of God come, not with
observations, saying, Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there; for behold it is within
you: and thus shall the Kingdom of God take place, and all Kingdoms bow, and
come in to it. This is the only King and Kingdom that shall be set up, and
there shall be but one in all the earth: This is the time when God takes to him
his great power and reign, and then shall you be ashamed of all your doings:
And as you have cut off much of the unrighteousness of men, and gross
corruption of the world; so shall the Lord, in this day, cut off all your
righteousness, holiness, goodness, beauty, and comeliness, leaving you none at
all, but you shall be the vilest among men.

2. There is a second judgment (which is proper to you) and that you shall
find mentioned Zech. 13.7, 8. Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against
the man that is my fellow; and I will turn my hand upon the little ones: And it
shall be, that in all the land, says the Lord, two parts thereof shall be cut
off, and dye, but the third shall be left therein. Note the word, his hand
shall be turned against the little ones: Two parts of you, and two parts of the
Land and Nation, shall be cut off and destroyed: God has used you in this
work, you have wounded, destroyed, and slaughtered multitudes of people,
Captains, mighty men, and nobles have you cut off in one day. Thus the Day of
the Lord is begun, and you see it not; this is the day of Judgment, and you
say, it is afar off; Joel 3.12, 13, 14. Let the Heathen be wakened, etc. and
Verse. 14. Multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision; for the Day of the
Lord is near, in the valley of cutting off. God has rouzed up the Nation out
of that careless and secure posture in which they lay: God is a disquieting the
whole earth; multitudes in the valley of slaughter: people gather and aslemble
to this destroying Angel; People muster their forces, and march along with this
destroyer, they delight in blood: and thus the people are consumed for their
parts, and destroyed out of the Land, and blood touches blood: And yet in
these is the design of God carried on, in a slaughtering the pride of all
flesh, in putting a final period to the credit, repute, excellency, goodness,
hopes, and comforts of man, blasting all that outward glory, because the Spirit
of the Lord has blown upon it; and now every man begins to be weary and
ashamed of himself and of all others, and does hug and embrace to them a naked,
pure, and divine God; yea, cry out, creatures have been our destruction, men
have undone us: we have built our hope, joy, and peace upon the sands; O how
have we bin deceived! O how vile is every man? how have we called good, evil,
and evil, good? O how have we deified those, which had any good, holiness, or
righteousness dwelling in them? burying God, the goodness and holiness wrapped up
in that earth, and dwelling in those houses of clay; and heathen-like have
changed the truth of God into a lie, worshipped and served the creature more
then the Creator, God blessed for ever.

2. Now, as I have rebuked you, viz. that evil in you, am I, in the second
place, to counsel you, and therein not I, but the Lord: And this is twofold;
1. To cast off your filthy polluted garments, to wear your garments of blood no
longer. 2. To become a white Army, clothed in white linen, therein following
the Prince of Peace.

First, Cast off your filthy polluted garments, shake your selves from the
dust, strip your selves of your bloody garments; leave off contending, you have
a long time been disciplined in war, to the ruin of your selves and others:
And as you have ruined and killed others, so the sword of the Lord has killed
you, and stained your pride and glory, self-interest, self-preservation, the
outward liberties of you and the people: You must dye to your outward peace and
liberty, and lay down your lives, and thereby take it up again; yea, I mean,
all you, that are the little ones of Christ, shall thus have power, as well as
the man Christ, to lay down your lives, and take them up again. Come with me,
my friends and dear hearts, come with me from the Lions den, from the fury,
wrath, destruction, and violence that have dwelt in your borders; Come, beat
your swords into plow shares, say to the people, We will no more oppress you,
we will no more fight you: O my hearts, let the oppressed lord go free, you
have taken the Lord captive for these many years, your God and King on high is
your prisoner; he preaches peace to the Heathens, and compassion to the
Nations, and yet you take him captive, and you preach blood, contention, and
make laws to destroy every man that dislikes your government, it must be called
treason, that you might thereby kill all that do oppose you. What still sheding
of blood? Are you not wearyed in your vanities? When, when shall nothing bind
but love?

Object. But if we should thus leave off sighting, our Liberties, and all that
we have striven for to obtain these many years will fall to the ground, our
righteous cause dye, and the people return either to their former bondage, or
to Anarchy and Confusion, and the godly party become the prey of their and the
Lords enemies.

Ans. In answer hereto, I could first tell you, (that which every man knows,)
That though you rule, the people still remain in bondage, and the righteous
souls are cut off, and many Saints afflicted and persecuted for their zeal to
God, and worshipping him according to their Consciences, which may sufficiently
discover your pretended zeal for God, and how little truth there is in it, but
I forbear: And in answer to your scruple, know, That the way to the pure and
upright Government of the great God, among and toward men, is, by Anarchy and
Confusion. This doctrine is strange, yet true, That the only way God has
declared he will use in the promoting and carrying on that design of greatness
and Majesty he is intended to advance in the world, is, by depopulating,
defacing and wasting Kingdoms and People, and this design of God has been
actually carried on among us. God has hastened to this work of his in our
days, and his Charet wheels have run swiftly this way. When we build a new
house, if there be an old one in the room, we first pull that down, and make it
a desolation, and then lay a sure foundation for a more glorious one: Thus does
God, Your house (says he) shall be left unto you desolate. The people boasted
in the Temple, God had a Temple to build; Well, says God, I will first destroy
yours, desolation shall first attend your worldly, earthly Temple: God has now
a pure glorious House to build, a pure Government, to which the Nations must
all bow, and bring their glory to: Now the Saints, that are under dark and
cloudy dispensations, say, Come let us govern and rule, and we will rule for
the Lord; but they, alas, by reason of their darkness, patch and piece up a
Government, made up of the Laws and Statutes that our forefathers in their days
(not partakers of our light, or rather the Lords in us) formed and made; and
their Reformation is a retreating back to prestine purity, but not a going
forward pressing after that purity and glory, which eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, nor entered into the heart of man to conceive. For further testimony see
Isai. 24. the whole Chapter, especially 20, 21, 22, 23 verses, Chap. 26.20, 21.
Chap. 65.15, 16, 23. Zeph. 3.8, 9. where you may plainly read, that when the
Lord will do his great work, when all shall confess to him, and every knee bow,
when his glory shall be lifted up, and peace and love shall dwell in the hearts
of men and women, and no hurting in Gods holy mountain, That destruction shall
go before, and the high and lofty ones shall be brought low; a consumption will
the Lord bring, and make a short work in all the earth.

Object. But it may be said, and that by honest hearts, That Anarchy and
Confusion is that aspersion which the world casts upon the Saints, by reason of
the changes the Lord makes in the Government of the Nation, and the people of
God conceive themselves wronged in it; and will you own that which they
disclaim?

Answ. I am against Anarchy utterly, as that which has no Order and
Government, and the dissolver of all Order; but yet as it leads to the setting
up of a pure, righteous, and everlasting Government, I quietly and contentedly
submit to it, and behold the strange and mavelous actings of the Lord in it,
and there feasting my self with those dainties that are secretly involved in
those black and dark dispensations, and in this confusion find a sweet and
blessed Order begun in me, and behold the Lord bringing it forth to the view of
the world, that every eye may see him, and all shut their mouths at him.

2. That you would remain naked and senseless before the Lord and men, to be as
helpless creatures: You could be content, many of you, peradventure to be naked
before the Lord, but not before men; O then, say you, will the world trample
upon us, and we shall be destroyed, and that without remedy, and make our
selves a reproach and contempt to all Nations, when we shall thus freely and
voluntarily resign up our selves, Wives, Children, City, Country, and Nation
into the Fathers hands; and so to have no Wife, Child, Servant, or Habitation;
yea, no Husband, Parent, or Master, but what is in the Fathers resignment: To
have no Keeper of the Vineyard, but the Lord, no Watchman, but the Watchman of
Israel; to have no bulwarks, and no walls, but Salvation, Freedom, and Liberty
from on high; to have a strong City, and yet without Gates: To be presented to
the Lord and men as creatures undone, broken in their estates, glory, and
repute, having nothing to live upon, but what the Ravens, by the Word of the
Lord, bring morning and evening to them, beholding all the vessels of the earth
broken to pieces, and not a potsheard left to take up coals withal. You must
lose all, part with all, have nothing, be nothing to God, to the world: Have
nothing, but what the barrel of meal, and cruse of oil affords; a famine
being in the Land, upon the Prophet, Teacher, mighty men, and men of war, upon
the Captains, and men of strength, and no bread but in the Lord, nor water, but
in this living fountain.

2. My counsel is, That you would come forth clothed with pure and white
linen, with the man God, or the God-man in your arms, dressed with divine
attire, clothed with embrodered garments, yea, of needle work, of all curious
workmanship; and this work is not yours, but the Lords, in which you are only
to wait until the Lord bring forth his name in you; in which day you shall go
forth, bearing to men the meekness, quietness, peace, love, and goodness of
God: as you did once administer to your brethren destruction, misery, wrath,
and judgment, and as you soar up into God; so shall you, in the majesty of this
God, heal and cure the Nations, even by the leaves that this tree of life shall
yield: and thus shall ye become men of another garb, men of another dress, and
you shall be named by a new name, which the Lord our God shall name; new
Jerusalem shall be written upon you, and there shall be no goings out, not a
thought of man, not a word of man, that name shall be mentioned no more, unless
as an abhorring to all the Israel of God: The earth shall cease to yield her
fruit, man shall give forth no longer, he shall be emptiness unto the Lord,
vanity shall be written upon every thing that remains, and all things shall
sound forth God, a trumpet shall not blow that cannot echo forth the Lord; and
this shall be the great conquest, and the great reward, That we our selves are
conquered, and brought in subjection to the Lord: That whereas, after all our
victories and successes, there still remained Creature and God, now there
remains after this success and victory, God, and nothing of Creature: And
whereas you were the fear of men, when you were gift with a sword; so now, you
are swordless and manless, you are the love and good will of the people: and
what you are, you are to the Lord, and for the Lord, not to, nor for your
selves.

Object. But you may object and say, This is a happy time, were it in our days,
were it to be fulfilled upon us, but the time is not yet.

Answ. All that dye, shall live, and all that live, shall dye: They that now
have neither house, land, credit, profit, repute, glory, wife, child, brother,
and sister, but having had all, do now part with all, shall find all these in
God; And they that have these, as you have in abundance, shall lose all, and be
without all: You that cease from your own honor, shall enjoy far more in God,
and cease as to your offices among men, shall obtain greater in God, and from a
common Soldier, shall become a Captain, and from a Captain, a General, and from
a General, to be One with the great God of Heaven and Earth, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: And for the time, behold it is at hand, Summer is
near, even at the door, for the Fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the
Vines, with the tender Grapes, give a good smell; every creature has a sweet
smell of God in it, God is written in lively characters upon every creature in
heaven and earth: There is in all these, more or less, a giving and resigning
up to the sweet and gracious dispose of the Lord; As the Lord passes before
them, so are they ashamed and confounded in themselves, for when he appears,
who can ^an^* By which you may know, the Day of the Lord draws near, therefore
say not, it is afar off, for it is near, and shall overtake you, even ere you
are aware, and your souls shall be made like the charets of Aminadah.

A Second WORD TO THE CHURCHES.
YOu have a name that you live, you have the image and representation of God
amongst you; you assume to your selves the name of the Churches of God,
Churches of the Gospel, of clear light, and yet live in the darkness and
cloudiness of your own spirits: You have made flesh and forms your habitation,
you have offered upon every mountain, and sacrificed under every green tree,
and bowed to graven images: You have in truth so hugged and embraced the outmost
and lowermost dispensations of God, as you will not, nor durst not leave them
for the enjoyment of a pure and naked God: You have known Christ after the
flesh, and have eat and drunk with him in this fleshly way, you have seen the
miracles that he has wrought, and the wonders he has done among men, and you
by him have repented, and turned from your own works of righteousness to the
righteousness of God, as thus held forth unto you: And you have had much
sweetness and comfort under all these, for the Lord has lived in them: Now,
says the Lord unto you, Behold, I go to my Father, I withdraw from the
creature, and ascend into my own glory, into my pure self; I leave the earth, I
will abide no more in the Temple, I will forsake my dwelling place: Note the
word, God does sometimes leave his dwelling place; I have made my abode and
dwelt in Water, Bread, and Wine, in the observation of days, in praying,
fasting, reading, writing, preaching, hearing; I will now leave them all. O
then sorrow fills your hearts, and you begin to weep and lament, seeing the
flesh of Christ crucified before you, hung between two thieves; but his Holy
One cannot dye, nor see corruption, but his flesh is abased, shamed, disgraced;
the Lord gives up those garments and vestures, wherewith he was clothed, to the
moth to devour, to the enemy to make a prey of; and the worldly Christian parts
his garments, and casts lots for them, and rejoices in the spoil, and embalms
the body of the Lord with sweet spices, though the soul and life is departed
from it, yea, though it be but a mere carcass, the spirit of Christ leaving it,
yet this poor man loves it as much as ever, delights and pleases himself in it;
and Christ being dead and buried, you go to his Sepulcher, wherein he is laid,
seeking for him, and Mary-like ask the Angels where your Lord is; they answer,
He is not here, he is risen; why seek ye the living among the dead? You go to
fasting and prayer, and enquire, saying, Did you see the Lord? No, say they, He
is not here; He was here for three days, but he is risen and gone: Then you go
from one Church to another, from society to society, and enquire, but he is not
here, say they, he is risen: Then you go to the rudiments of the world, to
elementary things, and they give you the same answer, saying, He was here, but
he is risen, behold the linen clothes and the napkin in which he lay; you may
see his grave-clothes, his outward garments, his several and sundry
appearances, but he is gone, he has left them all: Then you begin to be
afraid, you know not what to do, now you have lost your Lord, and there is
nothing now remaining to take pleasure in, and to enjoy, but a few
grave-clothes, some old castoff garments; no place now to live in, but a
desolate and forsaken house, a habitation for Dragons, and a Court for Owls, a
place which the wild beasts of the field have made their rest.

Object. But you may object, and say, We are a Church formed according to the
pattern in the Mount, according to the Scriptures prescribed by Christ and the
Apostles, and in obedience to these we walk and abide.

Answ. You are much below (even all the visible Churches on earth) that pure
and primitive order in the Apostles days; you have not that pure infallible
doctrine to deliver as they had, nor that clearness of the Spirit poured down
upon you; the Holy Ghost not falling upon you in cloven tongues, as upon them:
nor that oneness of mind, as to sell all, and lay it down at the Apostles or
Churches feet; you have not so learned Christ, you cannot do greater works then
ever Christ himself did, when he was upon earth, and that because Christ is
ascended: Yours, at the best, is but an earthly, weak, erring, imperfect
Ministry, a worldly Sanctuary, a Baptism of Water, not of the Spirit, that
which (as John said) decreases, not increases; a doctrine which, because of the
weakness of it, cannot go beyond Repentance, Faith, Hope, Baptisms,
Resurrection of the dead, and eternal Judgment, with laying on of hands; All
which are but milk for babes: yet you are always contenting and satisfying your
selves with such a baby-condition, not going in your selves, nor suffering
(without offense) those that would; nay, you will not move a step beyond these,
but asperse, as erroneous and blasphemous, all such that pass through hope and
faith to sight and enjoyment, through the Flesh into the Spirit, and it is
unseemly to name the word perfection (as attainable) among you. But further,
were you as perfect and complete in all things as the Apostles were, yet must
you, with such a Ministry and Church, cease, and give in, for behold, a greater
then the Apostles and Prophets is here; here is one standing among you, whom
you know and see not as yet, that will not own Paul, Peter, and John in this
Apostleship, there being no manner of co-parnership in it; and that it may
appear that the Apostolical Ministry and Doctrine was but to continue its time
and age, does Christ himself, when upon earth, manifest as much to us, Matthew.
28.20. Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you, and
behold, I am with you always, or every day, even to the consumption of this age;
So the Greek reads it, (...), in the singular number, not in the plural number,
as in other places, where it is used for ever, the word is, (...), or (...);
and Peter bears witness hereto, 2 Pet. 3.12, 13. Looking for, and hastening
unto the coming of the day of the Lord, wherein the heavens being on fire,
shall be dissolved, etc. Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for
new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness: Peter though an
Apostle and Minister of the Churches, and to the world, yet he expected a more
glorious Church and Ministry, for you must not understand by heavens and
elements is here meant those visible to us, as if they should be burnt up; or
heavens and earth, to be that which you behold, and live in; but Churches and
Ministry, Doctrines and teachings of and by men; Yea John will lead you to the
knowledge of this, Rev. 21.3, 22, 23. Behold, the tabernacle of God is with
men, and God himself shall be with them, etc. And I saw no temple therein; for
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the temple of it. He is a weak man,
and a weak Christian, that is under the Ministry of the Apostles, that has any
man to teach him, or is under any teaching of God by men. And my dear friends,
and brethren, let me tell you without offense, that you are not under the
second Covenant, but under a Covenant of the outward man, under the Compact of
the Letter, until you cease teaching one another, and preaching one to the
other, but are taught of God only: So runs the terms of that Covenant, observe
it Hebr. 8.10, 11. In that Covenant, when persons are under it, they shall not
say one to another, brother, know the Lord; this is the voice of the Lord, that
is not: This the Lord says, that man says; this is truth, that is error. No,
in this Covenant you shall know God perfectly, fully, and clearly. O strange
doctrine, and horrid blasphemy, will some of you, my brothren, say; but I will
bear with the fruits of your darkness. And now I am to deliver to you; First, a
word of terror and judgment: and secondly of counsel and advice.

First, Terror, and Judgment; I am to tell you, the Lord has cursed the
Figtree, he has caused your gifts to wither, you tree yields no more fruit,
your root is without sap, your teachings without life, your ministrations
affording no peace; either, I say, none at all, but dejection and casting down;
or else peace temporary, because of the uncertainty of your doctrine, peace
mixed with enmity and breakings out; and a love with fear, when perfect love
casts out fear, for fear has torment; A Saint and yet a sinner, when he that
is horn of God sins not. You shall call in this old Church Way, and not be
heard, cry, and the Lord will turn from you; you shall sly at the rebuke of
one, though you are a thousand, at the rebuke of five shall ye slye, until you
be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an Ensign on a hill.
The Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them;
Emptiness and a shadow shall be written upon all that you (...). This Sun and
Moon of yours shall be ashamed, when the Lord shall reign in mount Zion. The
Lord is sending leanness among you, and a famine not of bread, and a thirst not
of water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord, and you shall wander from Sea to
Sea, from Church to Church, from Society to Society, from Preacher to Preacher,
from man to man, from brother to brother, from doctrine to doctrine, and shall
not find the Lord: you your selves shall shortly see this fulfilled upon you;
you shall burn your books and writings, you shall see this mountain of yours
forsaken; and thus judgment shall follow you, and a fire shall be kindled
among you, and burn you up. And the Lord to make out tokens of his indignation
against you, how he has left you, as you have left him, and his glory, has in
these our days visibly discovered it, by a giving you up to the weakness and
folly of your own hearts, which has produced and effected in you, the
betraying and shedding innocent blood, even the blood of those whom you
formerly honored; strengthening the hands of their oppressors, adding
affliction to affliction, which the spirit of God calls cruelty. In the day
that the strangers carried away captive his, even Jacobs forces; and foreigners
entered into his, even the righteous gates, and casts lots upon them; even thou
wast as one of them, thou stood'st in the crosswaies to cut off those that did
escape: But the day of the Lord is near, as thou have done, shall it be done to
thee; the reward shall return upon thine own head, this innocent blood have
you shed, even you, or most of you, that call your selves the Churches of God.
As I do not own their boasting in, or gathering to themselves an arm of flesh,
and by a warlike way to endeavor to free themselves, and establish
righteousness in the Land: So I cannot but testify against the bloody,
unchristian-like thoughts, and actions that has been manifested in you to
them. And who should have thought, that no sooner could liberty be given you,
which once were so enslaved, and captived in and for the practice of your
Religion, that for so doing, you daily suffered, or in continual leopardy; I
say, that you should seek to enslave and embondage others, whom you professedly
honor as righteous; some to God, and others of them to men, save in this
action. But sweet and good is the hand of the Lord in this, that he might
thereby make a discovery of you to the World. Now I shall show you a few
Reasons of the judgments of the Lord thus falling upon you.

1. Because the Temple of the Lord, not the Lord is your glory. Every thing
that God welleth in, you fall down to, and so fall down to Angels, Saints, Men,
Ordinances, Ministers, and Officers, when these, at the best, are but Gods
habitation, garments of the earth, and decaying vestures wherewith God clothes
himself. You are satisfied that you are a Church member, that you are of such
and such a Congregation, that you have such a Pastor, that you have submitted
to such an Ordinance, or Ordinances. O this does tickle you, I know it when I
walked among you; Nay, it further appears, by those mean and low thoughts you
have of those that are not of your Order; some of you can hardly pray with
them, others not own them as brethren, and the rest charging them with
disobedience, in not walking up to those withered, dead, and decayed things,
that you seek to keep alive.

Now as long as you remain under these dispensations, the Lord in, and under
these, should only be your glory, 1 Cor. 1.31. He that glories, let him glory
in the Lord.

Object. But some of you will say, Though indeed we are under all these
administrations, yet we glory not in them, if we may be said to know our own
hearts, we are commanded so to do by God, and we dare not slight any
injunction from the Lord.

Answ. I know it is here you stick, you cannot get off it. O it is a command of
God and you dare not omit it. To which I reply.

First, That when God had an outward Tabernacle and Temple, Church, and
Ministry, as under the Law, he was very exact with the people in the
observation thereof, a Pin must not be left out, nor a Nail out of its place:
but Look that thou make them after the pattern which was showed thee in the
mount, Exodus 25.40. And this day shall you observe for ever in your
generations, Exodus 12.14. And this the tenth day of the first month, verse. 3.
And the seventh year should be a Sabbath to them, and the fiftieth year, a year
of Jubilee, Levit. 25.4, 11. There must be no swerving from the observation of
these.

Secondly, When the Lord leaves this house, and will build another, Clothed
with greater glory, he ties not his people to the outward observation of
things: he is not now as formerly exact in them: Does not command them to be
baptized with water, but into the Spirit. Christ tells them, They shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire; commands that they be baptized into
the Name of Father, Son, and Spirit: viz: into the power and glory of these
three, and yet one, into a clear knowledge and understanding of these: And for
the Supper, does not enjoin them to the strict and absolute observation of it,
nor when; as under the law, such a day shall you observe the Passover: but
now, As often as you do it, do it in remembrance of me, not telling them how often
they should do it. But how long must this eating bread and drinking wine last?
during your continuance in the dark, until the Lord comes, and be a feast of
fat things in the spirit and life to you, until he be revealed from Heaven,
consuming this dross and earthly knowledge within you; and then shall you drink
no more of this fruit of the Vine, but drink it new in the Kingdom. You used
signs and tokens of his death, etc. had many letters representing him, but now
he is come, what need these? he is come himself, even his sweet self; nay,
further, as the Lord did not then bind his people to outward, so were they
used by the Apostles, as in them they might become all to all, stoop to them,
and speak them in their own language, and as children to deal with them.

3. Those Churches, with their glory, ministry, and all, were to dye and wither
away, apostatize and fall back, and this for time, times, and half a time, as
the Scripture plentifully witnesses, and the holy City under foot: and when
Christ comes, shall he find faith on the earth? And this should be until the
Kingdoms of this world become the Lords and his Christ's, and God take to him
his great reign, yea, till the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, and a new
Heaven and Earth appear, and God make all things new: and this is the Church,
and the Ministry, which, the Scripture tells you, shall be set up after the
Apostatizing days: Therefore, dear hearts, bind not your selves, where God
has not bound you; be free in what the Lord has made you free.

2. A second Reason, why the judgment of the Lord shall from Heaven fall upon
you, is, because you, by reason of your narrow thoughts and apprehensions, keep
the Lord Jesus prisoner, will not permit him to go any where, or dwell in any,
save your selves: You are offended if the Lord break forth in a further
manifestation of Glory to others, not of your rank and order; Lord, says the
Presbyter, here thou must abide, this is thy dwelling place, never remove from
hence: And here, says the Independent; And here, says the Anabaptist, etc. Do
you think that he that has the key of David, that opens and no man shuts,
and shuts and no man opens, will become your prisoner? No, no, his glory
he will not give to another. The Lord, if he rend the vail of this fleshly
Temple, and pass through it into the highest Heavens, you will serpent-like
wait for this man-child brought forth by the woman, viz. weakness, that you
may devour it; and therefore you cry out, Lo here is Christ, and lo there, and
question people, saying, Are you a member of a visible Church, of what society?
and so lessen that comfort and peace (or at least endeavor it) that poor souls
have in God, by reason they are not joined to your societies: But in all their
afflictions he is afflicted; the Lord in this weak brother, or sister, is
afflicted, and bears all he bears: and thus you imprison and afflict the
Lord himself.

3. Because it is your shame to live upon a naked God, to have the Kingdom of
God only within you; you are unwilling to leave outward bread and wine for God
the bread and water of life: and he that is ashamed of God, of him shall God
himself be ashamed. What say you? shall we by men be accounted no more praying,
fasting men, hearing and preaching men? no more to weep and mourn, but all
tears to be wiped from our eyes? to observe no Sabbath, but the Lord God, and
to call him holy, a delight, honorable? not to think our own thoughts, nor
speak our own words? O this is your shame, namely to leave the water in the
cisterns, and that run in the channels, for that great river and fountain whose
streams make glad the City of God: It is to you a greater shame to be at your
fathers house with the fatted calf, then in the Country to feed swine, and to
eat their husks: therefore he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped
shall fall down, and they shall all fail together.

II. A second word, and that of advice and counsel.

First, That you would assemble your selves to the Supper of the great God: and
this says the Angel, the Messenger of God, that stands and abides in the glory
of God, Rev. 19.17. And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and cried with a
loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and
gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God: The Lord invites
you, the great and mighty God woos you by his Messenger, by another appearance
of his: My advice is, That you would go, tarry not; and that you may understand
the Supper what it is.

1. The flesh and blood of the mighty men of the earth, the power and authority
of the rulers of the world, which are bound in chains, Rev. 19.18. That ye may
eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, etc. Ezekiel. 39.18, 19. Ye
shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the Princes of the
earth, of Rams, of Lambs, etc. And ye shall eat fat, until ye be full, and
drink blood, until ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for
you: You shall fill and satisfy your selves with the judgment of the Lord upon
the great and high-looked men of the earth. You shall see the Day of the Lord
upon all flesh, upon all might and power; you shall see all the pride of the
earth stained and defaced, and this shall be your joy and rejoicing: And it
shall then be said, Behold, the man, the woman, that gave not the glory to God;
Behold, end see, every thing, that is not pure God, defaced, has lost its
life, its blood, runs to the Rocks and Mountains, there to hide themselves. O
blessed Feast! O sweet Supper! nothing remaining but the Holy One; Iniquity
has here an end, and the terrible one is here brought low.

2. This Feast is the flesh of the Whore, an eating of her, and a burning her
with fire: You know in the burnt-offerings under the Law, the flesh, and the
fat, and all, was to be burnt, and nothing to remain: so nothing is to remain
in this burnt-offering, but the Lord: For by Whore, I understand to be any
thing, or person whatever, that you love and delight in, and go to bed to, save
the pure and individeble God; any of those Lovers that give us our bread and
our water, our wool and our flax, our drink and our oy^, whatever it be, that
refreshes us inwardly, or outwardly, save God: Do you joy and delight in Forms,
in outward Dispensations and Administrations? Nay, do you delight in Christ as
after the flesh? Do you feast your selves with the fleshly presence of Christ?
This shall be burnt up with fire: And do you eat it up, and let not ought
remain? There is a Strumpet within you, your wisdom, which is your snare, your
knowledge, reason, and will, which will cause you to fall. O let all be burnt
up, yea, this will of yours, let it not remain until the morning, and it shall
be a sweet swelling sacrifice unto the Lord; let your will be terminated in
God, let your reason be the Lords reason, and your judgment, his; let this
affect you, and the zeal of the Lords house even eat you up.

Secondly, Let me advise, that you go and return to your first husband, you
were first espoused to the Lord, well, have but one husband, stray not from
this man of knowledge any longer, be not a stranger at home; though you have
played the harlot, yet will your husband receive you. Seek the Lord, and David
your King, and fear the Lord and his goodness now in these latter days, Hos.
3.5. This is the first thing you must do, when you are come out of bondage, and
out of the Land of Egypt, when delivered out of the strange land, ask for the
Lord, seek him out, never leave until you have found him, even him whom your
soul loves; You must seek the Lord God, and then Zion. If you know God
perfectly, you will know men as they are; but this is the reason, men and
Saints are so much deceived; because they first seek the Church, and then Lord,
men, and then God. But were you fully and prefectly acquainted with God, you
would know men and things distinctly; O you would easily learn to distinguish
between the light of God, and the darkness of men, between the emptiness and
vanity of men, and things, and fullness that is in God. God is that blessed key
that opens the door to every creature, giving a perfect and distinct knowledge
of them: creatures shall be no more then creatures to you. Did you know the
Lord by these espousals of his, were this the marriage day to you, it would work
out all strangenes that is in your souls to this God, Hos. 2.17. For I will
take the names of Balaam out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered
by their names. They shall no more call God, my Lord, but my husband, verse. 16.
There is not such a discovery, such an intimate understanding of secrets
between the master and servant, as between the husband and wife. The servant
knows nothing, but as it relates to his duty and obedience, as it relates to
the servitude he is under. Well, says the Lord, I will free you of this
bondage, you and I will not be strangers but familiar friends. It shall be no
more I and you, but you and I one; we will have one table, one house, one
heart, one mind, and by the effecting this work, I will do it.

First, I will first bring you into the wilderness, I will have you alone, your
lovers shall no more remain before me; you shall be where there is no path, no
way, no Church, no Temple, no company: O, then says God, you will be glad of
company, then society with me will be your delight; will in that day step in,
and show my self, and then shall you freely come in worshipping and serving of
me.

Secondly, The Lord will in this day reveal and discover himself in a full and
glorious manner. Your vailes shall then be rent, and your coverings removed;
then shall ye say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, This is the
invisible One, whom no man have seen, nor can see, whom flesh and blood has
not revealed: this consuming fire is he, this everlasting burning is our
husband. O, then shall you loath your selves for all your abominations; you
shall then cease crying up that fleshly knowledge, wisdom, understanding,
teaching, and hearing, which you now so much strive after, that it shall be an
abhorring to you. Isai. 66.23, 24. And it shall come to pass, that from one new
Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to
worship before me says the Lord. And they shall go forth, and look upon
carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring
to all flesh. You shall go forth out of this holy City, and you shall look for
the Praying, Fasting, Preaching, and Reading men and women, for all the carnal
worshippers, and you shall see nothing but the carcasses of these men
remaining, and they shall stink in your nostrils, and be an abhorring to you;
For, Behold the Lord creates new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall
be remembered no more.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
Reader in the Flesh, and Disciple in the Spirit,
I Was encouraged thus to write to the Army and Churches, because Michael, the
great Prince, is standing up, and it is a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a Nation, and yet at this time a people are delivered, and they
are found written in the Book: Would you know them, who they are? Look among
the writings of the Spirit, and that book will discover them. This Book (that I
have in weakness written) tells you of a time of war, desolations, and
forsakings of hoasts of men, of an Army of brave spirited-men, zealous,
professing men, an Army, that hardly any Army can write after them, lifted up
to Heaven, and yet brought down to Hell; Of Churches forsaken, and made a
desolation, yet reformed Churches, Candlesticks that hold out more then their
Fathers did: Yet you hear of a people standing upon the same earth and sea,
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under their feet, that are at rest, that are
entered into Canaan, and passed through the river Jordan dry-shod. I have
written to you, because it is the time that men are running to and fro, and
knowledge is increased, That you, the Nations, and kindreds of the earth,
fleshly societies, may see the Son of man coming in the Clouds, and weep and
wail because of him: That you, that seek great things for your selves, glorious
structures, and buildings of men, a City made by hands, may know, the Son of
man, the Emmanuel, God with, and in us, has not in all these, where to lay his
head. As you hear in this a house fallen, because built up on the sands, of a
City whose inhabitants are sick, weak, dying; men that are flesh, and not
spirit: So, if the Spirit will permit me to write again, you shall hear of a
house, that, like Mount Zion, shall never be removed, and that because it is
founded on a Rock; a City, the inhabitant whereof shall not say, I am sick; the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity, they shall weep no
more, God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: There shall be no more
thence an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days; the
child shall dye a hundred years old, the full age of a man, or more: They
shall be all, from the least to the greatest, perfect in knowledge, come unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: But the Sinner, being an
hundred years old, the old professor, the man that has known Christ after the
flesh for a whole age and more, that has trotted up and down all his life
after Eli, the old man, the man Adam, the flesh that is corrupt, shall be
accursed, shall, like the barren tree, wither and be cut down.

FINIS.

