THE FIRST AND LARGE PETITION Of the City of LONDON and other Inhabitants
thereabouts: For a Reformation in Church Government, as also for the
abolishment of Episcopacie: WITH A REMONSTRANCE thereto annexed, of the many
Pressures and Grievances occasioned by the Bishops, and the sundry
inconveniences incident to EPISCOPACIE.

The Tyranny and Extortion practiced in Ecclesiastical Courts, together with
the unlawfulness of the Oath EX OFFICIO: preferred to the high and honorable
Court of PARLIAMENT.

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of many of his Majesty's Subjects in and about the City of
London and several Counties of the Kingdom.
THat whereas the government of Archbishops, and Lord Bishops, Deanes, and
Archdeacons, etc. with their Courts and ministrations in thom has proved
prejudicial and very dangerous both to the Church and Commonwealth, they
themselves having formerly held, that they have their Jurisdiction or authority
of humane Authority, till of these later times being further perused about the
unlawfulness that they have claymed their calling immediately from the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, which is against the Laws of this Kingdom, and Derogatory to
his Majesty and his State Royal. And whereas the said government is found, by
woeful experience, to be a maine cause and occasion of many foul evils,
pressures and grievances of a very high nature unto his Majesty's Subjects, in
their own Consciences, liberties and estates; as in a Schedule of particulars
hereunto annexed may in part appear.

We therefore most humply pray and beseech this Honorable Assembly, the
premises considered, that the said government with all its dependances, roots
and branches may be abolished, and all laws in their behalf made void, and
the government, according to Gods word, may be rightly placed among us, and we
your humble Supplyants as in duty we are bound, will daily pray for his
Majesty's long and happy reign over us, and for the prosperous success of
this High and Honorable Court of Parliament, etc.

A Particular of the manifold Evils, Pressures, and Grievances, caused,
practiced, and occasioned by the Prelates and their Dependants.
I. FIrst, the subjecting and inclining all Ministers under them and their
Authority, and so by degrees exempting of them from the Temporal power,
whence follows:

II. The faint-heartednesse of Ministers to preach the truth of GOD, lest they
should displease the Prelates, as namely the Doctrine of Predestination, of
Free Grace, of Perseverance, of Original sin remaining after Baptism, of
the Sabbath, the Doctrine against universal Grace, Election, for Faith
foreseen, Freewill, against Antichrist, non-Residents, humane Inventions of
GODS worship, all which are generally withheld from the peoples knowledge,
because not relishing to the Bishops.

III. The encouragement of Ministers to despise the temporal Magistracy, the
Nobles, and Gentry of the Land, to abuse the Subjects and live contentiously
with their neighbors, knowing that they being the Bishops creatures they shall
be supported.

IV. The restraint of many godly and able men from the Ministry, and thrusting
out of many Congregations their faithful, diligent and powerful Ministers,
who lived peaceably with them and did them good, only because they cannot in
Conscience submit unto and maintain the Bishops needless devices; nay
sometimes, for no other cause but for their zeal in Preaching, or great
Auditories.

V. The suppressing of that godly Design set on foot by certain Sects, and
sugared with many great gifts by sundry well-affected persons, for the buying
of Impropriations, and placing of able Ministers in them, maintaining of
Lectures, and founding of Free-Schooles; which the Prelates could not endure,
lest it should darken their glories, and draw the Ministers from their
dependence upon them

VI. The great increase of Idle, lewd and dissolute, ignorant and erroneous men
in the Ministry, which swarm like the Locusts of Egypt over the whole
Kingdom, and will they but wear a Canonical Coat, a Surplisse, a Hood, bow
at the name of JESUS and be zealous of Superstitious Ceremonies, they may live
as they list, confront whom they please, preach and vent what errors they
will, and neglect preaching at their pleasures, without control.

VII. The discouragement of many from bringing up their Children in learning
the many schisms, errors and strange opinions which are in the Church; great
Corruptions, which are in Universities; the gross, and lamentable ignorance
almost every where among the people; the want of preaching Ministers in very
many places both of England and Wales, the loathing of the Ministry, and the
general defection to all manner of profaneness.

VIII. The swarming of lascivious, Idle, and unprofitable books and pamphlets,
Play-books, and Ballads, as namely Ovids fits of Love, the Parliament of Women
came out at the dissolving of the last Parliament, Barnes Poems, Parkers
Ballads in disgrace of Religion to the increase of all vice, and withdrawing of
people from reading, studying, and hearing the word of God, and other good
Books.

IX. The hindering of godly Books to be printed, the blotting out or perverting
those which they suffer all or most of that which strikes either at Popery or
Arminianisme, the adding of what or where pleases them and the restraints of
reprinting Books formerly lycensed without relycensing.

X. The publishing and venting of Popish, Arminian, and other dangerous Books
and Tenets, as namely; that the Church of Rome is a true Church, and in the
worst times never erred in Fundamentals, that the Subjects have no propriety in
their Estates, but that the King may take from them what he pleases, that all
is the Kings, and that he is bound by no Law, and many other, from the former
whereof has sprang.

XI. The growth of Popery, and increase of Papists, Priests and Jesuits in
sundry places, but especially about London since the Reformation, the frequent
venting of Crucifixes and Popish pictures, both engraven and printed, and the
placing of such in Bibles.

XII. The multitude of Monopolies and Pattents, drawing with them innumerable
Perjuries, the large increase of Customs and Impositions upon Commodities, the
Ship-moneyes and many other great burdens upon the Commonwealth, under which
all groan.

XIII. Moreover, the Offices and Jurisdictions of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, being the same way of Church Government which is in the
Romish Church, and which was in England in the time of Popery, little change
thereof being made (except only the head from whence it was derived) the same
Arguments supporting the Pope, which do uphold the Prelates, and overthrowing
the Prelates, which do pull down the Pope, and other reformed Churches,
having upon their rejection of the Pope, cast the Prelates out also as Members
of the Beast: Hence it is, that the Prelates here in England by themselves or
their Disciples, plead and maintain, that the Pope is not Antichrist, and that
the Church of Rome is a true Church, has not erred in Fundamental points, and
that Salvation is attaynable in that Religion, and therefore have restrained to
pray for the Conversion of our Sovereign Lady the Queen. Hence also has come,

XIV. The great Conformity and likeness both continued and increased of our
Church to the Church of Rome, in vestures, postures, Ceremonies and
Administrations, namely as the Bishops Rochets, and the Lawne sleeves, the 4.
cornerd Cap, the Cope and Surplisse, the Tippit, the Hood, and the Canonical
Coat, the Pulpit clothed, especially now of late with the Jesuits Badge upon
them every way.

XV. The standing up at Gloria Patri, and at the reading the Gospel, praying
toward the East, the bowing at the name of JESUS, the bowing to the Altar
toward the East, Cross in Baptism, the Kneeling at the Communion.

XVI. The turning of the Communion Tables Altar-wise, setting Jmages,
Crucifixes, and Conceits over them, and Tapers and Books upon them, and
bowing, and adoreing to or before them, the reading of the second Service at
the Altar, and forcing people to come up thither to receive, or else denying
the Sacrament to them, tearming the Altar to be the mercy-seate, or the place
of God Almighty in the Church, which is a plain device to usher in the Mass.

XVII. The Christening and Consecrating of Churches and Chappells, the
consecrating Fonts, Pulpits, Tables, Chalices, Churchyards, and many other
things, and putting holiness in them; yea, reconsecrating upon pretended
pollution, as though every thing were unclean without their Consecrating, and
for want of this sundry Churches have been interdicted and kept from use as
polluted.

XVIII. The Liturgy for the most parts framed out of the Romish Breviary
Ritualium Massebooke, also the book of Ordination, for Archbishops and
Ministers framed out of the Roman Pontifical.

IX. The multitude of Canons formerly made, wherein, among other things,
Excommunication, ipso facto is denounced for speaking of a word against the
devises above said or subscription thereunto, though no Law enjoined a
restraint from the Ministry without such subscription and Appeal is denied to
any that should refuse subscription or unlawful conformity, though he be
never so much wronged by the inferious Judge, also the Canons made in the late
sacred Synod, as they call it: wherein are many strange and dangerous Devices
to undermine the Gospel, and the Subjects liberties, to propogate Popery to
spoil Gods people, ensnare Ministers and other Students, and so to draw all
into an absolute subjection and thraldom to them and their government,
spoiling both the King and the Parliament of their power.

XX. The countenancing plurality of Benefices, prohibiting of Marriages without
their lycense at certain times, almost half the year and lycensing of
Marriages without Banes asking.

XXI. Proph^nation of the Lords day pleading for it, and enjoining Ministers to
read a Declaration, set forth, as it is thought, by their procurement for
tolerating of sports upon that day, suspending and depriving many godly
Ministers; for not reading the same only out of Conscience, it was against the
Law of God so to do, and no Law of the Land to enjoyne it.

XXII. The pressing of the strict observati^^ of S^ints D^yes, whereby great
sums of Moneys are drawn out of Men's purses for working on them, a very
high burden on most people, who getting their living by their daily
employments, must either omit them and be idle, or part with their money,
whereby many poor families are undone, or brought behind hand, yea many
Churchwardens are sued, or threatened to be sued by their troublesome
Ministers, as perjured persons for not presenting their Parishioners, who
failed in observing Holy Days.

XXIII. The great increase and frequencie of whoredoms and Adulteries,
occasioned by the P^elates corrupt administration of Justice, in such Cases,
who taking upon them the punishment of it, do turn all into moneys for the
filling of their purses, and lest their Officers should defraud them of their
gain, they have in their late Canon, in stead of remedying their vices,
decreed that the Commutation of Penance, shall not be without the Bishops
privity.

XXIV. The general abuse of that great ordinance of Excommunication, which GOD
has left in his Church to be used as the last and greatest punishment the
Church can inflict upon obstinate and great Offenders, and that the Prelates
and their Officers, who of right, have nothing to do with it do daily
excommunicate men either for doing that which is lawful, or for vain idle and
trivial matters, as working or opening a shop on a Holiday, for not appearing
at every beck upon their summons, not paying a fee or the like, yea they have
made it, as they do all other things, a hook or instrument wherewith to empty
men's purses, and to advance their own greatness, and so that sacred ordinance
of God, by their perverting of it, becomes contemptible to all men, and seldom
or never used against notorious offenders, who, for the most part, are their
favorites.

XXV. Yea further the pride and ambition of the Prelates being boundless,
unwilling to be subject to either man or Laws, they claim their Office and
Jurisdiction to be Jure divino, exercise Ecclesiastical authority in their
own names and Rights, and under their own Seals, and take upon them
Temporal dignities, places and offices in the Commonwealth, that they may
sway both swords.

XXVI. Whence follows the taking Commissions in their own Courts and
Consistories, and where else they sit in matters determinable of Right at
Common Law, the putting of Ministers upon Parishes, without the Patrons and
peoples consent.

XXVII. The imposing of Oaths of various and trivial Articles yearly upon
Churchwardens, and Sidemen, which without perjury, unless they fall at
jarres continually with their Ministers and Neighbors, and wholly neglect
their own calling.

XXVIII. The exercising of the Oath Ex Officio and other proceedings by way of
Inquisition reaching even to men's thoughts, the apprehending, and detaining of
men by Pursivants, the frequent suspending and depriving of Ministers, fining
and imprisoning of all sorts of people, breaking up of men's houses and studyes,
taking away men's Books, Letters, and other writings, seizing upon their
Estates, removing them from their callings, separating between them and their
wives against both their wills, the rejecting of prohibitions with threatenings
and the doing of many other outrages, to the utter infringing the Laws of the
Realm, and the Subjects liberties, and arraigning of them and their families,
and of latter time, the Judges of the Land are so awed with the power and
greatness of the Prelates, and other ways promoted, that neither prohibition,
Habeas Corpus or any other lawful remedy can be had or take place for the
distressed Subjects in most cases, only Papists, Jesuits, Priests, and such
others as propagate Popery or Arminianisme are countenanced, spared, and have
much liberty, and from hence followed among others these dangerous Consequences.

1. FIrst the general hope and expectation of the Romish part, that their
superstitious Religion will ere long be fully planted in this Kingdom again,
and so they are encouraged to persist therein, and to practice the same openly
in diverse places, to the high dishonor of God, and contrary to the Laws of
the Realm.

II. Secondly, the discouragement and destruction of all good Subjects, of whom
all Multitudes both Clothiers, Merchants, and others being deprived of their
Ministers, and overburthen'd with these pressures, have departed the Kingdom
to Holland, and other parts, and have drawn with them a great part of
manufacture of Cloth and Trading out of the Land into other places, where they
reside, whereby wool, the great staple of the Kingdom, is become of small
value and vends not, Trading is decayed, many poor people want work, Seamen
lose employment, and the whole Land much impoverished, to the great dishonor
of this Kingdom, and blemishment to the government thereof.

III. The present wars and Commotions happened between his Majesty and his
Subjects of Scotland, wherein his Majesty and all his Kingdom are endangered,
and suffer greatly, and are like to become a prey to the common Enemy, in case
the wars go on, which we exceedingly fear, will not only go on, but also
increase to an utter Ruin of all, unless the Prelates with their dependancies
be removed out of England, and also they and their practices, who, as we,
under your Honors favor, do verily believe and conceive have occasioned the
Quarrel.

All which we humbly refer to the consideration of this Honorable Assembly,
desiring the Lord of Heaven to direct you in the right way to redress all
these evils.

FINIS.

