Good Nevves from Plymouth: Being a true Relation Of the death of Sir Ralph
Hopton, and many of his Commanders, who by treachery sought to surprise the
good Town of Plymouth.
ON Monday last there was a great Treason found out, which is, That Sir
Nicholas Slaning, being acquainted with one of the Master Gunners in Plymouth,
sent him a Letter to this effect: That if he would charge his Guns with Powder
and Paper, and give false fire, he would give him an hundred pound; this news
being brought to the Mayor of Plymouth, he presently send for the said Gunner,
and imprisoned him, and wrote back a Letter in the Gunners name, that all
should be effected according to Sir Nicholas Slanings desire; upon which
promise, Sir Ralph Hopton went on, and set upon one of the out works, with
confidence to enter; but Plymouth men having charged their great Pieces with
small shot, discharged upon them, and slew eight hundred of their men, amongst
whom Sir Ralph Hopton was one.

This is very certain, I heard two men take their oaths, that they being at
Stratton, saw a Horse-litter, guarded with sixty Horse, who said these words:
If the Devonshire-Rogues should hear of Sir Ralph Hoptons death, we are all
undone.

On Thursday last, Bar. Northcot having gathered 8000. men from the North parts
of Devonshire, the Parliament was set on by the Cavaliers at Chafford, ten
miles from Exeter, where they had a fight, and slew six of the Cavaliers upon
the place, and one Commander, cousin to Sir Ralph Hopton; Sir William Maulton
with the loss only of one man, and one hurt, the Lord be praised for it: The
Commission of the Millitia, have by their Warrant gathered all the Country
together, which are to meet this day together in a Body at Brint, and to morrow
to advance to Plymton. There are in all of our men for certain, 30000. which
are of good courage.

Diverse Letter speak the same thing, only they differ in number, and speak
of 17000. armed men in the field, and several Towns and in Exeter.



London, Printed for Francis Wright, Frebr. 20. 1643.


