The First New Persecution; OR, A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Cruel usage of two
Christians, by the present Mayor of CAMBRIDGE. As it was certified from thence
by an Eminent Hand.

LONDON, Printed for G. Calvert; 1654.

The first New Persecution: OR, A true Narrative OF THE Cruel usage of two
Christians by the present Mayor of Cambridge: As it was certified from thence
by an Eminent Hand.
ON Friday, December 23. came into Cambridge, two Northern Women, the one of
them about 50. the other about 30. years old, who went to Sidney-Sessex-Colledg
in Cambridg, and fell into discourse with some Scholars there, about God and
Christ; the Scholars asked them how many Gods there were? The women answered,
but one God; and told them, they had many that they made Gods of: at which the
Scholars laughed and scoffed them; the women told the Scholars they were
Antichrists, and that their College was a Cage of unclean Birds, and the
Synagogue of Satan. Hereupon complaint was made to Mr. William Pickering Mayor
of Cambridg, that two women were preaching; who immediately sent for them by a
Constable; and when they were before him, he demanded of them, whence they
came, and where they lay the last night? They answered him, they were
strangers, and knew not the name of the place; but paid for what they called
for, and came away. The Mayor asked them what was their names? they answered,
their names were written in the book of life. Again he asked them, What was
their husbands names? they answered, they had no husband but Jesus Christ, and
he sent them. Upon this the Mayor was in a great rage, and thrust them to the
door of his house, and said they were whores, and made a Warrant to the
Constable to whip them at the Market-Crosse until the blood came. And when the
poor women heard that, they fell down on their knees, and desired the Lord to
forgive him, for he knew not what he did. And the Mayor spoke to the Constable,
and bad him see them whipped till the blood ran down their bodies, and sent three
of his Sergeants to see it done to the purpose; and 'twas done accordingly; but
by what Law no man knows; for they neither did beg or steal.

So they were led away to the Market-Cross, crying, The Lord strengthen our
faith, the Lord strengthen our faith, etc. And when the Executioner came, he
commanded them to put off their clothes; they said, they would not, they were
there; if he had any thing to do to them, they bad him do it, for they would
not: so immediately he stripped first one all naked to the waste, and then the
other, and put their arms into the Whipping Post, and executed the Mayors
Warrant on them, in as fierce and cruel a manner as could be, that so their
bodies were cut, and slashed, and torn, as never were the bodies of any rogues,
or thieves, or whores, seen to be, as those poor Christians were; who took
their punishment so cheerfully, that they never whinched for it, nor was their
pain seen by any change of their countenance, as if there had not been any
thing done to them; and all the while they were in their punishment, they sang
and rejoiced, saying, the Lord be blessed, the Lord be praised, who has thus
strengthened and honored us to suffer for his name sake. And when all was
done, they said to the Executioner, If you think you have not done enough, we
are here ready to suffer more for our Savior Christ: and then they fell down
on their knees, and prayed God to forgive them, for they knew not what they had
done. So being led back into the Town toward the Castle end, they exhorted all
people to fear God, and not to care for men, telling the people, this was but
the beginning of the sufferings of Gods people. So they were thrust out of the
Town, no man so much as giving them a cup of cold water, that the Scripture
might be fulfilled in the 129 Psalm, The plowers plowed upon my back, and made
long furrows.

A Postcript.
THese are to give notice to all men, That none of the Justices of the Town had
any hand in this barbarous and unlawful act, saving Mr. William Pickering
Mayor; and I hope, the righteous Lord will cut the cords of the wicked, and
send deliverance to his people, and make his enemies known, and make them like
the grass on the housetop; and as these poor people sang, so do I, Blessed
and praised be the Lord who has made the heavens and earth, and created
strength and power in weakness, to him be glory evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

