A Fresh Discovery OF THE High-Presbyterian Spirit. OR THE Quenching of the
second Beacon fired. DECLARING I. The Un-Christian Dealings of the Authors of a
Pamphlet, Entitled, A Second Beacon Fired, etc. In presenting unto the Lord
Protector and Parliament, a falsified passage out of one of Mr John Goodwins
Books, as containing, either Blasphemy, or Error, or both. II. The Evil of
their Petition for subjecting the Liberty of the Press to the Arbitrariness
and will of a few men. III. The Christian Equity, that satisfaction be given to
the Person so notoriously and publicly wronged.
Together with the Responsatory Epistle of the said Beacon Firers, to the said
Mr Goodwin, fraught with further revilings, falsifications, scurrilous
language, etc. instead of a Christian acknowledgment of their error.

Upon which Epistle some Animadversions are made,

By JOHN GOODWIN, A Servant of God in the Gospel of his Dear Son.

When I would have healed Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim was Discovered, and
the wickedness of Samaria, etc.

Hos. 7. 1. Then were there two thieves crucified with him, the one on the
right hand, the other on the left.

Mat. 27. 38. Humanum est errare: jacere, belluinum: perseverare, Diaboli^^m.

Also two Letters written some years since, the one by the said John Goodwin to
Mr. J. Caryl; the other, by Mr Caryl in Answer hereunto; both relating to the
passage above hinted.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by H. Cripps, and L. Ll. in
Popes head Alley. 1654.

To the Reader.
GOOD Reader, I shall not impose upon either thy Time, or thy Patience, at
present: the brief of the Story is this. Six London Booksellers, whose Names
thou will find mentioned in the superscription of the next ensuing Letter, and
subscribed to the second, all (as it should seem) devout homagers to the
Presbyterian fraternity of Sion College, not long after the first sitting of
the present Parliament, presented to the Lord Protector, and the Parliament, a
small Pamphlet, entitled, A Second Beacon Fired. In this Pamphlet amongst
Errors and Blasphemies (by them so called, and some of them, in my judgment,
too truly such) they cite some words of mine, which, and as, they please, out
of a passage of my Book of Redemption, leaving out others, which give the sense
and import of the passage: These words, thus Sycophantly and traducingly
severed from their fellows in the same Sentence, they present to the Lord
Protector and Parliament, as containing in them Blasphemy and Error. It was
some while after the presentment of the said Pamphlet, before I came to the
sight, or knowledge of it. At last hearing that somewhat published by me was
listed in their Muster-Role of Heresies and Errors, to serve the design of
their Petition for the Restraint of the Press, as also of their no-Christian
intendments against me otherwise, I purchased a sight of the Pamphlet; and
comparing the transcription, as they had mangled and misfigured it, with my
words related unto by themselves, I found my self most notoriously wronged and
abused. Hereupon I wrote and sent a Letter to the said Gentlemen Booksellers,
desiring Christian and equitable reparations (expressed in the said Letter) of
my Name and Repute, which they had not a little damnisied by that egregious
falsification of my words, sense, and meaning. These Gentlemen, in stead of
giving me that satisfaction, which Christianity and Conscience required at
their hands, return me such an Answer in Writing to my Letter, as if they had
taken unto themselves seven spirits worse then that, by which they or whosoever
for them, indicted the said Pamphlet, and the falsifications thereof, ading
drunkenness to thirst, multiplying reproaches, slanders, and revilings (as the
ten Tribes sometimes did their Idolatrous Altars) like the furrows in the Field:
and are so far from acknowledging any wrong done unto me by mis-using me, and
my words, that they justify themselves in that high misdemeanour, and seem to
think that they do God service in straining the peg of that iniquity yet
higher. Notwithstanding I may (I suppose) clearly and fully acquit the said
Gentlemen Booksellers from the guilt and crime of inditeing, or drawing up,
the said responsatorie writing: this I judge to be the froath and foam of
another Spirit, which some years since leapt upon me, and attempted to rend and
tear me:

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat:

Such eyes, such hands, such mouth that spirit had. Only the said Gentlemen
have involved themselves in the guilt of the un-Christian Contents of the said
writing, by consent, and subscription, and possibly by solicitation also;
although I rather incline to think, that the Penman was chosen and requested to
the work, not by men that use to sell, but by some who are more frequently wont
to buy, Books. That Motto in their title Page, For Sions sake we cannot hold
our peace, whose device so ever it was, seems, by the Contents of the Book, not
to be meant of Sion, in the common acceptance of the word, viz. as it
signifies the Church of God, but rather of Sion College in London. For certain
it is that the Book or Pamphlet is not calculated with any relation at all,
except it be that of opposition, to the Interest of the Church of God; but most
exactly for the Interest of Sion College and her children. Doubtless whosoever
was the Epistler, or Enditer of the said Answer to my Letter, might have stood
in the High Priests Hall without danger: his speech would never have bewrayed
him to have been of Galilee. I have, in the days of my Pilgrimage, both seen,
and heard of many Writings fraught with much more then enough of that which is
vile, and sinfully extravagant in men: but to this day never did mine eye see,
nor mine ear hear of, nor will it easily enter into my heart to believe, that
ever there was any Piece (for the inches of it) fuller of that which is
un-Christian, yea, unman-like, as of most notorious and broad-fac'd untruths
(of such obvious and easy an eviction) such bold slanders, such childish
cavils, wrestings, and perverting of words, such scurrilous and unseemly
language, such ridiculous quarrelings and exceptings against manifest truths,
such revengeful suggestions and insinuations (with many other unworthinesses)
then that letter of theirs, here presented unto the world. It may be justly
said unto them, Many Writers have done foolishly, but you surpass them all.
Their letter is for a writing, what he was for a man, whose character was,
Monstrum nulla virtute Redemptum A vitiis. There is nothing savorie or
Christian in it, to balance in the least the high demerit of it.

Therefore as Paul, having received reproachful measure from men, and those
faling in their duty, who ought to have vindicated him, complains that he was
compelled himself to appear in his own vindication, which otherwise he had
rather should have been the work of others; in like manner am I compelled once
again to take hold of shield and Buckler in mine own defense, and either to
make, or to keep, those things concerning my self, straight in the minds and
thoughts of men, (if it may be) which men of most untrue suggestions have
endeavored to pervert, and make crooked.

For thine accommodation about the Animadversions made upon the Booksellers
Epistle, and for the ready application of them in their respective branches, to
the particular passages in this Letter, unto which they (respectively) relate,
I have distinguished their Letter into twenty two Sections; and again
distinguished these by letters of the Alphabet, where any Animadversion is
particularly made upon them, which readily lead thee to their appropriate
passages in the subjoyned Animadversions, characterized by the same Letter also.

And because the Gentlemen Booksellers, or rather, the son of their right hand
(their Amanuensis) challenge me to print Mr Caryls Letter about the passage of
their falsification, sent unto me some years since, and threaten me that they
may do it for me, if I will not, glorying over this Letter, as if the
publishing of it would confound me, and that the reasons therein against the
said passage in my book, were so satisfactory, that they did effectually
silence me; I have therefore published both this Letter of his to me, and mine
also to him, which occasioned it. The truth is, I had Printed both these
Letters presently upon their writing and sending, but only for a clause in Mr
Caryls Letter (toward the close of it) wherein he insinuates his unwillingness
to have passages of that nature made public. So that it was clearly, and as
in the presence of God, only out of my respects to Mr Caryl, that I then
forbear the printing of them, and should have done so still, had not these
importune Sons of high Presbitery thus reproachfully and triumphingly clamoured
upon me to do it. But as for any reasons against the said passage, either
satisfactory, or unsatisfastory, that Letter mentions none, unless it be the
asserting of the Authors own judgment and some other men's, in the point, in
opposition unto mine, notwithstanding any thing offered by me in my book. If
either the Booksellers, or Book-buyers, judge this a reason so satisfactory, as
effectually to silence me for ever, I cannot but juag them to be of the race
and lineage of those, who are owereasie of satisfaction for their own carnal
advantage Besides, of such a reason as this, I was not, nor lightly could be
ignorant, before Mr Caryls Letter came to me.

Concerning this Letter; with that of the Booksellers, I have delivered the
Autographons themselves unto the Printer, that there may be no mistake in the
printing of these, unless (happily) Typographical, which notwithstanding, I shall
endcavour to prevent. For my own two Letters, not having by me the Copies
themselves, which were sent, but being necessitated to make use of the rough
draughts, possibly there may be some variation in words, although my desire
stands, as near as may be, to vary in nothing, especially without giving
notice of the variation, where I have any knowledge of it. This I speak because
of the capritious weakness of my Antagonists, who on the one hand, are wont to
make a long arm to reach pretexts and occasions of cavilling, and on the
other, to complain of the grasshopper as a burden.

Such personal contests as these have always been the regret of my Genius: and
if I thought not that my reputation were, or may be of more concernment unto
others, then I judge it to be to my self, I should not move, heart, hand, or
foot, to pursue the rescue; but abandon it to the lust and folly of those, who
have attempted to make a prey and spoil of it: But I remember a good saying of
Austine; For our selves (Brethren) our conscience suffices, but for you, our
name also had need be excellent Nobis, fratres, suff cit conscientia nostra:
sed propter vos etiam fama pollere debet.
: and Jerome's advice was, that no man should sit still under a suspicion, or
charge, of Heresy In snspicione Hereseos nolo quenquam esse patientem.
.

Besides, this consideration, that by how much a further and fuller discovery
is made of the folly, or madness, (as the word (...) was Englished in our
former Translation, 2 Timothy 3. 9.) of those, who resist the Truth, they have so
much the less time remaining to endanger the world by such a practice; this
consideration (I say) did balance the averseness of my disposition to the work.
Now as Jannes and Jambres (says the Apostle) withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the Truth: men of corrupt minds, in-judicious conconcerning the Faith.
But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest unto all
men, as theirs also was c. It is always folly, if not madness, which ingageth
men in a resistance of the truth; yea it is one of these which causes men to
persist in this practice. By means hereof, it cannot but in time utter and
discover it self. For that which is active, especially in matters and cases of
public and weighty consideration, must needs ere long bewray it is Genius,
nature, and property, at least unto those, who are intelligent and
apprehensive; who being lovers of Truth, and of the peace and comforts of men,
cannot forbear the communication of their vision; and in case that which they
see in this kind, be of any evil or dangerous import unto men, they cannot but
give the most public notice of it accordingly unto the world. And when the
generallity of persons shall he brought to understand and see the folly or
madness of men in any course or way of acting, wherein they have been deceived
and injured by them, they will for the future, abhor their practices, and buy
their merchandise no more. I trust this small piece may do some service unto
the world in promoting and perfecting the discovery of the folly of those men,
who resist that great Evangelical truth (with its accomplices) which asserteth,
That God, with his Antecedent and primary Intentions, intended the Salvation of
the whole world by Jesus Christ. Or however God, and the consciences of other
men, shall agree about the event and succese of it, it here prefents ts service
unto thee (Good Reader) together with the Christian respects, and further
service, of

Thy cordially devoted Friend
From my Study. December. 12. 1654.
Mr John Goodwins Letter, Endorsed.
To my Christian Friends, Mr Thomas Underhill, Mr Samuel Gellibrand, Mr John
Rothwel, Mr Luke Fawn, Mr Joshua Kirton, Mr Nathaniel Webb; or any one, or
more, of them, These present.
GEntlemen; A few days since, an ill-conditioned Pamphlet, entitled, A second
Beacon fired, presented to the Lord Protector and Parliament, fell into my
hands. I find all your names sub-printed to it; but know not whether your
hearts be to it, and were consenting to the publishing and presentment of it;
or whether some Son of Belial, one, or more, taking the advantage (it may be)
of some of your known weaknesses, and desirous to disport themselves (and
possibly others also) with your disparagement, did not, without your privity or
consent, borrow your Names to father so hard-favoured a Birth of their own. The
reasons why I cannot but a little (at least) demur, whether the piece be yours,
or no* are. 1. Because I find in it most un-Christian falsification, even that
which some would call Forgerie. 2. Because I find in it likewise, such counsels
offered Petition-wise to the Lord Protector and Parliament, under a pretext of
Godliness, and zeal for Sion, which are obstructive, if not destructive, to the
prosperity and Sovereign interest of both. 3. And lastly, there is a sent or
smell of such a spirit, in the said Pamphlet, which teaches men to suppose
that gain is Godliness. I confess, that notwithstanding any personal knowledge I
have of you, or any of you, the Pamphlet may be yours under all the three
characters of unworthiness now specified: for I know none of you beyond the
face, and only one of you, so far; yet report has so far befriended some of
you in my thoughts, that I am hardly able to conclude you all under the guilt
of the shameful and un* Christian enormities, which dare look the Parliament
and the world in the face, out of those Papers. For (to touch the first in one
instance only, not having opportunity of making proof of more at the present.)

Page 4. (of the said Pamphlet) this absurd passage is charged upon me in my
Book of Redemption, page 33* 5. That in case any assureance of the
unchaugeableness of Gods Love, were to be found in, or regularly deduced from,
the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any intelligent man to question their
Authority, and whether they were from God, or no. Surely they who lay this
saying to my charge, may with as much honesty and conscience, yea, and with as
much appearance of truth, impeach David as guilty of saying, There is no God,
Psalm. 14. 1. or make the Apostle Paul, to say, Romans 10. 9. If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, thou shall be saved. For though these
words are to be found in these sacred* Authors (respectively) yet the sense
they make, otherwise then in consort of the other words relating in their
respective periods unto them, was as far from their Authors meaning* as the
Heavens are from the Earth. David was far enough from affirming, that There is
no God: and Paul, from saying, that If a man shall with his mouth confess the
Lord Jesus, he shall be saved; yet the words, of which both sayings consist,
are extant in their writings. In like manner the Beacon-Firers, whoever they
be, you, or others (for I shall not charge you with the folly, but upon better
evidence) commit the foul sin of Forgery, in making me say, in their* pretended
Transcription out of my Book, that In case any assureance of the
unchangeableness of Gods* Love were to be found, or could regularly be deduced
from the Seriptures, etc. Whereas (besides several other words in the sentence)
they leave out the characteristical word, Such, [any Such assureance of the
unchangeableness etc.] the word, that is the Heart, Spirit and Soul of the
sentence, that gives a most rational and Orthodox taste and relish to the whole
Period, and without which, the passage contains no more my sense or judgment,
then theirs who forged the Transcription. For my sense and opinion, which I
argue and assert in several places (upon occasion) in my said Book of
Redemption (as viz. p. 63. 64. and again, p. 278. etc.) clearly and expressly
is, that The Love of God, as all his Counsels and Decrees, is unchangeable; and
consequently, that an assureance of this unchangeableness is regularly enough
deduceible from the Scriptures, and this without any prejudice to their divine
Authority; yea rather to the establishment and confirmation hereof. So far am
I, either from thinking, or saying, that if in case any assureance of the
unchangeableness of Gods Love, were to be found in, or could regularly be
deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any intelligent man to
question their Authority, etc. Therefore they who have accused me, especially
unto a Parliament, of such a saying, have the greater sin. That kind of
unchangeableness of Gods Love, the assureance of which, I affirm, were it to be
found in, or regularly to be deduced from, the Scriptures, would be a just
ground to an intelligent and considering man to question their Authority; etc.
I had imediately before described, and besides, sufficiently explained in the
reason of the said assertion, which I imediately subjoyn in these words.
Forthat a God, infinitely righteous and Holy, should irreversibly assure the
immortal and undefiled inheritance of his Grace and savor unto any creature
whatsoever, so that though this Craeture should prove never so abominable in
his sight, never so outragiously and desperately wicked and prophance, he
should not be at liberty to withhold this Inheritance from him, is a saying
(doubtless) too hard for any man, who rightly understands and considers the
Nature of God, to bear. From these words it plainly enough appears, that it is
not any assureance of the unchangeableness of Gods Love, as the Beacon-firers
most un-Christianly and unconscionably suggest to the Parliament, and (indeed)
to the world, which I conceive to be a just ground to any intelligent and
considering man to question the Authority of the Scriptures, in case it could
either be found in, or drawn from them; but such an assureance hereof, by
virtue of which, men turning aside from Christ, after Satan, from ways of
righteousness and of truth, to walk in ways of all manner of looseness and
profaneness, may notwithstanding with a secure confidence, promise salvation
unto themselves, and that God will never take away his love from them. And
whether such an assureance of the unchangeableness of Gods Love, as this, were
the Scriptures any ways confederate with it, (which far be it from every
Christian Soul to imagine) would not be derogatory or prejudicial in the
Highest to their Authority, let the Beaconfirers themselves, or any other
persons, who make any conscience of putting a difference between God and the
Devil, judge and determine.

If I were a person prone to jealousy, or desired to make any further breach
upon men's reputations, then only for the necessary reparations of the truth
injured by them, I could suggest this Query to the thoughts of men; Whether it
be not likely, that they, who thus palpably and notoriously have falsified the
writings of one, have not committed the same folly in the rest of their
Transcriptions from the writings of others? considering that it is a saying in
the civil Law: He that has injured one, has threatened many. and our Savior
himself; He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful in much: and
he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16. 10. But no
more of this at present.

2. That pernicious Counsel against the liberty of Printing and for the
subjecting of all the learning, gifts, parts and abilities of all the worthy
men in the Nation, unto the humor and conceit of a few men, who for their
comporting with the Religion of the times, shall be surnamed, Orthodox, which
the said Beacon-firers do (in effect) very passionately suggest and commend
unto the Parliament, ( p. 11.) and which, were it put in execution according to
the terms of the suggestion, would certainly fire both City, and Country, as
well as Beacons, should (me think) argue the second Beacon not to be of your
firing. For you are reputed friends unto Jesus Christ; and to the truth: and
consequently who can imagine that you should give any such advice, especially
unto a Parliament, which is of an obstructive, at least of a threatening
import, to the advancement, and further discovery of Jesus Christ unto the
world, yea and which, were it pursued by those, to whom it* is given, cannot
(in greatest likelihood) but sort to an issue or consequence, quite contrary to
that, whereunto it pretends; I mean, to a further propagating and spreading of
errors and unsound Doctrines and Opinions in the Land; and for the
justification whereof, there is neither footing nor foundation in the
Scriptures. For,

1. Where does the Lord Christ, authorize any person, or persons, of what
capacity soever, to authorize or appoint any number of men, whom they shall
please to call Orthodox (whether they be such, or no) yea or those, which are
such indeed, to say unto the Holy Ghost; nothing which thou revealest unto
other men, be it never so much for the glorifying of the name of God, of never
such worthy and sacred concernment unto the world, shall publicly go forth
into the world, unless thou will reveal the same unto us also, and make us
partakers of the Vision, as well as others? Or does not the Beacon-firers, very
passionately and importunely tempt men in authority to assume unto themselves
such an exorbitant and prodigious power, as this; I mean, to authorize a
certain number of men, who shall, in their sense, be Orthodox; though according
to the sense of as understanding men, and (probably according) to the truth it
self, be as erroneous in their judgment as other men, to word it is (in
effect) at such a rate with the Holy Ghost?

2. What ground is there in the Word of God for the investing of Edmund (for
example) Arthur, and William, with a Nebuchadnezzarean power over the Press, to
stifle or slay what books they please, and what they please, to keep alive;
more then there is for the investing of Joshuah, Peter, and Tobiah, with the
same? Or if the three latter be altogether as religious, as judicious, as
learned, as the three former, by what rule of equity, reason, or conscience,
should they be more obnoxious in their writings, and publication of them, to
the censure and disapprobation of these, then these in their writings unto
them? Or by what rule delivered in the Word of God shall any man judge the
three former, either more religious, learned, or judicious, and so more meet
for the intrustment under consideration, then the latter?

3. Whether has the Holy Ghost any where characterized, or declared what
qualifications are requisite and meet, to be found in such persons, who shall
be set over the Press and be entrusted with such a sovereignty of power, as by
which they shall be enabled to fill the world with books and writings, for the
advancement of their own faction, or for the propogation of their own
erroneous, (and perhaps dangerous) conceits, and on the other hand, to
suppress whatsoever shall be prepared by men of solid and sound judgments
for the detection, and eviction of their folly in such cases?

4. Is not the granting of such a power over the press, as the Beacon firers
in the great heat of their devotion and zeal, solicit the Parliament to vest
in a certain number of men, ill consistent with the interest and benefit of a
free Commonwealth, and of like nature and consideration with the granting of
Monopolies? Or may not the Commonwealth deeply suffer by the exercise of such a
power, in being thereby deprived of the use and benefit of the gifts, parts,
experiments, diligence and labors of many her worthy members?

5. Who are in a regular capacity of power, to nominate and appoint such
persons, to whom the said power over the Press ought to be committed? If it be
said, the civil Magistrate. 1. I would gladly know of the Beacen-firers, who
has delegated such a power or authority unto him, or in what part of the Word
of God, any such power is asserted unto him. 2. Whether the said power over the
Press be an Ecclesiastic, or civil power? If it be the latter, how are men
set apart for the ministry of the Word of God, and prayer, capable of the
investiture? If it be the former, how is the civil Magistrate in a capacity of
conferring it, or investing any man with it?

6. If the Supreme Magistrate in a State or Commonwealth, be allowed a power to
invest what persons he pleases with such a power over the Press, as the
Beacon-firers demand, is it not to be expected that only such persons shall be
deputed to this trust by him, which are of his own sense and judgment in
matters of Religion, and consequently who shall comply with a State Religion?
And are men of this character competent Arbitrators, between persons of their
own party and persuasion, and those who are contrary minded to them, in their
contests about truth and error? And in case the Magistrate himself shall be
unsound in the faith (as men of this Order have no privilege of exemption from
error, more then other men; nay, they are under more and greater temptations,
then other men, to be carried aside in their judgments from the truth) if then
(I say) the Magistrate be of an unsound judgment in things appertaining unto
God, shall not our Press-Masters be unsound also; and consequently, shall we
not have error countenanced and set at liberty, and truth imprisoned, and
condemned to silence and obscurity?

7. Shall not such men who shall undertake the administration of such a power,
by which the Press shall be suffered to speak when they please, and be
compelled to keep silence when they please likewise, run an extreme hazard of
fighting against God? Or to reject and repel the Holy Ghost, when he shall at
any time be desirous to come forth by the way of the Press, into the world with
any new Discovery of Truth, is this any thing less (being interpreted) then a
fighting against God? Or do they, who know but in part, universally or
infallibly know, when the spirit of truth, and when the spirit of error is
desirous to come abroad into the world?

8. Does not a power of gagging the Press, when men please, carry a dangerous
Antipathy in it to that Evangelical charge, or precept, imposed upon all men,
whereby they are commanded by God to try all things, and particularly to try
the spirits, whether they be of God or no? For if many things, or many spirits
of Doctrines be not suffered to come to the knowledge of men, how shall they be
able to try them? Do not then the Beacon-firers, by their counsel given to the
Lord Protector and Parliament, for the restraining of the Press, render that
great commandment of God for the trial of all things, of none effect?

9. And lastly, That great evil of the infectious spreading of errors and
heresies in the Nation, the prevention whereof the said advice given touching
the Press, pretends unto, is not likely to be at all prevented, but promoted
rather, by it, should it he followed and put in execution. For,

1. (As the saying is) Quod licet ingratum est, quod non licet, acrius urit.
What Laws permit to do, to do
Men do not much desire:
But what restrained is, to do
They burn as hot as Fire.


And the Apostle Paul himself says; That Sin taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in him all manner of concupiscence. For without the Law,
Sin is dead. Rom, 7. 8. And little question there is, but that in case the
liberty of the Press shall be by any law restreined, they who otherwise would
be but indifferent whether they published in Print their weak, it may be their
erroneous and wicked conceptions, or no, will be hereby admonished and provoked
to do it, though more secretly. Stolen Waters are sweet.

2. In case they shall by any such law of restraint, be kept from venting their
fond and uncouth notions by the Press, or shall by the Masters of the Press be
prohibited the Printing of them, they will by way of indignation and revenge be
so much the more zealously diligent and intent to propagate them underhand, and
privately; and probably gain many more disciples this way, then by the other.
The profane and vain babbling of Hymeneus and Philetus fretted like a Canker,
although they wanted the opportunity of a Press for their propagation.

3. When the generality of people shall understand that the publishing of such
or such notions, or Tenants, has been restrained and obstructed by those, who
shall exercise an arbitrary dominion over the Press, it will (in reason) both
occasion them to think the better of them, or at least to think that there is
somewhat more then ordinary in them, in one kind, or other; and consequently,
they will be awakened and stirred in their spirits to inquire more narrowly
after them, and to acquaint themselves with them. So that in this respect also
there is little like to be gained toward the suppression of errors and
heresies, by subjecting the Press unto a Test.

4. The setting of Watchmen with authority at the door of the Press to keep
errors and heresies out of the world, is as weak a project and design, as it
would be to set a company of armed men about an house to keep darkness out of
it in the night season. For as the natural darkness cannot be prevented, or
dispelled, but by the presence of light, nor needs there to be any thing,
either for the preventing or dispelling it, but light only: So neither is it
possible either to prevent, or to remove, errors and heresies, which are
spiritual darkness, but only by shining spiritual light in the hea^ts and
understandings of men; neither needs there any thing but this to effect
either.

5. Errors and Heresies, the less they play in sight, are like to defend
themselves upon terms of more advantage, and to lengthen out the days of their
continuance amongst men for the longer time. For by this means they are kept
from the clear and distinct knowledge of judicious and learned men, who
otherwise, being both able and willing to perform so worthy a service both unto
God and men, would publicly detect and confute them. And I verily believe that
the printing of J. Biddles most enormous and hideous notions, and conceits
about the nature of God, and some other very weighty points in religion, will
bring the judgment of bloody and deceitful men upon them, which (according to
David's Award) is, not to live cut half their days. Psalm, 55. 23, For as the
great Apostles reasons concerning such Teachers, whom he calls men of
corrupt minds (...) injudicieus, or without judgment, about matters of Faith,
But (says he) they shall proceed no further for their madness shall be
manifest unto all men; as theirs also was; so is it very reasonable to conceive
and judge, that the more generally and publicly any vile, wicked, or
blasphemous conceit shall discover and manifest it self unto men, it is so much
the nearer to become the loathing and abhorring of all men. Nor do the
Beacon-firers argue like worthy men, when from the numbers of unworthy books
printed, they infer the number of buyers, and from hence conclude the number of
persons, either infected with, or inclined to, the errors contained and pleaded
for, in those books. For who noweth not that many men, especially Ministers,
Scholars, and learned men, buy many books, not with any intent to say as they
say, or to side in opinion with their Authors, but partly to inform themselves
concerning the spirits that come abroad into the world, partly to rebuke and
confute them upon occasion, in case they see cause for it?

6. (And lastly for this) The Gospel, and the truth never flourished,
prospered, and triumphed at an higher rate in the world, then when errors and
heresies were no otherwise restreined, punished, or opposed, then by those
spiritual means, which God himself has sanctified and prescribed in this
behalf, as viz. by the effectual preaching of the Gospel, the stopping of the
mouths of the gainsayers of truth by arguments of conviction, and solid
demonstration; by casting out of their respective Churches, and delivering up
unto Satan, all such, who after admonition and conviction, shall persist in
their errors, and in the teaching and spreading of them. But certainly amongst
all the means, Offices, and Officers, which the Lord Christ has directed or
established, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and acknowledgement of the son of God, unto a perfect man, etc. neither
restraint of printing, nor Licensers of the Press, are to be found; these are
Apocryphal, both Names and Things. This for the second particular.

For the third and last, He, or they (whether it be some other, others, or your
selves) who have represented you as the firers of the second Beacon, and
consequently, the Authors of the advice given (in the Pamphlet mentioned)
touching the monopolizing of the Press, do insinuate you as men, who can be
too well content that others of the same craft with you, should suffer in their
trade, so you may advance in yours. For it is not much to be doubted, but that
your desire is, that such men as you count Orthodox, should be recommended by
you, or by your motion and interest, to the high preferment over the Press,
who by the opportunity of their standing on this ground, shall be in a good
capacity to gratify their friends and benefactors in their way. But in this I
shall spare you.

For a cloze, I shall make this reasonable and Christian request unto you, that
in case you be fellow-fufferers with me, and have not been privy or consenting
to the framing or publishing of that unworthy Pamphlet, entitled, A Second
Beacon fired, etc. you will publicly, and in print, wash your hands from the
guilt hereof, and declare unto the world, that you had neither right hand nor
left, either in the inditing, or venting, of that Pamphlet. Or if your
consciences be not at liberty to accommodate you in this (for by somewhat I
have heard since I began this Epistle to you, I am little less then all
thoughts made that you are the true, and not the personated, Beacon-firers your
selves) that then you will with your own hands, quench your Beacon on fire;
first, by acknowledging publicly and in Print,

1. That you have falsely accused me, either of Blasphemy or of Error, and this
unto his Highness the Lord Protector, the Parliament, the Nation, and (indeed)
to the whole world.

2. That you have given unadvised council (to speak no worse of it) for the
oppressing the Christian and just liberties of the Commonwealth of England,
about printing, by subjecting the whole Nation [I mean as many in it, as shall
at any time intend, or be desirous, to publish any thing Press* wise] unto the
wills and pleasures of a few particular men.

3. By delivering or presenting Copies of what you shall Print, or cause to be
printed, upon both these accounts, to all the same persons, as well Parliament
men, as others, or to as many of them as are yet living in, or near, the City,
to whom you not long since delivered Copies of that unhappy Pamphlet, styled A
Second Beacon-fired. If you shall with your own hands thus quench the Beacon,
which you have rashly and unchristianly fired, I shall rest satisfied.
Otherwise you will compel me to do it after my weak manner for you, by
publishing the contents of these Papers, which I have sent unto you, I shall
wait for your Christian Answer till the latter end of the next week.

The God of all Grace give you Wisdom and a sound understanding in the Gospel
of his dear Son, that you may be capable of knowing things that differ, to your
own comfort and peace.

Your very loving Friend in the John Goodwin.
From my Study in Swan Nov. 9. 1654.
The Booksellers Letter to Mr J. Goodwin ENDORSED, To the Learned Mr John
Goodwin at his House in Swan-Alley.
Together with the said Mr J. Goodwin's Animadversions thereon, according to
the respective Sections of it.
Booksellers, or Beacon-firers,. I.
SIR,
Our weakness shall be as readily acknowledged by us, as it is scornfully
derided by you; ( a) but God who does righteously conceal himself from lofty
and crafty Sophisters, ( b) does graciously reveal himself to Weaklings and
Babes ( c) We own that Book which you say was written by a son of Belial, (d)
because thore was one little word SVCH ( e) mitted in transcribing a passage
out of your Redempt. Redeemed. We cannot but admire this righteous providence (
f) For you accuse us of falsification, as Joseph's Mistress accused him of
wantonness, whereof he was innocent, and she was guilty. ( g)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion, I.
(a) Your weakness may be as readily acknowledged by you, as it is scornfully
derided by me, and yet never be acknowledged by you at all, (yea as far as by
the Contents of your Letter can be reasonably judged, you are too far hardened
in a conceit of your strength, ever to acknowledge your weakness.) For your
charge here is but an unchristian calumniating of my Christian intentions
toward you, in remembering you privately of your weaknesses: nor do my words
import any scornful deriding, either of them, or of your persons for them.
Your Prophet and Amanuensis (the Compiler of your Letter) has drawn you into a
sinful snare in the very beginning, (as he has done unto twenty more in the
sequel) by occasioning you to subscribe such an insinuation of untruth.

(b) The word, Sophister, in the canting dialect of high Presbytery, commonly
signifies, a person who levies such Arguments, whether from the Scriptures, or
otherwise, against any of their Tenants, which their Prophets cannot tell how
to answer. In this sense of the word, the Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians,
etc. might have termed Stephen, a Sophister, because they were not able to
resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6. 9. 10. In like manner
the Jews at Damascus, might have called Paul a Sophister* because he confounded
them, (...) argumentatively proving, or enforcing by argument, that this
(Jesus) is very Christ, Act. 9. 22. The Prophets of the said school of high
Presbytery have attempted to impose a like exotique sense upon several other
words of frequent use amongst us. They make the word, Orthodox, to signify, a
man of their judgment, whether rotten, or sound: the word Heteredox, or
erroneous, a person differing in judgment from them, though in the truth: the
word Blasphemy; that which contradicts any of their notions or conceits about
the Nature, or Attributes of God: this complex, the Reformed Religion, with
them signifies, that Systeme or body of Doctrine, which they teach: the word,
Arminian, or Pelagian, signifies such a person, who holds that Christ tasted
death for every man, in the Scripture sense: and again who holds in the
Scripture sense, that God would have all men to be saved, and none to perish.
By Socinian, they frequently understand a person that will not bruit it in
matters of Religion: by proud, they sometimes mean, him that will not stoop to
the high Presbyterian yoke, or to their judgment in other things. My meaning
is not, that they intend or desire; that the words or terms specified, should
in their writings, or teachings, be taken in the senses respectively mentioned;
but that truth cannot ordinarily be made of what they write or teach, when any
of the said words are used by them, unless they be taken and understood in the
said respective significations. And by their usage of these, and several other
words, upon the terms expressed they have wretchedly abused the simple and
over-credulous world. But I confess, that if I be learned, (as you please to
style me in the superscripcion of your Letter) and yet a Sophister (in the true
and known signification of the word) my condemnation is the greater, and equal
to a rich man's, who is a common thief. But it may be, that was your complement,
and this your heart.

(c) Those Babes unto whom God graciously reveals himself, are not persons
full of malice and revenge, or who will justify themselves in scandalous and
public misdemeanors, nor who are always learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth; but such who are babes or children, in malice, who
are tractable, and teachable, and easy to be entreated by the truth, though
otherwise they be men in understanding.

(d) This is an untrue charge, like unto many others in your Epistle. I do not
affirm or say, that your Book was written by a Son of Belial; but only
suggested that such a thing might possibly be, and that you might be abused in
it, as well as my self.

(e) Whereas you seem to extenuate the crime of your falsification, by saying,
because there was one little word SVCH, omitted, etc. I confess the word,
Such, is no word great of bulk, or body: but it was the spirit and life of that
sentence, of which you make a dead corpse, by separating it from it, and without
which, as specificating that assurance of the unchangeableness of Gods love, of
which I there speak determinately, you represent me as speaking that, which is
further from my thoughts, or sense, then possibly from your own. And for you to
pretend that it is one little word omitted, as if it were the less in
consequence, because it is little in bulk, or quantity, does it not bewray your
great inconsiderateness? The words, no and not, are each of them somewhat less
then Such, yet he that shall leave them out of nine of the ten Commandments of
God, shall of so many holy and just Commandments of God, make alike number of
horrid suggestions of the Devil. Besides the difference between Sibboleth and
Shibboleth, consisting only in an aspiration, which as Grammarians inform us,
is less then a letter, is far less then that between, any assurance, and
any such assurance; yet did it cost many thousand men their lives a: But
besides the little word SVCH, you omit many others in your said Transcription,
Judge. 12. 6.
viz. all these (in the beginning of the period) yea (that which is yet more) I
verily believe; which words have some considerable influence upon the sentence.
Yea the truth is, had you put in all these, and the little word, SVCH, too,
unless you had moreover interpreted my meaning in this word, which you might
and ought to have done, from what I had said before, and from what follows
after, you had not dealt Christianly or fairly in the transcription. For to
take a sentence out of the midst of a discourse, the meaning and right
understanding whereof depends upon what goes before, and what comes after, is
not to represent the mind or judgment of the Author in such a sentence, but
with ambiguity, and with the greatest probability of mistake. Therefore whereas
in your words immediately following, you go about to justify your selves from
the crime of falsification in any degree, the very certain truth is that you
are falsifiers in a very high degree.

(f. g) It is indeed a righteous Providence, that I should accuse you of
falsification: I believe that God put it into my heart to do it, for the
manifesting of your unworthiness, first privately unto your selves; and then,
upon your obduration and impenitency, unto the world. But that I should do it
upon the terms asserted by you, is no Providence at all, but a broad-faced
untruth affirmed by you, and such an affirmation from you is indeed to be
admired. For whether I be a falsifier or no, (which shall be put to the trial
anon) it is as certain as certainty it self, and has been already proved in
the sight of the Sun, and above all contradiction, that you are falsifiers,
according to your charge: Therefore not Joseph with his chastity, but Joseph's
Mistress with her wantonness, is your parallel. You lay claim to innocence,
as Saul did to obedience, when the Prophet Samuel charged him notwithstanding
with rebellion. 1 Samuel 15. 20, 23. And he that taught you to talk of admiring
that which you express, as a righteous Providence, taught you to speak
profanely, and not as men awfully sensible of the Majestique Holiness and
power of God.

Booksellers or Beacon-firers,. II.
To the first of your three censures then, We answer, that when you relate the
judgment of the reformed Churches, concerning the unchangeablenesse of Gods
love toward his regenerate Children, ( a) You your self are guilty of a most
notorious falsification, which your Letter tempts us ( b) to call, forgery,
because you forge a vile opinion, (and you are excellent at that kind of
forgery) ( c) and then lay a bastard of your own begetting at the Churches
doors, and would persuade the most chaste Protestants, that they must father
your own hard-favoured Monster. Are not you ashamed to stain paper with such
slanderous Cavils ( d) Did any of those learned men, against whom you write,
ever assert the unchangeablenesse of Gods love to Apostates? to men that are
never so desperately wicked and profane in his sight, though they continue
never so long in their outrageous wickedness. ( e)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion, II.
(a) Here again you falsify a fresh, laying to my charge that which I know
not, no nor yet your selves; you should have done well to have pointed at the
place in my writings, where I relate the judgment of the reformed Churches
concerning the unchangeablenesse of Gods love toward his regenerate children.
For I do not remember that I have related the judgment of any of them all,
touching this head of Doctrine but only of the reformed Churches of Saxony;
and this I relate in their own words p. 394. of my Redempt. Redeemed. In the
same page I refer indeed the Reader to another Author, who has made a
collection of the sense and judgment of more of them: whose relations and
collections in this behalf, if you can disprove you may do it, if you please;
but if you discover any thing amiss in him (which I presume you cannot) you
must have a conscience by your selves to lay it to my charge. However it had
been requisite for you, upon such a charge as this, to have directed me where I
shall find the judgment of the reformed Churches in the point, related in
conformity to your sense and desire (for I am far to seek in this) that so I
might have compared my report hereof, with the said judgment declared and laid
down by these Churches themselves. For in case I should find that I had
mis-reported it, I should not consult your example for a justification of my
error, but the example of David, which teaches me to confess my sin, and to
flee to the golden Altar of repenrance for my sanctuary. So that that most
notorious falsification, of which you would make me guilty, is but another most
notorious falsification of your own: you can prove nothing of it against me.

(b) However, I marvel you should say that my Letter tempts you to call it,
Forgery. He that calls a spade, a spade, does not tempt another to call an
hatchet, a spade.

(c) No Gentlemen; as Elijah answered King Ahab, who charged him with troubling
Israel, I have not (says the Prophet to him) troubled Israel, but thou and thy
Fathers house; so may I with evidence enough of truth, answer you, that it is
not I, but you and your Prophets, that are excellent at that kind of Forgery
you speak of (if you will needs place an excellency in it) you, or they, or
both of you together, in the inditing of this very Epistle, have begotten I
know not how many of those Bastard and hard-favoured Monsters you talk of, and
have laid them at my door. But I shall remand them to those, who have polluted
their consciences with the malicious pleasure of their generation, and cause
them to bear the shame of them.

(d) The shame of staining paper with slanderous cavils, is a covering fit for
your faces; it suiteth not with mine, further then by a Christian Sympathy I
bear the burden and shame of your folly in this kind. I wish that slanderous
cavils were as much beneath you, and your Prophets, as they are beneath me.

(e) Truly you need not put this question to me. For I freely confess that I do
not know any of those learned men against whom I write, who ever asserted the
unchangeableness of Gods Love to Apostates, or to persons of that Character,
which you further describe. The opinions of those learned men, whom I oppose or
write against, so far as I oppose them, are obnoxious more then enough, as
expressed by themselves; so that I have no temptation lying upon me to falsify
or corrupt them; yet some of the learned men you speak of* and particularly
your Prophets about the City, do assert the unchangeableness of Gods Love
toward all true Believers; many of which I have evinced both from the
Scriptures, by pregnant argument and demonstration, by a full consort and
harmony of Orthodox and learned men both ancient and modern; yea by many
Testimonies of those persons themselves, who are counted pillars of the
contrary Faith; yea and lastly, by experience it self, may, and do, turn
Apostates afterward.

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers,. III.
We have heard of some Arminians, who never did read Calvin himself, but were
wont to read Calvin's opinion in a Jesuit, and take it for granted that their
brother Jesuit was to be trusted: We fear that you may be baptized into the
same spirit of giddiness ( a) You put the poor Protestant in a Bear-skin, and
then set the dogs upon him, that you may disport your self and your
Confederates with that Tragic Comedy. Give us leave to tell all your friends
who believe as your Church* believes, That they who are false accusers of the
brethren are sons of Belial, (b) It is not Calvin, but Mr. Goodwin, who does
maintain the Apostasy of the Saints in his blasphemous Libels. ( c) It is no
wonder if Such (we shall remember the word Such) Apostate Saints are inslaved
in Journey-work to Apostate Angels; ( d) Be pleased to arm your self with
patience, whilst we tell you a story which runs thus in brief; when your
Brother Bertius gave his book, De Apostasia Sanctorum to King James, the King
passed this censure upon him, This Heretic, says he, deserves to be commended
for his wit, but hanged for his knavery. ( e)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. III.
(a) I can deliver you, or, if you please, you may (I conceive) with some pains
deliver your selves, from this fear concerning me. For in my reading I never
met with any of those citations from Calvin, on which I insist in any of my
writings, in any Jesuit whatsoever: and I believe that you may travel a long
journey in reading these Authors, before you meet with any of them. You speak
so many untruths, and these fully known unto me for such, in this letter, that
I know not how to believe you, when you say, We have heard of some Arminians,
who etc. I much doubt whether ever you heard of any such or no; especially from
any Informer worthy credit. I fear you pin your Faith upon the sleeves of many,
who (after the manner of the false Prophets of old) make you glad with lies.
You make the Arminian, brother to the Jesuit; but the kindred is much nearer
between the Jesuit, and the Black-Friars.

(b) Here again, you only vary the phrase; but pour out your High-Presbeterian
spirits in the same shameless untruths, with which you stained both your
credits and consciences at once in the former Section. You and your Rabbis to
use a word of your own) are they, who put not Protestants only, but many the
dear children of God themselves into the Bears-skins you speak of, and then do
as you say. As for me, I do not remember that I any where make use of any Bears
Skin, but what I have plucked off from the backs of those, whom I put into
them. Nor do I set the dogs upon any poor Protestant, unless it be upon my
self, and those few friends (by you termed Confederates) which God has given
me: against these I have exasperated and enraged, you know who, and how. But
neither I, nor any of my Confederates (as far as they are known to me) are wont
to disport our selves with any man's weakness, or shame. The truth in this
point, as in twenty others in your Letter, is not at all beholding to you for
your courtesy in sparing her.

You need neither crave leave, nor take leave, to tell my Friends, that they,
who are false accusers of the Brethren, are Sons of Belial: they are instructed
in this truth to your hand: and by the light of it they are able fully to
discern, who, and what manner of persons you are. If your meaning be to reflect
upon me as a false accuser of the Brethren. you act like him, who compasses
the Earth to and fro, to draw men into the same condemnation with himself: You
will never be able to prove that I ever accused any man falsely, much less a
Brother. Therefore consider in the fear of God whose Sons you make your selves
by this charge.

Those who believe as the Church with me believes, believe as the Scriptures
teaches you, and all other men to believe: and this you may, through the long
suffering and bountifulness of God, come to know in time; although the truth is
that you desperately obstruct your way to the knowledge of the truth, by
entreating those so unworthily, who desire to make you partakers of this
happiness with themselves. But me thinks you of all men should not disparage
men for believing as their Church believes, who suffer your Classique and
Synodical Pastors to exercise what dominion over your Faith, they please.

(c) If by my Libels, you mean my little Books (for other Libels of mine,
neither you, nor I, know any) you commit the sin of Falsification, in adjuncto,
in calling them, blasphemous. Nor need I at all be troubled for being charged
with Blasphemy by the sons of High Presbitery; for was not the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, Blessed for ever, charged with the same crime by men of a
sympathizing spirit? Then the High Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has
spoken blasphemy: What further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye have
heard his Blasphemy. Mat. 26. 65. Be you more confident, if you can, or more
zealous in the expressions of your confidence, that there is Blasphemy in my
Books, then the High Priest with his Associates were, that that Lamb of God
blasphemed. Nor does Mr. Goodwin in any of his Books maintain the Apostafie of
the Saints; but condemns it, as a most hideous sin. Or if your meaning be,
that in some of his Books he evinceth by the Scriptures, by arguments
impregnable, by Authorities numerous (and these of the best) by frequent
experiments, a possibility of the Saints Apostatizing, I subscribe the charge,
and shall not put you to prove it. In the mean time, whether Calvin does not
maintain the Apostasy of the Saints, as well as Mr. Goodwin, let himself be
consulted in those few places and passages in his writings, which are
transcribed by me, Page 387. 388. 389. of Redemption Redeemed. Therefore here
again you are out of the way of speaking truth.

(d) Who you mean by SVCH Apostate Saints, (You remember the word SVCH, to very
little purpose here, for you had spoken of none before) and who, you say it is
no wonder if they be enslaved in journey-work to Apostate Angels, when you tell
us, it is like we may consider of the saying: mean while it shall pass for a
nihil significat, and so escape upon better terms then all your Letter
besides. Only I cannot but wonder a little, that YOU should talk: of SVCH
Apostate Saints, who deny all possibility that Saints should turn Apostates.

(e) I have more need to put on bowels of pity, then arm my self with
patience, to hear you tell a story, with a conceit of lifting up your cause to
Heaven by it, of which first you have no knowledge whether a word of it be
true, or no: Secondly, which, if it were true from first to last; would rather
be a blot and prejudice to your cause, then any matter of honor. For first, If
you remember who made King James, the Defender of your Faith, you have small
cause to like your Faith the better for his Defending it. Secondly, Nero's
hatred and enmity to the Christian Religion, turned rather to a Testimony unto
it, then to any matter of disparagement, or disrepute. But you are (I perceive)
of that generation of men, who love to be of the Kings Religion, be He, or it,
what they will. I wish for your sakes, that your honesty may turn to as good an
account unto you before God another day, as that in my Brother Bertius (as you
call him) which your story calls knavery. And as for the Hanging you speak of,
I believe that some of your Arch-Teachers (I will not say the Architect of your
Epistle-Fabrique) for Carolizing, and Scotizing, and playing yea and nay with
the Parliament, was far deeper in the merit of such a penance, call it by the
name of knavery, or what you please, then Bertius* was.

Booksellers, or Be* Firers,. IV.
Be pleased in cool blood to consider, that the Protestants do maintain, That
the chosen people of God are Elected to Faith and Godliness ( a) and to
Perseverance in both, and Such is the unchangeableness of Gods Love toward
them, that they are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. 1
Pet. 1. 5. The purpose of God according to Election, shall stand ( b) and
therefore they shall stand, Romans 9. 11. We depend upon Gods Faithfulness, and
not upon our own, Heb. 10. 23. The Gifts and Calling of God, are without
Repentance, Romans 11. 29.

Mr. Goodwins Animadversions. IV.
(a) It seems you think you have over-het my blood by making me to bear your
burdens of unjust revilings and reproaches. But if this be your thought,
surely you judge your request here made unto me, viz. to consider in cool
blood, etc. very difficult of performance. But I have been so long a Bearer of
the burdens of men, that the work does not much trouble or distemper me.
Therefore I shall here hearken unto you, and consider with the best of my
understanding what the Protestants do maintain. But I fear that neither you nor
your Prophets are competent to inform me. Besides if I were never so well
satisfied herein, yet I must cleave to, and profess, what Paul and Peter, and
the rest of the Hagiography maintain, not what this or that Protestant
maintain. For that there is not idem sensus, eadem men's, amongst Protestants
about the point you here speak of, is too well known to be any knowing man's
question. If there be some that hold as you say, that Gods chosen people are
elected to Faith and Godliness, they are none of the best considerate, unless
by Faith and Godliness, they understand increase in Faith and Godliness, in
which sense the word believing, is used 1 John 5. 13. and frequently elsewhere;
and so holy, for further holy, or perseveringly holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. with many the
like; and by being chosen to these, and to perseverance in them, such a kind of
choosing on Gods part, which does neither necessitate, nor include or suppose
any thing that does in time necessitate, those who are thus chosen, either to a
progress or increase, much less to a perseverance in them. With such
Protestants, who thus conceive of Gods Election unto Faith and Godliness, and
perseverance in them, I fully concur in judgment so far. If your Prophets tell
you, that there are no Protestants of this judgment, they either bewray their
ignorance herein, or a much worse principle.

As for the two texts of Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. 5, and Romans 9. 11. how irrelative
they are to your cause, unless it be by way of opposition, and consequently,
how impertinently they are here cited by you, I have sufficiently declared and
proved elsewhere, the former page 185, 186. etc. of my Redempt. Redeemed, the
latter, page 97, 98, and again page 132, 133. etc. of my Exposition of the 9th.
to the Romans.

Whereas you say, you depend upon Gods Faithfulness, if your sub-meaning be,
that I do otherwise (as it must be, if you write by the same Law, by which you
censure and condemn me in my writings) you put me into a Bears-skin, and lay a
Bastard of your own begetting at my door. I trust the language pleases you
well, being your own. But whereas you add, and not upon our own, if by your
own Faithfulness, you mean, either your own Faith, or your perseverance in it,
if you have no kind of dependence upon it, it seems your judgment is, that
you may be as well saved without it, as with it. If this be your sense, I
confess I am not herein of your mind. You may be rectified in your judgments,
if you please, about the mind of the Holy Ghost in Romans 11. 29, by perusing the
55.. of chap, 8. of my book of Redemption, and reading forward to the end of
this chapter.

Booksellers, or Beacon-sirers,. V.
We are assured of the unchangeableness of Gods counsels by the Promises and
Covenant of God, ( a) By the seals annexed to the Covenant, by the earnest
given to assure the bargain, by the Witnesses to confirm that last Will and
Testament of special and saving grace; Which Testament is further ratified by
the Oath of God, and heart blood of Christ: We are assured of all this, not
only by Christ's death, but by his life, for Christ says to every soul that he
has quickened by special grace, as he said to all his disciples, but Judas the
Son of perdition; ( b) Because I live, ye shall live also, Jo. 14. 19. God
says to all whom he brings under the power of the Covenant of grace, I will be
your God, and ye shall be my people: I will, and ye shall. I will not depart
from you, and ye shall not depart from me, I will not, ye shall not (c) Such an
unchangeableness as this, true Protestants, such as Edward, Arthur, and William
(d) do maintain, Such an unchangeableness as this you do oppose (e) Such an
unchangeableness as this the Scriptures do hold forth, and yet you cannot upon
this or any other account, prove the Scriptures of the old and new Testament,
not to be the pure word of God, though you have a cursed Art in Swan-Alley to
undermine the authority of the Scriptures, even when you do most pretend to
defend them ( f) It is a black Art ( g) leave it for your juggle is discovered,
your folly manifested, and your book about, we had almost said, against, the
Scriptures would have been wast paper, had not some Anti-Scripturists brought
them up ( h) we can purchase some of your works at a good easy rate already:
but we believe the Cooks will help you away with some of them next month to
defend Geose and Turkeys, to lay up spice, and underlay their pies, ( i) and
therefore we think your works need not be called in.

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion 5.
(a) If you be assured of the unchangeablenesse of Gods counsels, by the
several means you here enumerate, I am glad for your sakes, that you are in so
Christian a posture. God of his Grace keep you in it.

(b) But whereas you exempt Judas from amongst the Disciples, to whom Christ
said, Because I live, ye shall live also, I know no sufficient ground you have
from the Scripture, or otherwise, to do it. For certainly Judas was included in
another saying from the same lips of grace, which imported as high a favor as
this. And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye who have
followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne
of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel. Mat. 19. 28. If you please to peruse Chrysostomes exposition of this
place, which you may find faithfully delivered, page 360, 361. and again 373,
374, of my Redemption Redeemed, you will find him looking upon Judas, as a son
of the Kingdom for a time, which opinion of his I give notice to be (together
with the ground and reason of it) approved by Peter Martyr, who was always
until now judged a Protestant, yea and not the least amongst those that are
called Orthodox; from whose pen likewise we took knowledge, upon the occasion,
of that golden rule, That the promises of life and salvation, made by God unto
particular men, are to be understood with reference to the present state and
condition of things with them. Promissiones itaque illae (...) pro statis
praesenti rer^^^ sunt (...) gende
But if Judas was excepted as you say, your cause is neither the whiter, nor
blacker, for it.

(c) God indeed speaks, as you here say, I will be your God, and ye shall be my
people, unto all whom he brings under the power of the Covenant of grace; but
first, this proves not, that he speaks not the same thing unto others also.
Nor do you, nor can you, prove that the whole Nation of the Jews, to which this
promise was jointly and indifferently made, Levit. 26. 12. were all, in your
sense, brought under the power of the Covenant of Grace. 2. The performance of
this promise, even where it is made, or applied, to such persons as you speak
of, is suspended upon their obedience and perseverance in it, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
Whereas you mention another promise in these words, I will not depart from you,
I find it not, at least in your terms, in all the Scripture. I suppose you look
at Jer. 32. 40. But how far the heart of this passage is from your cause, is
demonstrated at large, page 219. 220, 221, etc. of my Redempt. Redeemed. By the
way is it not a rank impertinency in you to think to stop my mouth, or satisfy
me, by a bare citation of such texts of Scripture, as if they countenanced the
way of your error, which I have upon a diligent and narrow enquiry, evinced
above all reasonable contradiction, to have no Communion therewith at all?

(d e) Your Edmund, Arthur, and William, may very probably maintain such an
unchangeablenesse, as you have described; for I think that in many points they
maintain they know not well what. And the description which you have made of
your unchangeablenesse, has neither head nor foot in it. And whereas you say,
that I oppose it, you again oppose the truth in so saying. For according to the
best construction, among many, that can be made of your words, I assert it, as
well as you. The men you speak of may be Protestants at large, but this is no
character of their Orthodoxisme. Besides concerning that unchangableness,
which, I suppose, you would describe, if you knew how, the public confessions,
of several Protestant Churches do manifestly contradict it, as you may inform
your selves, if you please, by a perusal of page 394 of my Redempt. Redeemed,
and by pursuing the directions there given. Therefore let us hear no more of
this Fable.

(f. g.) In this you speak truth (though to little purpose) that I cannot upon
the account you mention, nor any other, prove the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, not to be the pure Word of God. Nor have I lift up either heart or
hand to any such proof, though you (after your manner) diabolize me so to have
done. That which I have any where asserted (as to this point) is only this, or
to this effect; that we are not bound to own for the Word of God, or as any
part of it, whatsoever every ignorant or heedless person, who was employed of
old to transcribe the Old and New Testament (for the best penmen are seldom
the greatest Clerks) did insert in their Transcriptions, nor yet what every
Printer of later times, has through carelessness, or mistake, thrust forth in
their Printed Copies of the Scriptures, into the world. Jerome in his latter
Prologue upon Job, complains, that for his labor and faithfulness in
correcting the enormous Translations and Transcriptions of the ancient
Scriptures, he was charged with a double error, one that when he corrected
things amiss, he was a Falsifier; the other, that he did not remove or take
away Errors, but sowed them. Nunc aute^, quia juxta sententiam Salvatoris,
volo operari cibum qui non perit, and antiquam divinorum voluminum viam,
sentibus virgultisque purgare, Error mihi geminus infligitur: corrector
vitiorum falsarius dicor, et errores non auferre, sed serere.
In the same piece, he complains* likewise of many professors of Christianity,
who had Bibles full of errors and falsities, and these acknowledged for such by
themselves, and yet to keep their Books fair, without blotting and
interlineing, would not suffer them to be amended. And particularly speaking of
the Book of Job, he says that amongst the Latins (he means, in the Latin
Translations of this Book) Job until his days lay on the dunghill, and was
spread all over with worms of errors. -- Ac Beatus Job, qui adhuc apud Latinos
jacebat in stercore, et vermibus scatebat erroram, integrum, immacultumque
gaudete.
Yea nothing is more frequent amongst the best and learndest Expositors of the
Protestant party themselves, then to take and give knowledge of error after
Error, as yet retained in the ordinary Copies of the Bible, which at first
crept in thither, partly by the ignorance, partly by the negligence of those,
who were employed to Transcribe them. Yea very many of the Expositors I speak
of, ever and anon take upon them to correct and amend: those Translations
themselves, which notwithstanding they follow otherwise in their Expositions:
Nor is there any of them that attempt this more frequently then Piscator.

But surely, although you would have me in cool blood to consider, your own
blood was in an high distemper, when you talk of a cursed Art, and a black Art
in Swan-Alley to undermine the Authority of the Scriptures, when we most
pretend to defend them. But whatsoever there is in Swan-Alley, there is such an
Art as you speak of, cursed and black, in Black-Friars, and, perhaps, in the
Northern quarters of Paul's Churchyard also; the Practitioners whereof, like
the Pharisees of old, who defamed the Lord Christ as having a Devil (and this
most confidently and impudently; Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and
have a Devil; Joh. 8. 48.) when as he was full of the Holy Ghost, and acted and
spoke accordingly; so do these men most shamelesly, and with outfaceing the
most evident truth, traduce such persons as underminers of the Authority of the
Scriptures, and enemies otherwise to the interest of Christian Religion, who
have been, and so continue most zealous, and faithful Assertors of the former,
against, all opposers, and are devoted heart and soul to the promoting of the
latter. Concerning that Book, which your Epistling Prophet teaches you to
charge with undermining the Authority of the Scriptures, one known to be as
learned, grave, and judicious as any English-born at this day, and he no
Independent neither, nor yet of my judgment, at least in several points, about
Redemption (with the controversies relating to it) gave a far different
testimony of it (though not to me, nor in my hearing.) To a friend of his he
gave his sense and judgment of the Book in these words, or to this effect;
That it was as good a Book as any was written since the Apostles days. This
testimony (I confess) may be as much too wide on the right hand as your
malignant imputation is on the left. Nor should the story ever have been told
or reported by me (for fear of being counted a fool for my labor) but only to
balance the most importune malignity of those men, whose consciences serve them
to spit that poison of Asps mentioned in the face of it. Upon occasion of which
strange unworthiness, the said person expressed himself further to this effect;
that we are now fallen into an age, in which men's consciences will serve them
to say any thing. My juggle is discovered, and my folly detected, in such a
sense, as the Lord Christ's blasphemy was discovered, by the high Priests
rending of his garment, Mat. 26. 65. and the Apostle Paul murder detected by
the Barbarians, when they said of him, No doubt this man is a murderer, Act.
28. 4.

(h. i.) It seems by the latter passages in this Section, and the mention of
Cooks and good cheer, that your Prophets Animus, when he compiled them, was in
patinis: and moreover that amongst you, you intend to be at the cost and
charge, by the help of Cooks and Geese, and other good Cheer, to preserve the
Ceremonious frolique and jollity of Christmas (so called) from sinking in your
days. But because such of my Books, as are sold, offend Foxes, therefore those
that are not sold must do penance, and defend Geese: But do not you your selves
defend your selves with some of them in this very Epistle? You do somewhat very
like a defending of your selves with some of them. Sect. 7. and Sect. 11. and
in several other places.

Whereas you think you reflect great disparagement upon my Books, that some of
them might have been wast-paper, etc. 1. I have no demonstrative ground to
believe that there were not as many Novice Presbiters, sold, as Busie-Bishops,
or Blind Guids. If there were not it may signify nothing else but that the
Presbyterian party of the world, and their money, are sooner parted, then those
that are wiser, and theirs. Besides, it is the Observation of one of your
Orthodox men (for so I conceive him to be, pardon me if I mistake in this) that
Learning has gained most by those Books, by which the Printers have lost;
whereas foolish Pamphlets have been most beneficial to the Printers. When a
French Printer (says he) complained that he was utterly undone by Printing a
solid serious book of Rablais, concerning Physique, Rablais to make him
recompense, made that his jesting scurrilous work, which repaired the Printers
loss with advantage. Of the former part of this Observation, he gives three
famous Instances: The first of Arias Montanus, who wasted himself in Printing
the Hebrew Bible (commonly called the King of Spains Bible:) The second, of
Christopher Plantine, who by Printing of his curious Interlineary Bible, sunk
and almost ruined his Estate. The third and last, of a worthy English Knight
(he means, Sir Henry Savile) who set forth the Golden-mouthed Father (
Chrysostom) in a silver Print, and was a loser by it. Therefore that many
books are no quicker of sale; may as probably argue the ignorance, weakness,
and injudiciousnesse of the world, as any defectivenesse, or want of worth in
the Books.

Whereas you inform me of some Anti-Scripturists, who bought up my books about
the Scriptures* I am very glad to hear it. For the work was in special manner
calculated for the use and benefit of such persons, who are either in whole, or
in part Such, I mean, Anti-Scripturists; I trust that thorough the blessing of
God upon their labors in reading it, it has reclaimed many.

But I somewhat marvel at your tenderness here, in saying, We had almost said
against the Scriptures, considering how bold and daring you are in twenty
places besides to speak aloud, and without regret, most palpable and gross
untruths. Your thought, that my works need not be called in, is very grave and
considerate: should you not do well, humbly to present it to the Parliament?

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers,. VI.
Sir, you might have had more honesty and piety, then to have talked of
impeaching David of Atheism. ( a) One of our Company that understands Latin
says, that you are, illud quod dicere nolo, for saying so ( b) and we fear
that if God do not stop you in your Blasphemy, Apostasy, Heresy, (c) Psalm.
14. 1. may be spoken of your own self* and be a very suitable Motto to that
ill-conditioned book, called, (...) which one of our society who understands
Greek (d) says is a fighting against Peace, as (...) (which would have been a
fitter title for your book) is a fighting against God as we shall prove when
you call us to that service ( e)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. VI.
(a) Whereas you tell me that I might have had more honesty and piety, etc. do
you think it is impossible for your selves to have more of either, then at
present you have, or at least had, when you talked of my talking of impeaching
David of Athisme? where do I talk either of your, or any other man's, impeaching
David of Athisme? I only show you the foul face of your transgression, in a
glass made of such a supposition, as I there mention.

(b) I know not who that One is of your Company, that you say understands
Latin: it were well that more, or all, of your Company, understood your
selves, and your duties, both toward God and Man, better then yet you do,
though none of you understood either Latin or Greek* One language is more then
enough to speak untruths in, and to revile persons that never did you the least
wrong or harm. But to me it is a small thing to be called by One of your
Company, or by your whole company, an illud quod dicere nolo: only in this I
cannot but glory, that the reproach of an, illud quod dicere nolo, is of so
near affinity with the blessed Apostles, (...) 1 Cor. 4. 13. the very terms of
reproach and abasement, by which he expresses the opinion of the world
concerning himself, and the rest of his honorable fraternity of Apostles,
together with their most wile entreaties and usage of them. But whereas you
make me bear your Latin reproach, for saying so, I cannot imagine what it is
you mean I should have said, as meriting the opening of so foul a mouth upon
me; you mention no saying of mine of such an import.

(c) What such words as these, Blasphemy, Apostasy, Heresy. etc. signify in
your Dialect, has been already declared, I think not the worse of any man, nor
of my self, for being arraigned of Blasphemy, Apostasy, Heresy, by you so
called. But I marvel how any Apostasy should be a crime or matter of offense,
unto you, who deny all possibility of any man's Apostatizing from true Faith and
Holiness; Surely to Apostatize, with you is but to do as Paul did, when he
turned his back upon his Pharisaisme, and set his face toward Christianity, or
as he taught the Gentiles to do; when he persuaded them to turn from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18. I am content to
be accounted an Apostate of this denomination. For Blasphemy, I signified unto
you before, that my great Lord and Master was accused of this crime: and he
has quieted my Spirit as concerning this reproach, with these sayings: The
disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough
for the Disciple if he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: if they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call
them of his household. Mat. 10. 24. 25. And concerning my Heresy, I confess
unto you, as Paul once did to the Governor of Cesarea, that after the way,
which you, and some others, call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers.
believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, Act. 24. 14.

It seems it is but a small thing with you to take the Name of God in vain, in
that you say, we fear lest if God do not stop you in your Blasphemy, etc. as if
to prevent inconvenience, God must stop men for going on in such a way, unto
which they never came near by 600 furlongs.

Psalm. 14. 1. May very well be applied unto those, who care not what they say
with their lips; for these are the men, that say in their hearts, There is no
God. Therefore look to your selves.

(d) Concerning your suitable Motto, in talking at this wild rate you seem to
imagine, that the Word of God was written to serve the folly and distemper of
Presbyterian Spirits. The Motto you speak of is as suitable to every book in
your shops, as to that of which you speak. I perceive you have no dexterity of
fancy, for calculating or contriving Motto's.

(e) You may very possibly prove, what you boast you shall prove, when I shall
call you to the service. For though you have most provokingly entreated me, and
spoken all manner of evil of me falsely, yet do I not love you so little, as
ever to call you to any service, which you cannot perform without fighting
against God and his Truth. Nor is a Book ill-conditioned, because you call it
so: your common Dialect is Antiphrastical, as has been more then once already
signified.

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers.. VII.
You say that this sentence of Scripture [whosoever believes shall be saved] is
the only decree of election for substance, and yet you say the decree of
Election is really and simply God himself, ( a) This Sentence of Scripture
then, yea and another that is not really the same with this, is by your
agreement for substance really and simply God himself. For you say that this
sentence of Scripture: [whosoever believes not, shall be damned] is the only
decree of Reprobation, Agr. p. 3. This Sentence then of Scripture also is God
himself. For in the 3d. particular of your Agreement, upon the first head page
1. you say that the Decree of Election, and also of Reprobation are both (as
well as all other Decrees attributable unto God) really and simply God himself
( b) Now as far as our weakness can judge, these two sentences of Scripture,
are not for sense or substance really or simply the same Sentences. Tell us
then whether you have not set up two Gods really distinct. ( c) And why may you
not make all the promises of eternal life; and all the threatenings of eternal
death in Scripture decrees, as well as these, Nay Gods as well as these,
seriously we do not as yet understand; and if the wise Doctor of Swan-Alley
make so many Gods, really we are afraid the f^ol has already said in his
heart, That there is no God ( d) Nay have you not advanced to a more impudent
folly, and said as much by clear consequence in some of your books: In the 1
chap. of your Redempt. Redeemed, Sect. last. p. 7. you tell us that the
Ordinary effects here below, such as victory to the strong, are perhaps more
properly ascribed unto the second Causes, then unto God. They are the last
words of your first Chapter. It seems then that victory may be rather ascribed
to a potent Army, then to an Omnipotent God.

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. VII.
(a) You should have done well, to have directed me to the place, where I say,
as you say, that this sentence [whosoever believes shall be saved] is the only
decree of election for substance. That 1. I might know whether you do not
falsify here also. 2. That I might consider upon what occasion I thus express
my self. I rather judge that my saying is this, or however my meaning plainly
enough is none other, that the Sentence of Scripture, you mention, contains the
only Decree of Election, that I know of You will I presume please to
understand me as speaking of Election to salvation, and not of any Election of
another kind. Whereas you add, that yet I say that the decree of Election is
really and simply God himself, I suppose that in this you are of the same mind
with me, unless you either think to find the Decree of Election out of God, or
else something in God, which is not really himself.

(b. c.) And whereas you charge me further with saying that the Decree of
Election, and also of Reprobation (expressed in that saying, Whosoever believes
not, shall be damned, (as well as all other decrees attributeable unto God) are
really and simply God himself: and from hence (in your weakness, as your selves
truly speak) these two sentences of Scripture not being (as you say) for sense
or substance, really or simply the same sentence, insultingly demand; Tell us
then whether you have not set up two Gods really distinct, I answer distinctly,
and plainly, no: For as justice and mercy (and there is the same consideration
of all his other divine properties, or Attributes) though they import very
different properties or Attributes in God, yet are they really the same in him,
nor do they plurifie or diversifie, his Essence or Being: in like manner the
two Decrees you speak of* though different, and expressed in two different
sentences of Scripture, yet are they really one and the same thing in God. Yea
do not you your selves, at least your Prophets, ascribe both Decrees the one of
Election, the other of Reprobation, unto God, without so much as once dreaming
that hereby they incur the crime of setting up two Gods. These then are but
frivolous and childish cavils, and unto which your own Teachers with their
Doctrines lie altogether as open, as I, or any of my sayings.

Whereas you further deridingly (like your selves) say, That if the wise Doctor
of Swan-Alley, make so many Gods, Really we are afraid, the fool has already
said in his heart, That there is no God; Surely in case this be so, it is no
matter of fear, either to you, or to me. Yea I had reason to like my Heart the
worse, and so had you) if the Fool did not say there, as you express. The
Trasgression of the wicked (says David, Psalm. 36. 1.) Says within my heart,
that there is no Fear of God before his eyes. Was David's Heart the worse, or
less holy, and not rather much the better, and the more enlightened, because
the Transgression of the wicked spoke, as he declares, in it? If the Fool
says not in your Heart, That there is no God, the silence argues the darkness
of it. But it is a thing very incident to your weakness, to make obloquies and
reproaches of things commendable and worthy.

(d) You go on beating the Air very fiercely with the rod of your anger, Nay,
have you not advanced to a more impudent folly (it seems you measure me by your
selves, as commonly men use to serve their neighbors, and so are in a grand
mistake) and said as much by clear consequence in some of your Books? It seems
then that your former consequence, by which you made me speak as much, was
obscure and dark. But I perceive that a clear consequence, and a dark
consequence, to you are both alike, and a consequence which is no consequence,
but a broad non sequitur, as good as either. Well, let us be instructed in your
clear consequence.

In the first Chapter of my Redemp. Redeemed, you tell me (Oh that you would
learn to tell truth) that I tell you that the ordinary effects here below such
as victory to the strong: this Parenthesis is a Bastard of your own begetting,
as your selves speak, laid at my door; you find no such in the place you here
pretend to transcribe) are perhaps more properly ascribed unto the second
causes then unto God. Neither are these the last words of my first Chapter, as
you suggest (it seems you are resolved not to give over the trade of
falsifying) the Tenor of the last period in the said Chapter, is this. 2. That
the ordinary effects, acts and operations produced in these sublunary parts,
are not so, or upon any such terms, attributeable unto God, but that they have
their second causes also respectively producing them, whereunto they may as
truly (and perhaps more properly) be ascribed, as unto God himself. This
position I lay down, as the latter of the two consequents, naturally flowing
from this assertion of the Apostle; In God we move. Here you do not only
falsify by addition (inserting the Parenthesis mentioned of your selves) but
by substraction also, leaving out my Parenthesis (at least the form of it, and
somewhat of the matter also) and over and besides both these, you do not only
mangle and deface my period, transcribing such words of it as you please, and
suppressing what others you please, but further turn my MAY perhaps more
properly, into your own, ARE perhaps more properly. It seems you must keep your
hand in ure, and practice Falsification at every turn, least you forget it.

But suppose your words had been mine, and I had said, as you charge me, that
ordinary effects here below are perhaps more properly ascribed unto the second
causes, then unto God; is this an hard, much less an erroneous saying? is it
not more proper to say, that Abraham begat Isaac, then to say, that God begat
him? Or is it more proper to say that God warmed Peter at the fire in the High
Priests Hall, then to say (with the Holy Ghost, Joh. 18. 18.) that Peter warmed
himself? Your exceptions and cavils all along, are so childishly ridiculous,
that it is scarce worthy a man to take knowledge of them. And suppose your
exceptions in this Section, had been material, or considerable, how impertinent
notwithstanding had they been to the cause depending between you and me?

Booksellers or Beacon-Firers.. VIII.
2. You say if God reprobated any from Eternity, it must be himself. ( a)

3. You say that neither Knowledge nor Foreknowledge are attributed unto God,
any otherwise then hands or eyes ( b) in the third Chapter of the same Book.

4. We meet with so many passages in your writings derogatory to the Word,
Providence and Grace of God, that we are afraid Atheists will but make
themselves merry with your Atheistical and blasphemous Books. ( c) We are weary
of this drudgery to which you have enslaved us. ( d)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion,. VIII.
(a. b.) What if I do say, as you say I do? what does this concern either your
falsification, or your Petition to the Lord Protector and Parliament, or your
covetousness, about which three particulars, only my Letter expostulateth with
you? Or what evil or untruth, is there in this connex proposition; If God
reprobated any from Eternity, it must be himself? Why are the most intelligent
and considerate amongst your own Prophets and Doctors, so careful to
distinguish between the Decree of Reprobation, and the act of Reprobating; and
so likewise between the Decree of Election, and the act of Electing, or
Election it self (affirming the Decrees themselves to be from Eternity; but the
executions, or actings of them, in time;) What is the reason (I say) why they
are so weary thus to distinguish, but that they see the unavoidablenesse of the
enormous consequent in the said proposition, if they should affirm or hold,
that God reprobated any person from eternity. But I have elsewhere
demonstratively asserted the truth of the proposition. Therefore it was a pure
piece of impertinency in you, to challenge me for such a saying, unless you had
first disabled my grounds for it.

Again, what if I say, That neither knowledge non foreknowledge, are
attributed unto God, any otherwise then hands or eyes, etc. [meaning*
unproperly, or not formally, or upon such terms, as they are in men, or
ascribed unto them] is not this also a most apparent Truth? Nor is it for want
of ignorance that your Oracles, Dr. Kendal, Mr. Pool and others, contend
against me for such a saying. It was a lightsome saying of that great light of
the Christian Church in his days; We speak few things (he might have said
scarce any thing) PROPERLY [of God] but many things IMPROPERLY: yet it is well
known what we mean Pauca sunt enim quae proprie loquimur (sc. de Deo) plura non
propri^: sed cognoscitur quid velimus. Aug. Confess. 11. c. 2.
[when we speak unproperly of him] And that men should think that they speak
more honorably of God, who ascribe unto him knowledge or foreknowledge,
properly, formally, in the letter, and as they are found in men, or in other
creatures, then they, who attribute the same unto him by way of eminency, and
transcendency of perfection, free from all those Deficiencies, wherewith they
are accompanied in men, and in other creatures, as viz acquisition, reception
from another, accidentality to their Subject, separablenesse from their
subject, impairablenesse in degree, limitednesse in degree, reality of
distinction from the nature or essence of their subject, (with several others
of like consideration) that men (I say) should think, or imagine, as has now
been expressed, argues extreme oscitancy* and either want of due apprehensions
of God, or of a right understanding what knowledge, or foreknowledge, in their
formal and proper significations do import.

(c) You possibly may meet with such passages, as you speak of, in your own
distempered and prejudicate fancies; but certain I am that you can meet with
none of them in any of my writings. I wish your Prophets may come off with as
much peace at the great Tribunal of Jesus Christ, for their Doctrines and
speakings of the word, Provia^nce, and grace of God, as I am groundedly
confident I shall. But most assuredly shame and confusion of face will be your
portion in that day, for all your un-christian, scurrilous, shameless
revileings of persons who never wronged you in the least, nor ever intended the
least evil against any one of you, or any belonging to you, unless you take a
timely course by confessing, and forsaking your sin to find mercy. Prove. 28*
13. you have much more cause to be afraid that the Atheists, you speak of, will
make themselves merry, with the writings and preachings of your Prophets, who
day after day, preach broad-faced contradictions, and make the Scriptures to
say, and unsay; which being interpreted, is to make them say just nothing. Nor
are many of their writings any whit more excusable upon the same account.

(d) Your work of cavilling, and calumniating, you speak properly enough in
calling, drudgery. You lately told me of some that wrought Journey-work to the
Apostate Angels, I hope you will be no longer of their occupation. Whereas you
say that I have inslaved, you to it, it seems you are very easy, and apt to be
inslaved: and of this your weakness your Prophets make no small advantage, I
confess that in some such sense as the Lord Christ has caused many in Israel
to fall* Luke 2. 34. you may say that I have inslaved you to your drudgery. My
speaking of the truth has occasioned you to utter your selves in many sordid,
base, and ignoble terms against it.

Booksellers, or Beacon-Firers,. IX.
But that we may stop your mouth for ever. ( a) we will at your request correct
the Press and put in Such, that you may acknowledge a full restitution, and
desire you to make good your assertion, not against us (who are but the
Servants of the Commonwealth of Learning) but against Mr. Caryl, who as we are
informed, did first stigmatize this your presumptuous Blasphemy. And when you
sent him a Letter, and did therein demand a reason of his censure, He gave such
satisfactory reasons in his Letter to you, as did effectually silence you. ( b)
Oh that they had humbled you, But we challenge you in the Name of Truth and
Piety, to print his Letters, and return an answer to them; lest we put you to
the trouble before you are aware. ( c) Dr. Kendal has charged you home to the
life: why do you not answer his challenge? He taxis you smartly for the
self-same passage, which we complain of. Dr. Owen blames you upon the same
account. All these three reverend Divines questioned you before we complained
of you to the Protector and Parliament. And if you and your Confederates lay
your heads together, you will never be able to return a satisfactory answer.
You see the restitution of Such will not releeve you ( d)

Mr. Goodwin Animadversion. IX.
(a) You take indeed the same course to stop my mouth, by which Rabsecah,
stopped the mouth of the godly K. Ezekiah and his people, Esa. 36. 21. and
possibly the course you take in this kind may hereafter prosper in your hand
accordingly. For the mouth of an Oven may dishearten any man from gaping
against it. But if you should stop my mouth, by revilings and reproaches, you
should render me in this posture but like unto him, who like a Lamb dumb before
his Shearer, so opened he not his mouth. Act. 8. 32.

(b) You talk of correcting the Press, but you should do well in the first
place to correct your selves. For you are the crooked thing that most needs
streightning. If you expect an acknowledgement from me of a full restitution,
you must not only put in SVCH, but repair me in all those particulars, in
which I complain of your unworthy dealings in my Animadversions upon the first
Section of your Letter under the letters, (d, e) I fear you are not so much
servants to the Commonwealth of learning, as slaves to your own wealth; and
upon this account, to those also, whom you judge to be the Grand-masters in
this Commonwealth, as men that are likeliest to serve your turn, and befriend
you.

I am both able, and ready thorough the grace of God, to make good the
Assertion you speak of, not only against you, who I fear had rather trust men
with your Religion, then with your books, but against him also in whom you so
much glory, yea let him take unto him Dr. Kendal, and Dr. Owen, the one for his
right hand man, and the other for his left, together with a Totquot of as many
as you count pillars of your cause. The said Assertion then, being interpreted
according to the plain, and best known, signification of the words and phrases
therein, amounts to nothing more, or less, or worse, then this, viz. that if
there were any thing to be found in the Scripture, which rightly understood,
should represent God as unholy, unjust, a lover of wickedness, a respecter of
persons, or should charge him with any thing contumelious or reproachful, to
the most transcendent excellency and perfection of his being, it were a just
ground to any intelligent man to demur about their authority, and to bethink
himself again and again, whether they proceeded from God himself, or no. The
reason of such an Assertion as this is evident, and near at hand, as viz.
because it is not lightly incident to any intelligent man's thoughts, that God
should defame himself, or speak any such thing of himself unto the world, which
should be a just ground unto men to think unworthily of him, or of making him
like to the vilest or worst of men.

Whether this be presumptuous Blasphemy, or most Orthodox Doctrine, let any man
who (in Mr. Fishers parable) has not his senses sodden into Trapezuntius his
temper, judge and determine. I confess you, and your Tutors, are somewhat the
more veniable under your zeal, in attempting to cavil, and quarrel down such
notions, and sayings, as that of mine misused by you. For many of your opinions
and Doctrines, concerning God, his counsels, intentions, and dispensations,
being so enormously dishonorable to him as they are, and you pretending to
build them on the Scriptures; in case any thing found in the Scriptures of a
defaming import against God, were enough to shake the foundations of their
authority in the minds and consciences of intelligent men, you must needs fall
under the condemnation, not only of men speaking most unworthily of God, but
of such men also, who teach and tempt the most considering men, and (in part)
others also, to suspect and question the Authority of the Scriptures. And if
the case were thus with you and them, how should their Kingdom, (and
consequently your interest therein) stand?

You may be informed (for you had need to plead information with many untruths,
to ease your credit a little, for telling so many) that Mr. Caryl stigmatized
my presumptuous Blasphemy. But I was never informed, no not by Mr. Caryl
himself, though he wrote unto me about the passage, that he stigmatized it for
presumptuous Blasphemy* no not for Blasphemy in any the lowest degree Yea when
as in my Letter to him, Lonely expostulated with him for stigmatizing it with a
brand of ignominy, in his answer he disowns any stigmatizing it at all, save
only in a very qualified sense, as is to be seen in the Letter it self,
printed verbatim at the end of these papers.

But whereas you affirm, that in his letter to me he gave such satisfactory
reasons, which did effectually silence me, you do your accustomed Devotions to
the Goddess Mendacina. There was nothing at all in this Letter in any degree
satisfactory unto me: nor does he argue the point, (I mean the subject matter
of the passage) little, or much, in it. And so far was this Letter from
effectually silencing me, that my mouth has ever since been as wide open, in
the defense of the truth contained in the passage, as ever before, and is like
to be so still.

(c) Whereas, in the swelling vanity of your spirits, you challenge me in the
Name of your two strangers, Truth and Piety, to print his Letters, and to
return an answer to them, threatening me withal, as if you meant to put me to
the trouble before I should be aware, if did it not I; I must 1. Appologize for
my self upon somewhat like terms with him, who being conscienciously devoted to
his Idol, coming toward him upon an Assesback, and so having occasion to bow
down to it, that the standers-by might not think that he worshipped the Ass,
said to the Beast (in the Act of his Adoration) Non tibi, sed Religioni: so
being charged by the sacred Names of Truth and Piety, to print Mr. Caryls
Letters, etc. though I know no reason why I should gratify the persons
adjuring me by these Names, yet for the reverence I bear to the Names
themselves. I shall herewith print the Letters, and return an answer, when
either I shall see my time to do it, or Mr. Caryl see his to require it.

But (good Gentlemen) you seem to threaten me with some sore trouble, if I will
not do as you say, and this before I am aware. If you could cause the great
Fabric of the whole world, to fall like an old rotten House upon my head,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.


The fall should smite a dreadlesse fearlesse man.
There is nothing to be gained at my hand by threatenings. (d) As for Doctor
Kendal, and Doctor Owen, two other of your Champions, their folly may look them
in the face in due time. Or if they shall turn their backs upon it, it will
present it self with never the more disadvantage unto the world. The first of
these (you say) has charged me home to the life. You are mistaken in the
method of Doctor Kendals warfare: he fights more by the Stratagem, and goby,
then by the charge. Or if by charging home to the life, you mean (for you are
wont to cant) speaking great words to small purpose, I acknowledge your
Encomium of him. And if by taxing me smartly for the passage you speak of, you
mean, that he would very fain make somewhat of it, if he knew what, for the
honor of his wit, and the ingratiating of himself with his party, I must
confess that you speak the truth in this also. Whereas you imperiously demand
of me, Why I do not answer his challenge: Why do you not ask your great
Champion* Doctor Owen, why he has not all this while answered Mr. Horn? As
Charity, so Discipline, should begin at whom. Yet I think I may in part excuse
the Doctor at this turn. For (doubtless) Mr. Horns (...), Open door, is too
hard for Doctor Owen to shut, and his most satisfactory answer would be, to
acknowledge as much. If he would make this Answer, he should deserve the
commendation of a, recte respondes. But my Answer to you upon this question,
is, that I have publicly engaged my self, (death, sickness or other
occasional intrusions not preventing me) to answer more considerable men, and
more considerable Arguments, then he, or his, are See the 26. and last Chapter
of my Redemption Redeemed.
. It is meet that his betters should be served before him. Besides some of his
own judgment in the controversies, have no such opinion of what he has
written, as to think that it needs much answer. The reason hereof I conceive to
be, because his Answers (more generally) stand upon such odd, uncouth, wild,
and reasonless principles and notions, in which the generality of his own
Party, can neither find sap, nor savor, nor well tell what to make of them. Yea
(if all hearsays be Orthodox) Mr. Vice Chancellor himself, his Co-adjunctor
against the Truth, has notwithstanding pulled in his Horns again, which he put
out to such a length in his Quaint Encomiastique of him, prefixed before his
former Book, entitled (...), reserving (as it seems) upon better advice, his
high thoughts, for his own writings. But the consideration now mentioned, in
reference to Doctor Kendal, is another reason, why an answer to his Book may be
spared without any great detriment or loss to the cause. Yea upon the same
account, an answer given to it, though never so satisfactory and full, would
yet amount to no more, then only to an Answer Ad hominem: Others of his
judgment would be little satisfied, or convinced by it, because it would not
reach their apprehensions.

One thing further is, that could I but entertain the one half of that opinion
concerning his Theological abilities, which by several strains in his writings,
I perceive he admits of himself, I could not but consequentially suppose, that
he were able to Answer all his own Answers, and upon competent study, to
discover the nakedness of all he has written in the controversies depending
between him and me. Yea my present apprehensions of the learning, parts, and
worth of Docter Owen, are such and so high, that I really believe, would be
ingeniously, and with the best of his understanding apply himself to the work,
he could pluck up by the roots all he has planted, and make Hey and Stubble of
those answers and discussions which now (I question not) but he desires should
be esteemed Silver and Gold by his Friends and Party.

Notwithstanding, as to Doctor Kendal, if what he has written in answer to me,
be too hard for himself to answer, I shall at my first leisure, be willing to
help him, upon this condition, that he Re-print his Books, and cause all his
Froliques (as himself terms them) all his unseemly jears, all his childish
and frivolous cavils, all his windy and importue insultations and triumphs,
with abundance of other rubbidge not fit for any man to be troubled with, but
himself, to be left out.

Lastly, what Doctor Kendal has written needs the less Answer, because in the
eye of an intelligent and observant Reader, he has rather confirmed, then
infirmed, or confuted the arguments of his Adversary, by giving the stress and
strength of them the go-by (well nigh all along) spending his Attillery upon
Phantasms of his own conception, and matters very irrelative to his cause. As
for Doctor Owens blameing me, it is like his act in blaming me, is more
blameworthy, then that for which I am blamed by him. They who have had time to
look into his Book, find more then a few blame-worthies in it. Yea these two
great Hyperaspists and Champions of your cause, have by one Horn both been
pushed to the Earth, and overthrown both Horse and man.

(d) It is (I confess) very probable, that neither my self, nor any other in my
behalf, will ever be able to return an Answer satisfactory either to you, who
are not capable of an Answer (truly so called) or to such of your party, who
judge it more honorable to persist in an error, and this unto death, then to
seem to have erred: but I suppose an Answer has been lately given, though
brief, yet satisfactory to the life (your own phrase) to all considering and
un-prejudiced men.

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers,. X.
You are pleased to tell us in your Letter to us that you could make a further
breach upon our reputations, if you would examine our Transcriptions out of the
writings of others ( a) Sir, if you have a mind to maintain Mr. Biddles
Blasphemies, or adopt them into your association, let us feel the dint of your
two edged tongue, ( b) But we pass to your second charge. You say we give
pernicious counsel to the Parliament, and advise them to authorize some men,
Sir-named Orthodox, to word it with the Holy Ghost? What is this but to charge
the Blasphemies and Heresies of these times upon the Holy Ghost. ( c) The Lord
rebuke thee thou false tongue; Consider that text sadly, If any man speak a
word against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him. Mat. 12. 32.

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion,. X.
(a) Here again you falsify: I do not tell you in my Letter, that I could make
a further breach, etc. but only that it is not unlikely, but that having dealt
foully by me, you have not dealt much more fairly by others; which being found,
would make a further breach upon you. Concerning Mr. Biddles Blasphemies, I
believe, and believe it to be the sense of many others, that I have labored,
and this publicly, more abundantly in opposing them, not only then you all,
but then all your six Commissioners (elsewhere boasted in your letter.)
Therefore whereas you talk of my maintaining these Blasphemies, and adopting
them into my association, you do but teach those, who know the truth, to
undervalue you, and to look upon any thing you say as less considerable.

(b) If my tongue be two-edged, it holds so much the better resemblance with
that two edged-sword, that came out of the mouth of the Lord Christ, Rev. 1.
16. It is much better to have one tongue two-edged, then to have two tongues,
or one tongue without any edge at all.

(c) Is the not authorizing some men to word it with the Holy Ghost, to charge
the Blasphemies and Heresies of the times upon the Holy Ghost? To say that
Abraham begat Isaac, is it to charge Sarah with being an Adultresse? I
perceive you are no good Consequentialists. Or have the Parliament hitherto, in
not authorizing men to word it, in my sense, with the Holy Ghost, charged all
the Blasphemies and Heresies of the times upon the Holy Ghost? When you take me
with a false tongue (as I have done you ten times over) if you will not forgive
me, then imprecate against me, as you do now without any cause at all. The Lord
rebuke thee thou false tongue. You wish me to consider sadly, that which you
propose and cite madly. They who speak maliciously, and contrary to the light
of their own consciences, against their brother, are very near neighbors to
him, that shall speak against the Holy Ghost. Therefore it concerns you as
well, if not much more, to take the advice you give, then to give it.

Booksellers or Beacon-firers,. XI.
As for your Committee ( a) of three Orthodox Pastors, Edmund, Arthur, and
William, we will enlarge them if you please with three more, John, George, and
Joseph, and then there is a Committee of Six: make your exceptions against
them, if you can, and take you your Joshuah, Peter, and Tobiah, into your own
consociation. We wonder at your boldness, in calling the power of the Protector
and Parliament, a Nebuchadnezzarean power, ( b) but we wonder more that you
should invest Doctor Whichcote Doctor Cudworth, and the rest of the Doctors of
Cambridge, with a Nebuchadnezzarean power over Books and Opinions ( c) and yet
deny it to the Protector and the Parliament; you cannot answer that to a
Committee: And we wonder most of all at your boldness and sauciness with the
God of Heaven, when you invest the Doctors of Cambridge with an Autocratorical
Majesty, ( d) and affirm that Nebuchadnezzar had the self-same investiture. 1.
Consider that this is the basest kind of Flattery. 2. The grossest Blasphemy to
attribute that which is proper to God, to the greatest or best of men: for you
your self do acknowledge that Autocratorical Majesty is peculiar to God only,
where you deny second Causes to be Autocratorical: We wish that you had a
better heart, and a better memory: ( e) We hope the Cambridge Doctors will not
take that glory to themselves, which you ascribe to them, least they be as
Wormeaten in their intellectuals, as Herod was in his body, if they aspire
above the order of second Causes; ( f)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion XI.
(a) Nay, stay a while: you Ante-date the power of the men, whom it seems you
would have for your Presse-masters, in stiling them, a Committee. God in his
just judgment upon a sinful Nation, may permit them to be invested with such
a power too soon: but as yet I suppose you have not procured a Dedimus*
potestatem for them. Whereas you challenge me to except against them, I suppose
they are not Exception-lesse, unless their perfection be Hyper-angelical. But
as to a Magistrality over the Press, my exception against them is. 1. That they
know but in part, and therefore must needs be ignorant, if not of many, yet of
some, of the things of God, and which concern the eternal salvation of men. In
which respect, they are likely to obstruct the publishing of truths of highest
concernment unto the world, in case they be ignorant of them. 2. Their present
judgment considered, I judge them ignorant of, or at least declared enemies
unto, many grand and important truths of the Gospel. And that my judgment in
this particular, is according to truth, I have satisfied many, and said enough
to satisfy you, and all your party, were you not so near of kin to him, who
having inconsiderately affirmed that there are twelve Commandments, and being
admonished of his mistake, and prompted to say, there are ten; replied; I have
said there are twelve, and I will, say so still.

But thirdly and lasty, (and somewhat more particularly) what think ye of him,
formerly touched with Carolizing, Scotizing, and playing fast and loose with
the Parliament? Is not he one of the six, if not of the three? I know you would
have your Committee Honorable, and untainted, from the one end of it to the
other. The Emperor Augustus was very tender in admitting any person to enjoy
the least degree of the Roman liberty, who had ever been in bands, or upon the
rack Cum et ed numero et de condition ac differentia eorum, qui
manu-mitterentur, curiose cavisset, hoc queque adjecit, me vinctus unquam,
tortusve quis, ullo libertatis genere urbem adipis ceretur. Sueton. Octav.. 40.
. If you do not like this tang of the Bell, you must not blame me, but your
selves, who pulled the Rope so hard by the hand of your challenge sent unto me
to make my exceptions if I could. I fear some body forgot the old saying. Ipse
crimine vacare debet, qui in alterum paratus est dicere.

I may have cause indeed to wonder at your boldness in sining, but have you any
cause to wonder at that, which is not? I no where call the Power of the
Protector and Parliament, a Nebuchadnezzarean Power. And yet understanding the
word Power, of an executive Power only, which the Latins more properly call
potentia, and not of an Authoritative regulated or juridical power, commonly
signified by the word Potestas, he that shall not estimate their Power to be
Nebuchadnezzarean (in my sense of the word) under-valueth it.

You pretend here again to wonder, and this with a greater wonderment then your
former, at what no wise man would wonder at all. Do you not wonder that men
should speak, or understand any thing? Or that all men are not either Horses,
or Mules? Or do you wonder that men in speech, should sometimes use metaphors?
Are there no such doings in those parts of your Commonwealth of learning,
which you are wont to frequent and visit? do none of your Prophets speak
Metaphors at any time?

Your Cavil at my investing Doctor Whichcote, Doctor Cudwoth etc. with a
Nebuchadnezzarean Power over books and opinions, is extremely childish and
futile. It may be I should not be able to Answer the high misdemeanor of using
a Metaphor, to such a Committee, as you would obtrude upon me, and others: But
before a Committee of wiser men's choosing, I make little question of my
purgation. But in saying that I Invest the Doctors you speak of, with a
Nebuchadnezzarean Power over books and opinions, you falsify by retail, though
not by wholesale. For 1. I do not any where use the expression of a
Nebuchadnezzarean Power, in all my Epistle to them. Nor secondly, do I invest
them with any power, privilege, prerogative, or the like, but only declare, or
affirm, them to be invested already.

(d) It seems you are set upon the pin of wondering (a seat whereon wise men do
not ordinarily sit) and the firstborn of all your wonderments is, at a very
strange thing indeed, were it not in the retinue of things that are not, viz.
my boldness and sauciness with the God of Heaven, when I invest the Doctors of
Cambridge* with an Autocratorical Majesty* But will ye not next wonder at the
boldness and sauciness of David with the God of Heaven, for ascribing unto
Magistrates the name of Gods. Psalm. 82. 1. Psalm. 86. 8. and much more of those
other Penmen of the Scriptures, who so frequently call the Idols of the
Heathens, by the name of Gods also? Or is it more boldness or sauciness with
God (as your unbandsome, or ill-sounding expression is) to ascribe unto men,
not simply (as you, after your manner suggest) an Autocratorical majesty, but
with limitation and explication, an Autocratorical majesty OVER BOOKS AND
OPINIONS, then it is to ascribe unto them the plain and express Title and Name
of Gods? Besides, your charge of my investing them with this Majesty, carries
the print of a false singer in it (as was lately said.) Nor is it any better
then a putid of silly cavil, not worthy the Genius of a Schoolboy of ten or
twelve years old, to charge me with the grossest Blasphemy, because I ascribe
unto the University an Autocratorical majesty over Books and opinions, in such
a sense, as I declare and explain in the period immediately following, at
large. Nor would your Committee of Licensers, should the Parliament indulge you
in your Anti- Christian I call your request, Antichristian, because a
restraint of the Press is generally practiced, where Antichrist has his
Throne. The same Engine was made use of by the late Prelacy, to support their
Kingdom of unrighteousness. Is it me^t to bring in the methods and arrifices,
invented and practiced by Satan for the support of his tottering State and
Kingdom in the world, into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, for the establishment
of this, as if it were not able to stand but upon Satan's legs?
request about them, (which I trust is found among the Absits of all
considering men) be able to accommodate you in your expectations, or desires,
if they should not invest them with such an Autocratorical Majesty over Books
and Opinions, as I ascribe to the Doctors of Cambridge: Should then the
Parliament be guilty, either of base slattery, or of the grossest Blasphemy, in
case they should invest them with such a power over Books and Opinions, as that
which I Rhetorically term, an Autocratorical Majesty? Or have not I every whit
as much ground of hope, that there will be found none (at least no wise men)
who will take that power and glory, to themselves, without which Licensers of
the Press cannot be established to do their work effectually, and with
authority, as you have to hope that the Cambridge Doctors will not take that
glory to themselves, which I ascribe to them?

When you insinnuate, (indeed, as good as say rightdown) that I my self ascribe
unto God, that Autocratorical Majesty, which I ascribe unto men, vestratim
facitis, you do like your selves, and not like unto men honestly considerate.
Do I any where ascribe unto God an Autocratorical Majesty over Books and
Opinions? But he that commits sin, I see is the servant of sin.

(e) Whereas you wish me a better memory, then that which I have, I fear you
would be better satisfied, if it were worse. But I shall not burden you with
this jealousy. Nay if you be real and Christian in your wish, I most heartily
concur with you in it. And by way of recompense, for your good affections to
me, most cordially wish you a better understanding; which I know will
accommodate you as much, as a better memory will do me.

(f) Your Prophets are they, who aspire above the Order of second Causes, when
they claim a Lordship and Dominion over men's faith, and undertake to prescribe
what must be taught and believed by men. And if your notion here be true, this
probably may be the cause, why they are (in your affectate Metaphor) so
Wormeaten in their intellectuals.

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers.. XII.
3. To your 3* reason concerning Qualifications; the Holy Ghost does set down
such Qualifications both Negatively and Positively, as would fit men to oversee
a Press, though printing was not invented some hundreds of years after the
Canon was perfected. 1. Negatively, They are not fit to oversee the Press who
are men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth ( a) void of judgment, or
delivered over to areprobate sense. 2. Positively, they are fit, who hold fast
the wholesome form of sound words, the mystery of faith and Godliness, and
have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, ( b)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. XII.
(a) If men of corrupt minds, or destitute of the truth, be not fit men to
oversee a Press, I doubt you must contract the number of your Committee of
Six, or else admit of men not fit, according to your own rule, for the service.

(b) Again, if they, and only they, be fit, who hold fast the wholesome form
of sound words, certain I am that your Committee of Six, are not fit: for they
hold fast an unwholesome form of words, and teach many unsound Doctrines, which
are not according to Godliness; the unsoundnesse and ill consistency of
several of these Doctrines, with the interest of Godliness, I have
demonstratively showed and proved in sundry places of my writings. Nor have all
the Mercury water that has been applied, nor all the scrapings, and
scratchings, and scrubbings that have been used, been able to cleanse, or clear
those Doctrines from these stains and blots.

By the way, though it be true, that the Scripture does mention such
qualifications and characters of men, both negative and positive, as you speak
of, in reference to other occasions and employments, yet by what authority, or
warrant, do you make them competent to qualify for such an Apocryphal office,
as you call the over-seeing of a Press? Are not you men, who abhominate to
make use of your own wits, reasons, or judgments in matters of Religion,
especially to trust unto them? Or can you prove from the Scriptures that your
qualifications were ever intended, or meant by the Holy Ghost, for the
designation or characterizing of persons meet to make Oversee-ers of Presses?
Or is your Office of Presse-over-sight an alien to Religion, and irrelative to
it? Besides, what warrant have you, but only from your selves, and your own
reasons, when you* undertake to qualify your Presse-masters, with those
qualifications from the Scriptures, which you express, to lay aside and leave
out others, which are delivered there upon the same, or like account* with
those insisted on by you? Why do you not require in your Overseers of the
Press, that they be as well, blameless, husbands of one wife given to
Hospitality, not given to wine, not greedy of filthy lucre, not covetous, etc.
as men who hold fast the wholesome form of sound words (which by the way is no
Scripture qualification: this no where terms forms, wholesome, but words or
Doctrines only.)

Notwithstanding this Section of your Letter has this, that it is the calmest
of all the 22.

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers,. XIII.
4. To your 4th. all things are not free in a free Commonwealth: that Christian
Commonwealth must expect to be ruined, which allows men a liberty to blaspheme
Jesus Christ, or corrupt his Gospel ( a)

5. To your 5th. be pleased to read the 13th. of Deuter. the 13th of Zachary,
and the 13th. to the Romans, and draw conclusions from thence for your
satisfaction ( b)

6. To your 6th. The Religion owned by our State is the Christian Religion ( c)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. XIII.
(a) What you mean by a Christian Commonwealth, what, by this Commonwealths
allowing men a liberty to blaspheme Jesus Christ, or corrupt his Gospel, (I
profess ingeniously) I understand not. If by the former, you mean a Nation or
State, wherein Christianity at large is more generally professed, that which
you speak here of a Christian Commonwealth, you might as well have spoken of an
Antichristian. But I pray tell me, did you ever know, or hear of a
Commonwealth, which was either Christian, or Antichristian, that did allow men
a liberty to blaspheme Jesus Christ, or to corrupt his Gospel? Or does it
follow, that unless a Committee of Presse-Masters be established in a
Commonwealth, this Commonwealth must needs allow men a liberty to blaspheme or
corrupt, as you say? Or have the Lord Protector and the Parliament all this
while, wherein they have established no such Committee, allowed men a liberty
to blaspheme Jesus Christ, or to corrupt his Gospel? Therefore (doubtless) you
do not understand your selves. Nor can any man make sense and truth of your
words with the least pertinency to your cause. Nor do I well understand what
you mean by Blaspheming Jesus Christ, and yet less, what you mean by
corrupting his Gospel. You and your Prophets have odd notions and conceits
about Blasphemy. Scarce any truth can be held forth, which thwarteth, or
falls foul on any of your tenants* or Doctrines, but this Antipathy by you is
turned into Blasphemy. And whether by corrupting the Gospel, you mean the
mingling of any error, though never so light or small, with gospel truths, or
whether such a corrupting it, which wholly destroies the nature and blessing
intended unto men by it; or whether, a corrupting it to such or such a degree,
between these two extremes, who can so much as steadily conjecture? The truth
is, that I know very few, who are greater corrupters of the Gospel, then your
greatest Champions.

When you say that all things are not free, in a free Commonwealth, do you
speak to any purpose? Or does it follow from hence, so much as by a dream of a
consequence, that therefore the Press ought not to be free, because all things
are not free? Behold the natural face of your arguing in a glass: All things
are not lawful for men to do: therefore eating when they are an hungry, or
drinking when they are thirsty, are not lawful.

(b) The three thirteenths you here point me unto, I have already read at least
thrice over (respectively) and have drawn conclusions from them to my full
satisfaction against yours. And if you please to see what conclusions I have
drawn from them, and what grounds I have laid, upon which you also may draw the
like, I shall direct you to my respective arguings and explications of them.
The first of your three places you shall find examined by me at large, in my
treatise entitled, Hagiomastix, from. 34. to the end of. 41. Your second, in a
small discourse, written upon that text of Scripture only, entitled, a
Postscript, or Appendix to the former discourse. Your third and last in the
said discourse, from the beginning of. 45. to the end of. 50. Between these
Scriptures taken conjunctim and divisim, and between your cause, you will find
a very cold Communion.

(c) Your Answer to my sixth reason, is very little, and yet to less purpose*
For 1. What do you mean by The Religion, which the State owneth? 2. What do you
mean, by the Christian Religion? For this latter, first: The Religion owned and
professed by Antichristian States, is (at least in a sense) the Christian
Religion. Yea they have as much confidence, if not more, of the truth and
soundness of their Religion, as any Protestant State can have of the Religion
owned and professed by them. Secondly, I would know what you mean by the
Religion which the State owneth; that so it may be considered, not so much
whether it be, but how, and how far, and in what sense, it may be called the
Christian Religion.

First, if by the State, you mean, either all those only that have part in the
Rule and Government of the Nation, or else the great Body it self, and Bulk of
the Nation, who can distinctly, and in particular, tell, what Religion it is,
that is owned, or that ever will be owned by either? That Religion, or that
System of Tenants, or confession of Faith, which was composed and drawn up by
the late Assembly of Divines and others at Westminster, is not (it seems)
owned, or is not like long to be owned, by the State, (in either acception of
the word.) For the State (in the former sense) is in Travail with another
Religion, I mean, another Confession, or Profession of Faith; which, when they
shall have assented unto, and Authorized, there is little question but the
State (in the latter sense) will (more generally) own also. If a man should
repair to every particular member of the State (in the former sense, and much
more in the latter) and desire his sense and judgment, distinctly touching his
Religion, and what he particularly holds in such and such points, there is
little question to be made, but that in many things at least, he should meet
with the exemplification of the Proverb, quot capita, tot sensus: quot homines,
tot sententiae: as many men, so many minds. Yea in case the respective members
of the State (in the former sense) shall jointly and unanimously subscribe and
Authorize any confession of the Faith, which shall be formed, either by
themselves, or by any number of Ministers, or others, this will amount to no
proof, that therefore the same Religion, especially in all points, is owned by
them. For it is a most true saying, that Fides est in sensu, non in verbis; a
man's faith consists in that which he means, not in the words which he
speaks. And who knows not but the same words may have different
interpretations and senses put upon them? Therefore in case a State shall
publicly own and Authorize a model of Religion, or Confession of Faith, that
shall be presented unto them, I shall be very little the nearer hereby to know
of what Religion this State is, unless each particular member of this State
shall further, distinctly and particularly explain his sense touching every
Article, or head of Doctrine therein. The truth is, that to a State Religion it
may be aptly said; Belluae multorum es capitum: nam quid sequar, aut quem?
A many-headed Beast thou art; for what, or who,
May I with peace and safety, for my Guide allow?


I confess men may be very unhappily, and beyond the forecast of their own
Genius inspired in the composing and drawing up a Catechism or Confession of
Faith: But I judge that hardly can either be formed or contrived in such words,
but that in case I may be allowed my own sense and construction of them, I can
subscribe them.

Booksellers or Beacon-Firers.. XIIII.
7. To the seventh. You do but repeat the Blasphemy which you darted against
Heaven in your first Argument. For we never desired the Parliament to suppress
any truth revealed by the Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures, but to suppress
Blasphemies and Heresies. ( a)

Mr. John Goodwins Animadversion. XIIII.
(a) What Gentlemen, suppose I had charged you with desiring the Parliament to
suppress truths revealed by the spirit, etc. had this been blasphemy darted
against Heaven? Are you Heaven, or any the Inhabitants thereof? I cannot but
here tell you, that such importune and horrid assumings as these, on the one
hand, and such abominable untruths and slanders, one following in the neck of
another like the waves of the Sea, on the other hand, are not so much as the
way thither, but to a far differing place. For I know cause to believe, that I
both am, and have been, further from charging you with desiring any such thing
of the Parliament, as that which you here mention, then you are from desiring
it. I only charge you with desiring that of the Parliament, which very
possibly may produce the great mischief you speak of, viz. the suppression of
truth revealed by the Spirit in the Scripture. This charge I subscribe and own:
and have pleaded to it in part, and am ready to plead further, if you shall
require it.

Booksellers, or Beacon-Firers.. XV.
8. To the Eighth. You have been a Tryar these twenty years, and you have cause
to fear that you will be trying all things so long, that you will hold fast
nothing at last. ( a) You are now about sixty years of age, and one of us
remembering a Verse. Dum quid sis dubitas, jam potes esse nihil,
He that cries all things, and holds nothing fast,
Seems witty at the first, prooves -- at last. ( b)


Sir, we have heard that a Seeker, who had run through maemany Forms and Sects,
when he came to dye, cried out that he had been of all Religions, and was now
of none; Lord, says he, I have been seeking thee till I have lost my self. O
seek and find me now, or I am lost for ever.

Mr. John Goodwins Animadversion.. XV.
(a) I confess I have been a Tryar of men's Doctrines and opinions for well nigh
twice the number of years, which you speak of. Therefore here, contrary to your
wonted manner, you undercharge me. But my trying of all things, as I am
commanded by God (whom I shall not disobey for your profane jearings at me,
because of my obeying him) is so far from being any snare, or occasion unto me
of holding fast nothing, that without it I could hold fast nothing like a
Christian, nor (indeed) a sober man. But you (it seems) and men of your spirit,
instead of trying all things, as God commands you, hold fast all things,
which your Teachers dictate unto you, hand over head without trying any thing.

(b) You guess somewhat near the years of my Earthly Pilgrimage. I bless the
God of Heaven with my whole heart and soul, for sparing me so long in life and
being on the Earth, until I had thoroughly tried many the Doctrines and Tenants
of your Teachers, and found them liars; yea and had opportunity to stigmatize
them for such publicly, and to allarm the world concerning the hatefulness
and danger of them.

The story you tell of your Seeker, is extremely insipid and senseless, yea
and irreligious with all. For was there ever any man, who lost himself, by
seeking God constantly? There is a Letter in print, entitled, Sal Scylla,
written by one that had been a Seeker for many years, out of which you may
gather a story worth ten of that reported by you here.

For your Poetry 1. you see that I hold several things too fast, for your
stoutest champions to wrest from me. Therefore you shoot this arrow at a wrong
mark. 2. To hold nothing fast, and to hold fast nothing, that will do a man
good, are birds much of a feather.

Booksellers or Beacon-firers. XVI.
9 To the 9th, and the full scope of it in its numerous subjunctions; We say
you are like sin you take occasion by the Commandment, to lust after that
which is forbidden by the holy Law of God, ( a) If your reason be of any force,
it is of an Antinomian confederacy* and spends its strength against the Holy
Law of God, as well as the good laws of men. Upon this account no law must be
made, against Theft, Murder, or Adultery, lest all these notorions crimes be
promoted by these non-prudential Laws; As for spiritual means, we join with
them who say, they are most proper to sanctify all civil helps ( b) and shall
ever pray that God would make both effectual for the preventing or suppressing
of Errors and Heresies, lest the Plague of Egyptian darkness overspread us. We
humbly conceive that Magistrates may do much in their places, for the
preventing of spiritual mischiefs, by denying men of corrupt minds and
injudicious about matters of Faith, any such opportunity, as you confess the
Press affords them, for the spreading of their hideous and cursed errors, ( c)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion, XVI.
(a) I know not what you mean, when you say that I take occasion by the
Commandment to lust after that, which is forbidden by the Holy Law of God. But
if you, in no sense at all, take the occasion you speak of, you are of a better
Mold and temper then the great Apostle was. For he (speaking of himself) says,
but Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence: for without the Law Sin was dead. Romans 7. 6.

You reason not at all against my reason, when you say, if it be of any force,
it spends its strength against the Holy Law of God, as well as the good Laws of
men. I think in this as you think: it does spend it self alike against both
kinds of Laws, i. e. against neither. I confess that my reason
notwithstanding, good Laws* may be made by God, and ought to be made by men.
And further when you say, upon this account no Law must be made against Theft,
Murder, etc. lest these notorious crimes should be promoted by these
non-prudential Laws; I confess, that if 1. The only end of making Laws, were
to restrein the evil prohibited by them; And 2. If the generallity or far
greater part of men, were of the disposition and temper of some (I mean of
theirs, who are apt to be provoked unto evil, by means of the opposition or
Bar of the Law prohibiting it) it were better that no such Laws as you speak
of were made. But both these suppositions being evidently false, your reasoning
here falls to the ground. And touching such persons against whom you desire
your Law, viz. those who are apt or likely to publish such things, as you call
Errors, Blasphemies, Heresies, etc. they are (generally) of that disposition
and spirit, which we lately described; men (I mean) that are apt to be
admonished, and the more provoked to do the evil, which you desire should be
restreined, by occasion of a Law made to oppose them. One reason hereof (among
others) may probably be; because such persons will hardly ever be persuaded,
that any Law made to oppose them in such a way, is just or Christian.

(b) It seems then you join with those, who think, and (in effect) say, that
all the means, which the Lord Christ has afforded, or prescribed, for the due
government of his affairs, and Kingdom in the world, which are all spiritual,
are ineffectual, or unproportionable, for such an end: and that he was short in
his provisions and prescriptions in this kind, not remembering to call in the
civil Magistrate with his prudentials, and arm of flesh, to assist him. If you
be agreed with men of this notion, you may walk together.

(c) Those whom you call men of corrupt minds, and injudicious about matters of
faith, at least many of them, will (I question not) be found men of as pure and
sound minds, and of as discerning spirits in matters of Faith, as either your
selves or your best Teachers. In the mean time, I would gladly purchase of you,
at the price of the best book in all your shops, so much as a tolerable answer,
to this double Question; who are competent to appoint, or to be appointed
Judges, between men men of corrupt minds, and injudicious, etc. and men that
are otherwise? For it is not meet for any man, or men, to take this honor unto
themselves, I mean of being Judges over all other men's faith; much less is it
meet, that any man, or men, should take so great an honor unto themselves, as
to constitute or appoint others to be Judges hereof. If your answer shall be,
that the civil Magistrate is competent to appoint Judges in this kind; you must
give me a very pregnant and satisfactory account of his Commission from the
Lord Christ in this behalf, and by what rule he is directed by him to proceed
in this great and important affair.

Booksellers or Beacon-firers,. XVII.
To your 3d. and last charge which is, that we smell of such a spirit as
teaches men to suppose that Gain is Godliness, and that our endeavor is to
Monopolize our trade. We answer 1. That we are not so vain as to desire what is
utterly impossible to effect. ( a) 2. That we are willing that all of our Trade
and Company, should have equal liberty with our selves to Print or sell any
Books which may promote the truth, which is according to Godliness. ( b) 3d.
We shake our hands from all dishonest gain, it is below us to live by the Sins
of the Age, we look upon it as the basest drudgery in the world to be Pandors
to the Errors and Lusts of men ( c) We might gain by selling Biddles Books, but
we had rather see them burnt by the hand of the Hangman. Your Motto will best
become those, who usually Print and sell Blasphemous Pamphlets. For they, if
any, look upon Gain as Godliness: but our Motto is this, Godliness is Gain,
and true Piety is the best Policy ( d)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. XVII.
(a) Here again you make your charge from me greater then it is, that by
denying the sum total of it, as your selves make it, you may seem to deny all
the particulars. I no where charge you with Monopolizing your trade. You would
gladly (I perceive) be charged with that, of which you can acquit your selves
with credit.

(b) But what if your Licensers shall suppress such books which may promote the
truth which is according to godliness, and commend to the Press those that look
another way? How then shall men of your trade, yea or our selves, have that
liberty you speak of?

(c) To what end you should purge your selves so zealously from the guilt of
being pandours to the lusts of men, I understand not, unless (happily) some of
your consciences charge you in this kind, and you speak thus to stop their
mouths. But for that which you call pandour-ship to the errors of men, I fear
you are as obnoxious as others of your trade; though perhaps you understand not
your guilt in it, more then they.

(d) If you saw the Books that you speak of burnt by the hand of the hangman,
do you think that the Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, contained in them,
would burn with them? If you do, I confess I am of a far differing mind from
you. I verily believe that the ashes of these Books would be much more
propagative of the said Errors and Heresies, then the Books themselves.

Your Motto may be as you say, and you shall do well if you be not like those
Boxes in Apothecaries Shops, of which an ancient Father said, that they had
Pharmacum in titulo, in pixide venenum. The Archpriest of Rome, has this
Motto, Servus Servorum Dei; yet in his practice he is, Dominus Dominantium, He
of your company, that understands Latin, may interpret.

Booksellers, or Beacon-Firers,. XVIII.
Finally to your close, we answer, that you have no jurisdiction over us, and
therefore you have no Authority to impose any penance upon us, ( a) or to curse
us with Bell, Book and Candle, because we have in some weak measure, discovered
you to the world. ( b) It is true, we owed you SVCH, and now we have made
restitution of it, ( c) You know not what to do with it, because you are not
able by the help of it, to return an answer to those three Reverend Divines,
whom we mentioned before (d)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. XVIII.
(a) I am sorry to hear from you, that you look upon a Christian request made
unto you, to do that which is your duty, as an imposition of a Penance. I
perceive that things which are just and comely, are far from being the joy and
rejoicing of your souls. You have forgotten your Motto already.

(b) Curse you with Bell, Book, and Candle? Surely either I was asleep when I
did it, or you, when you said it. Name the word, or words of the Curse, and
save your selves from the shame of a new foolish slander. Whereas you speak of
suffering from me, because you detected me to the world: The truth is, had you
detected me, I should have counted you my great Benefactors for it. I shall be
a gainer, not a loser, by detection. But so far have you been from detecting me
to the world, that you have concealed and hid me from the world, as Tertullus
did Paul, when he termed him a pestilent fellow, Act. 24. 5. and the malicious
Jews did our Savior, when they put the veil of this reproach over his face,
that he was a Samaritan and had a Devil* Joh. 8. you have not detected me to
the world, but your selves, and have given the world an opportunity, yea a kind
of invitation, to see your nakedness.

(c) Concerning the restitution of which you vainly here boast, it was before
proved unto you, that you are debtors unto me of far greater Sums, then of the
word Such: Besides, you speak at an extreme low rate of understanding, when you
have traduced a man openly, and in print, to call a broken kind of
acknowledgement in hugger mugger, and sealed up in a paper, a restitution. If
you pay your debts after this manner, they are wisest that trust you least.

(d) Yes; you have seen that by the help of the word h, I am able to return an
answer (as you term it) to your three reverend Divines) in case any of them
should levy an Argument, or ground of exception, against the passage you wot
of; which yet none of them have done (nor can do, with any color of reason)
but only clamoured and cavill'd, as you have done.

Booksellers or Beacon-fyrers.. XIX.
If you desire us to print your Letter, and this our answer, we will for once
make you an Apocryphal Licencer, and print both; if you send us an Imprimatur
by the 24 th. of this instant November; and then you may present both to the
Protector and Parliament. ( a) And because the world takes so much notice of
you, or at least you of it, you may have both your Letter and our Answer turned
into as many languages, as Cerberus has tongues, and so disperse the History
of your Conquest over a few Stationers throughout the world: But that you may
deal fairly with the world, be pleased to tell them the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth; ( c) We will be your Remembrancers in some few
particulars.

Mr. Goodwins Animadversions, 19.
(a) I shall not put you to so much trouble or charge, as to print either my
Letter, or your Answer: you see I have done both to your hand. I doubt whether
you will return me your thanks for it, or no. It seems you claim a right of
power to make Licencers: What need you petition the Parliament? if you can make
Apochryphal Licencers, you can make Licencers of the highest Order that is: for
certain I am, that there are none Canonical. Touching your permission to me to
present my Letter and your Answer to the Lord Protector and Parliament, it is
not much unlike but that I may accept, and make use of it, if I see occasion.

(b) If you think not the English Territories large enough to spread your shame
into, or those who understand the English tongue, a competent number to be
witnesses of your folly, you may if you please procure my letter, and your
answer to be translated into twice as many languages, as, Cerberus had tongues.
You have many learned men to friend who abound with leisure. It is but for
every man of you to procure his Translator in an appropriate language, and then
you have double the number of Translations to Cerberus tongues.

As for me, you must needs conceive that I am nothing competent for the work,
in comparison of you; who, in respect of your own number, being six, and your
learned Party being many, lie under a like disadvantage, as the Prophet Elijah
sometimes did in reference to the great number of the 450. men spoken of, 1
King. 18. 22. 25.

(c) If you will please to perform the service your selves, you may be your own
Proveditors, and deal as fairly with the world, as you desire me to do, and (if
you can at last hit upon it) you may tell them the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth.

Booksellers, or Beacon-firers.. XX.
Remember how you have set this City on fire (for that is your only glory) by
preaching. ( a)

1. That there was no necessity of Humiliation before Conversion: you bid men
go boldly (did you not mean, proudly) to Jesus Christ, and he would humble
them. Sir they that know you well, think you so proud, that they fear you have
not as yet been with Jesus Christ to humble you. ( b)

2. Secondly, You taught that a General Faith or assent was sufficient, without
any particular application of Christ to the Soul ( c)

3. Thirdly, You taught men to renounce all in erest in Christ's active
obedience, and you have likewise affirmed that Christ needed not to have shed
one drop of blood for us, Red* Red. p. 16. (d)

4. You denied the imputation of Christ's all sufficient satisfaction, though he
has suffered for us; ( e)

5. You taught men to trust to their own trusting, to a Catholic, To credere,
or an Act of general faith, which we look upon as very imperfect and
unsatisfactory ( f)

6. Your Anti-Scriptural Blasphemies have been detected by Mr. Jenkins (g)

7. Your Arminian Blasphemies have been discovered by Dr. Owen, Dr. Kendal and
others ( h)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. XX.
(a) If I have set this City on fire, by my preaching, certain I am that it
has been with that Fire, which Jesus Christ came from Heaven, to put on the
Earth, and which he so longed to see kindled, Luke 12, 49. And that I have
caused it to burn no more with this Fire, then I have done, is both my sorrow,
and my shame. And if I have thus set it on fire, to any degree, this indeed is
(as you truly say) my glory.

(b) If I did exhort or encourage men to go boldly unto Jesus Christ, does not
the great Apostle the same? When he incourageth, Therefore let us come BOLDLY
unto the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. will you ask him, did you not mean
PROVDLY? And if I did teach that Jesus Christ will humble those that come to
him, I judge I have a very sufficient Voucher for my Doctrine. Yea, or what do
you your selves think? will Jesus Christ make proud or humble, those that come
unto him? Or do not they rather teach men to go proudly unto Jesus Christ, who
teach them to bring humility, along with them, and to expect entertainment and
acceptance with Christ, upon the account of their humility, then they, who
persuade them to go unto him notwithstanding any sense of the greatest
unworthiness in themselves, and not to be afraid of being rejected by him for
any want or weakness, that may accompany them in their way? But it may be,
that he that penned your letter, out of some consciousnesse to himself is
afraid of this Doctrine.

You are much mistaken when you say, They that know me well, think me so proud,
etc. there are none but those that are strangers, or enemies to me, that think
thus of me: they that know me well, are otherwise minded. Yea and confidently,
and upon good grounds believe, that I would be willing and free,
notwithstanding all your evil entreaties, and fiery provocations of me, to
carry your books after you; yea to stoop to loose the latchet of the Shoe of
the meanest of you, had I any competent ground to judge that such a service
from me would turn to any spiritual, yea or temporal advantage unto you. But
your tongues, it seems, are your own, and you think you are at liberty, to say
with them, even what you list.

By the way, the City was so far from being set on fire (in your sense) by the
Doctrine you here challenge me for, that it was rather cooled and composed by
it, the Ministers about the City in those days, when it was preached by me,
more generally, if not universally, consenting to it, and embracing it. How the
latter generation rellisheth the said Doctrine, I know not so well.
Notwithstanding for several years last past, I have not heard of any mouth
opened against it, but yours.

(c) I confess I have taught (and teach still upon occasion) that a firm and
cordial belief of the Gospel, as it comes from God, and as it is delivered in
the Scriptures, and more especially in the new Testament, is justifying Faith;
and that a particular application, is properly an act of hope, and not of
Faith, but only by the mediation of hope. For the justifying of this Doctrine,
I have not only Scripture, upon Scripture, Scripture upon Scripture, and these
most significant and express, but the joint testimony also of several Divines
of the Protestant party, as considerable as well for piety, and parts of
learning and sound judgment, as any of their fellows. You may see somewhat
more then a little upon this account in my Redempt. Redeemed. page 397, 398,
399 400.

(d) This is a most notorious slander: I never taught any man to renounce all
interest in the active obedience of Christ. Yea I have constantly taught and
asserted the absolute necessity of it to render him a justifier of the ungodly,
and Savior of men. My sense in this point is plainly laid down in several
places of my Treatise of Justification. ( Part. 2. p. 50. 54*
Nor are you Christian in the latter part of your charge, I no where affirm,
that Christ needed not to have shed one drop of his blood for us: these are
words of your falsification. My words in page 16. of my Redemption Redeemed, to
which you refer me, are these. The Salvation of the world, doubtless, did not
depend upon the actualor literal dying or cruoifying of Christ, but partly upon
the Council and good pleasure of God to deliver him up unto death in order to
this end; partly upon the readiness and perfect submission of will in Christ
to suffer death, in case any man or men should be found, that would inflict it
upon him. Of this my Assertion I give a sober and Christian account at large in
the sequel of the discourse. How wide the difference is between the notion and
import of these words, and that affirmation which you unworthily charge upon
me, an intelligent person may readily apprehend.

(e) This also is a most wretched and daring calumny. Never in my days did I
deny the imputation of Christ's all* sufficient satisfaction. I only denied
that most senseless and Anti-Scriptural sense of this imputation, which was
taught by some Ministers about the City: but in a regular and true sense I
always affirmed it, and accordingly declare my self in the second part of my
book of Justification, page 53. 57.

(f) If you had prayed David's prayer, Psalm. 119. 29. before your drawing up of
this Article, I judge that God would have heard you, and removed from you the
way of lying. For certainly never did any word pass from my lips, of any such
tendency, or sound, as here you are not afraid to fasten on me. That Catholic
(...) credere you speak of, I always abhorred, and set my self with the best
of my strength and understanding against it. Yea I argued against that opinion
from time to time, which makes Faith to justify by virtue of the relation
which it has to Christ, upon this very account and ground, viz. because of
that affinity it has with the notion of a (...) credere. Nor did I ever teach
men to trust in their own trusting. It is very like I may have taught them, to
trust that upon their believing, or trusting in God thorough Christ, they
should be saved: you are unsatiable in traducing.

(g) All my Anti-Scriptural Blasphemies may have been detected by Mr. Jenkin,
and yet nothing to be seen by any man. Mr. Jenkin, according to the Proverb,
when he went about to detect my Scripture Blasphemies, sperans fragili den* tem
illidere, in Solidum impegit, thinking to strike his teeth into that which
soft, met with that which was too hard for them to enter. Poor man! instead of
detecting my Anti-Scriptural blasphemies, he detected his own ignorance, and
perverseness of spirit.

(h) Mr. Jenkins Detections, and the two Doctors Discoveries, are birds of the
same feather, or rather feathers of the same bird. The Grasshopper weighs a
Talent of Lead, in comparison of them. They may for a time serve to build up
men in error, and obduration against the truth. But he that captived captivity
(...) Ephesians. 4. 8.
will detect all such detections, and discover all such discoveries in his
season.

Booksellers or Beacon-firers. XXI.
8. The Agreement subscribed by your Church (which says that our faith and
repentance is the cause of our Election) ( a) is such an absurd Disagreement to
sense, reason and Scripture, that we cannot but adore the Justice of God who
has smitten your intellectuals, and your fantasy, the glory of your proud
felf ( b) and fantastical admirers, ( c) with such effectual and gross
delusions ( d) that we wonder you your self do not take notice of it:

You see your Errors are so innumerable, that we can scarce find heads enough
whereunto they may be commodiously reduced. And we have heard of a great Rabbi
who was converted from Cards and Sack Possets to Errors and Blasphemies ( e)
but we spare you. ( f)

Mr. Goodwins Animadversion. XXII.
(a) You begin this Section with another Sacrifice unto the Father of lies,
instead of sacrificing to the Father of Lights. The Agreement you speak of,
does no where say, that our Faith and Repentance are THE CAUSE of our Election.
But what says it? (as to this point) it speaks on this wise* Our Brethren
holding with us (as has been noted) that there is no Election of persons, but
in time, though the Decree of Election be from Eternity, we cannot conceive
what should, or can, reasonably determine the time, when this Election should
be made (at least in persons living to years of discretion) but only their
Faith in the first raising it in the soul: and that UPON their believing, and
not before, they are numbered amongst the Elect of God. Is here any thing that
sounds like a making our Faith and Repentance the cause of our Election* No:
both the compilers, and subscribers of this Agreement resolved the Election of
all those, who are Elected, into the gracious and good pleasure and Will of
God. Only we are taught by the Holy Ghost, to look upon our selves as Elect,
according to the foreknowledg of God the Father, through the Sanctification of
the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
1. 2. and that God from the beginning, has chosen us unto Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. 2 These. 2. 13. But
though we look upon our selves as Elect or chosen by God through Sanctification
of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, yet we judge not either the work of
Sanctification wrought by the Spirit of God in us, or our Faith [or belief of
the Truth] to be either the the ground or meritorious cause of our Election,
but the condition only. We acknowledge no cause (taking the notion of causality
properly) of our Election, but the Grace, Wisdom, and good pleasure of our good
God only, as (we suppose) your selves do.

(b) You charge us with horrid untruths, and with such Tenants which never came
near us, and then pretend to adore the Justice of God, in smiting our
Intellectuals Is not this an horrid profanation, and taking the most Sacred
Name of God in vain? Our Intellectuals, through the Grace of God, have been
opened, enlightened and enlarged, to see the truth, as it is in Jesus: we
evidently discern that your judgments and consciences are smitten and blasted:
for you can believe, and speak any thing, without scruple or regret.

Whereas your composer calls my Intellectuals and fantasy, the glory of my
proud self, I fear he took measure by his own foot* when he made this shoe for
me, and (according to our English Proverb) mused, as he used. I remember what
David (speaking as some interpret) in the Person of God, says, to the wicked
man: Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self. Psalm. 50.
Yet I make no question, but that I am proud more then enough; but whether you
and your Teachers are not in part accessory unto it, let others judge. For I
confess it is not much unlike, but that I may have somewhat the better thoughts
of my self, because of your, and their, superlative unworthiness.
Notwithstanding all the ground and reason that you have, either to think, or
call, me proud, is because I do not bow the knee of my judgment and conscience,
to the Idol dictates and conceits of men, and more especially of your Teachers,
and this in the presence of that light of the contrary truth, which God
brightly shines in the face of my Soul. Notwithstanding what I am in humility,
I am by the Grace of God: what I am in pride, I am of, and from my self. If you
would but arm your selves with the Apostles resolution, rather to obey God then
men, and look for your credenda, beyond your Teachers on Earth, you would soon
perceive me to be as far from pride, as now you think me from humility. But the
best is, I am counted and called proud, by strangers and enemies only.

(c) If I have any fantastical Admirers (which is more then I know) I do by
these presents resign all my interest in them, and consign it over unto your
Teachers.

(d) If by effectual and gross delusions, you mean those importune and senseless
opinions, which you (I fear against your own knowledge and conscience) would
compel us to own, it is not God who smites our Intellectuals with them, but
the Devil by you smites our Names and reputations with them. Or if by your
effectual and gross delusions, you mean those Gospel truths, which God has
graciously revealed unto us, and as yet hidden from you (unless you see, and
will not see) how is it that you tremble not to blaspheme these by the name of,
effectual and gross delusions? You are admirers of the Justice of God, much of
the same kind with your grand Champion Doctor Kendal. He also (in an ecstasie
of devotion) much adores the Hand of God for infatuing my parts, only because
he finds the two words, Consequent and Antecedent, trans-placed in the Printing
of my Book. See Master Baxter. Preface Apologetical. page 6. And again in his
Prologue to Mr. Kendal. p. 4.
Ye he rejoices more impotently over the mistake, then he that (as David
speaks) finds great spoil. Yea he makes as formal, as grave, as solemn a
triumph for the discovery, as if it were his masterpiece, and the firstborn
service he had performed in the composure of his whole Book; or as if the
interpretation of the strange Phenomenon must needs be, that God had in an
extraordinaay* way given sentence from Heaven on his side, by permitting either
the Printer, or the Author, to show themselves in so light an oversight to be
men. Notwithstanding this man is (of the two) more excuseable then you. He
makes his Mountain of a Molehill: but you make yours of a plain. But you that
are such devout Admirers and Adorers of the Justice of God, and Hand of Heaven,
where neither of them are to be seen, are but negligent and loose observers of
them in such providence where they are conspicuous, and highly considerable.

If we were set upon the wondering pin with you, we might much rather wonder
that you take no notice of so many un- Christian and high misdemeanors, as by
notorious falsifications and untruths, you have perpetrated in this one
Epistle, then that you should wonder that we take no notice of such delusions
in our selves, which are not to be found in us.

(e) For the story of your great Rabbi, which your great Doctor brings in here
obtorto collo, by head and shoulders, it seems it is but a Presbyterian
here-say. If you had seven more as wise stories as this to join with it, I
cannot imagine what service they would all do you. Would they make you seem
either more wise, or more Orthodox, or more Religious, or else less unworthy,
less froward, less cavilling, less calumniating, then yet you appear to be? Or
if your intent be to Theatrize me under the pleasant fiction of your Great
Rabbi, the conversion you speak of, will not accommodate you with truth in
respect of either of the terms, either those a quibus, or those ad quos.
First, for Cards; there have now twenty one years passed over my head, since my
coming to the City: of all this time I never spent so much as half a minute in
the recreation; and for ten years at least together next before my coming, not
a whit more. In my younger days, I confess I did pass some of my precious hours
in the vanity; yet without scandal, or, any observation of excess or
inordinateness in my addiction or practice that way. As for Sack-Possets,
counting from the first hour that ever I saw the light of the Sun, I believe
there are very few Ministers about the City of London though there be diverse
that have scarce lived half my days, but have fished as often in those Ponds,
as I. If I be brought upon the Stage by you, as a man of a servile Appetite
unto Sack-Possets, I believe I never came there before, upon any such account.

And for Errors and Heresies, whereunto your story (if it personates me)
pretends that I have been converted, I confess I have been converted from
Errors and Heresies truly so called, unto Errors and Heresies by you so called,
that is, unto the knowledge and acknowledgment of many worthy Truths, into the
secret of which your souls (it seems) as yet never entered, which is the snare
upon you to term them Errors and Heresies.

(f) For your sparing of me, I could be content you should spare me less if
(less may be) then you do, upon condition you would not spare the Truth so
much. But if your handling me, as you have done in your Epistle, be your
sparing me, what would your inclemential and hard intreatings of me have been?
Therefore you give testimony against your selves by this saying, that you are
of that generation of men, whose tender mercies are cruel: and who are men of
this generation, you are informed most Authentiquely, Prove. 12. 10.

Booksellers or Beacon-firers.. XXII.
From these Premises we conclude, that we have justly accused you both of
Blasphemy and Error ( a) and do by these Presents oblige our selves to make
our charge good ( b) before the Lord Protector and Parliament publicly and in
print. And therefore you may proceed after your weak manner to vindicate your
self, and recover the sequestered revenues of your Reputation, by some Writ or
Act of Indemnity: ( c) This is the satisfactory advice and council of,

Your plain dealing (e) Friends, Luke Fawn, Sam. Gellibrand, Tho. Underhill,
John Rothwell, Joshua Kirton, Nathanael Webb.

Nov. 17. 1654.
Mr. Goodwins Animadversion, XXII.
(a) It is with your Epistle, like Premises, like conclusion. Neither is there
reason to be found in the former, nor truth in the latter. I pray what is the
Blasphemy, and what is the Error of which you have accused me? Certain I am,
that you have proved nothing of which you have accused me, to be either: nay
you have not so much as attempted or levied an argument to prove either. No,
you have not so much as showed, or declared in what word, phrase, clause or
strein of the passage quarrelled by you, the Blasphemy or Error, by you so
called, lies. The citation of the bare words of a Text of Scripture, is no
eviction of an Error, or proof of Blasphemy.

(b) You talk of making good your charge: it were a wiser and more Christian
undertaking, and more fecible of the two, to make your selves good* Can you
wash a Blackamore white? Or can you prove darkness to be light, or the night
day? Then may you have some hope to make good your charge. If you can make it
good, certain I am that you can do more then all the Angels in Heaven. It may
be you think to ascend up into Heaven in a vapor, and to carry all before you
with swelling words of vanity. This I confess is the lofty method of some of
your Don-Teachers; who if they can but speak gloriously and confidently of
their cause, and then wash it over with some slight color of an argument,
which it may be terminates the sight of a partial or formal Reader, though it
be as transparent as the air, to unprejudiced and intelligent men, think their
achievement to be greater then all applause; above all admiration.

(c) Here your Metaphorical eloquence passes (I confess) my intelligence.
What you mean by your Writ or Act of Indemnity, though your selves possibly
may understand, though I can hardly think this, yet I do not. But truly when
you make your selves the sequestratours of the revenues of other men's
reputations, you take an office and employment of no honor or credit at all
upon you, unless you think those who are known amongst us, by the Title of
Knights of the Post, to be persons of honor for their work sake. Certainly
Satan is the Sequestrator General of the revenues of men's reputations, and
imploies many under him. And what Seneca spoke touching men's lives, vitae
alienae Dominus est, quis-quis contemptor est suae, any man that despises his
own life, has power over the life of another man, is as true in the point of
credit and reputation. He that cares not to prostitute his own reputation, may
at pleasure sequester the Revenues of another man's. But for the sequestered
Revenues of my reputation, I shall recover all in good time, and this with
advantage, by an Act of Indemnity from Jesus Christ, which you will not be
able to reverse. You will be turned out of your Office of Sequestration in that
day.

(d) I know no advice or council at all, that you have given me, unless it be
implicitly, and by consequence: and thus you have advised me to beware of men
of your principles and spirit. This advice I confess is satisfactory, and I
intend to take and follow it, as far as with a good conscience I can.

(e) If your plain dealing in your Shops, be like your plain dealing in your
Letter, in case I were your customer, I would desire that you would deal
roughly, not plainly, with me, because your plain dealing, upon that account,
would be full of unrighteousness and untruth. But in as much as you give me to
understand, that one of your Company understands Latin, and the word planus,
from whence the English word, plain, comes, signifies, according to the
different quantity of the former syllable, in the Latin tongue, as well a
crafty, juggling, dissembling mate, as a plain, honest, and open-hearted man. [
Vir planus, est fallax: sed aperto pectore, planus;]


It may be you were advised by him to the choice of the word, for the
opportunity sake of the opposite signification of it, under the covert whereof
you may act what part you please. But were you really, and not in complement,
my plain dealing Friends, you would deal truly and plainly. [i. e. Honestly and
Fairly] with me, you would acknowledge your un-Christian misdemeanors toward
me, and adjust my reparations. In doing this you should be your own friends as
well as mine: and plain dealing, in your sense, with your selves, you will find
an higher point of Christianity, then the like dealing with other men;
especially with those whom you count your enemies.

My Christian and worthy Friend and Brother in Christ,
I Came some few days since casually to understand, that there is one passage
in my late Book, entitled Redemption Redeemed, (possibly among many others of
less offense) of so hard a resentment with you, that you judged it of very
dangerous consequence, and have cautioned several persons (as some of
themselves have reported, I know not how publicly, or unto how many) against
the danger of it. Whether your intent was hereby to blast the credit of that
one passage only, or to render the Book it self as unsafe, or however of no
good consequence for them to read; I shall not too narrowly enquire into, much
less determine. I acknowledge it to be far above my line, in the composure of a
Book to be able to pre-apprehend or foresee, what notions or expressions may
possibly distaste, or provoke a spirit of prejudice and pre-occupation; or to
deliver my sense at every turn upon such terms, as to leave no place or
possibility for sinister constructions: But this I am able to avouch, as in the
sight of God, who will shortly bring every secret thing unto judgment, that in
the penning of that Book I was conscientiously studious and careful, to
decline, as well in matter, as in words, whatsoever I apprehended likely to
offend any man, further or otherwise then as the truth, even with the fairest
and clearest delivery of it, is apt to offend those who are not disposed, or
prepared in their judgments, to receive it. And I now am, and I trust always
shall be willing, and ready to do the best I can, to heal every man's offense
taken at any saying or expression in that Book, when I come particularly to
understand the ground or occasion of it. I hear that within these few weeks
there was another (whose Name I shall spare at present) who very reasonlesly,
and without the least cause given, stumbled in the University Pulpit at
Cambridge, at another passage in the said book, where I give an account of my
judgment concerning the fullness, freeness, and effectualness of the Grace of
God. Notwithstanding, I had in some particular and distinct explications of my
self immediately before, endeavored to remove the stumbling-stone (such as it
was) out of his way; and had showed him before this, how he might with a very
good conscience, and with more honor to himself, have passed by that passage
without lifting up his heel against it, but that I want such particularity of
information about the carriage of the discourse, as I desire, and hope in due
time to obtain. As for him, who Arch-Rabbi-like, concluded at once, and without
premises, al those without exception that hold the Doctrines of general
Atonement by Christ, and of a possibility of a final declining in such who
ever believed, to be men Godless, Christlesse, Spiritlesse, Graceless, I
shall at present only advise him to lay his heart close to those two sayings
of a wise man, Prove. 26. 12. and Prove. 29. 20. When I shall hear that he is
thoroughly baptized into the Spirit of these Scriptures, I shall judge him a
person worthy a reproof, when he offends. In the mean time, I judge, that He,
who told it amongst news from Heaven unto the City, that Arminius his rotten
posts were lately new painted, together with him, who not long after
(diurnal-wise) told the same story over again to the same Audience, only in a
more dismal Metaphor, informing them, that Arminius his Ghost was lately
started out of his Grave, and walked; neither of them meddling any further with
the controversies. I judge, (I say) that these are men wise in their
generation, and did well consider that the name of Arminius is the most
forcible Engine (though made of nothing but air and wind) to batter the walls
of those opinions, which they so cordially wish in the dust; and that should
they have engaged any Scripture or Argument upon the design, they had run an
hazard of losing all that ground, or more, which they had reason to hope they
had won, by drawing the pedigree of the said opinions, though most untruely,
from Arminius, it faring with their credulous hearers according to the Proverb;
The blind swallow many a fly.

But Sir, Concerning that passage in my late Book, upon the horn whereof you
were pleased to tie a lock or bunch of hey, by way of signal unto your friends
and others, to take heed of it, and to keep at distance from it; if my
intelligence leads me to the right place: (as I suppose upon competent
grounds it does) as far as I am able with the most impartial eye I have, to see
into it, it is so far from meriting the brand of ignominy, wherewith you have
stigmatized it, that rightly understood and considered, it is as innocent and
offenceless, as any saying that ever fell from your own mouth, in any of your
Sermons. The passage (I presume) is this, page 335. of the said Book, I shall
recite it verbatim. Yea (that which is yet more) I verily believe, that in case
any such assurance of the unchangeableness of Gods love, were to be found in,
or could regularly be deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any
intelligent and considering man, to question their Authority, and whether they
were from God, or no.

The reason of this saying I immediately subjoyne in these words, For that a
God infinitely righteous and holy, should irreversibly assure the immortal and
undefiled inheritance of his Grace and favor unto any creature whatsoever, so
that though this Creature should prove never so abominable in his sight, never
so outragiously and desperately wicked and profane, he should not be at
liberty to withhold this inheritance from him, is a saying, doubtless, too hard
for any man, who rightly understands and considers the Nature of God, to hear.
What there should be in either of these sayings, so much as liable to any
suspicion of an incomportance, either with reason, or with truth, cannot enter
into my thoughts to imagine, or conceive. The pile of the discourse is built
and I cannot but presume regularly enough upon this foundation; that if any
thing were found in those writings or books, known by the Name of, Scriptures,
whether in the letter of them, or in any expresness of consequence from them,
(here justified or approved) of any blasphemous importance against God, or any
his Attributes, it were a just ground, at least to question, whether the said
writings were from God, or no. I suppose I shall not need to argue this
principle, being so full of light in it self. The Holy Ghost himself teaches
us, that God cannot deny himself 2 Timothy 2.
: and as certain it is, that he cannot blaspheme himself, nor yet authorize,
inspire, or teach any person, or creature whatsoever, to blaspheme him; the
blaspheming of himself being nothing else but a constructive denying of
himself, as is evident. Therefore what book or writing soever contains any
thing blasphemous against God, I do not mean as simply reported, but as
asserted and maintained in either, is not only a just ground to question
(which yet is all I affirm in the point) whether such a writing or book be of
divine inspiration, or from God, or no: but even positively to conclude against
them, that they are not. So then if there be any thing dangerous, or of
suspicious consequence in either of the said passages, it must be this; that in
the former of them, I suppose, and in the latter (constructively) affirm, that
such an unchangeablenesse of the Love of God, as is mentioned in the former,
and described (in part) in the latter, is of a blasphemous import, and
repugnant to those great Attributes of righteousness and holiness in God.
Though the latter of the said passages recited, carries a sufficient light in
it to satisfy any man (impartially considerate) concerning the truth of this
assertion; yet the matter being of an high and sacred importance, I am willing
and shall endeavor to give both unto your self, and others, somewhat a more
full and distinct account hereof.

First then evident it is, that that unchangeablenesse of the love of God,
which these passages speak of, and without a supposal whereof the common
Doctrine of Perseverance, against which I here argue, cannot be maintained, in
the formal and proper notion of it supposes, that if ever God once truly
loves a person, it is unpossible, that upon any occasions or interveniences
whatsoever, he should hate him afterward.

Secondly, Every whit as evident it is, that such a supposion or notion as
this, supposes, that in case a person has once, or at any time, truly
believed, suppose in his youth, (under which condition he must needs be beloved
by God) though the very next hour or day after such his believing, he should
fall into ways of sin, wickedness, disobedience, rebellion against God, and
should without repentance or remorse continue in these abominations, adding
drunkenness to thirst from time to time, for 10. 20. it may be 40. 50. years
together, and to his last breath, yet God all this while truly loves him, and
remains unchanged in this his affection toward him; and consequently loves
him with the same love; as great, as rich, as dear, under all these horrible
pollutions, and most accursed abominations, as he either would, or could have
loved him with, in case he had all this while walked in the greatest innocence,
and uprightness of heart and life before him. Now then this is that which I
affirm; that to attribute such an unchangeableness of love unto God, as this,
which makes him to love an obstinate and obdurate sinner, a worker of all
manner of abominations, with the same affection wherewith he loves a just,
holy, and good man, a worker of all righteousness, is of a blasphemous import
to those glorious Attributes of his, his Righteousness and Holiness. For if the
case were thus with God, should not the world have cause to demand* with those
in Malachy, Where is the God of judgment? Mal. 2. 17.
Or what is there, or can there be, of a more diametrical opposition unto
righteousness, then equally to respect and love the most unrighteous with
those that are most righteous? or unto Holiness, then to honor those that are
most polluted and abominable, as much as those that are holy?

Nor can you here pretend, that I wrong your Doctrine of Perseverance to the
value of the least hair on your head, by making it a Patroness and Protectrix
of such an unchangeablenesse of love in God, as that now represented: because
evident it is, that without such an unchangeableness supposed, the said
Doctrine will neither have footing nor foundation to support it. For though you
and others, Patrons of this Doctrine, understand your selves, and be-friend
your Doctrine better, then to express or represent it unto the world, in those
black and dismal colors, wherewith I have now drawn the pourtraicture of it,
or to describe the unchangeableness of love in God, which must be the Basis and
Pillar of it, in such terms as it has been described by me: yet there is
nothing more pregnant and notorious, then that your soft and silken, and most
tender expressions of it, being regularly, and according to the exigencie of
truth, interpreted, and drawn out of these collusive involutions, amount every
whit to as much, or more in deformity and A theologicalness of notion, as any
expressions used by me do import. For certain it is (nor do I remember that I
ever met with a denial of it, amongst the greatest Defenders of your Faith, in
the point of Perseverance) that he that truly believes, may possibly fall, and
that within a very short time after this his believing, into the greatest and
foulest sins that the nature of man is lightly incident into, as drunkenness,
adultery, murder, envy, malice, covetousness, oppression, idolatry, etc. yea,
and from the time of his first falling into them, may continue and hold on in
the practice of them for many years together, yea possibly to the very
approaches of death, without repentance. Only you teach indeed, but by humane,
not divine inspiration neither, that such persons (I mean, once believers) in
case they fall into such sins, as those now mentioned, or the like, yet never
miscarry in the great business of Salvation, but by an high hand of Grace from
God are always brought back unto repentance before their death: However, upon
the former supposition, it clearly follows, that your Doctrine of Perseverance
cannot stand, without the rotten prop of a Supposal of such an unchangeableness
of love in God, which is palpably, and in the eye of a very ordinary
understanding, of an highly disparaging, and blasphemous import to his
Righteousness and Holiness. In what sense the Scriptures hold forth an
unchangeableness in God, and so in all his Attributes, and particularly in his
Love, I declare once and again (upon occasion) in my late Book of Redemption,
page 63, 64. And again, page 278, 279. and page 205, 206. etc. Elsewhere (as
viz* page 318, 319. and p. 330. etc.) I demonstratively prove your Doctrine of
Perseverance to be at open and manifest defiance also with another great
Attribute of God, his Wisdom. Yea, when I look narrowly into the purport and
tendencies of this your Doctrine, I cannot overruled my thoughts, but that they
will be very jealous, that it is accessory to far the greatest part of those
abominations at this day raging amongst us, Antinomianism, Enthusiasm,
Familism, of the dangerous and vile opinions and practices of those called
Seekers, and of those bred of the dregs and retriment of all these, the
Ranters, and generally of all the coolings, declinings, backslidings, and of
all other foul and sad miscarriages amongst Professors.

Sir, I have looked upon you as the glory of the London Ministry, and do so
still, notwithstanding the contest of your judgment against mine, about the
Doctrine of Redemption, and the questions relating hereunto. Yet give him
leave, who is possibly looked upon by you, as by many others, as the reproach
and shame of this Ministry, to say this unto you, that those two opinions, the
one of a peremptory personal Election from Eternity, the other of a peremptory
and necessitated perseverance of the Saints, genuinely interpreted, do (upon
the matter) wholly dissolve the usefulness and necessity of your Ministry; the
former in relation to persons yet unconverted; the latter, in respect of
Believers. For first, if there be a certain number of men peremptorily designed
by God to Salvation, all others as peremptorily excluded, what need either the
one, or the other, regard either your Ministry, or any other man's? The former,
shall be infallibly and irresistibly converted, and so saved, whether you or
any man else, preach the Gospel unto them or no. If so, Fortis ubi est Ajax?
where, or what is the necessity of the greatest Preacher under Heaven, in
respect of them? The latter, notwithstanding all the possible relief that you
by your Ministry can afford them, will, and must inevitably perish. Yea all the
good that you are capable of doing unto these by your Ministry, is only to
help them deeper into Hell. Secondly, if those who already believe, shall
certainly, and against all possible interveniences persevere in faith unto the
end, what if the Ministry of the Gospel, and they, were quite parted; They
should run no hazard of losing their Crown hereby. This great Truth, viz. that
your Doctrine of Perseverance frustrates the Ministry in reference unto the
Saints, I prove at large (and I suppose beyond all reasonable contradiction)
Page 301. 302. 339. etc. of the book formerly mentioned: Where also I tear in
pieces the Fig-leaf of that pretense, that the Ministry of the Gospel,
notwithstanding the perseverance of the Saints be supposed absolute and
unfrustrable, is yet a means for the effecting or procuring of it.

But Sir, concerning the passage recited, wherein you pretend to find so much
danger, that you judge it necessary to arm your Friends with a Religious caveat
against it, I verily believe, that there is scarce any Page in any of those
books which either you have published in your own name, or Licensed for others,
but I could quarrel with somewhat therein, at as good a rate of ingenuity, if I
judged the engagement worthy of me, as you have done at that passage of mine.
Yea and wring every whit as bad blood out of the nose of it, as you have forced
out of mine. But for oversights, hard expressions, or doubtful passages in
other men's writings, otherwise then for the necessary defense of those Truths
which God has stirred up my Spirit to plead and protect, I have neither time,
nor mind, to take any such cognizance of them. Concerning my own writings, so
far as I find them justifiable for matter of truth, and defensible, I shall
(God willing) pro virili, stand up to maintain them against all Opposition and
Detraction, as fast as I shall come to understand what exceptions are taken
against them. What shall reasonably and in a Christian manner, be excepted
against any thing, I shall make no Apology for, but with a spirit of meekness
own the oversight, and only endeavor the rectifying. In case unjust Opposers
shall rise up too fast, or prove too many in number for me, I must then be
content to edecimate, and turn my self only to those, that are counted
Pillars, and leave Punies-either to share with them in such answers and
satisfactions which shall be given unto them, or otherwise to take their
pleasure in flying upon the wings of their own wind. Sir, I cannot suspect a
want of so much civility in you, as to deny water unto those for the washing of
their faces, who are bemired, though casually, and by their friends: or that
the publishing of these few harmless lines in order to my purgation, will be
matter of offense in the least unto you. Thus desiring, that the Father of
Lights will give both to you and me, and all others that desire to serve him
faithfully in the Gospel of his dear Son, light and not darkness, for our
vision; I take my leave, and rest

Yours with a perfect Heart to serve you J. G.

Mr. Joseph Caryl's Answer, to Mr. John Goodwins Letter.
SIR,
I Suppose you Printed and Published your Book with a willingness that it
should be read and considered by all men, and knew also, that your opinion
therein asserted concerning Universal Redemption, and falling from Grace, has
been (as still it is) opposed by very many. For my own part I plainly profess
to you, that I have (according to my measure) held forth and maintained the
contrary Doctrines, not only before I saw your Book, but before ever I saw
your face; and so I judge my self bound to do, (as I have oppertunity) till I
see ground to change my opinion, which as yet I do not, no not by what I have
found in your book.

As for that particular Passage of it, which you say I have stigmatized with a
Brand of Ignominy, as also cautioned my friends about it; what you mean by
stigmatizing I apprehend not: All that I have said of it, has been but a
manifestation of my dislike of it, or that it is an argument of your highest
confidence, that the truth, in that point to which it relates, is on your side.
Now truly Sir, if you call this stigmatizing it with a Brand of Ignominy, I
know not how to take it off, notwithstanding all that you have written in
vindication of it, in the Letter you were pleased to send me.

And whereas you intimate your purpose to Print that Letter, it shall (I hope)
be no trouble to me (unless for your sake) if you do so. Only give me leave
to caution you as a friend, to consider well both with your self, and with your
friends. Whether it be so comely or you to discover such an eagerness in this
cause, that you cannot contain your self from publishing in Print, what is
spoken in private discourse among Friends, concerning this, or other Passages
of your Book. The Lord lead us into all truth, and teach us how to walk in Love,

Yours in the truth to serve you, in Joseph Caryl.

Postscript 1. To be read in Page 42. line 23. after these words. Mr. Horn?
And why do you not demand of your Committee-man George, (otherwise called
Doctor Kendal) another of your three worthies, why he has not as yet answered
Mr. Baxter, who (in your phrase) has charged him home to the life, or rather
(indeed) to the death of those foppish opinions and conceits of his, which he
encounters with as much ease, and with like success, as the fire does the dried
stubble? Yea why do not you ask your third Committee-man, and Champion,
Joseph, why he has not answered the same Mr. Baxters Epistle, wherein he very
gravely and Christianly, yet roundly and smartly enough, expostulates with him
for helping into the world, and this with approbation and applause, such a
book, which well deserves to be hissed out of the world with indignation?

Postscript 2. To be read in Page 47. line 10. after these words, So still.
Yea there are such things found, and have been discovered by others, as well
as by my self, especially by Mr. Baxter and Mr. Hora, in the writings of the
three additional members of your Committee, which, according to the terms of
your own regulation (mentioned. 12. of your Letter) render them signally unmeet
for a superintendency over the Press. Mr. Baxter well nigh all along his Reply
to Mr. Kendals Digression, page after page, evinceth him to be a man destitute
of the truth, void of judgment, etc. in very many things delivered by him in
the said Digression. And for Doctor Owen, Mr. Horn has in a just volume
discovered his incompetency in the same kind.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in some Copies
Epist. p. 3. l. 3. r. oculos p. 4. l. 15. r. failings l. ult. r. over-easie,
p. 7. l. 26. r. generality. Book, p. 1. l. 5. r. Nathanael, p. 3. l. 21. r.
creature. p. 5. l. 15. r. Beacon-Firers. p. 8. l. 11. r. be p. 10. l. 14. r.
the. p. 10. l. 20. r. work. p. 14. l. 2. r. into p. 20. l. 6. r. black-friar.
p. 20. l. 8* r. Presbiterian. p. 27. in the marg. r. errorum. immaculatumque.
p. 28. l. ult. r. Paul's. p. 34. l. 3. dele.) p. 35. l. 14. after below r. ( l.
15. after strong, supply) p. 36. l. ult. r. wary. p. 40. l. 1. r. to l. ult.
for with, r. of p. 41. l. 24. r. if I did it not. p. 43. l. 3. r. Co-adjutor.
p. 44. l. 7. r. spend. p. 51. l. 33. r. ingenuously* p. 54. l. 5. dele the p.
70. l. 12. after less, r. (

