OF SCHISM. PAROCHIAL CONGREGATIONS IN ENGLAND, AND Ordination by Imposition of
Hands.

Wherein Dr. Owen's Discovery of the True Nature of Schism is briefly and
friendly examined, together with Mr. Noyes of New England his Arguments against
Imposition of hands in Ordination.

By GILES FIRMIN, Sometime of New England, now Pastor of the Church at Shalford
in Essex.

1 Cor. 12.25. That there should be no Schism in the body. 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The
Lord our God made a breach upon us for that we sought him not after the due
order. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at
the Bear in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door of Paul's, 1658.

To the Reverend the Associated Ministers in the County of Essex.
Fathers and Brethren,
EIther we have dealt hypocritically with God and man, or else the Divisions in
these poor Churches have lain upon the hearts of the godly in England as an
afflicting evil. The Civil Power have seemed to be so sensible of this evil,
that more then once it has been numbered amongst the causes in their Orders for
our Solemn and Public Humiliations; if our Fast-days, Prayers, Sermons, Books,
etc. may be believed, then the breaches in our Churches have broken our
comforts. For my part I have cause to take shame, and to ask pardon of God that
this sin which has wrought so much evil, and brought such dishonor to Christ,
have no more affected me; it is for them whose hearts are most divided from
self, and united to God, to be indeed affected and afflicted with Divisions in
the Church. I look on it as an act of a grown Christian, whose Interest in
Christ is well cleared, and his heart walking close with God, to be really
taken up with the public Interest of Christ. I will not measure other men's
hearts by my own, but I must say for my self, the good Lord pardon my
hypocrisy in this point, for to be affected as become Christians for Divisions
among Christians, I find it a hard matter, whatever words seem to affirm.

Could I joy in my self, I should be glad that I lived to see the day when the
Lord put it into two or three of your hearts to try what might be done for the
healing of our breaches, and thereupon to call some of your Brethren together
to see if we could agree so far that we might Associate together, as some of
our Brethren in other Countries have done: and let me leave this upon record,
so long as this poor Script shall last, for the honor of the Presbyterial
Brethren, as they were the first movers for peace, so they have bidden fair for
peace; had our Congregational Brethren [whose persons, gifts, and graces I
desire to honor and love] been but answerable, we might have had cause to have
joined together in praises for our healing, as we have had, and still have
cause to mourn for our breaches.

It is not to be forgotten how the good hand of God went along with us; for
though we were men of different principles who were chosen to draw up the
agreement, and we met near twenty times before we could finish, yet no
unbrotherly clashing was heard amongst us; but so soon as we saw each others
principles to be fixed, presently we were called off from Disputing, and the
next words were, Come, let us see how we can Accommodate; let the blessing of
Matthew. 5.9. fall upon such hearts.

Were it true that uniting with our Brethren in this Association, were a
dividing of our hearts from God, as one of our Congregational Brethren did
intimate in a Sermon of his upon Hos. 10.2. then I wonder not though he so soon
deserted us, and that others stand off from us. For this he said was one note
of the heart divided from God, when the heart did not fully come up to God: and
under this head brought in such who did fashion and mould themselves in State
and Church according to the Mode of the Times, though contrary to their own
principles and light, cross to [or laying by] the Institutions of Christ, when
as the Text says, Jer. 15.19. If thou separate the precious from the vile,
etc. our Brothers aim was understood by diverse in the Congregation, and unto
him I shall return this answer.

If he means I have gone contrary to my own principles and light, he is
mistaken extremely. If he meant he and other Congregational men must do so if
they Associate, how can this possibly be, when it was one of our foundations we
laid for agreement, and it was professed again and again, that we went not
about to take any man off from his Principles? I wish our Brother had instanced
what Institution of Christ we crossed or laid by.

For the Scripture he alleged, let us see how this suits our case; the
Presbyterial Brethren do not indeed separate as do he and others, but does he
therefore upon this Text stand off? I find five several expositions of the
words, and very few who take the word Precious for to relate to Persons. But I
will give my Brother that sense, Let it be meant of Persons, The Arabic word
which the Translator render Honestus Golius renders generosus, nobilis. And the
other (Dalilon) abjectus, vllis contemptus.
as Piscator thinks it most proper, because (...) alibi de persona tantum
dicitur. And so the Interlineary gloss. Now the question is, 1. Who are meant
by Precious? 2. How Jeremiah was to separate these Precious from the Vile.

For the first, those who do Interpret it of Persons do all understand real
Saints; and here standing so in opposition to others it must needs be meant so.
Obj. If he will say, that does not follow; for all Israel were called holy, and
that in as high a word as precious. I answer, The Lord speaks of these who were
called holy, and yet here commands the separation of the Precious from the
Vile; therefore it must be meant of real Saints. I could say more but spare.

2. For the second, How did he separate, either by Doctrine, or Discipline. Not
by Discipline [which must serve my Brothers purpose.] For

First, To separate real Saints from vile by Discipline is a hard work indeed,
and such a task as the Lord never put his Ministers to; who knew men's hearts?
then the Congregational Brethren must look to it that all their members are
real Saints.

1. But if my Brother says, by precious real Saints are not meant but visible,
though not so really. [Besides that all were called holy.] This my Brother must
prove, and then tell us what he means by a visible Saint. But however
separation by Discipline cannot be meant. For

2. Jeremiah then had a strange task, for he had no particular Church as we;
and for him to separate all visible Saints from the vile in the Jewish Church
by Discipline were a strange and impossible work.

3. Jeremiah a single Priest could not do it; as all that know the Jewish
governments will confess.

4. But put case it were so, yet this hinders not his Associating with our
Brethren, who desire him but to Associate, where they do separate the precious
from the vile by Discipline.

Since then this separation was Doctrinal, as all Divines upon the Text
acknowledge, then whether the Prebyterial Brethren [very many of them at least]
do not separate as well as himself, I desire my Brother to consider. For the
last words which he also used, Let them return to thee, but return not thou
unto them. Does my Brother indeed parallel our Associated Brethren with those
who are meant by them? Let the Presbyterial Brethren return to the
Congregational, not they to them: I should not have dared to have made such a
parallel.

I shall only put this Brother in mind what he then said against those who dare
depart from standing Commandments, and desire him to consider whether he never
read of a standing (to use his own words). Commandment, repeated again and
again, that we should follow the things which make for peace, and whether he,
with our Brethren who stand off, have answered that Commandment, sober
Congregational men shall judge.

Let me leave with our Brethren a few lines which I received a few weaks since
from that learned and godly Divine Mr. Norton, [Teacher of the Church in Boston
in N. England] in a Letter to me. The Association you mention amongst the
Ministers we much rejoice in, I never thought it better then human, but
oftentimes worse, that the Presbyterian and Congregational men cannot close
together in Brotherly Communion. The power of godliness interest us in the
affections of the godly, above the notions of either of them considered apart
therefrom. I believe the Congregational way to be the truth: yet I think better
of many Presbyterians then of many Congregational men. It Is no wonder if
Independents are unruly, for I distinguish between Independents and
Congregational men; or rather such [call themselves as they please] that will
not acknowledge the rule of the Presbytery, and the order of Councils Thus far
this reverend and great Divine. I am sure our Association reaches no higher
then a Council.

As for our Brethren who will not Associate till they see the Civil Magistrate
set his stamp of Authority upon this way of Association, whatever the late
Instrument made by the Parliament allows us, though they see Anabaptists and
Congregational Churches, and other Associated Counties to exercise Discipline
without any scruple, though they would quarrel with an Erastian Magistrate,
that should deny any such power to belong to Churches, yea, though some of
these can suspend from the Lord's Supper whom they please, we must leave these
to their own wisdom, and desire them to convince the Magistrate so that he may
be able to see clearly that the government of the Church is either Episcopal,
Classical, or Congregational, and so stablish one; or if the Magistrate be not
so clear in either, but yet willing to favor any of these, the persons being
godly and peaceable, [as he doth] then let these Brethren consider whether the
want of Church Discipline be a fault to be charged most upon the Magistrate or
upon themselves.

To return to you then [Fathers and Brethren] in a few words. Hitherto God has
brought us; the work we have engaged in is to most [if not all of us] new, and
such a work as many of those who have been exercised in it, have so often
miscarried in, that the Ordinance of Discipline has suffered much dishonor:
and that which adds to the difficulty, we set to it in such times wherein the
Ministry is so much reviled by Sectaries, and as to this work much contemned by
the Gentry, and our Episcopal Divines; one of which [and whom I honour] said to
me, That we were no more fit to manage the government of the Church of England
then David Saul 's Armor. We boast not of our fitness, but for the government
of the Church by such Bishops [though I highly reverence some of them] they
have no such cause to boast, as witness the Churches they have left us
miserably overgrown with ignorance and profanness; had we so many hundreds [or
thousands] of pounds per annum, such honor and regal power to stick to us as
had they, I hope the Churches might be governed as well as they were before,
and be purged a little from that ignorance and profaneness which now we find
them in.

But we must go to our work without Readiness Armor. I am sensible how much
wisdom and prudence this work calls for; all my comfort is, Christ of God is
made to us wisdom, etc. 1 Cor. 1. I take care for nothing but for Faith,
Humility, and Prayer, to fetch this wisdom from our King and Head, and leave
the success to him who did institute this Ordinance.

Your fellow labourer in the work of the Gospel, GILES FIRMIN.
Shalford 2. of the 2. Month, 1658.
An Advertisement of two Books lately published by this Author.
Mr. Giles Firmin. Viz. 1. Stablishing against Shaking, being a discovery of
the Quakers.

2. The Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion vindicated, and
the extent of it determined. By Mr. Stephen Marshall, published by his own Copy
since his death, with notes upon it.

CHAP. I. A brief and friendly examination of Dr. Owen 's discovery of the
Nature of Schism.
SEveral definitions of Schism both ancient and modern the Doctor recites, none
of which give him content. Austin [he saith] suited his definition directly to
the cause he had in hand against the Donatists: for the rest they do not
satisfy him; then offers his definition, being the definition which agrees
with Scripture, to which he appeals, and esteems this appeal to be necessary
and reasonable. I am of the Doctor's mind, and wish we had kept there all this
time; for while some men made Providence their Bible, others make Antiquity
theirs, they have made us by woeful experience know the evil effects of walking
by such Canons. Providence and antiquity are excellent things to confirm us
when they have clear Scriptures stand before them as Figures before Ciphers;
and if men would redu^e their actions and disputes to this Head, by which one
day we shall be judged, Romans 2. [and not by Providence or Antiquity] as we
might have spared many of our troubles, so we might sooner come to the closing
up of our breaches, which I perceive is one part of the Doctors aim, but I can
hardly believe will ever effect the Cure: For suppose he can convince men that
this separation from Churches is not Schism in the precise notion [as he often
mentions] of Scripture; yet if they apprehend it to be something else as bad,
and it may be worse, his book will prove ineffectual to the healing of our
wounds.

Thus then he defines Schisin, p. 51, 52. It is a causeless difference or
division amongst the members of any particular Church that meet together, or
ought so to do, for the worship of God and celebration of the same numerical
ordinances to the disturbance of the order appointed by Jesus Christ, and
contrary to that exercise of love in wisdom and mutual forbearance which is
required of them.

Two things I gather from this definition, and the Doctors discourse in his
Books.

1. That he confines Schism to a particular Church only.

2. If Divisions in a particular Church grow so high that diverse of the members
do causelessly make a Separation from the Church, holding Communion with
themselves apart, that this is not Schism in the precise notion, however for
disputation-sake against the Romanists and the Episcopal-men he may yield it to
be so. The withdrawing from any Church or Society whatever upon the plea of its
corruption, be it true of false, with a mind and resolution to serve God in the
due observation of Church Institutions, according to that light which men have
received, is no where called Schism, p. 46, and 77. And Rev. p. 83.

It is not called Schism, ergo it is not Schism. Will the consequence hold, if
the plea be false? What is it called? I pray. Welfare an erroneous conscience;
but suppose upon a false plea such a conscience should raise divisions in a
Church, according to the definition, without separating from the Church; were
it Schism or not?

I thought by one passage in the Doctor's Pre-view, p. 54. I had mistaken him;
for thus he speaks to Mr. C. If he suppose that I deny that to be Schism where
there is a separation, and that because there is a separation, as though Schism
were in its whole nature exclusive of all separation, and lost its being when
separation ensued; he has taken my mind as rightly as he has done the whole
design of my book. But adds withal, Because this is not proved, I shall desire
him not to make use of it for the future, as though it were so. These words I
did not observe till I had done.

1. If Schism in its whole nature will include causeless separation from a
particular Church, and this according to Scripture warrant, then the false plea
of an erroneous conscience for causeless separation from a Church, upon
pretense of serving God in his Institutions, according to its light, must be
Schism whether it be called so or not, unless you can tell us how else it is
called.

2. Why then does the Doctor pass by the definition of Schism so generally
received? for he knows this is the thing which has given that great offense,
separation from true Churches; and that which must satisfy here must be to
prove that all this separation is just and warrantable by Scripture; and if so,
I know not who can charge these men with Schism, nor any thing else in so
separating: so that there was no need of departing from the definition
generally received, and giving a new one, of which I know no use: unless,
First, To show there can be no Schism in the Catholic Church: And secondly, To
show that Church Members may be guilty of Schism, though they do not separate
into parties, and so show that our Churches are more guilty of Schism then we
are aware of, which I believe to be true; but this will bring no honor I doubt
to some Congregational Churches. Alas, what Schisms have we known? this is so
common a thing that a Divine whom I know, [and so does the Doctor] once a high
Congregational man, suffered much under that name, for whom my principles were
not strait enough, [but now he looks on me as erroneous, and too strait, though
I am the same I was then] being now turned about, and against all
Congregational Churches, says this of them, they will all break in pieces and
come to nothing.

3. Let the Reader be pleased to observe these passages in his books, then
judge if I mistake him.

1. In the same book where he speaks so to Mr. C. who had said there was a
separation into parties in the Church of Corinth; this the Doctor stiffly
denies, p. 70. and in p. 62. says, The Schism the Apostle rebuked consisted in
Division in it, and not in separation from it. Then in p. 72. What that Schism
was from which he dehorts them, he declares only in the instance of the Church
of Corinth; and thence is the measure of it to be taken in reference to all
dehorted from it.

Hence then we must dehort men from divisions in the Church, as being Schism,
the measure allows it; but we must not dehort them from causeless separation
from a Church as being Schism, because that only instance, which is the
measure, does not call it Schism. If that instance be the measure, what then
does not punctually agree with it is not Schism.

2. In his book of Schism, p. 42. To this Q. [If any one now shall say, will
you conclude because this evil mentioned by the Apostle is Schism, therefore
nothing else is so?] he says, I answer, that having before asserted this to be
the chief and only seat of the doctrine of Schism, I am inclinable so to do.
This instance is the only seat of the doctrine of Schism; but this instance
speaks only of division in the Church, not of separation from it, says he.

3. P. 193. Ib. Take it for a particular Church of Christ, I deny that
separation from a particular Church, as such, as merely separation, is Schism,
or ought to be so esteemed; though perhaps such separation may proceed from
Schism, and be also attended with other evils.

Who ever said that mere separation, separating all moral considerations from
it, just or unjust, was Schism? we are speaking of an unjust or causeless
separation from a Church, is that Schism? No, it seems.

Before this causeless separation, there was division most likely in the
Church, and this is allowed to be Schism; this Schism at last produces
separation causelessly, but this separation is not Schism, nor must be so
esteemed, he says. Compare this with his speech to Mr. C.

4. The Doctor seems to define the whole nature of Schism, It is a causeless
division among members, etc. meeting together for the celebration of the same
numerical ordinances, etc.

Had he thought there might be schismatical acts besides this Act in Corinth.
viz. Causeless separation from a Church which was not here, (he says) then his
work was only to describe what was this Schism the Apostle reproves, and so
should have said, This Schism was a causeless division, etc.

But he defines, Schism is, etc. And this agrees with the Title of his Book,
which promises to show us the True nature of Schism, [hitherto mistaken it
seems by all Divines] and that definition the Doctor only embraces; and for
others he can own them against the Romanists ex abundanti^ but no definition
has given the true nature of it but his. Nor does the Doctor find fault with
other men's definitions, because they mistook this particular act of Schism in
Corinth, [which it may be they never intended, but to give the whole nature of
the sin, as Logicians should do, and the true definition of the sin will fetch
in all particular Acts] but he looks upon them all as not giving the true
nature of Schism according to the precise notion of Scripture.

What then the Doctor means by his words to Mr. Ca. I know not; these grounds I
have laid down will clear that I am not mistaken in what I gather from him.

I see in his Rev. p. 85. he finds fault with Mr. Ca. because he had said that
he delivered himself obscurely. But Mr. Ca. is not the first man whom I have
heard complain of obscurity in his book, but diverse others; I could set down
their expressions, but forbear. In several places I observe things are not
clear, and should have taken some things in the same sense Mr. Ca. has done,
for which the Doctor blames him. The Doctor then must pardon us though poor
country-Ministers are not so quick of understanding to find out his meaning.

So far then as I understand the Doctor, I am not in diverse things satisfied,
and in particular not with his definition, which I do not look upon as
Logical. For, one rule of Definition is this. Definitio ne-sit angustior, neve
latior suo definito, but the Doctors definition is angustior suo definito.
Therefore not logical. It is angustior in two respects. 1. It takes not in
causeless separation from a Church, which I doubt not may be Schism. 2. It
takes not in the Schism in the Catholic Church. The Doctor says there can be
none. Whether there can be no Schism from the Catholic Church, is a harder
question, it would seem rather to be Apostacy, as says the Doctor; yet I do
almost think we may suppose Schism to be from the Catholic Church. But that
there is Schism in the Catholic Church, I doubt not. Now if these two can be
made good, then the Doctors definition is not logical. Every definition must
exhaurire totam naturam [specificam saltem] sui definiti, else not adequate,
nor reciprocal, which must be.

1. Then, Causeless separation from a Church may be Schism. Why I put in the
word, May, I shall give the reason afterward.

But it may be the Doctor may say, That definition of Schism which only
agrees with Scripture, that, and that only, is the true definition of Schism.
But such is mine. Ergo

The Minor [which I shall deny] he proves from this instance of the Church in
Corinth. Where is no mention made of Separation from a Church, there was only
Division in a Church.

The word Only I put into the proposition [and the Doctor himself speaks as
much, Here is the chief and only seat of the doctrine of Schism, p. 42.] else
though I yield such a definition agrees with a particular instance, yet it
agrees not with the whole specifical nature of the fin which we are enquiring
into, and therefore not logical. Does every Scripture-instance give a full
definition of the fin forbidden? The Command says Thou shall not steal, in
Exodus 22.2. I find mention made of a thief breaking in, etc. to which Christ
alludes Mat. 24.43. Suppose there were no other instance of theft in all the
Scripture, shall I now go set forth a book about the true nature of theft, and
go to this Instance, and there ground my Definition, and say, Theft is an
illegal and violent breaking into a man's house and taking away goods against
the owners will, and say nothing else can be Theft in the precise notion of
Scripture, because the Scripture-instance calls nothing else theft? This were
strange. Is not robbing at Sea theft, though no such instance is found in
Scripture? That definition given, Furtum est ablatio injusta rei alienae invito
domino, will fetch in all theft. It is true, every particular Act of any sin
forbidden has the specifical nature of that sin in it: If a man take my goods
unjustly, whether it be at sea, or on the highway, out of my house openly or
privately, and several other ways, all these have the specifical nature of
theft in them, and theft is predicated of them; we do not make several
definitions of theft because there are several Acts: Vnius rei una tantum est
definitio. There may be diverse degrees of the same sin [as there is of Schism]
yet gradus non variant speciem. But we do not use to go to particular Acts of
any sin, and out of such an Act fetch the definition of the sin confining the
specifical nature [which is more large] to that individual or singular Act.

So here. There is a command given, 1 Cor. 12.25. There must be no Schism in
the body. Now if I would define Schism, must I go to a particular instance,
and give a definition of the fi^ from that, and say this is Schism, and nothing
else, Division in a Church, but no causeless separation from a Church, because
there is no instance given where such separation is called Schism; as if we had
particular instances in Scripture of all the acts of sins forbidden in the ten
commandments. It is true, that is Schism [ i. e. the causeleffe Division in
the Church of Corinth, though they did not separate from it into parties,
whether they did or no, I pass not] which here the Apostle reproves: But is
nothing else Schism? Put case the division had risen so high that Cephas and
his company had separated from Apollos and his company, and held communion
apart by themselves, had not this been Schism? give a reason.

Object. Such separation is not called Schism? Answ. It cannot be called so
unless it were; the Doctor says it was not; we cannot expect the Scripture to
give names to Acts as done, when they are not done. But ex hypothesi, I ask the
question, if it had been so [as it is now common with us] that Cephas had
separated causelessly, had it not been Schism? Certainly if Racha and thou fool
be breaches of the sixth Command, then if one add to his word blows and wounds
unjustly, that man is guilty of killing also: So if Cephas and his company will
add Separation to Division, and that unjustly, let Cephas pretend what he
will, it is Schism.

There are diverse professors in these days, have been and would be esteemed
glorious ones still, who are so spiritual that they live above Ordinances [a
carnal and wicked spirituality] they have their grounds and pleas why they do
so, but we find no such Instance in all the Scripture, of men upon the plea of
spiritualness to live above them. Now to which command shall we reduce this
sin, certainly a sin it is; if I can find a command where the Lord has
instituted his external worship, and commanded all to attend upon it, thither I
reduce it, to the second.

So if men, though godly [for I know not but they have sin, and the Devil may
abuse them] will causelessly separate, though they think not so, but plead this
or that, because I find no such Instance in the Scripture, that men upon such
pleas have separated, yet causeless separation is a sin opposite to the Union
commanded; and I think Schism and Union are opposite.

If the Doctor then will give me [a poor Countrey-Minister] leave, I will
humbly propound the way I would take to find out the definition of Schism. I
see it is a sin, and offen-five to Christ, 1 Cor. 12.25. Now what is opposite
to this, what is the affirmative precept? Union of the members amongst
themselves. This is the thing often commanded, the thing Christ's heart seemed
to be fixed upon, John 17. when he was leaving the world, and that such Union
as thereby the world may know whose disciples we are, as the Dr. p. 54. then I
conceive Schism may be thus defined, Schism defined.
Schism is the solution of that Unity which Christ our Head requires in his
Visible Body. I am not in this place critical about the words Union or Unity;
the Reader has my meaning. I think the Dr. will not oppose this, for I find
him enquiring exactly into the Union of the Invisible and Visible Church, etc.
For the Invisible Church of Christ, there can be no Schism, says the Doctor;
hence I put it not in. It must be in his visible body, there I take in the
Catholic Church [which I look on as most properly his Body-visible] and also
particular Churches. I take this definition to be reciprocal, I do not call to
mind any schismatical Act but it will comprehend it, whether it be Schism in a
Church, or from a Church; in the Catholic or particular Churches: and yet my
ground is Scriptural also, though I go not to a particular instance.

1. Hence then let us see whether causeless separation from a Church be not
properly Schism. Let us see what unity the Lord required of this Church; was it
only that inward love and forbearance [which the Doctor mentions] which by
their divisions the Apostle saw they had broken? Did he not also require that
they should, as with reverence toward him, so with love one to another
mutually and jointly attend upon their Head in all his holy worship and
ordiuances, Sacraments, etc. [The Doctors definition says as much, Numerical
Ordinances, etc.] If then Cephas and his company had causelessly made the
division, and upon this separate from the rest, and not join with them in the
Supper [wherein they show themselves to be One bread, Chap. 10.17.] and other
Ordinances, dinances, did they not manifestly show a breach of that unity which
the Lord required? must I not say, Cephas, you and your company are highly
guilty of Schism? let the Reader judge. Thus then stands the argument.

If causeless separation from a Church be a solution of that unity God
requires in his body, then causeless separation from a Church is Schism.

But the Antecedent is true: Ergo, the Consequent is true. The Consequence is
clear.

2. In case these who made the Division in Corinth had separated from the other
members, the Doctor grants it had been a greater sin, Rev. p. 68. Since then we
must not call it Schism, let the Doctor give us another Scripture name for that
sin; let him set down the opposite affirmative precept, and see if Union will
not be found in it. I doubt he will hardly find another Scripture-name, for I
think he will hardly find in all the Bible where godly men, or such as appeared
so, dared ever to make a causeless separation from a Church. To say it is
Apostacy, no stay; I will suppose those members who thus divide, to be persons
sound in the main points of faith, in their conversation visibly godly, such as
maintain the Ordinances of God amongst themselves [the very case of diverse of
ours] but corprution and error in this point has divided Cephas and his
company; now here is no Apostasy: And though it be a Church guilty of Schism,
and so far a schismatical Church, yet a true Church. Hence I said a causeless
separation, etc may be Schism, i. e. supposing they hold to what before I
mentioned, else it fell from the faith, etc. it had been Apostasy, and not
properly Schism, unless you will say both. Hence

If causeless separation from a Church has no other name given it in
Scripture, nor can rationally be referred to any other head then. Schism, then
causeless separation from a Church is Schism. But the Antecedent is true: ergo
the Consequent is true.
The consequence is clear, because it partakes of the nature of no sin, as of
Schism: [provided those who separate be such as before I mentioned.]

3. Since the Doctor makes this instance the only seat of the doctrine of
Schism, and tieth us up so straightly to it, I was thinking whether it would
not hence follow that there can be no Schism in any Church but only in such
Churches as do exactly answer this instance; and hence Schism must be only in
such Churches where there are diversity of Officers, extraordinary gifts,
differences about meats, etc. thus I hope most Churches are incapable of
Schism; and that sin will hardly be found in our days. It may be he will say,
by consequence it will follow where there are causeless differences, where the
form of the sin is found, there is the sin of Schism, though Churches do not
answer Corinth.

But what the Doctor says, that the Scripture does not call causeless
separation from a Church Schism. So I can say, this Scripture instance, calls
that only Schism, where some were for Cephas, others for Apollos, etc.

But further, let us enquire into the form of the sin where it is. In the
division amongst the members to the disturbance of the order in the worship of
God, etc. I wish the Doctor had told us how that order was disturbed; some
things he does mention, but whether all the disorder in the worship of God be
recorded, I know not; and that which is recorded admits of some questions to be
resolved before we can clearly understand it. As for the disturbance of the
order, I suppose he does not make that the form of the sin of Schism, nor part
of it; I look on it rather as a consequent of the Schism, therefore not the
form; neither do I look on Order and Schism properly as contrary, where Vnum
uni tantum opponitur, they do not cominus inter se pugnare per proximas formas.
Nor am I certain that there was ever Schism where yet some disorder have been
found. I cannot tell that there was Schism amongst the Prophets. 1 Cor. 14. but
some disorder there was in the exercise of their gifts, as it should seem by
the last Verse, the Apostle calls for order.

Ecclesiastical union causelessly dissolved, I take to be the form of Schism;
this is it by which Schism is id quod est. If then the Doctor will allow that
Schism may be in Churches by consequence, though the causes be not such as were
in Corinth, north Churches parallel to Corinth in all things, because there is
the form of that sin which was in Corinth called Schism; then if canseless
separation from a Church, be Ecclesiastical union causelessly dissolved, there
must needs by consequence be Schism also, for posita forma ponitur formatum.

4. The Doctor tells us the word (...) is not used in the Scripture for
secession, or separation into parties. Division it does signify, but does the
propriety of the word forbid it to signify Division into parties? in an
Ecclesiastical sense it is used only in this particular example, (he says)
therefore it can signify no other. I suppose the Syriack Translator was not of
the Doctor's mind, for he uses that word in the 11. chapter 18. and 12. chapter 25.
which comes from the same root with Peleg. Genesis 10.25. Whence Peleg had his
name the text tells us, and I think there was division into many parties: the
word (...) in its primitive signification will carry a division into parts.
Matthew. 27.51. (...). I grant the Septuagint Other Greek Versions I have not to
see.
do not use the word (...) in 1 Kin. 11.11, 31. yet why the word (...) might
not be translated by (...) and signify what (...) does, I know not. I conceive
(...) is of a larger signification then (...) but comprehends what (...) does.
This appears,

1. By the Learned, who as they render (...) by findo, scindo, so they render
(...) findere, scindere, qui pannum aut aliquod ejusmodi continuum dirumpit,
etc. Buxt. Schind. Pagn. Merc. hence as (...) is rendered scissura, so the 70.
in v. 30, and 31, render (...) scissurae. So the vulgar render (...) 31. Nor
does (...) always signify the rending of a thing into parts [in opposition to
the Doctor's notion] more then (...). For among the Physicians a rupture in a
membrane, the rending of a Muscle, they call (...), though the part be not
separated from the body; so Gorraeus.

2. Because (...) in the Old Testament is used and applied to such things as
(...) in the New Testament, as to the rending of clothes here, and in diverse
other Texts. So is (...) John 19.24. Matthew. 27.51. Luke 5.36. John 21.11. so
that though the Hebrews have two other words which the learned render scindere,
findere, yet none [I conceive] answer (...) as this does.

There may be something in this that the Arabic in the 11. v. use that Verb,
(...)
whence the Noune in 1 Cor. 12.25. comes. Whence I think we may properly say
there was a great Schism in the Church and Commonwealth of Israel, and here was
separation with a witness.

To search over other Divines to see what they had said about Schism I thought
it in vain, because the Doctor had laid a bar against them all, they are all
mistaken, and so their authority is worth nothing; but when I had done, two men
came into my mind, who were near to the Doctor's principles, being
Congregational men, and therefore had need to look to themselves in their
definition of Schism, men of great renown for learning and piety, Dr. Ames, and
our Mr. Norton in N. E. in answer to the Q. Quid est schisma? I find Ames thus
answers, Schisma dicitur a scindendo, and est scissio, separatio, disjunctio,
aut dissolutio Vnionis illius quae debet inter Christianos observari. I was
nearer to the Doctor's definition then I was aware of; but then he adds, Quia
autem haec scissio maxim perficitur, and apparet in debita Communione
Ecclesiastica recusanda, idcirco illa separatio per appropriationem singularem,
recte vocatur Schisma; thus he.

Mr. Norton thus, Schisma est illicita separatio a Communione Ecclesiae; semper
grande malum. I will look no further, these are sufficient.

Now for the Catholick-Church, I am to prove there may be Schism in it. For my
groundwork I lay that Text 1 Cor. 12.25. That there should be no Schism in the
body.

If by the body in this text be meant the Catholick-Church visible, then Schism
may be in the Catholick-Church visible. But the Antecedent is true: ergo the
Consequence cannot be denied.
The Antecedent is to be proved. That by the body is meant the Church, the
Doctor yields, Schis. p. 147. but what Church he speaks of is not evident; the
difference he speaks of in the individual persons of the Church, is not in
respect of office, power, and Authority, but gifts and graces, and usefulness
on that account; thus he. But I had thought that by Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, Helps, Governments, v. 28. he had properly spoken of office, power,
and authority: are gifts and graces meant by these words? very strange. But to
come to our Text.

If the Church be here meant, then it is either the Church invisible or
visible. But not the invisible, that the Chapter clears; and the Doctor says,
It Is impossible Schism should be in the invisible Church.

If visible, then either the Catholic, or a particular Church; but not a
particular: Ergo

This I grant, that by body in one Text, v. 27. a particular Church is
mentioned, because the Apostle applies what he had been speaking of before to
this particular Church, being a similar part of the Church-Catholick, as our
Mr. Norton, and other Divines in the definition of a particular Church; [though
some Physicians make different definitions, as we respect the matter or form of
a similar part, yet I content my self with that definition which is commonly
given.] What duties are enjoined the Catholick-Church, or what sins are
forbidden, these concern every particular Church; for Christ gives his Laws to
the Catholick-Church primarily, no particular Church has a special law given
to it as such: whence well may the Apostle apply his speech to this particular
Church; but that the Apostle was not discoursing of a particular Church, in
viewing over the Chapter these arguments persuade me.

1. It is such a body into which we are all baptized, v. 13. but are we
baptized into a particular Church? is that the one body the Apostle means? Let
the Doctor speak, Rev. p. 134. I am so far from confining Baptism subjectively
to a particular Congregation, that I do not believe that any member of a
particular Church was ever regularly baptized. As much he seems to intimate,
Schis. p. 133. in his answer to this question, wherein consists the unity of
the Catholick-Church? A. It is summoned up in Ephesians. 4.5. one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism. It is the unity of the doctrine of faith which men profess, in
subjection to one Lord, Jesus Christ, being initiated into that profession [and
so that body] by Baptism.

2. It is such a body as with its head makes up Christ, v. 12. But if one
particular Church related to its head be Christ, what are all the other? how
many Christ's shall we have? For my part I conceive, as all true believers make
up but one spiritual body, to which Christ is a saving and spiritual head; so
all the particular Churches in the world are but one body visible, of which
Christ is the Political Head. Every true believer is said to be married to
Christ, and of this Church, Paul says, he had espoused them to Christ, and are
not thousands more? but we do not read Rev. 22.17. Brides say Come; nor of the
Lambs wives, chapter 21.9. but the Lambs Bride and Wife: thus the Catholic visible
body is called the Kingdom of Christ, not Kingdoms; though by reason of the
numberless number, the Lord bids one Pastor, feed you my flock there, and
another, feed you my flock there, etc. yet but one flock, one body; these
meetings of this great body being in a manner accidental to the
Church-Catholick, by reason of the numerosity of its members, for could we
conceive that all the members of this Church could meet in one place, and
partake of the same numerical ordinances orderly, this meeting in several
places should cease.

3. It is such a body as has Apostles set in it, v. 28. but though the
Apostles were officers to this particular Church, yet not to this only, but to
the Catholic.

4. It is such a body that the members of it suffer together, and rejoice
together, v. 26. but this mutual rejoicing and sympathy, is not confined to the
members of that particular Church, I hope? the same specifical care, though not
the same gradual care, I think such a distinction may help to understand the
25. v. for I conceive there is some nearer tie to my own members in particular,
as to my own family, and yet to have no care of other members of another
Church, though I see them in danger of sin, or require of me the dispensing of
an rdinance, (regularly) etc. I think this is not right. Then 27. v. what I
have said of the great body, I say to you who are a similar part of this great
body, and so called the body of Christ, Do ye take heed there be no Schism
amongst you.

Thus that parallel Text, Romans 12.4, 5. seems to be meant not of the particular
Church of Rome, but the Catholic; many members, but one body.

When I can see better reasons given me to prove he is discoursing of a
particular Church, I shall yield to them.

Q. But how can Schism be in the Catholick-Church visible? this must be
enquired into, though I fail in the opening of it, yet what I have said to the
Text before will save me.

A. I must premise some things, then come to the answer. The Doctor p. 133.
Schis. speaking of the Catholick-Church, says, The saving doctrine of
salvation by Jesus Christ, and obedience through him to God, as professed by
them, is the bond of that union whereby they are made one body. But [under
favour] I conceive the Doctor has expressed only that bond which is between
the body and the head; but are there no ligaments whereby the joints of this
great body are knit to each other? surely if a body, there are such; the
Apostle Ephesians. 4.16. I think speaks of a bond among the members; and by the 11.
v. he seems to me to speak of the Catholick-Church-visible, from whom the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part makes increase
of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. Upon which words Zanchy thus,
Concludere vult Apostolus quod initio proposuerat, fovendam esse unitatem hujus
corporis mystici per vinculum pacis: Ratio, quia ita se habet hoc corpus, ut
nisi quis per fidem vivam amorisque plenam cum Christo conjunctus, and per
fraternam caritatem cum fratribus totaque ecclesia congruenter coagmentatus
permaneat, is non possit a Christo vel vitam vel alimentum and incrementum
accipere. (...), etc. Chrysostom. Masculus thus, Dilectio conglutinat membra
Christi; and a little before Nihil igitur hic loci est separatis ac divulsis,
quales quales tandem esse videantur. With these agree Beza. Charity is the
knitting of the limbs together. Faith and Love use to be joined together; if
the Apostle does express it as the bond, surely we may call it so; and thus we
have the body united to the head, and each member one to another.

To the preservation of this union [saith the Doctor] it is required that all
those grand and necessary truths of the Gospel, without the knowledge where of
no man can be saved by Jesus Christ, be so far believed, as to be outwardly and
visibly professed, in that variety of ways wherein they are, or may be called
out thereunto, p. 134. To which I add; and unto the preservation of that bond
of union among the members, it is required that all such Acts which do
externally declare this bond of love whereby these members are joined together,
as such a body, ought carefully and Christianly to be performed, when we are
regularly called thereunto; this bond of Love so much commanded and prayed for
by our Head, being not confined to a particular Church, but extended to the
whole Catholic Church his body, by which men show whose Disciples they are.

Hence then as all such errors which subvert those grand and necessary Truths,
being received and believed, do dissolve the bond of union between the head and
the members, and declare men to be Apostates; So all such Acts as do openly
manifest the causeless breach of Love, by which the members are united each to
other, do declare such persons guilty of Schism. Apostasy [as I conceive]
properly respecting the Head, but Schism the Body. Now in reference to this I
lay down these Conclusions.

1. The members of this great Body in attending upon those ordinances of
worship instituted by their Head, especially the two Sacraments, do declare
that faith in their Head which they profess. Open Baptism, we find nothing
there but Christ; open the Lords Supper, we have nothing there but Christ our
Head, and the grand and necessary Truths which concern our salvation: As the
Martyrs sealed up their Confessions by their blood, we do, as it were, seal up
our Profession in partaking of our Lords blood.

2. The members of the Church in partaking of the Sacraments do professedly
declare that Union which they have among themselves by love, as such a body. It
is one reason why the Lords Supper is called a Communion, and it is one of the
ends of the Sacrament, Vnio fidelium inter se, as Divines do unanimously
acknowledge upon that, 1 Cor. 10.17. Fractio panis est unitatis and dilectionis
Symbolum, says Pareus. Much might be here spoken. I know there are other ways
by which Christians manifest their love, and so did Heathens in such manner as
now is scarcely found amongst Christians; but for the manifestation of their
love to each other as such a body, there is no way that I know of, nor no
ordinance in which they do so declare it as in this ordinance, wherein they,
though many, are one bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.

3. The Sacraments were not given to a particular Church primarily, but to his
Catholick-Body the Lord gave them; and so are the external pledges of the bond
of union between the members of this great body. That the Sacraments come to be
administered in several particular societies, I gave the reason before, seeming
rather to be accidental to the Catholic Church, by reason of the numerosity of
its members. That body which the bread signifies in the Supper is but one body,
and the members of the Catholic body make but one bread. Jesus Christ with his
body make one Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. The Sacraments do show our union with our
Head Christ primarily, and the union of the members amongst themselves. I know
a person who had received wrong from another who lived 40. miles distant: this
wrong caused a division between this person and the other, upon which this
person durst not venture to the Supper, but kept off till reconciliation was
made, knowing what the Supper did call for, then came to me and joined in the
ordinance; I knew not the reason of this person's holding off so long before.
If the Sacraments were pledges only of that Love or Communion which is between
the members of a particular Church, what needed the conscience of this person
to have been troubled, since the other person had no relation to our Church.
This was one bred up in the Episcopal way, but it were well if others made so
much conscience as this person did in this respect.

4. Hence then that Church which shall deny to the members of other Churches
[qualified as the Doctor requires Catholic members to be, and walking orderly
in their particular Churches] occasionally desiring communion with the Church,
fellowship with them in the Sacraments, because they are not of their judgments
as to Congregational, Classical, or Episcopal principles, and will hold
fellowship only with those who are of their principles, I charge that Church
with Schism in respect of the Catholic Church, by this Act declaring a breach
of that bond of union which Christ requires in his Church.

Object. But we may love them, and show our love in other ways, though we do
not this way.

Answ. So do the Heathen show love to Heathen, and so do we to Heathen,
though we will not admit them to communion in a Church-ordinance; but that
Symbol of your love to him or them as Christians, as members of such a body
having union with your Head, and union with you also who are of the same body
making up one Christ, 1 Cor. 12. you deny. And whereas one while you dare not
deny them to be visible members of Christ, being qualified according to the
rules for Catholic members, and having all the Ordinances and Officers of
Christ according to their light in their particular Churches; yet now as much
as in you lies you declare them to have no union with the Head, nor to be parts
of the Catholic Body, neither the members refused, nor consequently the
Churches to which they belong being of the same judgment. So that while you
talk of Love, I say as the Apostle, Show me thy faith by thy works; so show me
your Ecclesiastical love by Church Fellowship. To this opinion of mine Doctor
Ames in the place before quoted agrees fully. Haec scissio maxim perficitur
and apparet in debita communione Ecclesiastica recusanda, etc.

Thus I conceive Congregational, Classical, or Episcopal Churches may be guilty
of Schism, and cause Schism in the Catholick-Church-Visible.

As for that Doctrine, That an Officer of a particular Church must administer
an Ordinance to none but his own members. This is confuted in the practice of
all Churches that I know of, and I suppose will not be defended.

To this I add: Suppose there be diverse members of several particular Churches,
who are very zealous for Prophesying, and they must have their liberty to
prophecy, whether they have abilities or not; the Churches conceive that the
gift of Prophesying, being extraordinary, is ceased, therefore will allow no
such liberty. These are so set for their Prophesying, that they make Divisions
in the Churches, and at last separate from them all, and make up one Church by
themselves; they are qualified as the Doctor requires Catholic members; they
have all the ordinances and officers of Christ among them; whence I cannot deny
but here is a Church, but yet they refuse communion with all other Churches in
the world, unless of their opinion, neither give nor take, though desired; and
there are no other Churches in the world of their opinion or practice. Now this
Church I cannot charge with Apostasy from the Head, but with separation from
the Catholic Church, and so is guilty of Schism. If it be said this Church is
a part of the Catholic Church, how then separate from it? It Is true, else it
were not Schism, but Apostasy; but as it separates from all other Churches
causelessly, in that sense I speak.

Hitherto of the Doctors Definition. As for his Design to free All the
Congregational Churches from the imputation of Schism, though we suppose Schism
to be a causeless separation from a Church, I had rather wave that then go
about to prove the contrary, and that partly because of the honor which I bear
to many of these brethren; partly because I know not the practices of all
Congregational Churches: I cannot be of Mr. Ca. mind, if by the title of his
book [as I find it quoted by the Doctor, for I never saw Mr. Cawdrey]
Independencie is great Schism, he means that congregational principles will
necessarily conclude a man a Schismatic. Certainly from the principles as our
Divines in New England hold them forth, such a necessity of Schism will not be
forced; but whether all in England can quit themselves I doubt it. What some
may think of me who find me in Mr. Edwards gang amongst the Independents, and
now read this, I know not. Possibly they will say either Mr. Edwards wrote what
was false, or that I am changed from my principles [as some have said] but I
assure the Reader, I am not gone back, nor advanced one step in these
controversies, from what I ever manifested in those times when those letters
were sent to Mr. Edwards.

I intend not to follow the Dr. in all that he has written, but to come to the
point presently. In p. 263. the Dr. tells us He dare boldly say, the holy Ghost
has commanded a Schism from a congregation that is not reformed, will not, nor
cannot reform it self. with p. 262. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Timothy 3.5. Hos. 4.12. If the
Dr. apply these Texts to our separations which some congregational Churches
make, I question whether they will carry the thing he produces them for. But to
be short: I will not say the Holy Ghost commands Schism, but Separation in some
cases he does; therein I agree with the Doctor, and accordingly practice
[different from my brethren] but it is only within my own congregation,
denying to admit those who are, as Mr. Vines calls the generality of the people
in this Land, Bruits for their knowledge, and beasts for their lives, and so
will be unto the seals of the covenant of grace. Sacram. p. 152.
So I have made a separation in the congregation, but not from the
congregation. Had I read that the Apostles had stood upon the reality of grace
in their admission into Church Fellowship, I would have been as strict as some
brethren say they are; but because I find it not in their practice, I look on
it as men's adding to the Word, and so let it alone.

But our question is not whether any Separation, but whether such a Separation
be commanded as thus. Here is a Church where are many corrupt members, that is
true; but withal here are 1. many real and visible Saints. 2. A Pastor godly,
sound in doctrine, and able for his work, preaching Christ soundly. 3. The
Ordinances in themselves clear from humane mixtures. 4. Though here are corrupt
members, yet when the Lords Supper is celebrated, they are separated, not
admitted, but there is a pure lump. 5. The Church is not puffed up, but rather
grieved that there are so many corrupt members amongst them, but according to
their light, they being so many, know not how to cast them out, left there by
other men's sins, but bear this evil with complaint and prayer to God for
healing.

Yet notwithstanding a few of these Visible Saints, the minor part be sure [we
observe] shall make separation, not only from the corrupt members, but from
the major part of the godly and visible Saints, from that godly Pastor, having
no communion with these, no not in the Supper where they are a pure lump; and
yet this minor part have not done their part to reform these corrupt members.
If the Holy Ghost has commanded such a Separation, I pray Doctor quote the
texts where we may find it. I fear he will hardly find three texts for such a
Separation; yet I know where such Separations are, and of these men complain.
If he cannot produce Scriptures, he has said nothing to many of our
Separations.

The Dr. I perceive speaks much of original Institution and primitive
Constitution of Churches; but I shall desire him to show us the Scriptures
where the Apostles did use to go to several Congregations where indeed were
diverse corrupt members, but withal many godly, at least visible Saints, who had
walked before with their godly Pastors in constant attendance upon and
subjection to the Ordinances of Christ; and there the Apostles did pick out
some of the best of the members, and leaving the Pastor and others grieved,
weakened, and thus did constitute Churches: I cannot remember any Scripture
which shows this was their practice, whence I doubt this kind of constitution
is not so old, but rather had its original since 1640. As for Parochial
Precincis, I shall speak to them hereafter.

Object. But why then do not these godly Pastors and visible Saints you speak
of, separate the profane and grossly ignorant from their Congregations, but
sinfully retain them, or at least suffer them to abide with them? If they did
so, they should not be troubled with godly men's separating from them; they
sweep not the Lords house.

Answ. Whether godly men would not separate then I cannot tell: If the Apostles
rules of admission were sufficient to guide us, there might be more hopes they
would not. But when men set up rules themselves, and all men must come to their
rules and ways, they would be as apt to separate from those whom the Apostles
would admit, I think they would be almost as eager for separation as now.

Whether those Pastors and Saints visible do sinfully suffer such in their
Churches, and so are blameworthy, I dispute not; but as to the present state
of these Churches left such by the negligence and sin of those who usurped the
power over them, whence some will scarce own them for Churches, and others
plead so much for separation from them, something may be fairly offered, which
may plead for them. True it is, men of great grace, great gifts, great purses,
great courage, great favor with great men, having the chiefest persons in a
Town on their sides [which last was my advantage in this small village] may do
more toward the reformation of their particular congregations, then other men
can do who are not so advantaged. Magisterial and Cursed Divines, who being
aloft every way, consider not the tentations of men below them, are not such
honorable men with me as some others are. Those men who have lien in pickle in
the brine of varieties of tentations twenty years, have known by experience the
evils of debts, poverty joined to great family-charges, low gifts, desperate
workings of spiritual and fleshly corruptions, sense of guilt; these are the
men who shall write practical books for me; these, I doubt not, will write low,
and speak low; these will feel their brethrens temptations. But to the point.

1. These men do separate at the Lords Supper, and there allow them no
communion. This is attained with much difficulty in our days; we know they
contend much for it.

2. The most they do is, they admit their children to Baptism, which
considered in themselves are not profane; and were Baptism administered by that
latitude which the Apostles did administer it, I doubt not but many may be
admitted to it.

Now in that this is all the privilege they have, more then these men who
separate will allow them, the question is, whether there be nothing
considerable to sway men to this practice.

1. It is a question disputable, whether the immediate Parents only can give
title; whether the Grandfather, or Grandmother, being in covenant, may not help
to give title to a grandchild. Upon this account diverse administer Baptism.

2. There is a question, whether if others under the covenant will undertake
the education of such children, may they not be baptized? [as our Mr. Norton
conceives they may.]

3. There are eminent Divines who maintain, that though the Parents be
excommunicated, yet the child of such ought to be baptized, Zanch. Perkins, and
diverse whom I could name. Now if this be true, then though all these were
excommunicated, which is the most those who separate can desire, yet their
children should be baptized, which is all the privilege these men have though
not excommunicated, and which those who separate can stumble at. For the rest
of the Ordinances we admit Indians to, I hope they will not deny them admission
to those.

I omit that great question, whether Baptism be not a Regenerating Ordinance,
which diverse Learned men abroad and at home do maintain, and have Scriptures
which speak very fairly for them, so much, as I can scarcely be satisfied with
the answers our Divines have given to those texts they bring.

Now though I have not so much light to carry me in any of these opinions, and
convince me fully of their truth; yet I see so much argument for them, that I
am very tender toward those who go upon these grounds, whatever arguments I
have against them which carry me another way; and were I a private member of
one of those Churches where there were so many those visible Saints, an able
godly Pastor, and the Supper kept as I said, I should not dare to separate from
it as others do.

I might add to this how some Ministers, though they do baptize, yet they
deal roundly first with the Parents, and so as some will come no more at them
for Baptism. And one, an Episcopal Divine of eminent note, has refused to
administer Baptism to the children of such parents as he found sottishly
ignorant, but sent them back first to learn the principles of Religion, and
assent to them.

So that had these who separate stuck close to their Ministers, and encouraged
them in thus dealing with those scandalous persons in private, they might have
done more toward reformation then now they have done.

3. There were diverse corrupt members in Corinth, and their children baptized;
for ought I know a fault might be in the Officers, and better part, but no
command to separate from the Officers.

4. Should all the godly Ministers in England separate, as these men would have
us, and go by their rules in admission of Church Members, I question whether
there would be a godly Minister left in England, the common people would not
bear it. And verily for godly Ministers to suffer death in things so
disputable, wherein holy men and Martyrs before did walk without any scruple,
having so much probability from Scripture [as that argument of Circumcision,
with the rest before mentioned] but yet more, to suffer for rules which
themselves made, and not the Apostles, this is a hard chapter; those who are so
free of their lives may take their course. I will bless the Lord if he shall
please to assist me with grace to lay down my life for him [if he shall call me
to it] in things where I am confident I know his mind, and the Scriptures are
so clear that I need not doubt, and in the mean time thank God I meet with such
as will bear with me in things wherein I differ from them of less concernment,
arguments casting me on that side, but not without great scruples on the other
side. I hear great words from some of these, they will not practice any thing
but what they are ready to lay down their lives for. I dare not speak such
great words.

5. These men who thus separate, when as yet there is nothing but the baptizing
of their Infants they can object against, yet allow in their Churches, and
think we are bound to allow such who deny all Infant Baptism, and will call the
Anabaptistical Churches true Churches. These who cast off all the
Infant-posterity of Abraham from Church Membership: these men must be admitted
to the Supper, and what not: the others are debarred from the Supper, but their
Infants baptized, which of these two is the worst I wonder? for my part I would
rather baptize the child of a wicked man, professing Christ in words, then not
baptize the child of a godly man; more reason and Scripture may be alleged for
it. Whence me thinks the Doctor, being such a strong Champion for Toleration,
may allow unto the Presbyterial Brethren some benefit of his opinion: for
Toleration is Malorum, and if this be evil, I presume he looks on the
Anabaptistical opinion as evil also; and if this must be tolerated in Churches,
and does not weaken the purity of the Church, why the other should not have
some allowance I know not.

I know no understanding man that is against Toleration simply, he that will
allow none is not fit to live in these times; but how far we are bound to
Tolerate, is a hard question.

To conclude, Respon. ad Apol. 168.
I shall only see what our Mr. Norton, a man who in some cases allows
separation from a true Church, and one that in the Congregational way is
Theologus cum primis nobilis, to that question how is secession to be made from
a true Church? answers thus.

1. Not without due use of all means to remove the impurities. I am sure
amongst those means this is one, for these to bear witness against the
scandalous members, and labor in their places to get them removed regularly;
those then who never deal with any of these in a Church Way, who will not bear
witness against them to the Eldership, but when their Pastor have asked them,
Will you prove against these. etc. answer, No, not they. These use means well,
yet such separate.

Also how some of the Congregational Ministers, who have had their hands in
these separations, have used all means, when as they never went to the
Ministers; when they encouraged the people in their separation to speak with
them, I know not. I have heard two Ministers of note complain of this unkind
dealing.

2. Not presently, but they must use prudence, patience, and long-suffering.
Those Ministers and Churches who have found these in those who separated from
them, may testify for them if they can.

3. Without condemning of the Ch^^ch, but acknowledging it from whence this
secession is made. It were well if we could get so much from many of these, to
acknowledge any to be true Churches but such as are in their gathered [as they
call it] way.

4. Communion still continued with such a Church in things lawful. [Separation
from the Lutheran Yet Calovius in his answer to Jo. Crocius, tells us we differ
from them in ten Articles, and above thirty Controversies. p. 33.
Churches he will not allow, though we ought not to communicate with them in
the Supper.]

But our men, 1. will not communicate with the Church from which they have
separated at the Lords Supper where the doctrine is sound, and the persons
admitted as pure as any Congregational Church that I know of.

2. No, nor will some of them so much as hear the officer from whom they have
separated, though sound and godly, but rather set up a Tradesman to prophecy
in the absence of their own Minister, and before they had a Minister, exercise
their gifts amongst themselves, rather then hear their former Minister.

Certainly if some Congregational Churches in England be not guilty of Schism,
there was never any Schism in this world.

Thus I have given my reasons why I am not satisfied with all which the Doctor
has delivered concerning Schism, though with a great part of it I am
abundantly; men of more learning then I am may give more, only this I I may and
do add: it is a trouble to me that I have cause in any point to appear cross to
the Doctor, with whom I have had so much inward familiarity, whom I have so
entirely loved and honored, and do still both honor and love.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Parochial Congregations in England.
I took it for granted that our Congregational brethren did look on the
Parochial Congregations where they came, and have gathered Churches as true
Churches before they came there, and so did not lay new foundations, or gather
Churches where there were none before, only the Congregations being overgrown
with persons grossly ignorant and scandalous for want of Catechizing and
Discipline, they did segregate such persons from Church Communion, till they
got so much as might declare them to be visible Saints. But one of these
Ministers tell me I am mistaken: if I be, then I understand not our brethren
all this while, nor do I know when I shall: for my part I have ever professed,
I looked on the Parochial Congregations as a true Church before I came to it,
though overgrown [as before I said:] Those who were here and elected me to be
their officer, I look on my self as having sufficient authority over them by
their election; those who have come into Town since, I do require their owning
of me for their officer [knowing that government here is founded upon consent]
and subjection to all ordinances, if they demand the ordinances of me; so far I
go along with our brethren. That many Parochial Congregations are true
Churches, I doubt not, though the Presbyterial brethren have not proceeded so
far as others have done, and therefore the Congregational Brethren may safely
have communion with them. Some things let me premise, and then I will give one
argument or two.

1. The want of some ordinances in a Church destroys not the truth of the
Church. Then there can be no homogeneal Church; our brethren I hope will not
allow the Fraternity being destitute of officers to baptize, etc. but yet a
homogeneal Church they maintain; much might be spoken here, but I forbear.
Ecclesiastical Discipline which some allege, as being wanting in these
Parochial Churches, do not therefore deny them to be true Churches, [which yet
in part they had, for suspension it is well known.] The Rod is not of the
essence of the family, though the children may do ill where it is wanting.
Feast of Tabernacles, Neh. 8.17. was long wanting.

2. An officer usurping power in a Church, does not destroy the truth of the
Church. Diotrephes took more then was due. The Bishops were but Ministers, and
did ministerial work, if they took more power then the Lord gave them, yet that
does not hinder the truth of the Churches. What shall be said then to the
Bishops in the primitve Churches; I wish I had as much zeal and love to Christ
as they had.

3. Though many members be corrupt in doctrine and manners, yet they do not
take away the truth of a Church. Corinth had too many of these, and the
officers might be faulty in tolerating of them, but yet a true Church; and I
hardly think that Paul would have refused communion with the Church. I doubt
not but other Churches also had bad members. The Churches which lived under
Heathenish persecution were true Churches; yet there are foul scandalous sins
reported of some of the members.

4. Reality of grace, though desirable, O very desirable, yet is not
absolutely requisite to the making of a visible Church; though I think it is
hard to find such a Church, yet I know not but according to the rules we must
go by in admitting of Church Members, there may be a true visible Church where
there is not one real true Saint. Dare any Congregational Minister avouch the
true grace of all the members of his Church? will any Church excommunicate a
person for want of true grace? Did the Apostles when they admitted members
search narrowly for the truth of grace?

5. I had almost said, It is as great a fault to keep out visible repenting
believers willing to subject to all ordinances, as it is to tolerate wicked
persons in a Church. If the Presbyterial brethren are guilty of the latter, the
Congregational are guilty of the former. I think it as great a faultto sin
against the lenity of Christ, as against the severity of Christ. It is true,
these wicked ones are a dishonor to Christ, leaven to the lump, [but yet
suspended from the Lord's Supper] and they have not that means applied which
might help to their souls salvation; but it is that which these Ministers would
gladly reach if they could, they allege the words of the Apostle, their
authority is for edification, not destruction. On the other side, to keep out
those who visibly appear like Christians, when men have power to take in, is to
hinder these from being levened with true grace, a great offense to the godly,
discouragement of souls, and Magisterially to set up Rules which the Lord never
appointed. Who blame Bishops for setting up their posts by God's posts? I know
the word visible Believer is a contentious word, but I understand one plainly
thus; Here is one that has a competent knowledge of those grounds which are
essential to salvation, and believes them. His estate by nature he
understands, and professes he believes in the Lord Jesus for life and
salvation; his conversation does not confute his profession; worships God in
his family, and subjects to all Christ's Ordinances; [for the private
conferences of Christians and private fastings, which sometimes they have,
though this were desirable to have them frequent them, yet these [in such a
manner] being free will offerings, I dare not tie up men to these, or else
debar them] if he has been scandalous, he declares his repentance, cordially
so far as charity can judge, and proves it by some time, would the Apostles
have debarred such a person from the Church? but [I speak what I know] persons
who go thus far, and further, cannot yet be admitted to Church Fellowship.

Some would have us go to Rev. 21.15. and Rev. 11.2. to see the rules for
Churches. What they have drawn from hence I know not; I have bestowed so much
pains in reading of men upon the Revelation, and find so little content in all
that I read [great Hooker of N.E. would say, he would never forfeit his credit
in undertaking those Scriptures where he could not make Demonstration] that now
I regard nothing which is said upon it. One Text which I observed as I was
reading through it in my course, gave me more settlement then all I had read.
But alas good men, do they carry us to their Symbolical Divinity to prove what
they would have? this will not prevail with judicious men. I think the
Apostolical practices must be our Reed to measure by; if you have precepts
given where the qualification of persons admitable to Church Fellowship are set
down higher then I have set them down, I would be thankful if any one would
show me them. As for Rev. 21. I confess there is a golden Text, but I think
they draw a leaden argument from it to our Church Fellowship. The fifth Monarchy
dreams have not as yet infatuated us; that time is not yet come.

6. Parochial bounding of Churches does not detract from the truth of Churches;
it does not hinder the purity, much less the entity of a Church.

Vicinity of members is requisite for mutual inspection, convenient meeting for
celebration of ordinances, but it adds nothing to the essence of a Church;
particular Churches must be bounded somewhere.

When the Law enjoined men to keep their own parish Churches, it was but to
prevent disorder, that people should be bound to attend ordinarily at that
place, and not run up and down where they listed. If the Minister were godly
the Law helped him, and it is likely that this has turned as well to the good
of that people, which else would not have so attended upon that Ministry which
was powerful and searching; if the Minister were ungodly, it was but the
denying of some outward accommodation in that parish, and so remove to a godly
Minister. By virtue of the Law then every one did implicitly choose that
Minister to be his where he came, which as I said, was as well for the good as
the hurt of people; if men had no mind to the Minister, they might choose
whither they would go into that Parish or not: those who were godly in the
Parish, and had a good Minister, they were not offended at the Law: whence this
Parochial bounding should be looked upon as such an Antichristian business I
cannot imagine.

The chiefest inconveniency is by reason of the building of the place for
Assembling in diverse places upon the skirts of Towns; yet in N. E. persons who
live at farms three miles or more from the place of their Assembling in their
own parish, go constantly to that place, when as they might join to another
Church much nearer in another Town.

But let us see what we shall do when Parish bounds are broken down: Vicinity
is requisite, this is agreed upon by all, how then shall we agree upon
Vicinity? what will this Church call Vicinity? I doubt if there be a rich
person who would join, and the Officer with members have a mind to him, they
will stretch vicinity very largely to fetch him in. Some of our brethren oppose
Parochial boundings, because they are so great, I doubt our brethren will not
bring their Vicinity into a narrower compass; nay, we see how far they go for
members: should we go about to alter Parishes, I think few would be pleased in
the manner of doing it, nor will agree upon Vicinity: wherefore I think we had
better bear with some inconveniences, then while we seek to mend them create
worse.

7. In reducing of Churches to purity the Minister cannot do it alone; he must
know the members impurity, it must be proved to him by witnesses; let Churches
be gathered, or whatever you call them, this must be done before persons can be
excommunicated. But how do these members who find fault with Ministers do this?
One who came to his Minister and was very urgent to have him thus seclude
wicked persons from the Sacraments, when the Minister asked him whether he
would come and bear witness against them, answered, so he might leave himself
not worth a groat; but yet could separate from his Minister: is this right?
These things premised, now to an Argument.

Arg. 1. Where there are the essential causes of a Church [matter and form]
there is a true Church.

But in many Parochial Congregations of England, there are the essential causes
of a Church.

Ergo many Parochial congregations in England are true Churches.

The Major deny who can. Positis causis essentialibus ponitur effectus. For the
Minor, I prove that thus.

Where there are persons sound in the faith, and visibly conformable to the
rules of the Gospel in their practice, there is the matter of a Church.

Where these persons do consent together to worship God in all his ordinances
[Mr. Buroughs says, all the ordinances so far as they know] with Officers
duly qualified, and for substance orderly called, there is the form of a
Church.

But thus it is in many Parochial congregations in England.

For the matter I suppose we will not deny it, there are such for visible
appearance as true as those that are in congregational Churches. If it be
asked, How many Parishes are there that have such persons, sufficient in number
to make a Church? That is none of my question to answer; but this I can say
according to our brethrens practice, who make eight [or fewer] to be sufficient
to the first founding of a Church; there will be diverse Parishes found to have
that number without question.

For the form, I have put in enough; the covenanting or consenting, our
brethren make the form: But I have put in the Officer, and so make it an
Organical Church.

For the Officer, if the quarrel be with his qualification, I think none dare
deny but for personal graces, and Ministerial abilities, there are abundance
such Ministers in several Parishes.

For their call, elected by the people, and ordained by a Presbytery very
solemnly. If the Episcopal ordination be questioned, I have answered to it
before [as also in my Book against the Separation] however I think there is as
much cause to question their ordination who are ordained by the people when
Elders were present, or with others, only praying after election, as there is
to question Ordination by a Bishop and his Clergy. But what do our brethren
cavilling against that, when they have Election, which is the essence of the
call, as themselves affirm? I think God has witnessed for them that they were
true Ministers, in going forth with them, and giving such success to their
Ministry, as I think our congregational brethren have not found since they came
to question and cast off Episcopal Ordination [if any do so.] I doubt if the
congregational Ministers had no more members of their Churches then they have
converted since they have so much cried down Parishes and Episcopal Ordination,
they would have very thin Churches. I do not think the Lord did it therefore,
because of their Episcopal Ordination; yet I think the Lords appearing so much
in those days over now he does in converting-work, should teach us much
tenderness in these days, and not to walk so highly as some do.

If the objection be about the consenting, the election of the people declare
it explicitly, and their constant attendance upon such a Minister in all the
ordinances of God, declares their consent implicitly. No Congregational Divine
makes the form of a Church to consist in the expliciteness of a covenant, but
affirm that an implicit covenant preserves the true nature of the Church. So
Mr. Hooker Sur. Chapter Dis. part. 1. page 47, 48. So Mr. Norton Resp. ad Apol. p.
22, 28. So the Synod of New England, Cap. 4. S. 4.

Arg. 2. If there be as much for substance in many Parochial congregations as
there was in Corinth, to make it a true Church, then many Parochial
congregations are true Churches.

But the Antecedent is true; Ergo the Consequent is true.

The Consequence is clear; for the Church of Corinth was a true Church I hope.
For the Antecedent, 1. It Is true, we have not many preaching officers in one
Parish, as had that Church [which I conceive did not all meet in the same place
for Church-worship, but in diverse.] 2. Nor have we extraordinary Prophets, as
were in that Church [though our brethren strangely make those a proof for their
private members Prophesying [as they call it] yea and are so highly carried in
their notions, that if their Pastor be absent, though there be another Minister
preach in the Town, they will not go to hear him, but a Tradesman must
Prophecy [what this implies who sees not] if a Pastor be dead, and the people
go to another congregation, the Pastor whereof is of their own principles,
these have been charged by one of our Essex Independent Ministers with
irregular walking, for not staying at home and Prophesying [a sin certainly
against the eleventh commandment.] 3. Nor have we other extraordinary gifts,
as that Church had. 4. Nor have we men ordained by the Apostles. 5. Nor called
by the Apostles; for if these things do weaken my argument, then they do as
well cut off the congregational Churches to be true Churches.

But if the Church of Corinth had persons called by the Word, some whereof were
real Saints, and some only visible; so have we. If they had persons Officers,
who held out the faith of the Gospel in their teaching soundly; so have we, as
sound as they did or could do, if not sounder, such as build not hay nor
stubble, etc. If they had the Ordinances of Christ; so have we. If they
consented to worship God, etc. so do ours. These are the Essentials of that
Church. The Essence is perpetually the same, but Vnaquaeque res vera dicitur a
sua natura and essentia. If we have corrupt and erroneous members, so had they:
Ours debarred, suspended from the Lords Table [a great part of
Church-discipline] but that their corrupt members were so, I think will not
easily be proved; a great fault in the Officers, who it seems did not regard
discipline scarce at all, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. and 13.2. Paul threatens, that he
will not spare. Our Churches come to this by the oppression of the Hierarchy,
the Ministers else would have exercised Discipline; but those had none to
overtop them, and yet were negligent. How to get their Churches purer the
Ministry find it hard; to excommunicate a multitude our congregational brethren
say, no; to separate from the rest our classical brethren are not clear, they
quote the Text, 2 Cor. 10.8. Their authority is given for edification, not
destruction. They must do what they can by degrees, which they are resolved
upon, and deserve to be encouraged by all.

More Arguments I could give [ as from the nullity of all the Ordinances which
else must follow. Also, I wonder whether our congregational Ministers were
converted in Parochial, or congregational Churches.] But I forbear.

Hence then that congregational brethren may associate with the classical, to
me there is no question, though my practice is something different from the
classical brethren; yet what they allow is so candid, that I am rather thankful
to them that they are so willing to associate with me.

That we way hold communion with a Church so far as we are entangled in no sin,
I think was never denied; but so may we with the classical brethren: For what
though they baptize all, and all of them do not [though some do, and more
endeavor it] bring their people to an explicit engagement; yet they desire us
not to have communion with all their members, but with their complete members,
i. e. those whom they admit to all Ordinances; and I am sure those, according
to the rules drawn up, would have gone for good Church Members in the Apostles
days, and, I think, should now; so that we are called to associate only with
those who are as good members as our own.

As for their Baptizing of the Infants of such whom they debar from the Lords
table; though their arguments do not convince men [no not good Mr. Blake, that
man who now I hear is with God; if he had, I would have poofessed it to the
world. I do more admire to see what answers so learned a man gives; but that I
have professed in my Epistle to the Reader that I would meddle no more with the
question, I find it very easy to take off [at least in my apprehension] what
he has said, had but he cast the major proposition in p. 97. thus [which he
knew was my Scope.] Such as for manifest unworthiness de jure ought, and de
facto are debarred from the Lords Table, etc. To this I have spoken before.
Then see how his answer from Infants takes me off; but I shall add no more.
Now though he has not satisfied me] yet I look on the Arguments as more valid
to prove the Infants of those scandalous persons should be baptized, then are
their arguments who cast out the Infants of repenting and believing parents
from Baptism and the Church; yet these our congregational brethren make no
scruple to communicate with, and to have such members in their Churches.

Are all the members of congregational Churches such as they ought to be
visibly? I doubt it. Some are as offensive as many in Parochial Churches.
Should we therefore refuse communion one with another because of such? Would
Paul have done it at Corinth?

As for taking members out of other Parishes, which our brethren stand upon so
stiffely, and without which there will be no Association, this has been the
old breaking principle, and resolved it seems they are to hold it.

In what cases, and upon what conditions it shall be allowed, our classical
brethren have declared, and I think sufficiently to give a heart that loves
peace, satisfaction. For my own part I care not if the thing be yielded; I
think I might make as good a shift as another, and have had tentations strong
this way: but I did never yet take up such a practice, not out of any
conscience to the Parish bounds, but because I have to be that unworthy
principle which has chiefly kindled the fire in this poor Church. Should I
have done it, because I looked on my way more pure then my neighbour-Ministers?
I knew the impurity of my own heart, and looked on my Neighbour-Minister as
more godly; if I should think more highly of my own parts, I knew my own
weakness, and might justly fear lest God should blast the little I had. But

1. I hope our brethren do not think it a sin for a Minister to keep to his
own Parish, if they do, let us hear them prove it. I have heard it reported by
a very serious Christian, that one of our brethren should affirm that
Christians were bound to come out of their Parochial ways, and to join in
Church Fellowship after the congregating manner, else they did partake of the
mark of the Beast. I write it as well as I can remember it, but because I heard
it not with my own ears, first I do not so fully believe the truth of it; yet
there are good reasons why I should believe it: I had something to say, but at
present let it alone.

2. I am sure Paul said, All things are lawful to me, but all things are not
expedient, 1 Cor. 6.12. Is not this a rule for us? grant the thing to be
lawful, that is, it might be done without any breach of Gods Law [though not
commanded to do it] yet I am sure it is not expedient for us to do it,
because we see it is that which has broken and does break the peace of our
Churches; but the peace of Churches ought to be very precious to us. If we be
commanded to follow peace with all men, then I hope to follow after, and
endeavor the peace of the Churches, is a duty of great weight.

But this is looked upon as the Ministers weakness, that this should break
peace.

1. Be it so that it is their weakness, then let others show their strength in
bearing with their weakness, since they have no command to take people from
other good Ministers. Those who are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak.

2. But I doubt there is strong reason for this weakness. For 1. This grieves
the heart of a godly brother, to have those in whom lies his chiefest comfort
taken from him; if you take away my comfort, there is reason why I should be
grieved: would you not have a godly person to be a comfort to the Minister?

2. It weakens the hands of that good Minister in endeavors to reform. Who
will stand by him if the godly be gone from him? Those commonly who are taken
out of other Parishes are not of the poorest sort.

3. When a place has wanted a Minister, it has been a cause of such
discouragement to godly Ministers, that a godly man will not readily come into
such a Parish, because the congregational men have taken out the good people,
or some of them, it may be the chief out of the Parish, and so the Parish lie
destitute of a Minister a long time, and at last must get such as they can; and
thus the souls of others are endangered. As for their returning of such to that
Minister in case he will come, we know their judgment by their practices. When
Parishes have had good Ministers, this has helped to remove them. That
practice then which so discourageth good Ministers, as it causes their
removal, and hinders others from coming into place, I do not look at this as a
light matter, but a practice intolerable in the Churches. Though this be not so
bad as is the practice of some by me, yet in effect it comes to the same. Two
small Parishes lying so as they may easily join, and would; but those in them
who had a show of Religion turned to the Separation, whence no godly Minister
cares for coming among them, but there the people lie year after year, no
Minister to regard them, no Ordinances: who knows what God might have done for
the souls of some of them, had the professing party held close, and encouraged
a godly Minister to come amongst them, whereas now for diverse years they have
had none, nor are like to have. This practice of our brethren comes to the same
in conclusion, if they thus take away the good people out of other Parishes.

4. What weakness soever this is in them, I doubt our strong men would not
take it well, to have another come and take away their people from them.
Something I heard hisce auribus what one said when a Minister would have come
into another Parish by, and took away some of his people. Those who are eminent
in parts, and have their people sure to them, may say Let them go; but what
they would do if the thing should be practiced, I know not: But however it is
good to weigh things in the scales of reason; and if so, I think it a just
matter of grief, and so of offense to good Ministers, against their free
consent to take away any of their people. So much for weakness.

3. The congregational brethren being less in number by ten, if not twenty
parts, compared with the number of other Ministers, and those godly, one would
think it should be a mercy sufficient that they live in such a Nation as this
quietly; having the freedom of their consciences, let them reform what they
can in their own places. The Magistrate does countenance the Ministers, though
of different judgments, and so numerous, yet willing to associate, and show
brotherly communion. For my part, I look on it as a great mercy [had I a heart
to answer it] though I do not go and fleet the cream of my neighbors
congregations because they are not of my judgment.

This is spoken in reference to our Associating, which if it were but yielded,
there were hopes of closure: Nor do I see any reason why our brethren should so
much stand upon it; for I think their gathering of one Church out of diverse
true Churches is almost at an end; for those who have a mind to separate,
affect no Churches rather then Congregational Churches.

As for such to whom the brethren have offered the Agreement for peace, and
they refuse to associate with their brethren without any Scriptural reason
given why they so refuse [a great care having been taken of crossing of men's
principles which were not plainly against Scripture, and might stand with peace
and sobriety] but rather affect to stand alone: if any in their Parishes shall
desire to join with any of the Associated Churches, I know no reason why our
hands should be so bound up that we should not receive them; but others must
take from us, especially if they be such who have a right to the Lords Supper,
but did not, nor will communicate with such a congregation, because they
require that of them which the Word does not, before they will admit them. This
I conceive were great bondage, that a Minister with three or four men shall set
up a way of admission to the Lords Supper, which all must come to; the thing it
self may be good, but not required to a Church State, nor the receiving of the
Supper; and that all must stoop to this, or have no Supper there; and because
of Parochial bounds they must have it no where else. Men may be of different
judgments from mine, but that shall never hinder communion, if they be
otherwise qualified, and yield but to what is necessary to a Church State, in
which men, though of different persuasions other ways, yet all agree, be they
Episcopal, Classical, or Congregational, unless some of these last make an
explicit covenant the form of the Church, which I see some of our brethren do
here in England: Else what means that passage of a brother, But it will by us
be expected [satis pro imperio] that you leave the brethren and godly (yet
ungathered) free who have voluntarily come under no engagement explicitly with
your Parish ways since the fall of Prelacie. I could quote another who carries
it more closely. Then it seems all those Christians who before this walked with
their godly Pastors in constant attendance upon, and subjection to all
Ordinances, must now come under an explicit covenant, or what?

For my part, I said before, it was not any conscience to Parish bounds which
has kept me from receiving of persons from other Parishes, but desire of
peace: But if men will refuse terms of peace so drawn up with so much
tenderness, as I think can well be desired, I shall receive those who shall
desire to join with me, and resign them up again when there comes a man who
will embrace peace with his brethren: I do not look upon our rules binding me
further then our Associations.

CHAP. III. Of Association of Churches.
OUr Brethren in Cumberland [with whom our Brethren in Essex agree] conceive
That in the exercise of Discipline, Assoc. Cumb. p. 3.
it is not only the most safe course, but also most conducing to brotherly
union and satisfaction, that particular Churches carry on as much of their work
with joint and mutual assistance as they can with conveniencie and edification,
and as little as may be to stand distinctly by themselves, and apart from each
other.

This some of our congregational brethren look upon, as cutting off
congregational liberty by the middle. But I conceive not so, they put in the
words Conveniencie and Edification; nor is their intent [so far as I apprehend]
to null the power of particular Churches, but only to be assistant to each
other in the wise managing of so great an Ordinance: and Blessed be God [say
I.] that such Assistance may be had.

That Church Discipline is an Institution of Christ, I do not at all question.
That the cutting off a member from a Church is a thing of great weight, I do
not also question. [Chirurgeons, though able, when they come to the Amputation
of a natural member, love to call in all the help they can.] And as certain I
am that through the abuse and ill maniging of this Solemn Ordinance, it has
almost lost its glory. This has not been the fault of the Pope and the
Hierarchy; but I wish I could say that some congregational Churches had not
exposed it to contempt through their indiscreet carriages in this Ordinance; I
know of more then two or three of these Churches in which this fault will be
found. In Ipswich in N. E. where those two worthy men Mr. Nathaniel Rogers
[Pastor] and Mr. Norton [Teacher] had the managing of this Ordinance, they
carried on the work with so much prudence and long-suffering [the cause did
permit it] before they came to the execution of it, and with so much Majesty
and Terror when they came to the Sentence, that the hearts of all the members
[I think] were struck with fear, and many eyes could not but let drop tears;
the Ordinance had something of the majesty of the Ordainer in it. If we could
carry on this Ordinance thus, we might recover the glory of it.

What particular Churches may do when no Assistance can be had, is one thing;
what they ought to do when it may be had, is another. Doctor Ames is a man who
favors particular Churches enough, yet says, Medul. C. 39. S. 27.
Ecclesiae tamen particulares, ut earum communio postulat, naturae lumen, and
aequitas regularum, and exemplorum Scripturae docent, possunt, ac saepissime
etiam debent Confaederationem, aut Consociationem mutuam inter se inire, in
Classibus and Synodis, ut communi consensu and subsidio mutuo utantur, quantum
commode fieri potest, in iis praesertim quae sunt majoris momenti, etc.

Furthermore, because the brethren stand so much upon the power of particular
Churches, I desire [as I have diverse years professed my dissatisfaction
satisfaction in this point] they would please to clear it from the N. T. where
they find such particular Churches as ours are in these small Villages,
consisting of one Pastor, and a few members, being so near to other Churches as
ours are, and might unite if they would; yet that such particular Churches kept
themselves distinct, and exercised all power within themselves, without any
dependence upon, or consociation with other Churches. If Scriptureexamples be
any thing to us, I think they will not prove it. I could never yet understand
the reason of this consequence. The Churches in Jerusalem, in Rome, in Corinth,
in Ephesus, etc. were independent for the execution of their power; Ergo, every
particular Church in a small Village with one Pastor, and a few members, is
independent for the execution of all Church Power.

I pray let us consider whether it will not more answer the Scripture-patterns,
to have diverse of our smaller Villages to unite, and make up but One Church,
though every Minister continue in his station, taking care especially [though
not onely] of those who live within his own Parish, and to preach to these,
administer Sacraments, exhort, rebuke, etc. as he finds cause. But yet as to
the exercise of all Churchpower, they are but One Church. I dare say it will
come nearer to the Scripture, then does the practice of the Churches as now
they stand. Our brethren yield the Church at Jerusalem to be but One Church;
but that this Church met always for all Ordinances in one place, who can
imagine? Though the Apostles went up to the Temple to Preach, yet that was as
well for the sake of others who came to the Temple, and not yet converted; the
Apostles went to meet with them, they did not go to meet with the Apostles.
But we do not read that they went thither to administer the Lords Supper.
Where they could find a room for five thousand persons to receive the Supper
together, I cannot tell; to throw away ones reason in matters of practice is
hard: what a long time must they be administering? though others did help, yet
they must have room to pass to and fro to carry the elements, that at last we
must have a vast place.

Most Divines that I read agree, that by breaking of bread, Acts 2.42. is meant
the Lords Supper: I do not see that Beza has many followers. Why then by
breaking of bread, v. 46. should not be meant the Lords Supper also, and their
eating meat with gladness their Lovefeasts which attended the Supper, I see no
reason, though I know many Divines do not understand it as in 42.

That it is the phrase whereby the Lords Supper is set forth in the New
Testament, is yielded, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. and Cap. 11. and so in the 42.
v. of this Chap. Once in Luke 24.30, 35. we find it meant of an ordinary
supper, the text does clear it, though some Papists would draw it to the
Sacrament under one element, yet other Papists deny it here.

It Is true, we find this phrase once in the Old Testament, Isa. 58.7. to be
understood of the giving of Alms to the poor; but there is difference between
these phrases, Breaking bread to the hungry, and this Breaking bread: we do
not find the words to the hungry, or such like, added in the New Testament. If
this be yielded, then they did break bread Domatim, as Beza.

Corn. a Lap. thus interprets the Text of the Eucharist, and says that does
not hinder that they did break Domatim, quia crescoute numero fidelium, per
varias domos eos distribuere, in iisque Eucharistiam celebrare oportebat. In
this sense also Chemnitius takes the words, Exam. Conc. Trid. p. 95.
not troubling himself with that question, an ad veritatem Eucharistiae
requiratur peculiaris qualitas loci? He draws his answer from the example of
Christ and the Apostles: Nec Apostoli peculiares habuerunt Basilicas; sed sicut
perseverabant in doctrina Apostolorum, and oratione, quando in privatis domibus
colligebantur, ita etiam per domos frangebant panem. Although Lormus be against
this interpretation himself [his reason insufficient;] yet he acknowledges
Antoninus to understand it of the Lords Supper, qui ait esse communem
opinionem; so Gagneius, Baronius, Boderianus, etc. as Lorinus quotes. Thus I
doubt not but it was in Rome, Ephesus, and Corinth, where were many Officers,
and much people, Acts 18.10. They met in several places for Preaching and
Sacraments; yet these were but one Church. That Text 1 Cor. 14.34. (...), etc.
seems to carry it fairly: There were diverse of these Assemblies in Corinth
which he calls Churches; and yet in another sense it is the Church of Corinth.
As for the words (...), how Calvin and others interpret them is well known,
with whom agree the Arab. Version, Acts 2.44. so that I say no more to them.

Now if these did thus meet as before, why may not we as well meet in our
several Parishes, and yet be but one Church, and the Ministers Elders in common
to that One Church? so may we have diverse Elders in One Church, as had these
Churches. Our Parishes lie so, that those who dwell in the next Parishes are as
well known to Ministers as many of their own; they dwell much nearer to places
of Assembling for the worship of God, then do many in our own Parishes; and
for number, we may join diverse of our Parishes together before we shall have so
many complete members to all Ordinances as were in Jerusalem, Rome, or Corinth.
Such a Church as this I could willingly call (in one sense) an Independent
Church. Dr. Owen (a congregational Divine) was once very near this opinion in
his Country Essay for the practice of Church Government. P. 59.
He would have the extremes of the Division not be above 8, or 10 miles, so the
center not more then 4, or 5 miles from any part of it, etc. though in some
things we shall differ, yet not in what I aim at. For ought I can see this
would come nearest to Scripture, and for the benefits of it.

1. If any Minister die, here are Ministers still left in the same Church to
ordain another in his room [the people electing] and to try him before election.

2. The matters of Jurisdiction are carried on with the counsel and assistance
of diverse; where is hoped to be more safety, and the Ordinance of
Excommunication more solemn.

3. If any Minister be scandalous, here is a way for his Excommunication.
Things now may be carried on as they were in those Churches which we find in
the New Testament, where there were many Elders; and diverse questions which
have troubled the Churches, about the peoples ordaining of a Minister,
Excommunication of their Minister, etc. avoided. And thus our brethrens trouble
about Parishbounds is also avoided in great part. The greatest difficulty I
find is this, that we are divided about the qualification, of Church Members,
which they in Jerusalem, Corinth, etc. were not. Certainly there were and are
common rules for all Churches to go by, or else they could not have agreed
more then we. If the Lord had left it to the liberty of every Minister to
require what qualifications he pleased, then confusion and division must
necessarily have been always in the Church. Is it so hard then to find out
these Rules? Were we to Preach to Heathen, and they understanding the doctrines
of salvation, did profess their assents unto those Doctrines, their consent to
take Christ for their Savior and Lord, their sorrow for and renouncing of
their former wicked ways, giving up themselves to Christ, his ways and
ordinances, surely such as these we must admit and baptize; if not, give us a
Text where the Apostles refused such. If after Baptism they visibly answered
their profession then made, they were continued members, and had fellowship in
all Church Priviledges, I think so. Let us come thus far, and we shall agree
for many; those among us who apparently belly the profession made at Baptism,
let them either be brought to repentance, or secluded. [That is my opinion, and
I think all would have it so, who would reform the Church.]

2. However the congregational brethren, who do agree in qualifications, and
dwell thus near, may unite into one Church; and so may others.

3. Since our brethren who look on all their Parishes as Church Members, do
not yet require of us so to judge of them, and desire us only to Associate
with them in giving communion to such as are qualified according as they have
set down [the qualifications certainly being strict enough for Church Members,
if not too strict, if we go to the rigor of them, so as congregational
Churches will not answer in all points] why may we not unite with them so far?
These things I propound willing to receive some light; but as to what the
Classical brethren require, it is no more then N. E. Divines do allow and
practice in their Councils. Certainly since we know our selves to be men
subject to infirmities, corruptions, tentations, many, if not most now
unacquainted with the exercise of Church Discipline, a weighty Ordinance, the
glory of it almost lost, one would think no Christian Minister should desire to
stand alone, but be most willing to take in all assistance he could, and not
esteem it a needless troubling of himself [as say some of our brethren] but
rather a mercy that he may have help from his neighboring Ministers.

If any man will go further with me, and say, if you will mould your Churches
according to those in the Scripture, and have diverse Elders to carry on the
Affairs of the Church, why then may we not have one Elder among these, who may
be a (...), suppose a standing Moderator? For in those Churches we find mention
made of an Angel in Ephesus and the other Churches, which seem to imply as much.

I answer. If you do not make this (...) primus Presbyter, standing Moderator
[or what other name you will give him] a distinct Scriptural Officer from other
Presbyters, giving to him a power distinct from and superior to the power of
other Preaching Presbyters, whence he shall perform some Church-Acts which
other preaching Presbyters shall not or cannot perform, so that it be no
distinct or superior power, but only order which is contended for, I am well
content to yield it, being ready to go with others for peace and unities sake,
till they come to constitute Officers which Christ never did, then I say Hold.
But for a standing Moderator, one that Durante vita modo been se gesserit,
shall keep that place, let him, per me licet. For,

1. In the meetings of Councils there must be one who must rule and order the
affairs at those times; a President, a Moderator must be, reason leads us to it
to avoid confusion: and this is seen in the synodical meetings of
Congregational Elders.

2. He who is chosen President or Moderator this Session may be the next, and
the next; we may choose him for one year, or two years, what Scripture text
forbids it? why may we not twenty?

3. I am so far from thinking it is contrary to Scripture, that I think it
comes nearest to Scripture. [I may declare my opinion with submission to better
judgements] for as for the word Angel mentioned in the Epistles to the seven
Churches, though I cannot agree to that which that ever honored and learned
Davenant does gather from it, namely, Determ. 42.
the superiority of the Bishop above other Presbyters, because here was one in
the Church of Ephesus, etc. which (...) is called (...). For what Isidore says
of created Angels, Angelus est nomen officii non naturae, semper sunt spiritus
sed cum mittuntur vocantur Angeli, I may apply to this, if all true preaching
Ministers are sent, as they are, Romans 10. then they also are (...). I think our
Divines have spoken sufficiently to take off this; yet [with favour] I conceive
that Christ mentioning an Angel in the singular number, and reason telling us
what must be in all orderly Meetings and Councils to avoid confusion, there
being diverse Elders in one Church, who had the care, inspection, and government
of it; I conceive those Elders had one who for order sake was a President,
Moderator, [though he had not power above them, as may be proved by other
Scriptures] that ordered the transactions when they met; nor can I conceive it
was so, for one Session or two, but for his life for ought I can learn, he that
can, let him prove the contrary? in that he is taken notice of so in a special
manner, it should seem he was one that was so more then one or two Sessions.

4. I verily conceive that error [be not offended, I pray, if I call it so, for
I humbly conceive it to be so] which so soon crept in, of one assuming power
above other Presbyters, took its first rise upon occasion of this Order. God's
providence so ordering it to leave his own Servants to their wisdom and wills,
who freely acting made way at last for his Decrees: for if the President or
Moderator had shifted and changed every Session, I cannot tell which way it was
possible a Pope should have risen.

Obj. Therefore away with your standing Moderator, you have spoken enough
against it.

Ans. Stay, not too fast; must I throw away every thing that may be or is
abused? occasio and causa differ much. Diotrephes, and so other Ministers may
abuse their power; shall then a Minister have no power over his people?
Tollatur abusus, maneat usus.

Obj. But for Ministers power we have Scripture for it plainly, so we have not
for a constant standing Moderator.

Ans. By Scripture Authority we make Officers, who have power from Christ
immediately. I am not discoursing of the making of a Church Officer, and what
power such an Officer should have, I disclaim this; power and order are two
things.

2. That Text which before I produced, I know not what fairer Interpretation
can be given of it. I can exclude superiority of power by other Scriptures, but
why an Interpretation of Scripture which crosses no other Scripture, nor sound
reason, and has such fair probability from the practice of the most ancient,
should not be admitted [especially when a fairer Interpretation cannot be given
[for my part I know none] I know no reason.

The most that can be objected against me is matter of Prudence. But I conceive
1. that which comes nearest to make peace in the Church, and does not cross the
Scripture, that is prudence. 2. That which comes nearest to Scripture
Interpretation, having the practice of so many ancient holy Men and Martyrs
[though I know they went higher] to give light to it, this I call prudence. 3.
Time will discover which will have most prudence in it, whether a Moderator or
President changed every Session, or a standing Moderator. I think now we are
out of danger of making a Pope, if his time of ruin be so near as some think.

Thus I have delivered my thoughts, humbly conceiving that a Church so molded
as there may be diverse elders in it, and amongst these one chosen for a (...)
president, [or what you will call him] for order sake, to abide so constantly,
come nearest to the platform of the Churches in the Scripture; and in this
there is something of the Congregational, something of the Classical, and
something like the Episcopal way; such a Church for the exercise of its power,
being independent, as was the Church in Ephesus. But to have one Pastor, and it
may be twelve men to stand alone, and to exercise all Church Power when they
may associate, I desire to see such a Church in Scripture.

PART II.
CHAP. I. A Plea for Ordination. To. 4. Disp. 9. q. 1. p. 1. I own no Church
Officer which is not ordained. Nemo ad ordinariam in ecclesia functionem, sive
ad Diaconatum sive ad Presbyteratum, etc. admitti debet nisi legitime electus
and ordinatus. Zanch. 4. praec. p. ^77.

ALthough I am far from Valentia's judgment, making Ordination a Sacrament
[strictly so called;] yet in this I think he says true, when he would have the
word Ordination to be taken from the effect of that Ordinance, Quia per
Ordinationem aliquis in gradu quodam atque Ordine certo ecclesiasticae
dignitatis constitutiur. Thus some are Pastors, some ruling Elders, some are
Deacons, they are in such an Order in the Church when they are Ordained. This
has been the judgment, and accordingly the practice of the Church for many
hundred years; till yesterday Ordination was made but an Adjunct of a Ministers
call [popular election being made the essential cause:] and to day Ordination
is thrown out; no wonder, for Adjunctum potest abesse, etc.

This clothing of God's things with our Logical notions, (though I know Logic
is a general Art) and by them to raise one thing above another, one must be
cried up, the other slighted, when both have the same Divine stamp upon them, I
utterly mislike, and think it too much boldness. Has the Scripture made such
comparison between these, as between Ceremonial and Moral worship? We blame the
Socinians because they adhere not to Divine Testimony, but will try all things
at the bar of their reason, and so approve or disapprove: and are they
blameless, who when they have Divine Testimony and reason also for two things,
yet they will call this but an Adjunct, (when as that Adjunct has more and
clearer Scriptures for to prove it) and the other an essential cause (which
has fewer Scriptures, and those not so clear to speak for it) and so neglect
the Adjunct? what are these notions to our practice? to which God's Adjuncts
(if you call them so) are essential.

A few words then for Ordination (my chief aim being at Imposition of hands in
Ordination, and so I will make the more haste over this.)

Q. Whether gifts and popular election be sufficient to constitute a Minister
without Ordination?

Where, first, by a Minister I understand not one who exercises for the trial
of his gifts, before he be ordained; for if Timothy must commit the things,
etc. to faithful men, 2 Timothy 2.2. 1 Timothy 5.22.
and such as are able to teach others. If he must lay hands on no man suddenly,
then good proof must be had of men's lives, Chrysostom. in loc.
and so of their abilities. (...). But by a Minister I understand one who does
Officially and Authoritatively Preach, administer Sacraments, govern the
Church, ordain others, (though the latter seems to be a begging of the
question.)

2. Neither is the question what may be done in a case extraordinary when
Ordination cannot be had, this our Divines have spoken to sufficiently; Loc.
com. p. 748. Synop. pur. Theol. Dis. 42. S. 39, 43, 44.
I could quote diverse, but I will mention only Peter Martyr, who shall speak
for all the rest. Quando adhuc extructa non est ecclesia, and homines
Christianae religionis ignari sunt, quicunque ibi forte fortuna fuerint qui
Christum probe norint, illum tenentur annunciare, neque ordinatio est
expectanda ubi haberi non potest: quod est intelligendum, si omnino ei desit
copia Ordinantium; nam si aliquos possit accedere qui se usitato more ordinent
Manus imponendo, non debet Ordinationem negligere. Then adds a little after,
Quae a Deo fiunt extra ordinem, admirari debemus, non semper imitari. But this
is none of our case. These things being premissed, I undertake the Negative.

1. Gifts are not sufficient. A person gifted is the material cause of a
Minister, the formal as yet is wanting. Heb. 5.
It was said of old, No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is
called of God. But if he be gifted he may take it, may he not? No; the Text
allows it not. I let the Socinians alone to those who have answered them: I
only add, it was the office not the honor that did look to Christ. Our
happiness lies in this, that he is our High Priest, performs that office in our
behalf, not in the honor that attends the office (at least not primarily.)
Christ has his call, Isa. 42.6. Paul has his call, Romans 1.1. A Minister must
be able to say he was called to the office. Sur. chapter dis. p. 3. p. 9. p. 2. p.
42, 45.
Reverend Hooker calls it an Anabaptistical Frensy to meddle with the Acts of a
Church Officer without a call: and in another place he says, All such Acts are
void, and of none effect, though men have gifts.

I know Ames is much against the the common Interpretation of that text, Romans
10.15. upon which I perceive generally our Divines have grounded that Missio
potestativa, which they make the substance, essence, and formal act of
Ordination. But Ames says, Bell. ener. To. 2. p. 82.
Missio nusquam in Scriptura significat vocationem ordinariam, qua per homines
in aliquem derivatur: neque sua significatione notat actum aliquem hominum
vocantium hominem ordinaria ratione vocandum. Supple, a Deo, says Cajetan. I
intend not to meddle with what the Doctor has said (though to me the Apostle
plainly intimates, there can be no preaching without sending, but then I would
ask, How shall I know whether my self or another be sent of God?) but I will
rather examine what the Author of the (...) etc. (who makes Ordination not
essential to the call of a Minister) has commented upon it. The sending which
the Apostle means is not a Ministerial or Ecclesiastical sending, but a
providential sending by giving men gifts, and working with them in their use
and exercise. He gives reasons, of which afterward.

1. Then it seems Ecclesiastical sending is not providential sending. Has God
no act of providence in the sending of a Minister, when he is sent by
Ministers? I thought providential sending (as the more general) had
comprehended under it Ministerial sending, but this Author opposes them not
this but that.

2. I thought God's presence working with men in the exercise of their gifts,
let them be sent providentially or ecclesiastially had been a distinct thing
from his sending them; that to send is one thing, and to work with a person
sent is another. So to give gifts is one thing, but to send a gifted man
another: if not, but gifting be sending, then Election is as needless as
Ordination; for why? I am sent providentially because I am gifted: but that
Author is stiff for popular Election.

3. But what if God does not please to work in the exercise of gifts to breed
faith? are not therefore such persons sent? it must not be so by this
Interpretation. The Prophets of God did little or no good that we read of, yet
2 Chronicles. 36.15. God says he sent them: till they found the Lord working they
were not fent. It Is possible they might preach half a year or more before they
did convert one; it seems all that time they were not sent because God did not
work with their gifts. Isa. 6. the Prophet had a commission not to breed faith,
yet sent; this will trouble some good Ministers. Some men's gifts lie more in
building up then in bringing home, are they not therefore sent?

4. Then it seems if God make me an instrument to beget faith in any, I must
not look at it as the fruit of God's sending me Ecclesiastically (as he has
appointed Pastors and Teachers for the gathering and building up his Church)
but only as I was sent providentially, and so have no comfort quatenus an
Officer.

5. Does God's sending by giving gifts, and Ministerial sending oppose each
other? in one sense indeed he may make gifts and Ordination opposites, for they
do differ re and ratione: but if he consider them in their affection to a
Minister, they are essential causes constituting the same effect, the
Ministerial fending following God's gifting.

His Reasons. 1. Else none can be an instrument of conversion but a Preacher
sent.

A. The great standing Ordinance which God has appointed to breed faith
instrumentally, is the Ministry Ecclesiastically fent: and I think Ephesians. 4.11,
12, 13. will prove it; though God has not tied up himself so as to use no
other means, but this is his common way. Fox Mart. Vol. 1 p. 299.
Waldus when his neighbor that was walking with him fell down dead, began to
live spiritually; here was no body sent providentially with gifts. I have heard
of some persons who were adult, that could neither hear nor speak, yet so far
as in charity we might judge by some of their outward gestures in reference to
holy things, they might have grace; yet faith ordinarily comes by hearing. I
knew a good Christian, in conference with a sick person, another standing by
the beds-side and hearing the conference, he who was now seventy years old
began to live; the Christians gifts not fit for a Minister; but what then? does
not God ordinarily convert by gifted men? Diverse instances might be given which
would make as much against providential sending by gifts, as Ecclesiastical
sending.

2. Reason. No man can be sure whether he has faith or no, till he be sure his
faith was wrought in him by a Minister lawfully called.

A. The former answer serves here; we tie not men to this; the old man I
mentioned before, and Waldus, might upon his grounds as much question the truth
of their faith, because not wrought by men providentially sent with gifts.

I could give another answer, but I leave this.

2. As gifts alone are not sufficient, so neither are gifts and popular
election sufficient.

Let these men bring forth their Scriptures and show us where these two have
constituted a Minister. There are but three Texts brought to prove popular
election, and none of them will do it. Not Acts 1. for (besides diverse things
which might be said) they did not elect an Apostle, when they had nominated
two, they could not tell which was the Apostle till God chose. Cartw. Reply, p.
204.
The Church chose no Apostle, but only choose two, of the which one was taken
by the Lord to be an Apostle. Cartw. So Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 3. s. 13.

Acts 6. will not prove it; there was Ordination besides election, (though some
deny here as any officer at all ordained, of which anon.)

Acts 14. I find a Text much insisted upon: some from hence would gather that a
man may be a Minister without Ordination, that popular election is sufficient;
which they ground upon the word (...): others of our Congregationall Brethren
here in England, who will allow Ordination as an Adjunct to the call, they find
it here in the verse; which thus they define. Ordination is a recommending a
person (chosen) to God, by fasting and prayer.

(...) that carries the popular election; then with fasting and prayer they
commended them to God; here is Ordination, and that without imposition of
hands. I will examine both these heads.

First, for (...) I am confident that those learned Divines, who have made most
use of this word to prove the peoples power to elect their Minister, did never
think that this popular election did constitute a Minister without Ordination,
when it might be had; their writings prove it. Neither did ever intend to prove
and warrant such elections as our people make, namely, that without any
dependence upon the judgment and assistance of godly and learned Divines to
help them, to choose whom they list upon their own heads. Mr. Cartwright has
spoken enough, and with heat sufficient for the peoples privilege from this
word, yet how far he was from approving such elections we may conceive by his
words to the Rhemists. Rhem. 14. Test. Act. 22.
It may be understood how truly you speak, as if we so commended the Churches
election, as we shut out the Bishops ordination, which we do not only give unto
them, but make them also the chief and directors in election, (Scripture
Bishops we mean.) And thus in other place. Thus Ames also, Med. The. C. 39.
These. 31.

If what our ancient Divines have said will not give content, I will come a
little nearer.

1. It Is certain the word (...) relates to Paul and Barnabas; those who did
(...) and (...) in the 22. v. do (...) in the 23. v. else we must go look for
our Grammar, which Luke did and could write sure enough.

If then the word must be restrained to election, I am sure Paul and Barnabas
did elect; this the Grammar will force, which is a surer rule then a Criticism
to bring the people in.

2. If (...) must relate to the people, then let us see what sense we shall
make of it. (...) the people choosing by lifting up their hands, (...) Elders,
(...): I think it should rather have been (...), surely they choose for
themselves not the Apostles, then it would have run more smoothly for popular
election; but it is (...) est eligere proprio suffragio, non per suffragia ab
aliis data.

3. It is certain what we call Ordination, the Greeks call (...), when it is
used in reference to the constitution of an Officer: this is plain enough to
him who will read Chrysostom, who I see in all these places where Imposition
of hands is used in the Text in the Ordination of a Church Officer in his
Comment upon the Text, uses always the word (...). See him on Acts 13.3, and 4
where three times he uses this word. I will name no more but Acts 6.6. upon
those words (...), thus he speaks. (...). Thus I have observed Basil to use the
word; It Is strange these Greek Fathers should not understand their
mother tongue. Had Chrysostom been against the peoples Election, I should have
suspected something; but I find him contrary. That the word must needs imply
the peoples Election, Acts 10.41. is well known to oppose it.

The Syriack Translation confirms this; for they render the word, Et
constituerunt. The same verb, and in the same conjugation which Paul uses, 1
Tit. 5. But if it were the peoples (...), which did constitute Officers,
certainly Paul needed not to have left Titus there to do that, which they
could do without him, and did though he were there; to leave Titus only to
contribute an Adjunct when the people have given the Essence, I could never
receive this conceit.

The Arabic also refers the Act to the Apostles, Et designarunt eis manibus
suis in singulis Ecclesiis Presbyteros. And by this the Imposition o^ hands is
plainly employed. etc.


All things considered, I do much more question whether any thing can be
brought from this word to prove popular Election, then I do believe popular
Election constitutes a Minister. To have a Minister imposed upon godly people,
or a true Visible Church without their consent, I look on it as great tyranny.
This was not the primitive practice; Ep. ad Cor. p 57.
for Clemens says when the Apostles, or other (...) [no mention made of the
Fraternity doing it] did constitute Elders, he adds (...), yet I do not think
that the people elect tanquam ex authoritate, Electio non cogit.
they do eligere, non per jurisdictionem, sed per subjectionem, says Ames.
This power the people have, that no man shall have power over them unless they
consent to subject unto him; but what is this to their having so much power
over him, as to make him a Minister? To be their Minister, and to be a Minister
are two things. If no Authority be put forth in the peoples Election, there is
none put forth in Ordination (sure:) if it be but an Adjunct, certainly the
Adjunct should most properly belong to them who give the Essence, then
Ministers come into Office without any Authoritative Act put forth; fasting and
prayer [common to all Christians] which they make Ordination, is no Act of
Authority.

It is strange Doctrine to me, that a Minister should be a Minister only in
that congregation which elected him. Mr Noyes tells us, That the Elders of one
Church have power to act in all Churches upon mtreaty; P 48.
and yet tells us the power of the Keys is originally and essentially in the
body of the members, that they give the Keys: p. 10. p. 11.
that Election is the Essence of the Call; which doctrine I cannot yet receive.
I question not but every true Minister bears relation to the Church Catholic;
were now the Catholic Church reduced to six particular Churches, if members
came to my congregation out of all those six, I would not question to
administer the Lords Supper to them all at one time, and this our brethren deny
not; but why must I perform an official act to them to whom I bear no relation?
If I should go with my people into any one of these six congregations, then I
hope I may administer there also; this I suppose may be allowed; for why may
not I as well administer there as in my own place? I hope they will not tie up
Churches to places, so as the place makes the difference. I know what men argue
from the Analogy of a Mayor in a Corporation, which is no proof, but only
illustration; and if our brethren can find out that Christ has one Catholic
Civil Commonwealth which makes up his body, as we can find he has a Catholic
Church which is his body, then the Analogy will have more force. But I must
break off from this discourse, though I had something more to have said to this.

I doubt not but in some cases a man may be Ordained, and Authoritatively sent
forth to preach the Gospel and baptize without popular election preceding. What
Athanasius did with Frumentius is well known, and so others whom I spare to
name.

If this be true, Loc. Com. p. 199.
then popular election gives not the Essence. Musculus, though he had pleaded
for that privilege of the people in the Apostolical Primitive Churches, yet
again shows that that custom cannot be profitable to the Churches now; and
therefore in their Churches the people did not elect.

So much for the word (...), I know no other Texts that can be brought for
popular election. Our brethren do allow Ordination besides Election; but
whether that be Ordination which they call Ordination, is the question: being I
am now upon the Text, and think it is that which they build upon (for I know no
other) I will briefly examine, and so return to this Text no more.

1. It is true, that when a Minister is to be ordained, the Church does
solemnly seek the Lord by fasting and prayer for his grace and blessing upon
the person to be ordained, which shows the weight of the office, and of
Ordination to it; but commending here does not relate to their fasting and
prayer, but is distinct. Fasting and prayer relates to their Ordination. Cor. a
Lap. says, here is a Histerologia: Oration enim and jejunium praemissum fuit
ordinationi presbyterorum, Intex.
ut in. Cap. 13. v. 2, 3. Therefore Luke uses the Aorist (...), i.e. postquam
orassent q.d. cum post orationem and jejunium constituissent eis Presbyteros.
Nor is that the main business of Ordination, to commend a man to God, this Text
will not force it, as in the next I shall clear. (...) ordinationis proprius
est collatio protestatis docendi and sacramenta administrandi, ad illum
ordinatio per se dirigitur, De Minis. Eccles. p. 182.
eundemque perpetuo and infallibiliter consequitur: says Gerhard, with whom
agrees the stream of Divines, and the practice of the Churches in N. England:
For though a man may teach for the trial of his gifts in order to office half a
year, a whole year, yet he administers no Sacraments till he be ordained. Sepa.
Exa. p. 54, 55.
I have spoken more to this in my Book against the separation.

2. This Text serves not our brethrens turns; for if so, then All those whom
the Apostles here commended to God the Apostles ordained.

But the Apostles did not ordain all those whom they commended to God: ergo,
ordination is not a commending, etc.

The major is plain; for Definitio and Definitum reciprocantur. Our brethren
will say, but the commending of persons chosen, etc. will be ordination by this
Text. No; for the last words show whom they commended; The Believing Disciples.
The whole Churches; they commended them to God in whom they had believed. Now
believing is not the next cause of a persons being ordained, but they did
commend them to God quatenus believers. The method of Ordination is thus, 1. A
Believer. 2. A Person gifted. 3. A Person elected (in constituted Churches.) 4.
Ordained. Women did believe, and they were commended to God as well as any
other. So that (...) answers to (...) in the verse; and (...) relates to (...),
in v. 22. this being the last act of Paul and Barnabas, when they had confirmed
and exhorted the Disciples in v. 22. Ordained them Elders in v. 23. they
commended them all Pastors and people to God. I see Calvin, Piscator, Cor. a
Lap. agree with me, making no question of this Interpretation, for they pass it
over as granted. And Musculus speaks my mind clearly, Ergo jejunantes and
orantes, quod in coetu fidelium fieri solebat, ordinarunt Presbyteros a
fidelibus electos (observe, he puts a difference between election and
ordination in this verse) and post eam ordinationem, commendaverunt ecclesiam
Domino and discesserunt.

3. That Text in Acts 20.32. confutes this notion. (...). Follow (...) in this
Text to the 2. Aor. voc. med. and we shall find (...) in Acts 14.23. Now the
Apostle did not ordain these, he calls them Elders and Bishops before, and so
they were; but now taking his leave of them, he commended them to God; and so
he did in Acts 14. departing from the Churches he commended them to God in whom
they had believed.

4. I cannot yet be convinced, but that ordination is an act of authoritative
power; but commending of a person to God in prayer is no act of such power.

5. The Scripture gives us another definition of Ordination, as I shall show
afterward, ergo this is not the true definition.

Thus then I have made it clear, that gifts and popular election are not
sufficient to constitute a Minister, (if the Scripture may be judge) we may
make use of other civil officers to illustrate it more. Keck. pol.
The Athenian Senators were sworn, though the people did (...). So are our
Magistrates: take a Constable, though the Town has chosen him to that office,
yet if he shall act as a Constable before he be sworn, he is a trespassor, and
a man may have an Action against him for his so doing.

There is much reason why the popular election should give the essence here,
but there is no such reason why it should to a Minister; yet here we find in
civil officers more then election before they can act. I pray let us have order
in the Church as well.

This being dispatched, now it will necessarily follow that Ordination is
necessary to the constitution of a Minister, though I should say no more: it is
but little I intend to say, (or need to say) for the reason I gave before.

Arg. 1. First, Conformity to the rules of God's house in things pertaining to
his house is necessary.

Ordination of Ministers, Stewards (pertaining to the house) is conformity to
the rules of the house of God: ergo Ordination of Ministers is necessary.

The major, if any deny, they must take away the authority of the Scriptures,
leave men to their own fantasies, which no holy man ever dare say, so that I
doubt not but that will stand. The minor, if any deny, it must be upon one of
these two grounds. 1. Either denying that we have any positive rules, because
we have none but examples, which shows how Ministers came in to office. But if
those examples of Apostles commissioned by Christ to order his house, having
such a promise of his presence with them, be not rules to us, then we have no
rules at all left for officers coming into his house, which were strange defect
of wisdom to impute to Christ, that he should have a house and no order in it;
and contrary to the old Church, which had rules exactly for their officers
coming in. Nor must popular election be ever more pleaded for. Or

2. They must deny it, because officers were made without any ordination, which
is the thing. I desire to see proved from Scripture. If we observe the practice
of the Apostles after they had received the promise of the Spirit, and were now
fitted and sent forth to act with that Spirit guiding them, we find that thus
they did set Deacons in the house of God, Acts 6.6.

Obj. But it is objected, That here was no ordination to any office at all;
there were persons before who did this work that we suppose the Deacons should;
these men were appointed only for that (...), necessity, in v. 3. that is, to
end that difference which arose in v. 1.

1. A. It is true, there were some who did distribute the goods of the Church
to the poor, etc. who those were I think Chap. 4. v. ult. will tell us: They
laid the money at the Apostles feet. Whence it is clear to me that the Apostles
had this burden upon them also; compare the verse with chap. 6.2. and this they
found a great hinderance to them in their preaching work so that both they
could not tend; whence by the Spirit they were guided to Institute the Deacon.
Upon search I find other men of my mind. Inst. l. 4. c. 3.9.
Calvin. Exam. Con. Trid. p. 217.
Chemnitius. In 4. praec. p. 766.
Zanch. with more whom I could mention.

2. The Apostles do not say v. 2. to leave the word of God and decide
differences, but serve Tables, which they saw hindered them, and one they saw
they must neglect, or perform not well, as we see complaint made; whence (...)
in v. 3. must answer to that which the Apostles could not attend to in v. 2.
which was (...).

3. As the Church Members consist of bodies as well as souls, which bodies must
be provided for by others if they have not of their own to uphold them; and
since God has given in charge that collections should be made for the poor.
Since also there are diverse things which belong to the worship of God, and
things about the Church, which must have money to buy them, and to answer for
them; hence it stands with right reason that an Officer be chosen and
authorized to be the Church-Treasurer, to take in these collections and moneys,
and by these to serve the poors Table, the Lord's Table, (I conceive they had
their Love Feasts at that time also) and why they should not attend upon the
Minister at the Administration of the Lord's Supper I know not. In N. England
the Deacons also bring in to the Elders Table, they are not troubled as we are
here to send to every bodies house in particular for our due.

4. It is clear by 1 Timothy 3. and Phil. 1.1. there was such an Officer as a
Deacon, and that distinct from the Bishop. I wonder what was the work of this
Deacon being an Officer, not the Bishops I am sure, then he should not have
been distinguished from the Bishop; neither are the same qualifications in
every point required of him that are of the Bishop. When or where had this
Officer his original? I think in this Chapter we may be satisfied, but no where
else that I know of.

These things satisfy me, with the judgment of the Church, which constantly
has maintained that here were Officers ordained. I know much dispute there
has been and is whether this Deacon might not preach and baptize: but that is
none of my question; if here were the ordination of an Officer it serves my
turn. When I had done, casting my eye accidentally upon Bucanus. P. 494.
Loc. Com. I found him speaking my thoughts, and something more, who gave me
much content in opening the Deacons Office.

Thus then Deacons come into their office.

Thus Timothy also came into his office, 1 Timothy 4.14. so it is generally
understood. Out of his Epistles I shall gather more in the next argument.

Whether Paul and Barnabas were ordained in Acts 13.2, 3. is a great question,
some deny it, many affirm it: if they were, it puts much honor upon that
Ordinance, and shows more the necessity of this ordinance in men coming to the
Ministry. Let us see first who they are that own this to be ordination, some I
have met with, and others may know more; of this judgment I find Chrysostom,
(...) [observe the word] (...), etc. with whom agree others of the Greek
Fathers. Thus Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 3. s. 14. Chemnitius, Zanchy, Polanus,
Gualter (Officio divinitus simul and ab ecclesia commislo, says he upon the
Text) Aretius (who infists upon it largely.) Gerhard, Maccovius, Malcolmus,
Waltherus, (who reconciles this with Gal. 1.1.) Ravanel Diodati, Our English
Annotations, Ainsworth (upon Numb. 8.10.) The Synod of N. England, who quote
this Text to prove Ministers ought to be ordained, and that with Imposition of
hands. Of the Popish party I could name more, but I spare them. These men are
so worthy, that their judgment is not easily to be slighted.

But we have harder work in writing in our days then others had heretofore,
when the quotation of men was proof sufficient, but this will not now serve the
turn. Thus then

Posita definitione, ponitur Definitum. But here Ponitur Definitio
Ordinationis: Ergo. The Papists, who make Ordination a Sacrament (properly so
called) contend about the matter; for the form they are all agreed, that the
form Consistit in verbis, quibus sufficienter significatur traditio potestatis,
says Valen. To the same purpose speaks Bellarm. Convenit inter omnes, materiam
esse aliquod signum sensibile, formam autem esse verba quae dicuntur, dum illud
signum exhibetur. But whether the calix and patina cum pane and vino be the
matter, and those words then spoken, Accipe potestatem offerendi sacrificium,
etc. be the form, as Valen. and his party, or whether the Imposition of hands,
with these words, Accipe potestatem remittendi peccata do complete the Act, so
as a man is not ordained till this be done, as Bellarm. and his party; here
they are divided. Bellarm. will have Imposition of hands to be essential to the
Sacrament, because else, says he, we cannot convince the Heretics, that
Ordination is a Sacrament properly so called, because we cannot demonstrate in
the Scripture any other external symbol of this Sacrament. As for the word
Sacrament in their sense, their cup, platter, etc. we lay them by; so for their
words, which they make the form, we lay them by: yet I perceive our Brethren do
contend for some words which should be used at the laying on the hands of the
Eldership.

For my part I am loath to engage further then I have clear Scripture to back
me, or necessary consequence from it. If we take Ordination at large, as this
Scripture holds it out, and other agree with it, it may be thus described.
Ordination is the separation of a person called to the work of the Ministry, by
persons in office with fasting, prayer, and Imposition of hands: Thus far this
Text will warrant us; and it is the fullest that any one Text will afford us.
Let us see how this suits with other Scriptures. Romans 1.1. Paul tells the
Romans, he was called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God. Here
is my Authority, I do not run before I was sent. But when was this done? and
how this done? look to my Text, and I doubt not but these Texts answer each to
other. Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called
them, v. 2. I have called, do you then separate: both the words we find here.
It seems they were not to seek what it was to separate, how to go about it,
they had been acquainted with that work before. This phrase separate is the old
phrase the Lord used before in his ordaining of old Officers. Numb. 8.14. Thus
shall thou separate the Levites, etc. thus, how? among other things; The
children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites. It was so here with
Paul. So Deuteronomy. 10.8. At that time the Lord separated the Tribe of Levi. So
Numb. 16.9. a full place. The Lord separated Israel from other Nations, this
was a high favor; but in Israel the Lord made another separation, and this was
higher honor still. Seems it but a small thing unto you that the God of
Israel has separated you, etc. Thus we see the Lord keeps the old phrase.

A person called. Paul and Barnabas were so, by God immediately, and these
persons commanded from God immediately to separate to ordain them: whence well
might Paul say, Gal. 1.1. was no Apostle by man. For all is here by immediate
command from God; whatever was done about them was by immediate revelation.
Whence he says v. 4. So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost: yet they
prayed, fasted, and imposed hands. Waltherus, Harmo, p. 490. speaks more to the
clearing of this doubt. As Paul then and Barnabas were called immediately, so
in constituted Churches Ministers are elected.

By Persons in Office. Not every office; no mention made ^here of Ruling Elders
or Deacons, but Teachers at the lowest.

If the people should claim this power as some do, for the people in Numb. 8.
did impose hands on the Levites, I have answered to this. Sepa. Exam. p. 70,
71. I add but this, The Apostles did translate Imposition of hands from the old
Testament to the New in the Ordination of Ministers; but for the peoples
imposition of hands, we find no such thing.

With prayer, fasting, imposition, etc. Here a question may be moved, Whether
fasting and prayer did properly belong to the essence of Ordination? or whether
as in other Ordinances we pray before the Administration of the Ordinance, so
here was praying for the Lord's grace and blessing upon the person to be
ordained, but ordination for the essence a distinct thing?

Some I suppose make it the whole essence, their Acts declare it, they do
nothing else (unless preach) and others look on imposition of hands but as a
common thing among the Jews, when they would wish one well, or pray for them,
or bless them after their manner, they laid their hands on their heads, and so
imposition is now laid aside.

A. But stay a little, 1. Are you certain that these prayed while they imposed
hands in ordination? I do not see how you will force it out of the Text: nor
can you force it from Acts 6.6. the word is (...), the Aor. 1. Whence the
Syriack and Arabic Translations (with which Piscator and others agree) render
the words, and when they had prayed they laid hands, plainly signifying that
the prayers went before imposition; nor I am sure will this Text help them; for
what, I pray, Did they impose hands all the while they fasted and prayed?
surely their arms were very weary to lie upon their heads a whole day; whence
it is more probable after that day was well spent in fasting and prayer, then
they imposed hands. Then the Jews common custom does not make imposition so
silly a thing.

2. In the consecration of the Levites (and so of the Priests) where we find
Imposition, we find no mention of prayer at all (that I see) much less at their
Imposition; if it were, it was not the essence of the ordinance, so far as I
can learn; I know diverse of God's things must be esteemed as slight things, if
our heads must be judges. But I think Tertul. spoke excellently: De paeniten.
Audaciam existimo de bono divini praecepti disputare: neque enim quia bonum
est idcirco auscultare debemus, sed quia Deus praecepit, etc.

3. Ordination is the authorizing of a person to his work: So the word (...),
Acts 6.3. plainly imply. Both H. Stephens, and Scapula, agree that the word
signifies Constituo, sic Constituere Regem. vel Creare. H. Stephens, Ib.
praeficio. [Hinc praefectus] to put in authority, to give rule, to ordain a
Ruler. So these Texts, Acts 7.10.27. Luc. 12.42. make it clear, with other
Texts. H. Stephens, These. To. 1. p. 1768. quoting of these Texts, Matthew. c. 24.
and cap. 25. Acts 6. Luc. 12. where the word is used, says, Quibus in locis,
non constituere solum, sed and praeficere verti potest, Sur. Chapter Dis. p. 3. p.
9.
and quidem aptius. To this reverend Hooker agrees. The Lord Christ in his
Kingly care conceived it necessary for the honor of the place, and the
execution of the work of a Deacon, to appoint choice men and solemn Ordination
to authorize them to the work, etc. But then how Prayer does properly carry any
thing of this nature in it I do not apprehend: define prayer, and see how it
suits with authorizing, nothing like it; to beg and to authorize are not the
same. Unless we look on Ordination as the consecration of a man to God, then a
prayer may be part of the essence.

4. If you ask me what is then? truly I find it hard to answer; it is plain to
me, it is not that which some cry up so, and content themselves with,
dissenting from their brethren. Imposition of hands I am sure is in the Text,
and must come into Ordination. I find that the old Non-conformists, speaking
first of the election of a Minister, in which the help of neighboring
Ministers must be required; then add, After that he is to be ordained by the
laying on of the hands of the eldership, with these words pronounced by the
Minister thereunto appointed, [According to this lawful calling, agreeable to
the word of God, whereby thou art chosen Pastor, In the name of God, stand thou
charged with the Pastoral charge of this people over which the Holy Ghost has
made thee Overseer, to govern the flock of God which he has purchased with his
blood.]

When I read these words, it made me call to mind the manner of the ordination
of two Deacons in N. England about sixteen years fince, which was the last
ordination I saw, or can remember any thing of; my memory may fail me in some
circumstance, but as I do remember it was very little different from this.

The Pastor and the Teacher Imposed hands, and then said, We do in the name of
Christ ordain thee N.N. Mat. 10.5. Mark 3.14. Luc. 9.2. Christ called,
ordained, sent his Disciples forth to preach with power and authority, he in
his own name, we in his name, surely Christ used words suitable.
(naming the person) Deacon of this Church, etc. then what duties the Scripture
puts upon the Deacon they framed into a handsome form; when they had so done, a
short prayer they made, their hands being still upon the Deacons head.

According to the form of the Non-conformists and the Church in N. England,
there is something appears like authorizing of a person to his work. Now if the
question be whether this be lawful or not? where have we warrant for this? that
words were thus used in the primitive times, is plain enough to those who read
Hierom, Ambrose, Austin. For Scripture this is plain, though some of these
words be not set down in the Scripture, yet if there be an authorizing,
appointing, Acts 6.3. a separating, setting apart, Acts 13. Some words must be
spoken that must signify so much, and what breach of rule it is to say, we
ordain, or set apart, being the person is now setting apart, the thing is
doing? For using the name of Christ, I hope it is he who has given Pastors and
Teachers to his Church, and from him does the person now ordaining receive his
power immediately, (It was not the Kingdom of Heaven gave Peter the keys, I do
not say the form of Ordination lies in these words, I am not willing to make
that the formalis ratio of an ordinance, which I have not express Scripture
for, I would not give my adversary so much advantage; yet Reason tells that
prayer alone, or imposition of hands alone, or both without words suitable
cannot make an Ordination.
but Christ gave Peter immediately the keys of the Kingdom of heaven) under his
authority, in his name they must act. For the other words applying to the
person ordaining, what duties the Scriptures do charge such an office withal; I
hope this ought to be, else it were a raw business. So that by necessary
consequence from Scripture I cannot well see how these things can be denied;
who can prove the Apostles did not use some such words, though they be not set
down. A sending, Romans 10. Setting apart, Appointing there must be and is; then
give us that which show and express these words: they were rational men, and
the Spirit purely rational which guided them, whence we may well conceive
something was spoken which answered the Scriptural expressions; and so long as
we hold to them I can see no harm, but that rather ought to be. Let others
speak more rationally who oppose this; and leaving out imposition of hands,
with these expressions, show what you do, which does carry in it the
authorizing of a man to his work. I am sure there is more reason for this, and
Scripture will more look to us in it, then there is for that magisterial power
which congregational Ministers (not Christ, that we can find in Scripture) give
to the people to keep men as they please from being admitted into the Church;
and hence against their Pastors, qualified men are kept out.

For the Objections which are made against this Text for Ordination, I find
these.

Obj. 1. Some conceive there is no ordination here, because he does not say, to
the office, but for the work whereunto I have called them, v. 2.

A. By the same reason you may say, there was no ordination in Acts 6. because
the Apostles in v. 3. do not use the word office, but (...). But I am confident
those Divines who use this argument, do acknowledge there was Ordination.

2. If a person be separated to the work of an officer, I think he is separated
to the office which that work belongs to.

Q. But what office was it to which they were now separated?

A. To be Apostles to the Gentiles: this I conceive was the business, and if we
follow them in this and the next Chapters, we shall find what was the office. I
think verse 15. of Chapter 9. is now fulfilled: the Lord told Ananias that Paul
was a chosen vessel to bear his name amongst the Gentiles; and now is Paul
ordained to it, and not before. This was a great work indeed, to have the
Gentiles brought into the Church; there was need of some solemn act to prove
their commission. Observe verse 46. of this Chapter, Paul says to the Jews, Lo,
we turn to the Gentiles. Thus Chrysostom twice, it was (...), which I think
signifies Munus Apostolicum. And thus most Divines I meet with affirm.

Obj. 2. Paul was made an Apostle before, Acts 9.

A. Prove that; the Text holds forth no such thing. Aretius says, that in
Acts 9. Paul was not sent to the Gentiles, but to Ananias, a quo disceret
discenda. And Mr. Noyes denies that Paul was an Apostle in this Chapter 13.
but thinks he was an Evangelist.

2. Paul was a Preacher before (and so had his authoritative mission I doubt
not.) Our Divines in their Comments upon the 1. v. reckon up five eminent
persons amongst those Prophets and Teachers mentioned [and this runs most
smoothly] Saul must be one of those, or else five will not be found. Had Saul
been then an Apostle, then it should have been there were in the Church at
Antioch an Apostle, Prophets, and Teachers: but Luke does not mention an
Apostle, which sure he would, since he does inferior officers. For my part I
conceive Paul was a Prophet; partly because he was filled with the Holy Ghost,
Acts 9.17. [ Paul had there an authoritative mission to preach] as I conceive
the Prophets mentioned were extraordinary persons, and their gifts such for
ought any thing I could ever see to the contrary as yet: partly because I find
Prophets did go from one Church to another, according as there was cause, being
men so extraordinarily fitted for service. Thus Judas and Silas, chap. 15.32.
being Prophets were sent, etc. thus Chap. 11.27. Prophets came from Jerusalem
to Antioch. Thus we find Paul and Barnabas joined and sent together, Chapter
11.30. and 12.25. and these two abode together a whole year at Antioch, Chap.
11.26. But that he was an Apostle before now, I see nothing to force it. Paul
then being one of these, and now called to an higher office, this does not
prove Reordination to the same office: any person in office, and called to a
higher office, ought to be ordained to it, though he was ordained to an
inferior office before. Reordination to the same office I know no warrant for.

3. After Christ's Ascension Apostles were not chosen in such a private way as
that Acts 9. would hold out. We find Matthias, Acts 1. chosen in a public and
solemn manner, God declaring his choice. So here in Acts 13. in a public
meeting Paul is called and separated in a solemn manner.

Obj. 3. If Paul were ordained an Apostle, then the greater was blessed of the
lesser: his Apostolical power and order was given by them who themselves had
not Apostolical power, being but Prophets and Teachers.

A. 1. They were not commanded to bless, but separate. Ordination and blessing
differ very much; we might as well say, Why should the less separate the
greater? so we find it here, and it is in vain to dispute against it if God
will have it so; but this was extraordinary.

2. Paul's Apostolical power he received from him who commanded him to be
separated, that is, the Holy Ghost, yet he is pleased to command these to
separate him to it; and surely such persons who ordain others by virtue of an
immediate command and revelation from God, though their office be inferior to
the persons ordained, yet this immediate command and revelation will
countervail the act of others who are equal in office. They acted all by an
immediate and extraordinary revelation; whence Paul might well say it was by
the will of God not of man, that he was an Apostle; hence the Text says, v. 4.
they were sent forth by the Holy Ghost. The call was from the Holy Ghost, the
command to separate them was from the Holy Ghost.

3. That Barnabas was made an Apostle now, I think will not be denied: that he
was an Apostle, Chap. 14. v. 14. tells us, which when the Apostles Barnabas and
Paul, etc. Thus Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2. p. 373, and 375. mentioning some of
the writings of Barnabas calls him (...) twice. Thus Hierom, Catal. Script.
Eccles. says of him, Barnabas was ordained Apostle of the Gentales with Paul.
Others I. could quote, who call him the Apostle Barnabas. But that Barnabas was
an Apostle before now I think none will say; for the Text is clear against him.
Why then Paul should not now be made an Apostle also, I see no reason, as well
as Barnabas. Hierom says (...).

4. If Paul were separated before to the office of an Apostle, what need he be
separated now again: I know no instance in Scripture where men were twice
separated to the same office.

Corn. a Lap. upon the Text, speaks thus, Saulus jam ab initio suae
conversionis, a Deo designatus and auctoratus erat Apostolus Gentium. Acts
9.15. Sed in actu primo and secret, hic in actu secundo and public designatur
Apostolus.

Mr. Noyes, who writes against impostion of hands, finding it used in this
place, says, Paul was indeed called out of course, and therefore God may by
this sign with many other commend Paul to the Church as an Apostle of Christ.
Yet but an Evangelist as yet with him. See Waltherus Harmon. p. 490. Also
Aretius upon the Text.

Arg. 2. If Christ has committed power to Ministers to ordain Ministers, then
Ordination is necessary to a Minister. But the Antecedent is true; ergo the
Consequent is true.

The Consequence is clear; for to what end was the power committed if it need
not be executed; it is to accuse Christ of want of wisdom to give a needless
power to officers, to command them to do a thing, and order them strictly in
doing of it, if men may come into office without it. If I have a power
committed to me to preach, and baptize, then some are bound to hear and to be
baptized. So in this.

1. For the Antecedent, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands on no man suddenly. p. 2. p. 50.
In quo praecepto non solum exemplum sed mandatum continetur, says Walaeus.
That Ordination is here meant, there is such a unanimous consent of the Church,
that I think there is no question of it. Thus the Fathers, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Episcopal, Synod. N. E. platf. chapter p. 11. M. Hooker Sur Chapter Disp.
p. 2. p. 74.
Classical, and Congregational: yea, though diverse of the Papists do understand
their Sacrament of Penance, yet Anselm, Cajetan, Cor. a Lap. Justin, Salmeron,
understand it rather of Ordination. But I must meet with this Text again, and
then I will prove it must be meant of Ordination.

2. 2 Timothy 2.2. few Interpreters that I see touch that which I aim at, i.e. How
did Timothy commit? or what was it for him to commit? etc. The things which we
had heard [not Traditions, as the Papists hence gather, for Quae Apostolus
Timotheo viva voce tradidit, Gerh. in loc.
sunt eadem cum illis quae scriptis consignavit] he must commit: To whom? They
must be faithful mon, and (...) able to teaach others. (...), etc. Chrysostom
upon this Text, and Cartwright in his Comment upon the speech of Christ to
Nicodemus, would make us believe it is not so easy a matter to be a Minister
as our vain heads in these days take it to be. But still how did Timothy commit
these? was it by teaching or preaching to them? so he did commit them to weak
men and women as well as able men: was it by writing these? so the whole Church
had them committed. This is clear, the men must be able before the things be
committed: his teaching might help them to be able; but being qualified and
able, how does he commit them? Surely by laying on of hands, i.e. ordaining of
them, and thus separating them to the work of the Ministry, he does indeed
commit them. If this Interpretation do not please, give me a better. After much
searching I found one or two go my way. Non solum fideliter eos doceas, sed
etiam potestatem alios docendi ipsis conferas; this is Commenting in Gerh.
opinion. Magna cura eligendus est Doctor, says Ambrose in loc. If you lay hold
of eligendus, pray take it in a large sense as Ambrose does, and it was
Timothy's election. Anselm, and Bullinger incline also this way.

The 3 Titus 5. Titus is left in Crete to Constitute or Ordain Elders. I do
not remember that Clemens uses any other word, but either (...), or (...),
[signifying the same] in his Epist. ad Corin. when he speaks of the Apostles
ordaining of Officers. Doubtless [saith Musculus] as Paul left Titus to ordain,
Loc. Com. p. 198.
so Titus kept the method Paul used, i. e. election, prayer, and imposition of
hands. Those then that come into the Ministry in Crete, they must be ordained.
In vain were those words to Timothy and Titus, if ordination were such a
needless thing: Timothy and Titus also being Churchofficers, where is this
popular election that is so much cried up to give the Essence? One would think
the Apostle should have given strict command to the people to look to their
Election, because it gave the Essence; but not be so exact with Timothy and
Titus, who gave but an adjunct; who can deny the adjunct, or of what force is
it when the essence is given before? Timothy and Titus might well say, nay
Paul, We are clear, we must not ordain whom we will, See separ, exam. p. 55. ad
59.
but whom the people will, to whom they give the essence; if an unworthy fellow
be chosen, let the fault lie where it does, it cannot on us; if we gave the
essence it were true indeed: whether we will ordain them or not, that hinders
not, for they have the essence; then act they may sure enough without us.

Arg. 3. It is necessary that he who does the Authoritative Acts of a Minister,
should show true Authority by which he does them.

But he who does the Authoritative Acts of a Minister without Ordination,
cannot show true Authority by which he does them.

Ergo Ordination is necessary to a Minister.

The Major is plain, it holds in all Acts of Authority, else a man is an
usurper. By what authority do thou these things? said they to Christ; the
question was rational: if Christ had not Authority, he would not have done them.

Minor. He who shows true Authority for his Ministerial Acts, must show
Scripture-authority.

But he that performs Ministerial Acts without Ordination, cannot show
Scripture-authority. Ergo.

The major is plain. The minor, if any deny, let them produce their
Scripture-authorities. He who is sufficiently qualified, elected [supposing
there is a Church already] and ordained, this man I am sure may show his
Authority: But he that is not Ordained, cannot show it, I know no Scripture to
warrant it. Let our question be attended.

I have heard it affirmed, and that strongly, from a person of no small
abilities, that the Fraternity may Preach, Baptize, administen the Supper as
well as the Pastor; the common Scriptures urged by this wild generation, and
Acts 10.48. were alleged. I never heard that the Papists, or our Bishops,
would allow any private man to baptize in a Church where there were Ministers
present; this text would force it, if these men argue right, provided they can
prove that these brethren were private men, and Peter not extraordinarily
guided; which yet they have not done. But a little further.

1. It was granted there are Church Officers, and shall be till the body be
perfected, Ephesians. 4. If so, then these Officers have some things so proper to
them, that they are not common to others: But if all men may preach, baptize,
administer the Supper, there is nothing proper to the Officers: if any thing,
it must be government; which first is by many denied: But if it be yielded, why
may they not take this also as well as the rest? but if Church Officers have
nothing proper to them, how are they officers? That officers have something
proper to them, I think none can deuy, the nature of the thing will carry it in
all Officers: If all can make warrants, etc. where is the office of a Justice?
and thus in other offices, what is common to all, is proper to none: how are
officers known but by their actions?

To say, That though the brethren do the same things, yet they do them not as
their Officers, is to say nothing. How shall we know that? If any man may make
a warrant, and that warrant is as valid as the Justices, how shall a man know
who is Justice? the name may differ, but not the power, Ergo, not the office.

2. We find diverse promises made to the Church of Gods giving Officers, Jer.
3.15. and 23.4. Ezekiel. 34.25. Isa. 30.20. But if every body may do the officers
acts, then God seems to make promises of good to his Church, which are
needless; a great show of mercy, but no mercy indeed. There is no need, no use
of the things promised, what would this impute to God?

3. Our Divines have maintained against the Papists that Matthew. 28.19. was
spoken to the Apostles, and the Ministers of the word their successors, and the
context will force it, I think, if he spoke to the eleven Apostles, v. 16. And
though the Lords Supper is not there mentioned, yet surely it was there
included, there is par ratio. Let any man bring a proof from Scripture or
antiquity, that ever any but an officer did administer the Lords Supper.
Docete, baptizate, Matthew. 28.19. Haec dicuntur solis Apostolis and Ministris
verbi; certum est haec non fuisse dicta hominibus privatis. Bell. ener. co. 3.
p. 342
In Actis Apostolorum nihil omnino legitur de privatis Christianis absque
speciali revelatione baptizantibus, says Learned Ames.

4. The Church Officers under the Old Testament had such acts peculiar to them,
as none but they could do: It were strange that Christ should institute
Officers under the New Testament, and they should have nothing proper to them.

5. If this be true, then all the body is an Eye. The foot may say to the eye,
though you are placed above, and I below, yet I do the same acts you do; and
it is not the place, but the organ and the action which makes an eye. It is not
the place, but the actions show the Officer; that member which sees is the
eye, place it where you will; if all see, then all are eyes. But the Apostle
denies the whole body to be an eye, 1 Cor. 12.

6. Church Officers are called Stewards, ^verseers, Preachers, Ambassadors,
Rulers. We would think it strange, men would not bear it in civil acts, to have
every body do the acts which belong to these Relations; as much order I hope
in Gods house, as in other houses or States. He is every where a God of order,
but this was spoken in reference to his House especially.

I intend to add no more arguments to prove the necessity of Ordinantion: I
have only two objections to answer, which two eminent Divines made against me,
maintaining the necessity of Ordination.

Obj. 1. We read of no Ordination but it was performed either by extraordinary
persons, or at least some such were present when they died who know where they
left the power. The Bishop, Presbyter, Fraternity, each of these challenge the
power, but who knows to whom it belongs?

Answ. The first part of the objection cutts off Ordination wholly [and that is
chiefly aimed at:] The second part does seem to yield it, could we but find
who should Administer it.

To the first part I answer.

1. It Is no wonder though we find extraordinary persons in the administration
of this Ordinance when they were in Being. In the first beginnings these must
ordain, or none: we have but the histories of planting of Churches in the New
Testament, where none were before; and this was done by persons extraordinary.

2. All that extraordinary persons did, I hope did not die with them. What is
there more extraordinary in Ordination then in Preaching? why must not
Preaching die as well as ordination to Preaching? The action is no more then
may be performed by ordinary Ministers.

If it be said (as I know it is) they conveyed gifts in Ordination, I shall
answer this when I come to Mr. Noyes.

3. How shall we prove that there were Ministers elected without the presence,
acting, guidance, and consent of extraordinary officers? I think no man can
prove there were any so chosen, by the examples we have of the peoples choice;
for extraordinary persons were ever present, and we find they acted. By the
same reason throw away Election, which this Divine would hardly do, Walaeus
To. 2. p. 51.
Nullum etiam occurret exemplum in toto Novo Testamento, nec in primitiva
Ecclesia quae Apostolorum aetatem excepit, ullam ullius ordinarii Doctor is
Electionem in ulla Ecclesia peractam fuisse, sine consensu and consilio
aliquorum saltem Doctroum. This pincheth.

4. Were the Churches so blind, that they could not see this to be an
extraordinary thing, and that to die with these officers? Would the
extraordinary officers admit ordinary Presbyters to join with them in that work
which was proper to them as extraordinary officers. But that they did so, the
Epist. to Timo. does plainly carry it, and was, no doubt, the ground of that
Canon. 3. in Council. Carth. 4. where Presbyters were to impose hands with the
Bishop.

5. Were the Epistles to Timothy and Titus writ to them as extraordinary
officers? I know when Timothy is called upon to do the work of an Evangelist,
this was proper to him as such an officer; but I think, laying aside that which
was proper to them as Evangelists [which did not consist in the administration
of any Ordinance] those Epistles were written to Ministers. They must preach
the Word, be instant in season and out of season, etc. as well as Timothy; and
why not I pray commit the things, 2 Timothy 2.2.
etc. 2 Timothy 2.2. lay hands on none suddenly, as well as Timothy? What
extraordinary matter is in this above the other?

6. Shall persons come into the Ministry untried whether they be fit or unfit,
sound or heretical? No, by no means, this is judged a dangerous thing. Men
must be tried, and that by those who are able to judge [as now we have
Commissioners.] But what Scripturerule have you for this? If you leave out the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 3.10. I doubt you will hardly find any
in Scripture: but Timothy and Titus were extraordinary persons, and what have
we to do with their Epistles? but if you will make use of those Epistles to
mainain your trial of men [it was a Commissioner that made this objection
against me] give us leave to make use of the same Epistles to prove our
Ordination of Ministers; those who are able to do the one, I hope are as able
to do the other.

For the second part of the Objection, I little regard that. As for the
Fraternty, let the people bring forth their Charter, and show us where the
great Lord gave them this power. Against this I have argued a little [I
intended but a little] in my book against the Separatists, p. 70, etc.

For the Bishop and the Presbyter it must first be proved that these are
distinct officers jure divino, or else the contest is vain: this is not a
question for me to handle in this place, but I can safely say this, there must
be more brought from Divine writ then I see is yet brought to prove it, or else
I can acknowledge no such thing. I suppose Bishop Davenant in his Determination
upon the question, has summed up what can be brought from Scripture, but that
will not do: yet he there in some cases will allow Presbyters to ordain, and I
think our case is as weighty as any. Anselm, the Popish Canterburian
Archbishop, in his Comment upon Titus 1. [Though I see much of it is taken out
of Jerom] gave me enough to quiet my thoughts about this question; such lines
from his pen took much with me considering the Scriptures he brought. I am sure
he that made the objection did not own any such distinction. I think no sober
Bishop did ever yet deny the Ordinations in the French, Dutch, and Scottish
Churches to be valid.

The second Objection was made by another reverend Divine, when I passed the
Commissioners; He put this question to me, Whether I judged Ordination
necessary to the Constitution of a Minister? I answered, Yes, if it could be
had. He asked me to which command I would refer Ordination? I answered, to the
second. To which he assenting added, Cultus naturalis could not, nor must be
laid aside; but Cultus Institutus might rather then Cultus naturalis should:
God will have mercy, not sacrifice in such a case; but if I would say
Ordination was necessary and might now be had, then I must own it by
succession, and consequently maintain the Church of Rome to be a true Church.
Some words then passed, but time cut us off.

To this reverend Divine I shall now give a further answer:

A. The first part of the speech says no more then we allow, only when
Ordination cannot be had, I think it is not then properly laid aside.

2. Preaching, take the word strictly, as it is the act (...) is not to be
referred to the first Commandment (I conceive) but to the second; nor do I see
our Divines make it a part of Cultus naturalis.

3. This notion will cut off popular election, as well as Ordination, if
preaching belongs to Cultus naturalis, for that must not be laid aside, says
this Divine; I hope popular election does not belong to the first Commandment;
then election is as unnecessary, and if men may preach without Election and
Ordination we shall have brave work. [Preaching here is put for all other
Ordinances] where then is the essence of a Minister according to his own
notion?

But the last part of his speech was that where he put the most strength, which
yet has been often answered, that I might well spare my pains: something I
answered then, and now will add more.

1. Diverse of our Congregational Divines [of which this reverend Divine is one]
conceive [and practice accordingly] the Fraternity to have power of Ordination;
and if so, then if election may be had, Ordination may be had; so shall it not
need be laid aside, nor shall we need trouble our selves about Rome, that
dispute rather may be laid aside. I desired an Answer of him what he thought of
it, but he would give me none.

2. But suppose his judgment be contrary: According to this argument
Ordination, which we are sure was once an Ordinance of God, [and I have before
proved it] must be utterly lost, [unless with the Seekers we gape for some
Apostles again] For this argument of Succession may ever be urged, and will be
as strong to the worlds end as now. But why must the Church lose an Ordinance?
If the argument be so strong against Ordination, is it not as strong against
any thing else that came through Rome?

Rome is no true Church, ergo nothing that comes through Rome is valid. What
will be next? Mr. Ainsw. and other Separatists zealous enough against Rome,
would not say so of Baptism, therefore admitted of no re-baptizing. Nor would
Mr. Johnson upon the same ground admit of reordination; one was as valid as
the other.

3. If God has so far owned the Ministry of England, as to work with it to the
conversion of many soundly, and others visibly, whence there are numbers to
elect Ministers, I doubt not but he will as well own the Ordination of
Ministers by them, though they had some accidental corruptions adhering to
their own Ordination [for the substance true.] If he has not owned the
Ministry, how came our Brethren to gather Churches here some few years since,
those who elected them to office, I believe very few of them [if any in some
places] were converted by Ministers who were not ordained, because they must
have their Ordination by succession, etc. I pray where is there a Ministry in
the world which God has more owned?

4. Let it be as this Divine says, because Cultus institutus may be laid
aside, Ordination may be also, etc. Let us see whither this will go; then
official preaching [pardon the expression, for I think all preaching, properly
so called, is official] Baptism, the Lord's Supper, Discipline, may be all laid
aside upon the same account, for these belong to Cultus Institutus, so the
whole second Commandment lost; which way shall we come to these for fear of
Rome? will he say, that the Churches [and those without Ordinances, it seems]
may choose their Pastors [suppose Wickliff, Luther, Zuinglius, men gifted and
raised extraordinarily] and election giving the essence to a Ministers call,
these may now preach, baptize, etc. [so the second Commandment is saved, else I
know not which way he can save it] though they be not ordained; may not the
same Ministers as well Ordain other Ministers, Ordination belonging to the same
Commandment? surely no rational man can oppose it; this he must yield to, or
else the whole instituted worship of God must be lost out of the Church as well
as Ordination. But if election will help, then I hope most of the godly
Ministry in England may ordain, for they have been elected by the people, men
qualified, and whom God has blessed in their work more or less: though they
have more then election in their own esteem, that hinders not; they have that
which you think can authorize them to preach, baptize, etc. then to ordain as
well; and those who are ordained by such, no doubt but may Ordain again; so
Rome and Succession trouble us not. Ames grants that Wickliff, Med. The. l. 1.
c. 33. s. 39.
Luther, Zuinglius, may not unfitly be called extraordinary Ministers, joining
some of our famous Martyrs with them, and gives three reasons for the
assertion; the last is, Quia ordine tum temporis perturbato and collapso,
necesse habuerunt non nulla tentare praeter ordinem commune. So Syn. Pur. The.
D. 42. S. 41, 42, 50.

5. Carry the objection to our first Reformers, where it should seem to have
most strength, what godly man is there who calls to mind Cranmer, Latimer,
Hooper, Ridly, Philpot, Bradford, etc. persons upon whom this objection would
fall, as to their own Ministry, and their ordaining of others, that would not
be ashamed of himself, should he null their Ministry, and as some [though this
Divine abhors it I believe] whose mouths are full of nothing but Antichristian,
call these Antichristian Ministers, because ordained by Popish men. Thou who
call these Antichristian Ministers, rise up with them in the morning, answer
them in holiness, go to the prisons with them, and from thence to the stake and
burn with them for the sake of Christ: grant it they were ordained as the
objection runs, after inlightning they threw off Popery, but their Ordination
they held, being no Popish Invention, they go on still to preach, baptize, etc.
and ordain others; Why not? when these men were ordained by such men, they had
a Ministerial charge put upon them, set apart to the work of the Ministry to
dispense the things of Christ, not of Mahomet, or such like. While they were in
the dark they acted superstitiously, afterward more purely; the corruptions
they reformed, the substance they kept [and so our Divines now] Will not the
mercy of God pardon this, and keep his sacrifice still in his Church? I doubt
not but he will. The usual distinctions made 1. Between a person and his
office. 2. Between the substance of an ordinance and the accidental corruptions
of it. 3. Between what comes through Rome, [being Christ's Institutions] and
what comes from Rome, being their own Inventions; these distinctions will soon
answer the objection.

6. To. 2. p. 66.
Learned Ames in his answer to Bellarmin urging this, Ecclesia nullo modo
potest esse sine Pastoribus and Episcopis: illi soli sunt very Episcopi qui ab
Apostolis per legitimam successionem and Ordinationem descendisse ostenduntur,
etc. speaks thus, Ab Apostolis descenderunt ownes illi Pastores qui secundum
canones Apostolicos in Scripturis traditos sunt in ecclesia constituti. 4.
Horum perpetua successio ab Apostolis and Apostolicis viris non est necessario
ostendenda ex historiarum humanarum incertis testimoniis, sed ex promissione
illa Christi, qua spospondit se per omnes aetates excitaturum operarios ad
salutem electorum procurandam. 5. Ordinandi potestas quoad jus cuique ecclesiae
particulari est a Deo concessa. Now for his last. 6. Pastores hunc in modunt
descendentes, and justo jure ordinatos habemus nos per Dei gratiam in omnibus
ecclesiis ex voto nostro constitutis. If any should take hold of the last
words, and suppose the Doctor means, gathered Churches in which the people did
ordain, surely they wrong the Doctor much. I wonder how many such Churches
there were when the Doctor wrote? neither had the Doctor answered Bellarmin,
who opposes all Ministers not ordained by the Roman power, but had fallen off
from Rome: then the Doctor must own the ordination of the Reformed Ministers,
else he said nothing to the Jesuit. I wish this Divine would answer Bellarmin
better. Doctor Ames uses to be esteemed of amongst Congregational men.

7. For Rome being a true Church: it is well known that Rome is more corrupt
now in Doctrine then it was when our first Reformers fell off; what difference
there is between the former and latter Schoolmen who knows not? so that Rome
is not now what it was then, when our men had their Ordination from thence. But
may we not say as our brethren do of Parish-Congregations, they will not deny
[the most understanding and sober of them] but that in many parishes there are
true Churches, though they will not say the whole parish is a true Church,
according to the constitution. So there is a true Church under the Romish
jurisdiction, though we do not say Rome is a true Church.

But what shall we say to such a people where the true God, and the Trinity,
with the Attributes of God; Jesus Christ in his divine and human nature; the
satisfaction and price of Christ as the meritorious cause of our justification
See Bellar. de Justif. l 1. c. 2. and l. 2. c. 5.
and pardon; The Scriptures; All the ordinances of God; The doctrine of the
Freegrace of God in opposition to man's proud free will [O excellent Bradwardin,
and Alvarez; etc. are owned, defended, believed] where there are persons who
walk according to Scripture rules in a great degree: what shall we say? is here
no Church?

If our State have been rightly guided when they made the Act to Tolerate those
who own One God, Christ, and Scriptures, then a Church in Rome may be owned,
where these and many other truths are maintained, more soundly then they will
be by many of our tolerated persons: yea, it were well if all the members of
Congregated Churches in England were as sound in those truths [before
mentioned] and as holy in their conversations as are diverse who live under Rome.

As for the Pope, were it no more but bare government, compared with the
carriage of many Church Members, I may say as Learned Mr. Norton of N. England,
in his Epistle to the General Court, Is there no medium between Boniface and
Morellius, between Papacy and Anarchy, Babylon and Babel? etc. both are naught,
the Peoples Anarchy as well as the Popes Tyranny; and his Tyranny will not
sooner deny a Church there [as to Discipline] then Anarchy does in these
members: we see the effect, how many men in England have turned Papists, since
they saw these carriages in the Churches.

But again, What mean those Texts, Come out of her my people, Rev. 18.4. if
there be no Church there? The woman's flying into the wilderness, Rel. 12.6.
take it as Mr. Mead, or as Pareus, yet it will argue a true Church to have been
under Rome. The witnesses prophesied 1260. days, during the time of the woman's
being in the wilderness they were to feed her; this must needs fall under the
time before the Reformation, begin it when you will.

More I could say, but I think this is sufficient to prove that Ordination may
and ought still to be continued notwithstanding Rome, and that it is necessary
to a Minister. And since both these objections are made against me by
Commissioners [though I would hope more Disputandi gratia, then being indeed
opposite to my Thesis, I say I would be glad to hope so] and since this Script
may possibly fall into some of their hands, I wish humbly [and I know I could
have hundreds of godly Ministers to join with me] they would please to take off
that offense, which I conceive is justly given to the most part of the godly
Ministry in England, when they see them let into the Ministry persons
illiterate, and some blameworthy in their conversations [as I am informed by
godly Ministers who know them] besides being illiterate, and persons who
neither are ordained, nor will be ordained, nor I think would sober Ministers
ever ordain them. These things are not secret, but more publicly spoken off
then my Book can publish; whence their friends are grieved, their enemies
rejoice, having cause they think to open their mouths against them, and to
vilify Reformation, besides the hinderance of union in the Churches.

CHAP. II. Concerning Imposition of hands in Ordination.
ALthough our Divines have all I think [unless a few risen up in our days]
agreed in the necessity of Ordination to a Minister; yet they have not all had
the same thoughts about Imposition of hands, as if it were necessary to
Ordination. Most have agreed in this, that though they look on it as a
Ceremony, an Adjunct, yet it ought to be practiced, because of the Apostolical
examples. Our Congregational Brethen in Essex cast it away; and some cause I
have to stand upon it, because I therefore refused Ordination by them, because
they would not Impose hands, and so it was the longer before I could be
Ordained. If I did refuse upon insufficient grounds, I am sure the grounds
which were given to me for the contrary were very insufficient. I lost the
papers, but met with another manner of Antagonist shortly after Mr. Noyes (a
reverend Divine, and my dear friend) of N. England, who has said more against
it then I have as yet heard from these; what any body else have said against it
in writing I know not unless the Author of the Diatribe, etc. whom that worthy
Divine Doctor Seaman has answered: I cast my eye upon it long since, but do
not now remember any thing Pro, or Con, what there is said, or in any other
man. What then I can gather from Scripture and Reason I shall humbly offer to
the Reader, and to Mr. Noyes in answer to what he has said against it.

Not many years since Humane Ceremonies added to the worship of God, how much
trouble and misery they added to the Church, we have not yet forgot. Men wrote
and spoke so far as they dared, and suffered by reason of them. Men's wits are
now busied as much in throwing out of God's worship, as theirs were in adding;
why then we may not now stand up in desence of God's Ceremonies [if this be but
a Ceremony] as they opposed Men's Ceremonies, I know not.

Come then to Imposition, etc. Let us hear a little what other men have said
about it: And first for great Calvin, whom I hear alleged against Imposition,
which I a little wondered at, knowing Calvin had spoken sufficiently for it.

1. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. s. 16.
Licet nullum extet certum praeceptum de manuum Impositione, quia tamen fuisse
in perpetuo usu Apostolis videmus, illa tam accurata eorum observatio prae
cepti vice nobis esse debet.

2. Again, Impositionem manuum, L. 4. c. 14. s. 20.
qua Ecclesia Ministri, in suum munus initiarentur, non invitus patior vocari
Sacramentum.

3. Again, L. 4. c. 2. s. 16.
Et certe utile est ejusmodi symbolo Ministerii dignitatem populo commendari,
etc. praeterea non erit inane signum, si in germanam suam originem restitutum
fuerit-: nam si nihil frustra spiritus Dei in Ecclesia Dei instituit, hanc
ceremoniam cum ab eo profecta sit sentiemus non esse inutilem, modo in
superstitiosum usum nou vertatur. See him again l. 4. c. 19. s. 31. Calvin's
judgment is clear, with his Reasons for it.

Chemnitius giving us the judgment of the Lutheran Churches, says, Exam.
Council. Trid. p. 221.
Nec manuum Impositionem vocare Sacramentum gravabimur. I omit Austin, who
called it so long before they were born, in a large sense, not the Popish
sense. Nos uno verbo dicimus, si per Sacramentum jusjurandum, Loc. Com. p. 321.
and religiosam, obstrictionem intelligunt, sit Ordo ipsorum, per me licet,
Sacramentum, quale veteribus erat Sacramentum militare, says Musculus.

Walaeus says, Loc. Com. l. 1. p. 473.
In all the Confessions of their Churches [except one or two] it was required,
and because the Apostles always used it, and the Apostle gives that precept to
Tim. 5.22. Not to lay on hands suddenly we ought not to omit it; because in
that negative an affirmative is contained that he should Impose on worthy
persons; where since by a Synecdoche it is taken for the election of a Pastor,
certe pro ritu, vel part essentiali habenda est. Thus he.

From the same charge to Timothy, Sur. chapter Dis. p. 2. p. 74.
Mr. Hooker says he is willing to follow the rode, when he has no
constraining reason to go aside. It seems this Reverend man knew no cause why
Imposition should be laid aside.

The Synod of New England say, Platf. chapter Dis. c. 9.
Church Officers ought to be Ordained with Imposition of hands.

Here then we have the Fathers, Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Episcopal,
Classical, Congregational men, the Churches generally since the Apostles days
Imposing hands in Ordination. We must have strong reasons (as Mr. Hooker says)
to lead us afide from these Churches. Custom of the Churches Paul uses to make
something of, 1 Cor. 11. I think so should we, having especially such
Scripture-precedents going before them: I look upon their practice as very
weighty.

But I come to argument, laying down first my Position: Imposition of hands
ought to be used in Ordination.

Arg. 1. That form of Ordination which comes nearest to the Gospel-pattern,
ought to be used.

But Imposition of hands in Ordination is that form which comes nearest to the
Gospelpattern; ergo Imposition of hands in Ordination ought to be used.

The major I suppose cannot well be denied, especially by those who in the
Bishops days use to cry out so much, All things must be made according to the
pattern in the Mount; and why now I pray must not things be done according to
the pattern of the Gospel? what do you make of it? that which you may follow,
or let alone as you please? what is said against this I shall meet with anon.

For the minors bring us forth those rules, or examples which show that men may
be ordained, or were ordained without Imposition of hands: that Church Officers
were ordained with Imposition, the Texts are known, as before mentioned.

Arg. 2. If the Gospel expresses the whole Ordinance of Ordination by
Imposition of hands, then Imposition of hands in Ordination ought to be used.

But the Antecedent is true, Ergo the Consequent is true.

The Consequence is clear; for why should the Apostle mention that which is but
needless, or at least but indifferent to set out an ordinance by.

Obj. But it is said, Paul says at another time, for this cause I bow my knee,
etc. meaning prayer.

A. 1. Be it so, yet this hinders not; Paul says he did bow his knee, I know
Paul was so honest that he would not lie; he did bow his knee sure enough. So
when he faith, Lay hands, etc. I doubt not but Timothy did and ought to Lay
hands, etc.

2. There were other gestures for prayer recorded in the Gospel besides
kneeling; can you show other Ceremonies or Adjuncts [as you call them] recorded
besides Imposition in Ordination? If there had been never any other gesture
recorded in prayer but kneeling, then we would have concluded we ought to use
that gesture only; why not then Imposition of hands in Ordination, since none
but this is recorded.

3. There may be some difference put between Paul's narration, what he did, and
Paul's injunction of another, what he should do. Paul might tell them another
time that he prayed for them standing; but where does he order Timothy, or
others to ordain without Imposition?

4. This objection would carry it, as if there were no more in Imposition of
hands in reference to Ordination then in kneeling to prayer: which I will not
as yet yield; what I have said before I think will show the contrary, and more
I shall add.

But the Antecedent is the part I have to prove, which if I can make good, it
will make much to show the necessity of Ordination, and of Imposition in it;
the Text is well known. 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands on no man suddenly: the question
is whether Ordination be here meant. I named before the judgment of all sorts
of Divines, ancient and modern, Episcopal, Classical, Congregational, [yea, of
diverse of the Papists] who agree it is meant of Ordination: this might be
enough one would think; but in our days we must prove what we say; had our
Brethren given us reasons to the contrary, I might have known what to have
answered to; but I hear of none.

1. This Imposition cannot have reference to sick persons: There Is no matter
how suddenly he laid on hands to cure them; nothing appearing in the context.

2. Nor can it relate to the blessing of children; the context has nothing for
it: nor did I ever read that the Apostles did use this practice.

3. Nor can it be meant of the Sacrament of Penance, as many Papists do
expound it, though some of the most learned are against it, and rather expound
it of Ordination, as before; the context will favor something this notion: but
that I have this against it.

1. For their Sacrament we reject it; for absolution of a repenting person,
before bound under Church-censure, this we own; but in Scripture as we have no
precept, so no example that the Church did use to Impose hands on a penitent;
we read no such thing when the Incestuous person was loosed, after he had been
bound by excommunication; what reason then to have it understood of that which
in Scripture is not to be found; it stands with most reason to expound it with
other Scriptures.

2. I see Bellarmin and others make little of Imposition in the Sacrament of
Penance; but in Ordination he makes it an essential part: More reason then why
of this then of that, which has no other word for it.

3. For the Brethren who oppose us, I presume they will not understand it thus;
for they give so much to the people, in admission of members, that Timothy
might well be hindered for laying hands suddenly on such: and that 2 Epistle to
the Corinths, with the practice of Antiquity, especially Cyprian will give some
ground for it.

Had it not been for my first reason, and the reasons I have to prove it must
be meant of Ordination, I should have inclined this way because of v. 20.

4. Nor can it be meant of Confirmation. I have heard our Brethren have thus
Interpreted it. But

1. I can see no shadow of reason for this in the context; for the Apostle is
speaking nothing of Baptism, about which time that which men call confirmation
was used.

2. They must then prove that Timothy had power to confer the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost, for so we find in confirmation they were given, Acts
8, and 9, and 19. Of this more anon.

3. Nor do I see what need of that caution suddenly; for no matter how soon
they were confirmed in the faith: they were in the Church already, and to
confirm them as fast as might be was good. Peter in Acts 8. and Paul in Acts
19. did suddenly Impose hands to this end; good to keep them from Wavering and
Apostatizing.

4. How did Timothy partake of other men's sins when he sought to confirm them
suddenly?

5. Laying then these by, the text must needs be meant of Ordination, for I
know of no other cases in which hands were Imposed in the New stament, [nor at
all in one case, i.e. penance:] So that it must be this, and that I shall yet
further prove.

1. The Apostle from the 17. v. had been discoursing about Elders: now it is
very seasonable to give some word about the making of Elders. So the context
holds it fairly out.

2. The Aethiopick Version gives it, Ne Constituas quenquam subito: This is
Ordination plainly.

3. The reason why he should be cautious, was lest he should partake of other
men's sins. Ne reus fias corrupti ministerii, says Aretius. And it is certain,
he that is the cause of a corrupt man's coming into the Ministry (or
insufficient) may be guilty of much sin; it is so weighty a thing to have the
charge of souls. Chrysostom, on Isa. 58.
Jerome, Calvin, Chamier, Hemmingius, Cor. a Lap. speak excellently to this
reason of the caution.

4. As the Apostle had taught Timothy in the 3. Chapter what should be the
qualification of Bishops and Deacons, the former of which he had been speaking
of in this Chapter, just before our Text, it may very well suit that Timothy
should not suddenly ordain men, but first see whether they were so qualified as
he had written to him. So much for this Text.

2. A second Text wherein the Scripture expresses Ordination by Imposition
only, is that known place 1 Timothy 4.14. the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. This Text is generally understood of the Ordination of Timothy. I
never met with any who denied it but one Socinian. But of this Text more anon.

3. A third Text as some apprehend, is Heb. 6.2. which Mr. Noyes does very much
oppose. I could not at first tell what was his meaning to bestow so many lines
upon it, but at last I thought of Mr. Hooker, whose judgment it is likely Mr.
N. understood; two advantages Mr. N. has: 1. The multitude of Interpreters who
understand it of confirmation (as Mr. N. says.) 2. That it follows Baptism.

But first, let us see if no Divines understand it of Ordination, so as it is
comprehended at least under it. Junius, Pareus, and our Annotations take it
largely, and look at Ordination included. Gualter, Tossanus, Gellespio, Dicson,
Johnson, Jacob. Bullinger of Ordination only, or chiefly. Mr. Cartw. thus, By
Imposition of hands the Apostle means no Sacrament, Rhem. Test.
much less confirmation after Baptism; but by Trope, or borrowed speech the
Ministry of the Church, upon the which hands were laid; which appears in that
whosoever believes not there ought to be a Ministry by order to teach and
govern the Church overthrows Christianity: this is to the point indeed.

Mr. Sur. Chapter Dis. p. 1. p. 7.
Hooker proves that Church Discipline is a fundamental point of Religion from
hence; thus, Laying on of hands being by a Metonymy of the Adjunct put for
Ordination; and Ordination one particular put for the whole of Discipline.
Having then these men [and these no babes] on my side, I will see what reason
there is why Ordination here must not be meant.

For confirmation [which so many expound it of] I searched amongst those
Protestant Divines which I had to find a definition of it in our Protestant
sense, and why they call it so; but I could not find one who gave me
satisfaction but Chemnitius, Exam. Council. Trid. de confirmat. The Papists
definition I knew, and a pretty one it is. That which Chemnitius speaks gave me
great content; but I could wish some body would, prove this is the meaning of
Imposition in this Text, for then we should have one more strong ground for
Infant Baptism, as we may gather by Chemnitius opening of confirmation. Casting
my eye on Diodati I see he thus expounds it, and hence gathers Infant-Bpatism.
But this is not sufficient; we call for proof now. I know Imposition of hands
was after Baptism in Scripture, except Act. 9.17. and so far as we can learn
from Scripture, we find

1. Extraordinary gifts were ever the effect of it. So Acts 8. Acts 9. Acts 19.
nor do we find any other end of it; these gifts being conveyed in a way above
nature, might very well tend to the confirming them in their faith received,
and so well called confirmation. But in the confirmation we talk of there is no
such thing, nor do I see why we should call it confirmation.

2. The persons who did Impose hands, were either Apostles, or persons
extraordinarily raised. We read but of one Ananias, Acts 9. I do not find the
Evangelists did Impose. Hence the Bishops, who call themselves the Apostles
successors, they claim this power, and poor Presbyters must not do it [at
least without leave from them.]

That then which truly deserves the name confirmation, is ceased many hundred
years since. But for the thing it self, which our Divines call confirmation, as
Chemnitius lays it down, Instit. l. 4. c. 19. s. 4.
I could heartily wish with Calvin that it were brought into practice, only
Imposition, I think, might be left out; yet I would not contend with him who
did use it, rather so, then not have the thing practiced. Musculus speaking of
Imposition in confirmation, says, The Imposition of the Apostles was of
miraculous operation, Loc. Com. p. 321.
and ceased long since: Exemplum illius retinuerunt Episcopi, quo magis
Apostolorum viderentur esse successores. But he speaks nothing against
Imposition in Ordination.

But to the Text; let us see why Ordination must be shut out here.

1. The key of Interpretation I take to be the word Foundation and principles,
etc. (as we Translate.) So Camerarius, Sunt necessaria Dogmata and Capita
doctrinae Christianae quae enumerantur hoc loco. So Chrysostom. Now it seems
strange to me that a foundation should be lost out of the Church above fifteen
hundred years. I thought foundations should hold so long as the building lasts;
take away a foundation the house must be in danger. But if this be meant of
Ordination, then it holds; for the Ministry shall hold so long as the Church
holds; till the body be perfected, Ephesians. 4. But if confirmation, and
extraordinary gifts, which were the only effect, so far as we find in
Scripture, [as before I touched] then this foundation is gone long since.

2. Faith, Repentance, and Baptism, are to last to the end of the world. Some
of our Divines do from this Text prove against the Socinians that Water Baptism
is an ordinance still to continue, because it is put amongst the foundations,
Chatechetical heads; why then the Ministry, which is Christ's great ordinance,
to convert, to beget faith, [which comes by hearing, etc.] and authorized to
baptize to the end of the world, should not be meant by Imposition, Matthew.
28.20.
but a temporary thing which was to vanish presently, I can see no reason.

3. That Imposition alone is put for Ordination we have other Scriptures to
show. 1 Timothy 5, and 4. [as before] but show us another Text where Imposition
alone is put for confirmation.

4. Extraordinary gifts were conveyed without Imposition of hands: as Act.
2.10. and Act. 44.4. why then Imposition should only signify the Holy Ghost,
which yet was given without it, I am not satisfied.

5. Then these Divines must prove, that all who were baptized had hands
Imposed, and extraordinary gifts conferred, else the placing after Baptism
proves nothing; if only to some baptized persons and pro tempore, what is this
to prove it meant of confirmation; for I hope all baptized ones are to be
confirmed in their sense. But this will be hard to prove.

One thing more I shall add when I come to Mr. Noyes, why it should be meant of
extraordinary gifts; Camero gives the strongest reason. But yet I hope to an
indifferent Reader, it does appear by what I have said, that there is no
forcing reason why Ordination should be shut out, but may at least be fairly
implied. So much for my second argument.

Arg. 3. That Act which the Church ever used [and that regularly] in ordaining
of Officers, ought to be used in Ordination.

But Imposition of hands is an Act which the Church ever used [and that
regularly] in ordaining, etc. Ergo

The Major seems so fair, that I think no rational man will deny it. The Minor
is clear; the Church under the Old Testament used this act. Numb. 8.10. Upon
which verse Mr. Ainsworth thus speaks, This rite was kept at the Ordination
of Officers, both in the Old Testament and in the New. Acts 6.6. and 13.3. By
this sign they did put the charge and service of the Church upon them, etc.
Then why it ought not still to be used, I know not. Mr. Ains. was a man
learned, holy, and far from Popery, or idle Ceremonies.

Arg. 4. Let us suppose Prayer and Fasting to be of the essence of Ordination
[as say our Brethren.]

If Prayer and Fasting without Imposition do not difference Ordination from
another Ordinance, then Imposition of hands ought to be used in Ordination.

But the Antecedent is true, ergo the Consequent is true.

The reason of the Consequence is, because every Ordinance has something in it
whereby it is distinguished from others; so must this have something.

Here I lie open to two Objections. Some will say, Why do not you put in those
words which they call verba creantia, where some put the very essence of the
Ordinance? To these I answer, Mr. Weems says, In their Churches when they
Ordain a Minister they give him the Book of God in his hand, to signify that
now he has power to preach the word, as the Priests hand was filled with flesh
Numb. 3.3. P. 105.
Although I do agree with the old nonconformists, and other Churches, that some
such words must be used, and by necessary consequence it will be forced, [as
before I spake] yet I rather use this, because it is my question, and that
which we have plain Scripture for, and so feeling Scripture at my back, shall
be more able to make good my ground.

The other party say, by this I put the form of Ordination in Imposition; for
forms distinguish. I do not at this time assert what it is, but finding it in
Scripture, I argue against those who leave it out. Walaeus we see could not
tell whether to call it a Rite, or an essential part. I know Bellarmin and
other Papists look on it as part of the essence of Ordination, and if they do
so, I do not blame them [they having Scripture for it] as I blame those who
leave it out.

Doctor Owen in his Review of the nature of S. p. 23. tells us that by
Ordination of Ministers, many upon a mistake understand only the Imposition of
hands used therein. [I have not met with any of this opinion; I find none of
the Papists speaking thus, who make as much of it as any] then adds, Ordination
of Ministers is one thing, Imposition of hands is another, differing as the
whole and the part. Enough.

If a Totum, then Totum universale he cannot mean, but Totum Integrale: then
Imposition of hands stands affected to Ordination as membrum to Integrum, which
is Symbolum causae essentialis; then not an Adjunct. If it be a part, and a
principal part, then where there is no Imposition there is no Ordination, for
sublata part principali, tollitur Integrum. If it be not a principal, but less
principal, yet Ordination is but Imperfect; for sublata qualibet part tollitur
perfectio Integri. Then let those who are ordained [as they say they are]
without Imposition of hands, consider their Ordination, and I hope they cannot
be offended with me for refusing (at best) an imperfect ordination, when I
could have a more perfect Ordination. One of their own Ordainers has spoken
enough for me.

I pray tell us how praying and fasting for a blessing upon a person elected,
is an Ordinance distinct. We Pray and Fast for rain, for fair seasons, for
peace, for success in war, for health, for counsel in great affairs, etc. But I
hope praying and fasting for these ends does not make these several and
distinct Ordinances; but it seems it should be so, as well as praying and
fasting for a blessing on a person elected makes this a distinct Ordinance;
prayer and fasting is but one Ordinance by it self used for many ends.

Moreover, we seldom fast and pray [nay, never I think] at a neighbor
Congregation, but the Ministers use to pray for a blessing upon the Minister of
that Congregation, then it seems so often we Ordain him; this is absurd.

Also good people fast and pray before election, what is it then? I know not
how they will avoid it, but they must confound Election and Ordination, which I
am sure is contrary to Scripture.

When Paul wrote to Timothy, he did not charge him that he should not fast and
pray suddenly, but not Impose hands suddenly. Words used which signify
sending, setting apart, appointing to the office with Imposition of hands; do
distinguish Ordination from other Ordinances.

5. The last Argument I shall use will be ad hominem, yet I think there is
something in it.

If Satan from a wicked Imitation of God has made use of Imposition of hands
in the consecration of his Ministers, then Christians, from an obediential
Imitation of God, ought to use Imposition of hands in the Ordination of
Christ's Ministers.

Satan in his worship has ever loved to imitate God in his worship. As Justin
Martyr, Apol. 2. and Tertul. Praescrip. adv. Haeret. both show how this Ape
has taken example from the worship God had appointed in his house, and
accordingly appointed the form of his worship. So in the consecration of his
Priests, Livy reports of Numa that hands were Imposed upon his head, cum summo
sacerdotio initiaretur. Why should not we upon another principle stick close
then to the examples in the Word, since the Devil thinks there is something in
it, I suppose he took it from the Levites.

I am not ignorant that some of our Divines, though they do use it, yet they
look upon it as indifferent. So Polanus, Manuum Impositio est in rerum
indifferentium numero, Synt. The. l. 9. c. 33.
quia a Deo express praecepta non est. Yet adds Si in aliquibus Ecclesiis
Impositio manuum recepta est and usitata, improbari minime debet, cum exemplo
Apostolico nitatur. Say you so? then I think you had no reason to disapprove of
it indeed. Thus also Chemnitius; Exam. Council Trid. p. 222.
his reason, Nec enim necessitatem volu^runt [Apostoli] Ecclesiis imponere de
qua ipsi nullum habebant Christi mandatum.

The sum is, we have examples indeed but no commands, and therefore
indifferent. To which I say,

1. Then make the rule general; What examples soever we have in the word, for
which we find no commands, those examples are but indifferent, we may follow or
not. This must be a certain truth, else we shall ask the reason, why some
examples having no commandment are to be imitated, but the examples of
Imposition of hands in Ordination are not to be imitated? [I know all examples
are not imitable, but I cannot lanch forth in that discourse] See what follows.
Hence

1. Popular election of a Minister is a thing indifferent. I regard not whether
I be elected or not; we have some examples [though none such as our popular
elections] indeed, but we find no command, that the plebs should choose their
Minister.

Chemnitius had been pleading for popular election, and to prove it brings in
some examples out of the New Testament; when he had done, he adds Haec exempla
Apostolicae Historiae clare ostendunt electionem pertinere ad universam
Ecclesiam, certo quodam modo ut suae in electione seu vocatione sint parts and
Presbyterii and populi.

But if Chemnitius will plead for more then an indifferency in it, I must bar
this play, to have him come in with Haec exempla. I can show him Haec exempla
more clear for Ordination by Imposition, etc.

2. Hence the consent of the people in admissions [for which I know neither
example nor command] and excommunications of members is but indifferent; for
the latter though it may be conceived we have an example, yet no command.

3. Hence there is no Independent Church: with diverse more things which I would
draw from hence.

2. I answer, if Imposition of hands carry those five things in it which
Chemnitius, Ib. p. 221. tells us, then I know no reason why he should call it
an indifferent thing. At the end of that paragraph he is still speaking of
Imposition, as I think, and says Nititur mandato, etc. having quoted Acts
13.3. See Zanchy 4. praec. p. 785, 786.

Doctor Owen in his Review [before quoted] p. 23, 24. says, For that part of
Ordination which consists in the Imposition of hands by the Presbytery [where
it may be obtained according to the mind of Christ] I am also very remote from
managing any opposition to it. I think it necessary by virtue of precept; and
that to be continued in a way of succession. It is I say according to the mind
of Christ, that he who is to be ordained unto office in any Church receive
Imposition of hands from the Elders of that Church, if there be any therein.
But what, I pray, if there be no Elders, what is the mind of Christ then that
they must be ordained without it? here the Doctor conceals his judgment; but I
can help the Reader to understand his judgment [if he have not changed it] he
would have Ordained me with Imposition of hands [and there were no Elders in
our Church to do it] if the other Minister would have Imposed hands also. Then
still I had reason to refuse an Ordination where something of a precept was
left out, unless a Scripture can be brought to prove that the necessity of it
by virtue of precept ceases where there are no Elders in the Church. This
Scripture is desired.

3. If it be indifferent, then it may be used; there can be no sin in using it;
we have an Apostolical example for it, Confitente, Polano. Then

1. This will give a man more satisfaction, as to his Ordination whether it
were regular or not, when he finds it answer the Apostolical examples. I would
not have that scruple to lie upon me about my own Ordination, whether it were
valid or not, because I had Imposition, for much.

2. This will tend more to union; for now there is an occasion of difference
for want of this.

3. It is great and just matter of offense to the Episcopal party, who in some
cases do allow Presbyters may Ordain, but whether Ordination can be without
Imposition of hands, I do not know they are resolved for the affirmative.
Things then which tend to union, and taking of offenses and scruples out of
men's minds, if they may be done, and no sin in so doing, I think ought to be
done.

4. Imposition of hands, which we conceive Apostolical men, directed by the
Spirit of God, translated from the Old Testament to the New, had an express
command for it in the separation of Levites to their office, Numb. 8.10. it was
not indifferent then, why now?

5. When the Apostle gives Timothy this charge, Lay hands suddenly on no man;
and when the Lord commanded them to separate Paul, they answer the command by
Imposition Acts 13. I am mistaken if we find not a precept here. If Timothy
has a rule for the modification of his Act, and that Act, for ought we can
find, constantly used in this part of Instituted worship, I think the Act it
self must needs be commanded. For acts in themselves civil, and used amongst
men, even Heathens, as being customs of Nations, if we find the Scriptures
many hundred years after their civil use, to add a modification to such Acts,
whether we are bound to such Acts where there is no such national customs, I
much question. The thing the Lord intends in them, be it humility, hospitality,
love, we are bound to, that is true; but I suppose not to the mere civil acts of
other Nations, but from hence to cast out Imposition, I cannot yield to it. For

1. I cannot find that it was their custom to separate men in Civil States to
the Office of a Magistrate by Imposition of hands, and that God took this up
from them. Joshua indeed was thus appointed to his office, but by a command
from God, Numb. 27.18. but where do we find this civil custom before, thus to
lay hands on Magistrates?

2. The thing the Scripture intends in the civil Acts of Nations we may show
and exercise, though we follow not the civil customs of other Nations; but
this being an Act belonging to Instituted worship, I know not how the thing it
self is performed [at least not perfectly] without it. Deuteronomy. 34.9.
As for Joshua, though the spirit of the Lord was given in a larger measure at
this Imposition, yet this was not the only end intended, for then Moses might
have Imposed his hands in a private Tent, and not before all the Congregation,
and there give him his charge, v. 22, 23. but Moses did by this Act declare the
Designation and Ordination of Joshua to his Office before the whole
Congregation. So it is in Ordaining of Ministers.

3. If it were a Jewish custom, and upon that account only used, why should
Paul command Timothy a Greek to use it, and that in Ordination of Officers to
Gentile-Churches where no such custom was?

From these grounds I do not yet look upon Imposition as being a thing
indifferent; but I look at Ordination without it, at least as irregular: and
let me speak my mind freely, I would rather chose to be ordained by a Bishop
and Presbyters [which many cry out upon as Antichristian] then be Ordained by
any other without Imposition.

Now let us see what Mr. Noyes has written against it. I shall begin at his
third Argument against it, because that strikes at the examples in Scripture,
and is the very Argument our Brethren here now use, and indeed if that can be
made good, I shall not much stand upon Imposition. He says,

Those examples are not a warrant for us, because they were either
extraordinary persons [as Apostles] or extraordinary Presbyters, or they were
extraordinarily raised who did Impose hands.

To that of Timothy he says, It conferred an extraordinary and sensible gift.

All extraordinary it seems, but by this we shall not lose only Imposition but
Ordination also, which yet Mr. N. owns: the same objection was against
Ordination, as we saw before; and certainly if Mr. N. takes away those Texts
which speak of Imposition, I know of few Texts he will find to prove his
Ordination. I desire Mr. N. would give us strong proof for Ordination, leaving
out those Texts: so that we shall have nothing left but election, and I think
he will hardly prove any election, wherein extraordinary persons had not their
hand: so at last lose all.

But how does he prove these Imposed hands qua extraordinary persons? The
example in Timothy [the Presbytery which laid hands on him] and Acts 13.3. he
foresaw would be alleged; to these two he lays in answer aforehand, telling us
they were extraordinary Presbyters.

A. Say what Presbyters and prove; the extraordinary Presbyters are enumerated.
1. The Synod of N.E. Mr. Hooker, nor a thousand more ever thought of any such
thing; the Synod conceive it was the Presbytery of Ephesus which Imposed hands
on Timothy. Junius conceives it was the Presbytery of Derbe and Lystra where
Paul took him, Eccles. p. 1960.
Acts 16.2. Chrysostom indeed thinks they were Bishops, for Presbyters could
not ordain Bishops, says he. Mr. N. does not believe Chrysostom I know, nor do
I believe they were extraordinary Presbyters.

2. I wonder the Bishops of old, and our latter Bishops did not hit of this
notion, but that both according to the Canons of old, and so of our Bishops,
Presbyters were admitted to join in Ordination with the Bishop; I question not
but the Canons were grounde^ upon this Presbytery which Imposed with Paul upon
Timothy: but if Mr. N. notion be true, it might have been easily said, those
were extraordinary Presbyters, so these ordinary Presbyters have no power in
Ordination.

For Acts 13. he says, these seem to be extraordinary Elders. 1. Partly by
their Ambulatory course [ordinary Elders are no where described by the title of
Doctors only.] 2. Partly because it is evident some of them were extraordinary
Prophets, yet they are all put together as equal.

A. 1. How will Mr. N. prove that all the Prophets and Teachers which were in
the Church of Antioch used that ambulatory course? had not this Church a settled
Presbytery? that were strange; how was it in Corinth?

2. Teachers, when taken distinct from other Officers, [as here] I think use to
signify ordinary and settled Officers. Why does Mr. N. say that ordinary Elders
are nowhere described by the title of Doctors only? What difference between
(...) here, and (...) Ephesians. 4.11. there as here, distinct from Prophets. So I
think (...) 1 Cor. 12.28. else we must find no ordinary preaching Elders there.

3. Though there were some extraordinary Officers there, yet that hinders not,
but the whole teaching Presbytery of Antioch might join in the separation of
Paul, and so in imposing of hands: how will Mr. N. prove the Teachers were
excluded; neither does it follow, because they are numbered together therefore
they were equal. Prophets here [as in other Texts] are named before, and as
distinct from Teachers.

But ordinary Presbyters might not impose upon extraordinary Presbyters, this I
think he would have; but have you a Scripture-rule which forbids it? what if
God will have it so. If Paul were now made the Apostle of the Gentiles, as all
that I see but Mr. N. do acknowledge, then though only the Prophets had
Imposed, yet here inferior officers imposed on superior: for Apostles were
superior to Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. and I hope by the same reason a
Presbytery might impose on Timotby an Evangelist.

Thus Mr. Hooker and the Synod of N.E. say Presbyters [not extraordinary]
imposed hands on Timothy an Evangelist.

To say inferior may not impose, when the Text says, these did Impose, [and
it lies upon Mr. N. to prove which were excluded] is flatly to deny the Text.

But Mr. N. says, He was no Apostle yet, and his proof is, because the
Apostles long after this time gave him the right hand of fellowship.

A. 1. If there were no Apostles at Antioch now [as doubtless there were none,
for then they would have been mentioned as well as inferior Officers] then
Apostles could not now give him the right hand of fellowship.

2. Why should their right hand of fellowship make him an Apostle? that I
suppose he does not mean; he was one before they gave him the right hand [it is
so in inferior Officers.] Paul says he was called to be an Apostle, Romans 1.1.
What, when they gave him the right hand of fellowship? or here where God says
so? I have called him. Mr. N. in this is singular, and his proofs not
sufficient.

He further proves that they as extraordinary persons did Impose, because
there was an extraordinary and sensible gift conferred on Timothy: and thus
much he insinuates in his fourth Argument. The extraordinary gift cease in
respect of Ordination; ergo it must be removed, as from prayers for the sick
and converts, etc.

A. This is somewhat like, and this I have heard urged; I know nothing to take
off Imposition but this, if it can be proved. If Mr. N. can carry this, he
shall carry me: But how proves he this? Thus; it had this effect upon Timothy,
ergo. What? it had the same upon all, and this was the end of Imposition. But
this Mr. N. must prove: If I can prove the contrary, then I must tell Mr. N. to
argue a particulari ad universale is none of the best Logic. But of Timothy
more anon.

1. The Apostles Acts 6. when they Imposed hands, did it not to confer such
gifts. For 1. They say plainly it was to appoint them, v. 3. to such a work, i.
e. they were made Deacons [I think Mr. N. will not deny.] 2. They were to seek
out men full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom; they were then gifted before
Imposition.

2. In Acts 13.3. when the Prophets and Teachers were commanded to Impose hands
on Paul and Barnabas, the end was not to confer extraordinary gifts; Paul was
filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. when Ananias Imposed hands. The end here
was to separate them, etc. the Old Testament-word.

3. Timothy had command to Impose hands [in Ordination I doubt not] 1 Timothy
5.22. But that Timothy conferred extraordinary gifts, is a task for Mr. N. to
undertake to prove. Philip was an Evangelist, but it seems he could not do it.
Acts 8.15, 17. Peter and John the Apostles did this: besides that all the
ordinary Presbyters [for I hope some were ordinary] had extraordinary gifts,
seems strange.

4. Timothy is charged to commit the things, etc. to ahle men. 2 Timothy 2.2. So
Titus has order sent him to Ordain men qualified, gifted, such as must be able
by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. So in 1 Timothy
3.2. the Bishop must be (...) what need this caution? For if they by Imposition
of hands, could confer extraordinary gifts, they could make them able, be they
never so weak before. As we find in Acts 8. and Acts 19. when the Apostles
after Baptism Imposed hands, they did not look at their ability or inability,
they made them able presently.

5. Imposition was in practice before this time under the Old Testament, from
whence [as say our Divines] it was translated into the New Testament, Numb.
8.10. But I hope the Israelites did not thereby confer extraordinary gifts, it
was one Act in their separation of the Levites.

Now for Timothy, who is the only proof of Mr. N. his Argument. I wish Mr. N.
had opened the Text more fully. What was this Prophecy? One thus, He will have
Ordination be in facie Ecclesiae cum prophetia, i. e. cum recitatione, and
interpretatione verbi Divini de Ministerio Euangelii. But this gives no
content. Zanchy understands that Timothy came by that gift by Prophecy, i.e.
Per sacrarum literarum interpretationes quas partim jam inde ab ipsa juventute
didicerat, partim ab Apostolo acceperat: The Leyden Profes. understand
Prophecy as does Zanch. Disp. 42. S 37.
Deinde idem Donum confirmatum in eo fuit and aucium per impositionem manuum,
cum fuit Ordinatus. If this were all, this would not so confirm Mr. N. his
notion: for why may not the Lord increase the gift of a Minister, and confirm
it at his Ordination, by means of that Ordinance. If he has done it, may be
not do it still? Let him give me a reason. Nos vero non negamus gratiam. i. e.
(...) conferri in ordinatione, says great Chamier. Then Imposition need not be
cast out for this: for Mr. N. must prove it was an extraordinary gift which
Timothy had nothing of before, and which this Presbytery by Imposition
conferred; which I think he will not easily do.

Others understand by Prophecy a Revelation made to Paul concerning Timothy.
So Beliarmin, with which the thoughts of most agree, a Revelation made by some
Prophets which then were in the Church, by which he was designed to the
Ministry, In Loc.
and post ea per Impositionem mannum fuit in eo confirmatus and quasi
investitus, says Gerhard. And this the Apostle mentions, both for the
commendation of Timothy, and for his excuse, being yet so young, and else in
regard of years unfit for so great an Office. See Gerh. Ib.

For this (...) the thoughts of Divines are very various; but the most probable
fall under one of these two heads. 1. Either those gracious qualifications by
which he was fitted for his work. Or 2. The Docendi officium, the very office
and place unto which men through grace are fitted. So Romans 12.6. This is most
generally received. Gerhard takes in both, but does not reckon extraordinary
gifts; he says, Gratiam docendi, exhortandi, Scripturas interpretandi,
contradictores redarguendi. I think he says truest. Yet as Zanchy before, so I
conceive Timothy had some degree of those gifts before, though now more
increased and confirmed.

2. But if the gifts were extraordinary, let him tell us how Timothy should
stir up extraordinary gifts.

3. Where does he find extraordinary gifts conferred by a Presbytery? which is
here distinct from Paul, who was an extraordinary Officer. Presbyter is the
common word for an ordinary Pastor in the New Testament; and when it is named
as distinct from other extraordinary Officers, I know not why it should not be
meant of an ordinary Presbyter, and so this Presbytery but ordinary: to say
this gift was extraordinary, and the Presbytery extraordinary without
sufficient proof will not satisfy a rational man.

4. I had another Notion, but was afraid to set it down, lest I should be
charged with singularity, as is Mr. N. 't was this, Suppose the gift were
extraordinary, yet it should seem to be given (...), 1 Timothy 4.14. And (...), 2 Timothy 1.6. (...) is joined to both; so that this gift came by Prophecy, as much
as by hands. And if withal (...) comprehends the Ministerium ecclesiasticum to
which Timothy was ordained, he being by Prophecy designed to it being young,
the Presbytery might well Impose hands with Paul to separate him to his office,
as Paul being commanded to be separated, etc. Acts 13.3. Here the preposition
is changed, it is not (...), but (...). I knew no hurt in this Notion, nor what
fault could be found with it, only (as I said) I feared singularity. But
casting my eye upon Diodati I saw he concurred with me in my Notion. By the
Imposition of Paul's hands, 2 Timothy 1.16. Timothy received the extraordinary
gift. By the Imposition of the College of Elders hands, 1 Timothy 4.14. He was
installed in the Ministry with a public blessing. Thus he on 2 Timothy 1.6.

Didoclavius, whom reverend Mr. Hooker follows, observed the difference in the
phrase, but whether he meant as Mr. Hooker does I know not. For thus Mr.
Hooker, By gift he understands those gracious abilities which Timothy received
by the spirit in way of Prophecy, whence he was fitted to be an Evangelist. It
is by the hands of Paul there is a causal virtue under Christ of constitution:
but it is with the hands of the Eldership, as concurring by way of Approbation
only. Thus he. That Paul's hands should causaliter constituere gracious
qualifications, and that the hands of the Eldership should only concur by way
of Approbation that Timothy should have such qualifications seems something
odd: What need of their concurrence or approbation? Nor do I think constitution
here is taken in that sense the New Testament does use it.

I hope by this time this Argument of Mr. N. used by our Brethren does not
appear strong enough to remove Imposition: as for the rest of his Arguments I
will now take them in order, omitting what is needless.

His first Argument is, Imposition is not warranted in Ordination by Imposition
on the Levites. He gives diverse reasons; I can yield to diverse things without
hurting my cause.

His fifth reason, Israel Imposed hands on the Levites, to signify that they
were to bear their sins, and make atonement for them, Exodus 29.

A. 1. There is no such thing mentioned in the Chapter quoted. In Numb. 18.3.
the Levites were not to meddle with the Priests office; no not to sprinkle
blood. 2 Chronicles. 30.16.

2. The 14. verse tells us it was a part of the separation of the Levites: nor
do we make this our first warrant.

His fifth reason, This was a Jewish Ceremony, and why should this, all other
being abrogated, be only reserved.

Let the Apostles give the Answer; Why did they use it? and Paul bid Timothy
use it? Let him blame Paul if Imposition upon the Ordained be a Ceremonial Law
which took end by the coming of Christ, then the Apostles were injurious unto
his death, who translated that Ceremony from the Jews under the Law into the
Church under the Gospel, says Mr. Cartwright, Reply p. 221. More anon.

His second Argument from Heb. 6.2. does not hold it forth in point of
Ordination, but it is a fundamental principle of religion, used figuratively
for the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is signified and conferred.

A. Then Mr. N. of all men must not exclude Ordination, in which it conferred
extraordinary gifts [as he has affirmed before] for that time then it must
comprehend Ordination; his own Notion confutes himself.

2. I think as he says [and so in his sixth reason, which I will therefore
omit] it was a fundamental principle, and therefore should stand so long as the
Church stands. Let the Reader be pleased to cast his eye upon what I have said
concerning the Text before.

His first reason has there its answer also.

His second and third reasons, I think, aim both at the same thing. Doctrine is
added to Baptism, and Imposition, to intimate the doctrine of the Ordinance,
not the Ordinance it self was intended: the communication of the Spirit is the
thing signified, or the doctrine of Imposition.

A. Is indeed the Doctrine of Baptism here only intended, and not the Ordinance
of Baptism it self? I must request him to excuse me, I intend not to give so
much advantage to the Socinians. I think the Ordinance is plainly inded, and so
is Imposition.

2. Does not the Apostle then Tautologize? Do not Repentance and Faith
comprehend much of the doctrine of Baptism? why should the Ordinance be
mentioned if not intended?

3. What error is there if we read the words dividedly, with a Comma betwixt
(...), as do the Tigurin and Aethiopick Versions. So Oecumenius, Luther,
Erasmus, Gagnaeus, as Gerhard says, and the Greek do not oppose it; Thus
Cajetan and Aretius: See their Comments. Then this notion fails, and it will
make yet more for my Interpretation.

4. But let us suppose the Doctrine of Imposition be here intended: Yet as
Aretius says well in loc. De hac ceremonia admonebantur Neophyti, quandoquidem
tum in frequenti erat usu, quid illa esset, cur instituta, quibus, and per quos
imponerentur manus: item ad quid conduceret discebant Fidei Tyrones. Very good:
must not then the Neophyti answer, Hands were Imposed in Ordination of Church
Officers? If we come to teach ours this head of Catechism, and they must answer
according to Mr. N. his notion, they may well say, What is this to us? how is
it a foundation to us, the thing is ceased so many hundred years since?
[besides what I have before said.] But according to our Interpretation, we both
open the Doctrine, we use the thing, and it remains as yet a Foundation to us.
The old holy non-conformists tell us how they look upon the Ministry: there was
an objection made, We have been taught heretofore that Discipline is an
essential part of the Gospel and matter of Faith. To this they answer,

That Discipline of the Church [being generally understood] is a matter of
Faith, and an essential mark of the Church, I hope our Brethren will not deny;
for Discipline comprehends not only the Administration of the Keys, but
Ordination and Imposition of hands: but without Ordination there are no
Preachers, Romans 10.15. and without Preaching there is no belief, v. 14.
Wherefore without some part of Discipline it cannot be denied but that the
Church is no Church, Faith no Faith. Thus they. This suites Mr. Hooker's
exposition of our Text.

5. If the confirmation and increasing of ordinary gifts be the Spirit's work,
then still it may hold, as Zanch. and Chamier before.

His fourth and fifth reasons are answered before: only whereas he says,
Imposition is added as an explicative adjunct of Baptism. It should seem no
[besides what have been said] there being so few heads enumerated, it is
unlikely the Apostle would add an Adjunct to this ordinance, [which I think he
cannot prove was always at Baptism.] I think also this crosses the former
head, wherein he said, Not Baptism, but the Doctrine of Baptism is intended.

His seventh it is interpreted in the next, v. 4, 5. Illumination answers to
repentance, Taste of the heavenly gift to Faith, the participation of the Holy
Ghost to the doctrine of Imposition and Baptism, the tasting of the good word
to the resurrection.

A. This does not please. Illumination, as most understand the word belonging
to the Intellectual part, and repentance to the heart, do not seem to answer. I
know (...) in the 1. v. if the word be taken strictly as the word sounds
belongs to the mind, but so as it is Act is perfected in the heart; it is
(...). The Syriack render (...) otherwise; and that Baptism is taken for
Illumination among the Ancients, according to the Syriack who knows not; (...),
etc. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 94. So Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 1. p. 93, 95. So
Greg. Naz. Orat. 40.

2. Mr. N. says, Justifying Faith is signified in Baptism, then not in the
word Faith expressed in the Text, then Faith must be taken in a large sense,
and this will rather answer to Illumination then repentance.

3. How does Resurrection answer to the Taste of the good word; when as
Resurrection is a terrible word to most. The good word of promise rather, the
promise contains good.

4. Why does he make one word to answer Baptism and Imposition, when they were
divided in the Text; and Mr. N. has not yet proved that they went always
together.

5. Why may not the participation of the Holy Ghost have respect also to such
gifts as are given now in our days? for do we not observe [with trembling] how
some lose their gifts, even eminent gifts, profession, and so fall away, as
never more return? should it be tied up only to extraordinary gifts [which I do
not believe] yet those were given in Ordination, as Mr. N. says, so that for
that time Imposition must be comprehended.

His eighth: Imposition is made a principle from which it was necessary an
Apostate should fall if finally: but it is not necessary that one should be
instructed touching the office of the Ministry: one may be saved, and yet be
ignorant in the point of Ordination, and one may fall away finally though
ignorant in this respect.

A. I know not what he means by the Apostates falling from the principle. He
does not mean, I suppose, that a man must have first those extraordinary gifts,
and so fall from them, else not an Apostate; there are too many Apostates yet
never reached those gifts.

2. One may be saved as well though he does not understand the extraordinary
gifts conferred by Imposition. I presume Mr. N. does not think the Apostles
conferred the Holy Ghost in a gracious saving way by Imposition.

3. It is one thing for a person to be ignorant of Ordination, another to be
ignorant of that which Ordination holds out; of what necessity the Ministry is,
Mr. Cartwright and the Non-Conformists [before mentioned] tell us. So the
Scripture. But Mr. Hooker takes it in a larger sense.

4. I think there are few Apostates who have been ignorant of the Ministry; for
those who have been ignorant of this, never came to so much as the Text
expresses; then they cannot fall away from what they never had.

His ninth: If we should understand the docirine of the Ministry by Imposition,
then we must exclude the Administration of Baptism in the principle of
Baptism, because Baptism in this consideration belongs unto the Ministry,
and therefore cannot [unless it signify the doctrine of Baptism onely] be a
distinct principle from Imposition. And if we make Baptism it self together
with the doctrine which it holds forth a distinct principle, and the doctrine
of Imposition together with the Administration of it in Ordination another
distinct principle, to what principle shall we refer the Lord's Supper.

If I mistake Mr. N. in what he would have, I must craye pardon; I wish he had
been more clear, but as I understand him, so I answer. The Lord's Supper being
of the same nature with Baptism; a sign to represent, a seal to confirm, an
instrument to convey, etc. [as say our old Catechisms] well may it be referred
to Baptism. As for Baptism, it being 1. An Ordinance so long practiced before
by John. 2. The initiating Sacrament. 3. Answering all those Baptismes the
Hebrews knew well. 4. At this time greatly esteemed and practiced. 5. The
spirit foreseeing our times wherein that Ordinance would be slighted and cast
out, as now it is, no wonder though this be expressly set down, to which the
other is fitly referred.

If the Lord's Supper be referred to Baptism [as there is reason why it
should] and the Ministry [which will include Preaching and Discipline] be
understood in Imposition of hands, then we may have in these few heads the
sum of those Doctrines which are necessary to salvation and a visible Church
in the Ordinances and Officers held forth.

His tenth: Interpreters apply this to confirmation, not all, I named some
before that are of another opinion. But if we should lose this Text, yet we
have not lost our cause.

His third Argument I answered first.

His fourth is also as good as answered: this it is, If we must remove
Imposition from converts, from prayers for the sick, if from any, why not all;
the extraordinary gift cease in respect of Ordination, as well as in respect
of other Administrations. The strength of the Argument lying upon the
extraordinary gift, this is answered before.

Then he meets with an Objection. It may be a sacred sign in Ordination to
signify the consecration of a person to administer holy things; or if he had
pleased to have added to show the Designation, the Separation, the Appointing
of this person to his office. As the Congregation saw Joshua and knew him
appointed to his office when Moses imposed hands and charged him.]

To this he answers, 1. It was not of this use in the consecration of Priests
and Levites.

A. Why not? he should have told us of what use it was, not to confer
extraordinary gifts I am sure. Omitting what might be said, let Peter Martyr
speak for the rest of our Divines. Loc. Com. de. Voca. administ.
He reciting the several rites of the old consecration both of Priests and
Levites, says, Haec externa ratio eo valuit ut populus intelligeret eos esse
jam ministros sibi designatos a Deo: sublatis autem istis umbris nobis nihil
relinquitur nisi Impositio manuum. Thus also Zanc. 4. praec. p. 785.

2. He says It is not of this use in Ordination of Deacons.

A. I shall only give him Mr. Hooker's words, Sur. Chu. p. 3. p. 9.
The Lord Christ in his Infinite wisdom and Kingly care conceived it
necessary for the honor of the place, and execution of the work of a Deacon to
appoint choice men, and solemn Ordination to Authorize them to the work. If a
Deacon be only the Treasurer of the Church, he had need be designed and
authorized to it; but Mr. Noyes, who writes against ruling Elders, giving all
their work to the Deacon, p. 23.
had more cause to allow of it. Let him show us Deacons in Scripture ordained
without Imposition of hands.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 16. read review. p. 13. l. 7. r. Christ. p. 14. l. 2. r. if. p.
16. in the Syriack word put Tau in the place of Ae. p. 21. l. 17. r. Ordinance.
p. 22. l. 31. r. Musculus. p. 38. l. 17. r. 1. p. 39. l. 19. r. Congregation.
p. 49. l. 10. r. from being. p. 51. l. 6. r. me. p. 52. l. 15. after have r.
judged this. p. 63. l. 2. r. (...). p. 79. The Arabic words have neither the
Vowels nor Orthographical notes placed right; the words should be wasamou
lahom, with elif quiescens placed after Sin. p. 80. l. 12. (...). p. 92. l. 34.
r. others. p. 93. l. 20. r. think. p. 102. l. 30. r. committing. p. 103. l. 1.
r. 1. Titus. p. 114. l. 24. r. communem. p. 121. l. 8. r. ecclesiae. p. 130. l.
19. r. words. p. 138. l. 24. after had r. no.

Some few other faults in the Greek, and pointing, but the judicious Reader
will soon correct them.

THe Admission of persons baptized in their infancy, without due Trial of their
Faith and growth in Christ, when grown in years, to a full participation of all
Church-Privileges and Ordinances, has caused great confusion in the
Administration of holy things; And therefore, I conceive, the Learned Author of
this Elaborate exercitation has deserved well of the Churches, by clearing the
way of those Admissions from Scripture-grounds, and the concurrent Testimonies
of many, both Ancient and Modern writers; As also, by discovering and removing
those Popish additions and pollutions which by several steps and degrees have
crept into it. And if what he has offered in this Essay come not up to the
Judgment and Practice of the best constituted Churches; yet this ingenuous and
pious overture holds out more than most Churches have hitherto attained, and
may provoke the zeal of many to hold out what they have attained, as more
commodious for, and perfective of the much-desired and longed-for restoration
of the Churches to their privitive purity, both in separating the precious from
the vile, and in uniting the precious into a more beautiful and beneficial
Order among themselves. These considerations have confirmed me in giving not
only License to the publishing, but thanks to the Publisher of this discourse
of Confirmation.

Joseph Caryl.
The 24th of the 6th. Month, 1657.

