GOOD NEVVES OVT OF FLANDERS.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the most Victorious his Highness the Prince
of ORANGE his Leaguer before Sasse of Gent; by a Commander there, unto an
Eminent Person at present in England.

Concerning the taking and surrender of that inpregnable place Sasse of Gent,
Wednesday the 7th. of September, 1644. new Style, the 40. day it was
beleaguered.

Sept: 11th LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, 1644.

Good Nevves out of FLANDERS.
SIR,
BY my former Letter I have advertised you of the beginnings, proceedings, and
condition of the siege of Gent. But now God be thanked, I shall hereby give you
notice, that most happily it is surrendered into the hands of that unparalleld
Champion his Highness the Prince of Orange, to the wonder and amazement of all
that knows by sight, or relation the place, as strongly situated, and well
fortified as Art and nature could make it.

His Highness, according to his daily custom, (a custom not so pleasing unto
us, being too ventersome and desperate for such a General, whose life under
God, is the preservation of our Church and State) I say, he being in person
upon Monday the first of September in the approaches, to view the Gallaries
which were to be brought over the Mote of Rapenburch, as then not finished;
and that under the favor of twelve Demi-Canons constantly playing, and
innumerable Musket shot, having been there three hours, was about to go
away: when upon a sudden a great shout was made by the enemy, casting up their
hats and crying for a Parley.

Whereupon His Highness, remaining in the unfinished Gallarie; presently two
Captains of the enemy, one a Spaniard, bearing the Order of Christ, the other
an Englishman, were sent out Hostages unto his Highness, and a Dutch Captain
under the Regiment of Colonel Ferens, and a French Captain under the Regiment
of Colonel de Straides, (having at that time the guard) were sent by his
Highness reciprocal Hostages into the Town; and that very same night the
Articles were on both sides agreed upon, according to which the Town and Forts
should be surrendered.

The Hostages being demanded what the reason was they delivered over the Town
so soon, and so suddenly, gave no other Answer; But that when we first entered
the Town, we should see they had just reasons so to do. But some others
answered, that although they might have kept it ten or twelve days longer; yet
that time should but add unto their misery, that must see before their eyes
the unsuccourable extremities of their sick and maimed soldiers, destitute of
Chyrurgions and Chyrurgiry and Medicaments, being without all hope of any
relief.

But the most able said, it was because they wereso aftonish'd to see the
Prince of Orange was in so short a time so far advanced; and that accordingly,
they feared to be on a sudden surprised.

His Excellency of Brederoede, Marshall of the Field, had also that night taken
two Sconces, which separated the Town from the Sconce St. Anthony.

So that every one does wonder, and it is no wonder they should wonder, that so
strong a place, being situated in the midst of Flanders, and Dedicated unto the
Virgin Mary, and therefore called Propugnaculum inex pugnabile, (The
inexpugnable Fortress) as they themselves do write in the Volume of Flanders,
in which all their Towns and Fortresses are delineated should be taken in so
short a time. But it is the very hand of God, and that through indefatigable
Vigilance, Industry, the vast Wisdom, and incomperable Valor of his
Highness the Prince of Orange, which has brought this work about.

During the time of Treaty, and after, we showed unto the Earl of Megen, as
also unto diverse French Officers of knowledge and experience, that were come
hither to that purpose, our Approaches, and all the outworks: which they
blessed themselves, and admired at; and confessed never to have seen the like;
such strong works, and made in so short a time.

The Enemy marched out Wednesday the seventh of September, new style, with
about 1080 men, with forty Colors, being three Regiments, that of Don Stephano
de Gomero, the Earl of Megen, and Col: Royers; the rest were of the ordinary
Garrison, besides the sick and others upon Wagons, amounting in all to 1500.

We found within the Town above 50 left behind most miserably burnt and
maimed, so that they could not be transported: unto whom his Highness (as
Mereifull as Martial) being this day in the Town, sent his Chyrurgions to
dress and cure them.

We are most bound to render all due thanks and praise for this great and
unexpected Victory unto the Almighty, the Lord of Hosts.

FINIS.

