THE GREAT CASE OF TRANSPLANTATION IN IRELAND DISCUSSED; OR Certain
Considerations, wherein the many great inconveniences in the transplanting the
Natives of Ireland generally out of the three Provinces of Leinster, Ulster,
and Munster, into the Province of Connaught, are shown.

Humbly tendered to every individual Member of Parliament by a well wisher to
the good of the Commonwealth of England.

LONDON, Printed for I. C. 1655.

The great Case of Transplantation in Ireland discussed etc.
THE planting of Ireland is the subject of many men's Desires, most men's
Discourse, of few men's Endeavors; some of these few, deeming themselves lead
by Principles of Religion, in order to the purity of the Gospel, some by
principles of public good, in order to the preservation of the English Nation
and Interest entire; Some by Principles of Advantage, in order to the fixing
English Estates, where the hazard may be least, and profit greatest, urge
earnestly the transplanting of the Irish (pardoned for Life, and to continue in
the Dominion) into Connaught, as the first expedient in order to the well
planting of that Land; to which purpose diverse Orders have at sundry times
issued; but others, who embrace the same Principles, and are also desirous to
be ^ead by them, conceive this conclusion, at least inconsequent (if not
contradictory) to those premises; and for this persuasion, humbly offer these
Considerations.

Concerning Religion.
FIrst, if the Physicians and Attendants must necessarily cast out the Patient
whenever any hazard of infection is possible, all diseases are disperate: But
the unitive principles of Christianity teach us, that separations of persons,
are then only Lawful when necessary, and then only necessary when the
malignity of the poison is greater then the virtue of the Antidote, or
obligation of duty. Here two things then ought to be weighed.

First, whether it be more probable as things now stand, that the Irish Papists
should pervert the English Protestants, or that the English Protestants should
convert the Irish Papists.

Secondly, whether the English Protestants be more obliged by any special duty
to continue many of the Irish Papists (though the probability of infection were
greater) than by that general fear and probable hazard to remove them.

The consequent of the first disjunction seems most probable on these grounds.

First, Natural Conscience makes all persons, who stand in awe of a Diety,
prefer some Religious External Observations before none; When therefore no
toleration is given to the exercise of Popery, and the Reformed Religion
publicly professed throughout the Nation, it is very conceivable that Natural
Conscience may persuade many Papists (at least) externaly to frequent the
Protestant Assemblies; and many have been won in the Ordinances, who by
external Motives were first induced to them; But what Temptations in such an
Instance may invite Protestants to turn Papists, is not conceivable.

Secondly, By the Cruelty of the Papists in the late Rebellion, the Protestants
are more confirmed against Popery (as the Original of those Cruelties) and by
those heavy Judgments wherewith God has avenged the blood of his Servants; The
Papists themselves made less in love with that Profession which lead them on to
those cruelties, and thereby provoked these judgments; in this instance
therefore it is much more probable, Papists should be converted than
Protestants perverted.

Thirdly, when God intwists his interesse with man's, man is commonly so
inamoured with his own, that in such a case he is not apt to leave God's; and
such is the present case in Ireland, it is not even for the civil interess of
Protestants to turn Papists, it is for the Papists to turn Protestants.

Fourthly, in time of peace, when the highest external inducements, ran on the
Papists side yet many Irish were reduced to Protestanism, for every one English
seduced to Papism.

Objection, Against this some may perhaps pretend, That the Papists in Ireland
are hardened in their Idolatry, and few of them converted of late.

Answer, First, that it is not strange if only few of them be converted, yea
it is even wonderful that any of them should of late be converted considering,

First, the heavy pressures under which they have groaned to the very grinding
of them, by which means more families have been destroyed under the protection
of Protestants, then in opposition against them.

Secondly, the many divisions among those who are called Protestants, and
bitternesses of those who are thus divided, because by the former the Papist
sees not where to fix if he should come to us, and because of the later he sees
not what friends or security he could partake if the should fix.

Thirdly, the entire neglect of sending forth instruments to instruct them; it
is sad observe how Garrisons are placed in every quarter where the Irish
inhabit, Ministers in none; as if our business in Ireland was only to set up
our own interess, and not Christ's.

Fourthly, the lamentable ignorance of most and blasphemous haeresies of some,
who have been employed and allowed public maintenance, in Protestant
congregations, under the notion of Preachers.

First, so that if the Irish Papists be hardened, we must blame our selves for
it. It Is certain that in these few places, where Ministers make it their work,
to deal with them and to remove those gross scandals out of the way, they find
them, more pliant and flexible to submit to scripture directions, then some of
those who complain of their hardness.

Secondly, who art thou who complains of their hardness? did thou ever pray
for their softning? if no, mourn for thy own hardness, if yea, labor for what
thou have prayed, and presume not to cast the dust off thy feet till thou have
thus labored. Many fearing God, and studying the spiritual advantage of those
poor natives, are confident that the Lord's harvest in Ireland is far more
then the Laborers.

Thirdly, the blade appears not above ground, as soon as the seed is sown;
supernatural habits are infused after the manner of acquired; after good
husbandry has been used, stand still awhile, and see what increase the Lord
will give; nay what he has given; Many of them desire now, earnestly, to put
their Children into the Care of the English of quality adjoining to them;
offer largely to their maintenance in the Education of the Religion and manners
of England; I shall not search men's hearts to censure, the doing this for
sinister ends; who knows but God may have softened and convinced them by his
rod; But this is certain, The means is good (though their ends are bad) and God
may bring a good end out of that too; The son may be sincere, though he father
be a hypocrite, and what his earthly father intended only for the saving his
estate, his heavenly father may advance to the saving of his soul.

Objection. But some may be employed to instruct them as well in Connaught, if
they should be transplanted thither, as if they be not transplanted.

Answer, First, those that shall be employed, must be either such as are
already in the other parts of Ireland, or out of England: If the first, they
must be either Ministers, or Gifted men; For the Ministers, they are so few,
that they suffice not the places inhabited already; And for the gifted men,
although they (might possibly be spared hither without any considerable loss in
them, and to convert heathens (as they count the Irish) were a fitter work for
new Apostles (as they count themselves) then to pervert Christians, yet it is
probable they may be as unwilling to preach, where there is need of them, as
they have been forward to intrude themselves, where there was no need of them;
But alas, they must first stay at home, and be some years catechized before
they go, that so they may be learners before they shall be teachers, Railing at
Ministers; Ordinances, and all the reformed Churches observations will persuade
the Papists, they are men of their own Religion, not that will turn them from
it; And other Divinity these know not; and for Godly learned Ministers to be
brought out of England, to go among the Irish, will sure be a difficult work,
when we find it so hard to invite any to come among the English.

Secondly, the company of professors is a powerful engagement to profession,
the setting of brands together, and some already kindled to these unkindled, is
the way to get heat, when the spirit of the Lord is pleased to blow them.

Thirdly, man's soul is like a narrow mouthed bottle, the to fill it, is not to
pour buckets of water over it, but to take it singly, and pour in the water
gently by little and little; public preaching may be compared to the former,
but private catechizing and family duties to the later.

If then these Papists be suffered to continue in the English plantations, they
may enjoy the labors of Godly able Ministers, the encouragments of Protestant
professors, and the Catechizings of private Christians, all which are powerful
moral instruments to conversion; but if they be transplanted, as their
consociation may probably settle them on their old lees, so their separation
certainly deprives them of these advantages; And by a persistance in their
former Principles, continue them Papists still, or by a forgetting them (if
possible) and no better distilled into them, make them turn Atheists.

Secondly, Let us consider whether there be not some special obligations which
in conscience and religious duty more binds us to continue these poor Natives
(though Papists) with us, then that general fear and possible hazard of
infection binds to transplant them (especially since these have been shown to
be but Panick.)

It is a clear Maxim in Christian Religion, that we must not commit a less sin,
though it were to avoid a greater; in evils of suffering the less is eligible,
in evils of sin none is aligible; if then this Act of transplantation be
sinful and contrary to these obligations which lie on us, the avoydance of
future infection will not acquitus, it will not free us from the guilt of
murder, to kill our selves, lest another should kill us. Consider then, That
many of those who are thus punished with the guilty, are guiltless at man's
Tribunal, which only judges of outward expresses, the heart and intention
thereof being peculiarly subjected to the judgment of God who only can only
search it; many are such as not only did not act against the English in the
Irish Rebellion, but did eminently act with them, and for them; and were
instrumental, not only in the serving of some private persons (which might be
the result of particular affection) but also of securing some, and reducing
other public places of strength to the power not only of the English Nation,
but of the Parliament; and shall these Innocents be punished with the Guilty?
the Lord would not deal so with Sodom. Heathens did use to remark with great
Rewards, those who in common Causes abstained from common defections; they that
forgot the Bonds of Relation, Religion, and Nation, in the day of our Weakness,
should not be forgotten in the day of our Powr's. Is it an equal Crime to act
with and against the English Nation? Why then is there an equal punishment?

Objection. The avenging of blood is of strictest obligation, and the Irish in
the late Rebellion having contracted a national bloud-guilt, no eye must pity
them.

Answer. First, if by Nation be meant the greatest part, the assertion is true;
but if it be every individual, then it was shown before, that there was a
difference in acting, and therefore should be so in punishing.

Secondly, National guilt is expiated by national judgments; the wickedness
and bloud-guiltiness of Benjamin did not necessitate an universal destruction,
but 25000. being slain, ways are studied to preserve the remainder.

Thirdly, particular bloud-guilt of private persons, is expressly excepted from
pardon by that act of Settlement, which vouchsafes pardon to others; and as it
is unjust that those who are pardoned, should suffer for the guilt of those who
are not: so it is unnecessary that punishment should be inflicted in common,
when trial of the guilt and execution of the guilty may be single.

Fourthly, if all murder be unpardonable, and this whole nation be in that
degree, guilty of murder, as renders them unpardonable, then no punishment
inferior to death is proportionate unto their guilt; to which it is
consequent, that the transplanting them into Connaught is unjust, as in the
defect being less then that guilt or obligation to punishment, so in the excess
removing them from the English, by whose evidence alone the Courts of Justice
can proceed to their trial; and therefore tends more to their pardon then
punishment.

Fifthly, that even murder is in some cases pardonable, appears by the
practice of all States and Armies. David did not unjustly to pardon Abner, who
yet made it a sport to shed blood; and by the nature of the thing it self, for
every unlawful breach upon man's life is murder, and every Abettor of that
breach is guilty of the same murder: since then war may be unlawful on both
sides, but is not ordinarily on both sides lawful, either the war must
continue whilst one man therein engaged surviues, or the guilt of murder is
in some cases pardonable.

And if in any cases, then certainly in these two.

First, when the guilt was for most part contracted, either through ignorance
or infirmity.

Secondly, when the pardon directly leads to public good, and the sparing of a
few to the preservation of many; The former ingredients make the guilt less
evil, the later ingredients make the pardon more good. And in the present
instance both these concur.

First, the Irish nation were generally engaged in the Rebellion, either
through ignorance of the design, and apprehending they acted by the King's
commission, and for his and God's service; or through infirmity, partly
fearing their Priests threats, partly their Landlords frowns, partly the
violences of others, of the English who at the beginning reckoned an Irish man
and a Rebel tantamount, and on that score forced many into war, (who desired
peace) with the Irish in arms, who accounted and declared all Enemies, that
joined not (at least seemingly) with them, and proceeded with more severity
against dissenting natives than English.

On the clearing of this objection from justice, hangs indeed the whole weight
of the controversy; And therefore the doing it solidly, can be of no mean
concernment; the way will be, by Considering of the Resolution, that the law
gives to two or three questions, and the application of them to this present
affair.

1 What punishment is, what are the ends thereof, and whether and in what Cases
it may be annulled or Abridg'd. 2 In what kind of punishments the Rulers or
generality of a Nation may involve the Commons or each particular. 3 How long
punishment against a Nation is to be continued.
To the first, Punishment is the evil of suffering enjoined for the evil of
doing. The ends thereof are commonly mistaken, men making punishment the end of
punishment, and the gratyifing either the Law it self (which is without sense
of the satisfaction) or God (who delights not in suffering, as such) or the
party injured (the scratching of whose itch, in the way of revenge, barely, is
utterly unlawful) the truth is, an injury done is unrepealable, and neither
God, nor the law of Reason delights in accumulation of suffering, or are
pleased with pain (barely as it is pain) Reason dictates, man must do nothing
to hurt another man, unless it have some good end, and in the pain of the
Enemy alone so nakedly considered, there is no good but false and imaginary;
Therefore were it not for what is to come, the Law would never punish (though the
greatest crime, for what is past, for that's irreversible; Therefore the sayings
of the wise men are, we must come to vengance, not as it were sweet, but
profitable; some things are honest simply, some upon necessity, of which sort
is punishment; No wise man inflicted a punishment because a fault is done, but
that it may be done no more, for justice is not Anger but Caution; to devise
how one may bite him that bites us, is the part of a beast; from whence (it
follows) although you do no injury, though you punish an offense, yet you
likewise do no injury, if you do not punish (unless in connection with the ends)
contrary to the vulgar, who are as inexorable as Nemesis, and thinks him the
justest man, that like Draco, writes all his Laws in Blood. Now the ends of
punishment are these three. 1. That the Offender may be rescued from lapsing
into the same fault for the future. 2. The Offended from future injuries; And
3. Example to all by the penance of few.

From whence it will follow (to the third head) contrary to the Stoics
judgment, who say (that punishment is due to the offense, and a wise man gives
every one his due, and therefore no delinquency should escape) by better reason,
there being not always a juncture of those ends with suffering, That sometimes
it may be taken off, or relaxed; Before a penal Law will not seem so strange,
but even after a penal Law likewise. If the ends for which punishment was
ordained in a moral estimation be not necessary, or if other ends on the
opposite part occur, not less profitable and necessary, or if the ends proposed
by the punishment may be attained any other way.

Answerable to these reasons were their actings: when God gave the Law, he
deprived not himself of all power, but reserved a liberty to pardon; none can
put any one to death without Law, nor any but the Supreme pardon them, says
another; and this mercy they dispensed on these two cautions of Violence and
Ignorance, where they found them; for that these take off from voluntary, and
that from guilt.

Now if strict Law give thus much scope for mercy, what ought mercy and
goodness, which should be in all to their like; but especially when
Evangelicall Law (goodness and mercy) commands this too.

To apply this first particular to the case of the Irish, it will thus state
it, as was declared before, that though their crimes have been heinous, yet
they are to be punished only with reflexction (not on their evil past, but
the good to come) and then only if no other way will compass this end, but
their punishment, and then only in such a degree as they are found capable of
the diminutions of punishment, Iignorance and Violence; and certainly neither
of these will be denied, but that as a great part of them acted through
ignorance, so the force of an Army levied was sufficient to compel the rest,
etc.

2 The second question is Answered thus; Magistrates may contract guilt from
the Commons, they vicissively from their Magistrates and heads, or Rulers, and
in sharing in the public crime, must in the punishment; But it is to be noted
likewise, that there are public punishments and private for example (as when a
Commonwealth is overthrown, it suffers a public death; reduced to a Province,
undergoes slavery, a City loses its Walls, Shipping, Officers, Treasure, Laws,
Ensigns, Magazines; in sharing these each particular may suffer; But that
particular men for the offense of a Community without their consent, should
lose the things that are proper to themselves is unjust; public offenses
brings public punishments particular guilt, particular suffering.

Apply this second to the Irish, and let the active ruling part be
distinguished from the passive subjective, and public punishments from
particular, and justice is done.

The last question is thus satisfied; How long a Commonalty shall be prosecuted
with justice; shall punishment be always exacted while the community last?

No: Those being extinct by whom merit was derived to the Community, the merit
it self is also extinguished, and punishment cannot consist without merit; You
may account it a sufficient punishment that none of the offenders are now alive
(says the Civil Law) It is a mistake in man's dealings (though with God just)
that because Children receive honors and rewards for their fathers good deeds,
that they should be punished for their evil; Because a benefit may without
injury be conferd on any, but so cannot a punishment.

This decides the last part of the Scruple, touching the Irish, for the bloody
persons (known) are all dead by Sword, Famine, Pestilence, the hand of civil
justice, or remain still liable to it, or are fled beyond sea from it; The
Priests and Soldiers (the kindlers of the war in the beginning, and fomenters
of it since) are for the first universally departed the Land, and for the
second, to a vast number, and the most dangerous, and the remaining, are weary
of war, having long since submitted, and those that are out, sue for nothing
but mercy; for the poor Commons, the Sun never shined (or rather not shined)
upon a Nation so completely miserable; There are not one hundred of them in
10000. who are not by the first and fourth Articles, of the act of settlement
under the penalty of losing life and estate; The Tax sweeps away their whole
Subsistence; Necessity makes them turn Thieves and Tories, and then they are
prosecuted with fire and sword for being so. If they discover not Tories, the
English hang them, if they do, the Irish kill them, against whom they have
nothing to defend themselves, nor any other that can; nay if any person melted
with the bowels of a man, or moved by the Rules of Common Equity, labor to
bring home to them that little Mercy which the State allows, there are some
ready to asperse them as favorers of Tories, coverers of blood guiltiness; and
briefly, in a probable computation five parts of six of the whole Nation are
destroyed, and after so sharp an execution, is it not time at length to sound a
retreat? Must we still cry justice, justice? wherefore is justice so invok't
against them? was it not for cruelty? God has avenged it; let others take heed
how they become guilty, especially they that avenged it; The fair virtue of
justice (overdon) degenerates into the stinking weed of Tyranny, Beasts scorn
the humble Prey; Heathens having Conquered by Justice, have conquered again by
Mercy; The State does intend a Cordial for that Consumptive Nation; it is only
desired they would be pleased to accelerat it, lest by dying before, they lose
the opportunity of showing they would at last have had pity.

Secondly, that the Pardon of this national Bloodguilt is subservient to
public good, and in order thereto ought to be extended to all such as are
obnoxious to no other guilt than what is Common and National, may be evidenced
by diverse arguments; but in regard they conclude in like kind, against the
transplanting of the Irish, into Connaught, it is opportune to proceed to the
second instituted comparison, whether it be more conducive to the public good
of the English Nation, and to the preservation of them entire, to continue the
Irish or transplant them? Consider therefore.

2. Concerning Public Good.
THE public good of Ireland respects either the public Revenue, or the good
of the present, or of future English Inhabitants and Planters.

First, For the public Revenue. The Revenue or Contribution of Ireland is
generally raised out of Corn, and the Husbandmen of that Corn are generally
Irish, the removal therefore of these necessarily infers the failer of that*
For,

1. The Irish, who raise their Contribution out of Corn, live themselves on the
roots and fruits of their Gardens, and on the milk of their Cows, Goats, and
Sheep, and by selling their Corn to the English, provide Money for
Contribution; if then the Irish should be thus transplanted, their Corn would
not be vendible, not to one another, for all would be Sellers, not to the
English; for to carry it 50, 60, or 100 miles to English Plantations, would
make it so dear to the Buyer, and cheap to the Seller, that it cannot
reasonably be thought practicable.

2. The Lands of Ireland are generally so unapt for Corn, without much charge
in manuring them, and the Harvest-season so catching, without many hands to
save the Corn, that the first Crop seldom (if ever) makes the Husbandman a
Saver: if then the Irish be removed from their Lands prepared for Seed, to the
wast and uncultivated Lands of Connaught, the Lands they leave can pay no
Contribution for the first year, because they will become wast till others
inhabit; and the Lands to which they remove can pay none, because (being wast)
they must spend a year of their time, and much of their principal Stock to
improve* them, before they can derive any suitable profit out of them.

Secondly, For the present Inhabitants, Soldiers, and others.

1. The Soldiers lately disbanded (especially the private Soldiers) have
neither Stock, nor Money to buy Stock, nor (for the most part) skill in
Husbandry: But by the labors of the Irish on their Lands, together with their
own industry, they may maintain themselves, improve their Lands, acquire Stock,
and by degrees inure themselves sutably to that course of life: But the
transplantation of the Irish leaves these poor men's proportions of Land totally
wast; and unless they can, like Nebuchednezzar, live on Grass, they must
perish, or sell too too cheap their dear-bought recompense.

2. The other Inhabitants, by the labors of the Irish Tenants or Servants, are
enabled to contribute to the public charge, and maintain themselves and
Families in some measure: But the transplantation of the Irish will utterly
deprive them of all manner of livelihood; and as the destruction of the English
already planted in Ireland is a sad evil in it self, so in its consequence it
can be no encouragement to other English to plant.

3. Considerable numbers of English Families, (upon the hopes they had of peace
and quietness) have already scattered themselves into the Country, laid out
(what they saved thriftily, or got hardly all this long time of languishing) to
begin a new Fortune with) on purchasing Farms, buying Stock, building Houses:
But now this early hope must be nipt in the bud; for if transplanting goes
forward, (it will so multiply Tories) the English cannot possibly live in the
Country, and their Stock cannot possibly live in Towns, and their Improvement
and Buildings must be utterly lost, and themselves totally (when they least
feared it) undone.

4. The Army, and all the Inhabitants, derive their Bread, Meat, Drink, all the
most necessary means of living, from the labors of the Irish; and if these be
transplanted, then they must either fall with their own weight, or purchase
such supports out of England at rates too high for their condition, or leave
the Land.

Thirdly, For future Inhabitants, Adventurers, Soldiers, and such others as
shall engage in the planting of Ireland. The first and chiefest Necessaries to
the settlement and advancement of a Plantation, are those natural riches of
Food, Apparel, and Habitations. If the first be regarded, there are few of the
Irish Commonalty but are skillful in Husbandry, and more exact than any English
in the Husbandry proper to that Country. If the second, there are few of the
Women but are skillful in dresssing Hemp and Flax, and making of Linen and
Woollen Cloth. If the third, it is believed, to every hundren Men there are
five or six Masons and Carpenters at least of that Nation, and these more handy
and ready in building ordinary Houses, and much more prudent in supplying the
defects of Instruments and Materials, than English Artificers. Since then 1000
Acres of Land (Plantation measure) being but of indifferent goodness, with the
rest of the Lands in Ireland, shall require as much Stock as whose original
price and charge of transporting will amount to 15000 or 2000l. Since likewise
Husbandmen and Tradesmen that are laborious, can subsist by their Labors and
Trades comfortably in England, and most will not probably leave their native
soil on any terms; and those who will, on extraordinary terms. It is
necessarily consequent, that the transplantation of the Irish does not only
deprive the Planter of those aforementioned advantages, but also so exceedingly
aggravates his charge and difficulty in planting (by his irremedicable want of
whatever he brings not with him out of England) that his charge will manifestly
appear to be more than his profit; and it is not easily conceivable how or when
five or six Millions of Acres are like to be planted or inhabited upon so clear
an account of expense and loss.

Objection. Against all these advantages it is only objected, that the English
may degenerate, and turn Irish, unless a separation by transplanting the one
from the other be observed; and to this purpose experience of former ages is
urged.

Answer. Of future contingents no man can pass a determinate judgment; but if
we speak morally, and as probably may be, it may much rather be expected that
the Irish will turn English. Those Topics before instanced concerning Religion
do infer it as very probable, that with the Religion professed by the English,
it is likely they may receive their Manners also. And this is confirmed by
experience of all of that Nation who embraced the Protestant Religion. And as
to former experience, even that likewise seems to add weight to this
expectation, because whatever inducements persuaded the English formerly to
turn Irish, the same more strongly invite the Irish now to turn English.

1. When England was reformed from Popery, no care was took, nor endeavors
used to spread the reformation in Ireland; by which means the English Colonies
there continued still Papists, and so in Religion were alienated from the
English, and and fastened to the Irish: But now it being most probable that most
of the Irish will embrace the Protestant Profession, it is upon the same
grounds most probable that they will embrace the English Manners.

2. Former Conquests of Ireland were either the undertakings of some private
persons, or so managed by public persons, that the power and profitable
advantages of the Land remained in the hands of the Irish: But as in the
present Conquest the Nation of England is engaged, so is the power and
advantage of the Land in the hands of the English. For instance.

1. The Irish were the Body of the People, and too potent for the English
(especially at such times as the troubles of England caused the Armies to be
called thence, which Historians observe to have been the times of degeneration,
as a means to selfpreservation.

2. The Irish were the general Proprietors of Land, and an English Planter must
be their Tenant; and the temptation of this relation and dependence is very
prevalent (at least) to bring the Posterity to a compliance, and that to a
likeness, and that to a sameness.

3. The Irish were the chiefly estated, and the intermarriages with them were
accompanied with greater Friends and Fortunes than with the English, who were
not only Strangers, but for the most part (till of late years) comparatively
poor.

4. The Lawyers were Irish, the Jurors Irish, most of the Judges Irish, and the
major part of their Parliament Irish; and in all Disputes between Irish and
English, the Irish were sure of the favor.

But now the condition of Ireland is (through Gods goodness) so altered, that
all these Arguments are much more forcibly persuasive, that the Irish will turn
English.

3. The frequent use of the Irish Language in all commerce, and the Englishes
habituating themselves to that Language, was one great means of Irishfying the
English Colonies: But now the Language will be generally English; and if the
Irish be mingled with the English, they will probably learn and be habituated
to the English Tongue, which is found by experience to be suddenly learned by
the Irish; whereas if they be transplanted into Connaught, the distinction of
the English and Irish tongue will not only be continued, but also the Irish
left without means of learning English.

3. Concerning the Security of the English, and their Interess.
1. FOR the present, This Plantation will necessarily make many Tories. For,

1. Many Inhabitants, who are able to subsist on their Gardens in their present
Habitations, are unable to subsist in traveling to Connaught; and for the
present to derive subsistence from the wast Lands of Connaught, when they come
thither; and therefore will rather choose the hazard of Torying, than the
apparent danger of starving.

2. Many Irish Masters will disburthen themselves of their attendants and
servants on this occasion, in regard the charge of retaining them will be
greater, and their employment of them less, both in the journey, and journeys
end; and these servants, however disposed to honest labor and industry, yet
being thus secluded from means of subsistence, necessity will enforce to be
Tories.

3. The range of the Tories will be so great, and advantages thereby of
securing themselves and Cattle so much, that until the whole Land be otherwise
planted, it will not be probable that our Armies should either have
intelligence of their places of abode in their fastnesses, or be enabled to
find them, those who are acquainted with the service of Tory-hunting, know much
of this difficulty. And impossible it is, that those parts of the Land which
adjoyn to those Fastnesses, should be planted in many ages, if Tories (secured
in them) make incursions on such as shall plant.

4. The Irish numbers (now so abated by Famine, Pestilence, the Sword, and
Foreign Transportations) are not like to overgrow the English as formerly, and
so no fear of their being obnoxious to them hereafter: but being mixed with,
they are likelyer to be swallowed up by the English, and incorporated into
them; so that a few Centuries will know no difference present, fear none to
come, and scarce believe what were passed. The chiefest and eminentest of the
Nobility, and many of the Gentry, have taken Conditions from the King of Spain,
and have transported at several times 40000 of the most active spirited men,
most acquainted with danger and discipline of War, and inured to hardness; the
Priests are all banished; the remaining part of the whole Nation are scarce the
sixth part of what were at the beginning of the War, so great a devastation has
God and Man brought upon that Land, and so far are they from those formidable
numbers they are (by those that are Strangers to Ireland) conceived to be; and
that handful of Natives left, are poor laborious useful simple Creatures,
whose design is only to live, and their Families, the manner of which is so
low, that it is a design rather to be pitied, than by any body feared, envyed,
or hindered.

Secondly, For the future. By this Transplantation,

1. The Irish Commonalty are put under the power of those Chiefs, who have
engaged them in so much Blood in the late Rebellion.

2. They are collected into one Rendezvous, and so fitted for an united
undertaking, when occasion shall be administered. Scilurus, his Arrows might
easily be broke singly, but bound in one bundle, they abide any stress.

3. They are seated in a Country furthest distant from England, and for the
Seashore most remote from the course of the English Fleet, where therefore
they may receive Arms from any Foreign Prince with most security, modelize
themselves into Arms, and be furnished irresistably for a new war; by means of
these advantages, the English in the last Rebellion first lost Connaught, and
last regained it.

Fourthly, they exceedingly mistake who imagine that the passage out of
Connaught into the other three Provinces is difficult, or may be easily*
defended against the Irish, if they should thus be armed and fitted for a new
war.

Whereas it is evidently for the security of the English and English
interesse, to divide the Irish one from the other, especially the Commonaltie
from the Cheifs, and both from the advantages of receiving probable assistants
from Foreiners.

Objection. But notwithstanding many of these inducements to join with the
English, yet many of the Irish have of late turned Tories, by means of this
cohabitation.

Answer. The mistake is great in attributing that effect to this cause. The
real causes of those later Tories are such as these.

First, the Commonwealth's necessity for money to maintain the Army of
Ireland, brought the protected people under a tax so insupportable, that the
generality of them were forced to a monthly diminution of their principal
substance, which by degrees brought laborious husbandmen to so sad a state of
poverty, that they were necessitated to this hard choice of starving or
turning Tories.

Secondly, Laws were imposed on the protected to discover and resist Enemies
upon pain of death although they neither had nor were allowed Arms or means to
enable them to it, or defend themselves; nor could the Lawgivers protect them
either in their estates, or lives, from that Enemy to whose malice and fury
the observance of those Laws made them liable; so that both the contempt of,
and obedience to them, exposed these poor people to be punished with death
either by the English or Irish.

Thirdly, the violence and oppression by some of the Soldiers inflicted on
them is incredible; and by the injured people's just fear to complain, many
horrible facts of this nature go daily unpunished.

Fourthly, the narrowness and streightness of the Parliaments concessions of
mercy to that Nation in the first and fourth article of the act of settlement,
which does not declare one in 500. pardonable either for life or estate; and
when men see a line of destruction measuring out their portion, nature teaches
them to perserve their lives as long, and sell them as dear as they can, by
resisting to the uttermost, the power of that state whose declared resolves
exempt them from all mercy.

Object. But if this toleration of Irish cohabiting be allowed, the Adventurers
and Soldiers (it is feared) will acquiesce in them rather than expose
themselves to the expense and difficulty of transporting and planting with
English.

Answ. All the Irish, and all their stock is not proportionate to the fifth
part even of the three provinces, and therefore cannot satisfy the proprietors
ends, of planting their land; though being advantagiously dispersed and
disposed of, they may be isntrumental by their labors, and industry, to make
preparation for, and to facilitate the settlement of such others as the
planters must necessarily bring thither for the full improvement of his Land.

Thus we see no necessity of this transplanting* in regard of the three great
ends alleged, Religion, Profit, Safety, but rather so great a necessity of
them, that there is no reason at all for it.

But there is one thing more which wise men will consider, and that is, the
impossibility of this transplanting. Among the five things, Impossiblilities
are one head that are excluded deliberation. There are Laws made, and Orders
gone out, for their going Universally into Connaught by March next; But suppose
they should have a dram of Rebellious blood still in them, or be fullen and not
go; It is not impossible but this may be so, nay it is certain it will be so,
for they were by Orders to remove long since, and yet an inconsiderable part
only obeyed, the generality choosing to run all hazards obstinately, than
condescend.

They say they can but find want and ruin, (at the worst) if they stay, and
why should they travel so far, for that which will come home to them? can it be
imagined that a whole Nation will drive like Geese at the wagging of a hat upon
a stick? but there is an Army to compel them; I, this is the way to have an
Army, nay to have two Armies, one more then we would (of the Enemies) and then
perhaps to have one less then we would again, never a one of our friends;
Surely more English Souldidiers have perished by the Country, then the Sword of
the Irish; They are more afraid of Tories then Armies, and Woods and Boggs then
Campswhere; It will be harder to find them then vanquish them; And when will
this wild war be finished? Ireland Planted, Inhabitants unburthened, Soldiers
settled? at this rate who will be able to stir abroad for fear, to live at home
for want? And when a dangerous experiment has been tried, it may be Quiet will
be sought at a dearer rate then it might be found now; It Is a sad thing to
fight against men till they are reduced to us, and then to fight against them,
because they will not part from us.

And that this is certainly the true state of the controversy (and not any
dregs) of Rebellion in them unpurg'd, yet will by this evidently appear, that
those whom Fear or Want has made lately to swell the number of the Tories so
much (to show their disposition to quietness) did at their first going out, and
do still continue to offer security for their peacable demeanors in the
English quarters, if they may be accepted, and to take the first opportunity,
to go beyond sea for Soldiers; And if this will not be granted, who knows what
desperation may make them willing to do, and us unwillingly to suffer?

Although to discover so many monstrous and evident dangers and losses
necessarily impending upon the general removal of the Irish out of the three
Provinces into Connaught, and not against small single, but such several great
Interess, viz the continuing the Irish Papists, or making them turn Atheists,
the knitting again like Worms their divided septs and amities which are now cut
in sunder, the entailing barbarousness upon them by such a consociation for
ever, the giving them power to rebel again by crouding them all together, and
will, by the great injury they conceive they have in this action, against,
which they have ('it is strange) as great a resentment, as against loss of
estate, yea even death it self. The aspersing the English Nation with Cruelty,
ungratefulness, and in some sort unfaithfulness. The destruction of the States
Revenue, the standing Army, the disbanded Soldiery, former English
Inhabitants, present Adventurers, and future Planters.

Though it were enough to represent barely a Hydra so pregnant with mischievous
heads, to have it cut off, and new resolutions to succeed those which have been
before, and invention to project on all hands upon what surer grounds an action
of such moment may be founded: yet if the Parliament shall be pleased but so
much to respect the good meaning of what is here written, as (by their clemency
passing by all the infirmities thereof) to let the residue fall under the
cognizance of any persons deputed thereto. There are likewise Expedients ready
to be humbly tendered, if they may be accepted, which offer at least at the
assoyling all these difficulties and disturbances, and the putting that whole
Land (by Gods blessing) into a quiet and flourishing estate: but it was judged
more convenient to exempt them from the publication of this Paper, that the
Parliament might neither seem to have their Wisdoms forestalled, if they shall
advise on other Expedients, nor their Counsels revealed, if any thing offered
there should happen to find favor in their eyes.

There are some things wherein the Reader is to be premonish'd, to stop his
wonder how such destructive Resolutions could pass, or be let pass from the
hand of Authority all this time. For which consider,

1. Those that were in England must see and hear with their eyes and ears that
were in Ireland, and according to Informations given from them, were
necessitated to square their directions to them: Now it is no wonder if those
that were but Strangers to that Land should not (at first sight) understand the
complete interest thereof; and so though their wills were zealous to that which
was good in the general, yet their understandings not fully informed (so soon)
might cause them to deviate in some particular.

2. When these Resolutions were at first taken to transplant the Irish
universally, the face of things much differed in Ireland from what it appears
now; and that might be conveniently propounded (nay done in one time) which
will not so well suit with the series of Affairs at another: then Necessity
might have made it fit to have transplanted, now the unfitness makes it not
necessary: So that both the one and the other might have been just and unjust,
as they were accommodated to several times and conditions. It is impossible for
men to foresee all things; Events failing from what was preconceiv'd, may make
Counsels vary from what was precontriv'd.

3. Though those that sat at the Helm saw it necessary in their Wisdoms to
give out such Orders in those times, yet in their Goodness we see they did not
think fit to execute them even till this time, as if they did wait a time to be
gracious to the Irish Nation, and would expect all opportunities that might
enable them therein, and any new accidents intervening, that would conspire
thereto.

And now (God having put the same into their hands at present) it is the
earnest suit of many, and ought to be the desire and prayer of all moderate and
sober Christians, that he would put into their hearts to embrace and use it;
That Mercy may be remembered in the midst of Justice, by those who themselves
desire not Justice without Mercy, and that thoughts may be had of what
indulgence is due to the frailty of a man, as well as what severity to the
obstinacy of a Rebel; it being an Heroickness not to insult upon an humbled
Enemy, and Wisdom not to make him desperate.

The conversion of that Nation will be a more pious work than their
eradication, it was that was pretended, fasted, prayed, preached for so often;
sure it was intended. God has complicated our good with this mercy, as if he
would not let Men be too cruel to those poor blind Natives, without being so to
themselves; and would reward their compassionate thoughts toward them with the
many good effects that will thereby accrue.

The unsetling of a Nation is an easy work, the settling is not, it has cost
much Blood and Treasure there, and now Prudence and Mercy may accomplish the
work; the opportunity for it, will not last always, it is now; the Physicians
late assistance despairs, where his early help might have been prosperous. The
Soldiers (there) exhausted with indefatigable labors, hope now for their
rest. The old English, having lain so long under Taxes, wait for their Jubilee.
The Adventurers expect some Crop at length, from what they have long since so
plentifully sown. The State may challenge a Revenue from what she has so amply
expended on. It had been better Ireland had been thrown into the Sea before the
first engagement on it, if it will never turn to account, but still to expense:
but the time is come when the Venture will defray the expense of the Voyage, if
all be not shipwrack'd in the Harbors mouth; all there contrive quietness,
pray for peace. This Transplantation is the main Remora that puts to a stand.
The Seed-time was, the Harvest would come on. The Spring will hasten after so
sharp a Winter. And how glorious a Victory will that be, when both the Bodies
and Minds of a Nation are overcome! the first by power, the second by love? How
will the Souls of the Irish blush hereafter, that they should have been once
cruel against those, whom they find still so merciful toward them: when Love
shall hold a stricter rein upon them than fear, and make them wash away that
Blood they have drawn from others, by Tears drawn from themselves. How shall
they bless God for their Unprosperousness, and rejoice in those Infelicities
whereby they are made happy? And the English that are in that Land bid past
cares, and fears, and present wants adieu, and leave those Hives they have been
almost starved in, like industrious Bees, to repair their old Stocks with new
Honey. How at ease will the State be from those cares, that, like Vultures,
have continually preyed upon their hearts in the behalf of that Land? And what
a pleasing sight will it be to England, instead of meagre naked Anatomies,
which she received driven from Ireland in the beginning of a War, to empty her
self of her young Swarms thither in the beginning of a Peace? If Antiquity
deceive us not, that Land was once called the Island of Saints; and if Novelty
deceive us not again, it may find as strange a change to good, as it had a fall
to ill; God has made (in the nature of Instruments) the good or ill of
thousands beneath, to hang upon the breath of a few that are above. O what a
guard had there need to be on their lips, whose words dispense death! what
prayers to God! what uprightness toward Man! If any Errors be committed,
those on the right are easyest cancelled; It is better to save one innocent,
than destroy many guilty persons: but to make guilty persons become innocent
(by saving) how excellent will that be? How much more comfort will the heart
receive hereafter, to hear the once poor erring Irish live good Protestants,
honest Subjects, than to have heard they dyed blinded Papists, bloody Rebels?
And there can come no glory from that ruin which may be avoided. The most
contemptible things carry Engines of death along with them; a Gnat, a Hair, a
Rasin-stone can destroy, but great glorious universal agents (like the Sun) are
the Parents of life; A storm or accident may throw down a house, but art and
industry are required to build it; and this way treads a destructive path, as
has been shown, and therefore should be no longer trodden in; God grant they
whom this concerns most, may be as sensible of it, as some are whom it concerns
less; that they may mind this Affair according to the greatness of its
consequent (which slights all mediocrity) and will be transcendently good or
evil; and as Comets may reflect obliquely upon vulgar men, but more eminently
signify for great Personages, so these effects may be showred among the Common
People, but will be poured upon the head of the Commonwealth. But I had forgot
that I had said before, that Transplanting is an impossible work, and therefore
it is enough to pray (and may hope to prevail among wise men) that they would
be pleased to leave* undone that which they are not able to do, which I take to
be a reasonable and modest request.

FINIS.

