SYGKPETISS. OR Dis-satisfaction Satisfied.

In seventeen sober and serious QUERIES, Tending to allay the Discontents, and
satisfy the Scruples, of persons Dis-satisfied about the late Revolution of
Government in the Commonwealth, and to guide every Man's feet into the way of
his Duty, and the Public Peace.

Proposed by J. G. a Cordial Friend, and Well-willer to the Interest of all
men, consistent with the Public Peace and Safety.

For he supposed that his Brethren would have understood, how that God, by his
hand, would deliver them: but they understood it not.

Act. 7. 25. This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a Ruler and a
Judge, the same did God send to be a Ruler and Deliverer, etc.

Act. 7. 35. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People Rejoice.

Prove. 29. 2. LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and
are to be sold their shop in Popes head Alley, near Lombard street. 1654.

Dissatisfaction Satisfied.
I.
WHether does not the Apostle expressly affirm (Romans 13. 1.) That the Powers
that be [i. whatsoever they be, and however, in respect of second means
compassed, attained, or procured by men who stand possessed of them] are
ordained by God [i. orderly, regularly, wisely, and righteously in respect of
his providential interposure about the vestment of them, disposed of, and
lodged in the persons, whosoever they be, who are the present Ministers, or
Administrators of them?] Or were not the highest Powers in the world, when the
Apostle spoke this, viz. That the Powers that be, are (...), ordained of God,
vested in Nero, not only a Monster of men (as he is commonly termed) in respect
of his bloody cruelty, unnatural lusts, etc. but likewise advanced to the
Empire, neither by the orderly way of the suffrage or election of the people,
nor yet by the less disorderly way of the choice of the Roman Senate, but
partly by the wickedness of his mother Agrippina, who caused her husband
Claudius to dis-inherit his own son Britannicus, to make way for the Adoption
of her son, (this Nero) partly by the overruling interposure of the Cohorts
and rest of the Soldiery, The Senate (says the Story) as men affrighted with
amazement, not once contradicting the same?

II.
Whether is it any way necessary in point of reason, or conscience, that they,
who quietly obey, and submit unto the present power, or the persons actually
invested with Authority over them, should either justify, approve, or own the
terms, method, way, means, or manner, either of their attaining unto, or their
investiture with, this Authority and power? Or did the Apostle Paul justify,
or approve of, the way or means by which Nero obtained the Imperial Dignity,
in submiting and appealing unto him, or nnto his Authority, yea or in his
injoyning all Christians Acts. 25. 10, 11.
(as we heard) to be subject unto him, and this not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake Romans 13. 9.
? Or do we ever read in the Scriptures, of any person either punished,
threatened, or reproved by God, for doing things simply, and in themselves,
lawful, at the command, or in obedience unto, any Magistrate or Person, seated,
and settled in Authority, how unduly so ever advanced to his seat of power?

III.
Whether is it not the gracious Counsel and intent of God, in declaring, That
whatsoever Powers be, they are ordained by him (as we have heard) and again,
that ALL that are in Authority, should be prayed and Interceded for, yea and
thanks also given for them, etc. Whether (I say) is it not the gracious intent
of God in these, and many other like Declarations made by him, to provide for
the peace and quiet of States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, by cutting off al
occasions and pretexts from the people, of quarrelsome disputes about the
Rights and Titles of those, who are in present possession of the Sovereign or
ruling powers? And do not all they reject this gracious counsel of God against
themselves, and against their Nation, and labor to defeat it, who set
themselves with all their might (yea, with more might, it is to be feared, then
their own) to raise a Spirit of disloyalty and disobedience in the people,
unto the present Government and Governors, upon pretense, That those who are
in power, did by undue and unworthy means possess and invest themselves with it?

IV.
Whether is, or ought, the letter of the Law, to be observed in all cases
whatsoever? or is not ratio Legis, anima Legis, i. e. the reason, or end of the
Law, the soul of the Law, which is in all cases to be preferred before the
letter, which is but as the body of it? Yea or has any Law whatsoever any
binding force, further then the execution of it, or subjection unto it, are
consistent with the public safety and good Omnis lex ordinatur a^^ commun^m
hominum salutem, and in tantum obti^et vim and rationem L^gu^cundum vero quod
ab hoc deficit, virtutem obligandi non habet. Vade Juris peritus dicit, Quod
nulla ratio juris, aut ^quitatis benignit as patitur, ut quae salubriter pro
salute hominum introducuntur, ^a nos duriori interpretatione contrae ipsorum
commodum perducamus ad severitatem. Contingit autem multoties, quod al quid
observari communi saluti est utile, ut in pluribus, quod tamen aliquibus
easibus est maxim nocivum. Aqu. 12. q. 96. a. 6. Vnde si emergat casus, in quo
observatio talis Legis sit damnosa communi saluti, non est observanda. Ibid.
Necessitas dispensationem habet annexam; quia necessitas non subditur legi.
Ibid.
? Or are not such men Judges of evil thoughts (as the Scripture speaks James
2. 4
) who condemn such persons, as violators or transgressors of the Law, who in
order to the public peace and safety, act besides, or contrary to, the letter
of the Law, and in such cases only, wherein the observance of this letter
visibly threateneth the said common peace and safety? Or whether are private
men, who know little of, converse little with, State transactions and affairs,
the more competent Judges, when, or in what cases, the observation of the
letter of the Law is of a dangerous and threatening import to the public
safety, or such persons, whose daily residence is in the mount of
State-negotiations, and who by the advantage of the ground, where they stand,
may very reasonably be conceived to be in a full capacity perfectly to discover
and understand on what hinge the public Interest and Safety turns, and what
means and interposures are most promising of their procurement, promotion, and
establishment?

V.
Whether are such promises, engagements, or protestations, binding upon the
Consciences of those, who have made them, yea or lawful for them to observe or
keep, which, by reason of an alteration and change of those circumstances and
terms, under which, and in consideration of which, they were made, cannot be
observed or kept, without the imminent danger, or damage, of those, unto whom,
and for whose sake, wealth, and safety, they were made Ad hoc quod teneatur
bomo facere, quod promisit, requiritur quod omnia immutata permaneant:
alioquin, nec fuit mendax in promittendo, quia promisit quod habebat in mente,
subintellectis debitis conditionibus. Nec etiam est infidelis non implendo,
quod promisit, quia ^aedem conditiones non extant. Senecs. D. Benefic. l. 4. c.
34.

Ad quintum decendum, quod ille qui aliquid promittit, si habeat animum
faciendi quod promittit, non mentitur: quia non loquitur contra id, quod gerit
in mente. Si vero non faciat quod promisit, videtur infideliter agere per hoc,
quod animum mutat. Potest taemen excusari ex duobus. Vno modo, s^ promisit id,
quod manifest est illicitum, quia promittendo peccavit, mutando autem
propositum, been facit. Alio modo, si sint mutatae conditiones personaram and
negotiorum -- Vnde and Apostolus non est mentitus, qui non ivit Corinthum, quo
se iturum esse promiserat, ut dicitur, 2 Cor. 1. Aqu. 22. qu. 110. a. 3.


? Or in case, a man having borrowed a sword of his Friend, and promised to
deliver it back again into his own hand within a months time, this Friend of
his in the interim falling into a delirium or phrene tique distemper, and so
continuing till the said month be expired, is this man bound in conscience to
perform his promise notwithstanding, by delivering the sword into his friends
hand at the time appointed? Or is not the sad providence befaln his friend in
this case, to be interpreted by him, not only, or simply, as a discharge from
God in respect of the performance of his said promise, but as an Item, or
engagement laid upon him by God, at no hand to perform it? Or has there not
within these few years past, been an alteration or change in the politic
terms and circumstances of this State and Commonwealth, as considerably great,
as well can be imagined?

VI
Whether was that supposition of Moses without sufficient reason, or gronnd,
when, upon his avenging one of his Brethren by smiting the Egyptian, who
oppressed him, he SUPPOSED that his Brethren would have under stood how that
God by his hand would deliver them? Or were not his Brethren dull and slow of
heart in not taking the kindly impressions of such a providence, and nor
understanding, that pregnant intimation from God, that his Counsel and Will
was, to appoint and make his Servant Moses a Prince or Ruler over them, and
this in order to the vindication of their liberties, the freedom of their
persons from oppression, and to their further benefit and good otherwise? or do
not they show themselves to be altogether unexperienced in the speech and
language of high Providence, or at least to be either but dull and drowsy, or
else cross and froward, Interpreters of the most signal dispensations of God,
who do not understand that his will and pleasure is, to appoint such a person
toties quoties, by whose hand he vouchsafes unto a People a long continued
series of extraordinary deliverances, for a Prince and Ruler over them? Or do
not that people reject the Counsel of God against themselves, who say unto a
Person so commended unto them, and appointed over them by God, who made Thee a
Ruler or a Judge?

VII.
Whether did not God send THAT Moses to be a Ruler and a deliverer unto his
People, who was refused by them, saying unto him, who made thee a Ruler and a
Act. 7. 35.
Judge? Or is it not a matter of frequent occurrency and observation in the
Providential Administrations of God, that such things are brought about and
done by him, which, though as contrary to the minds and desires, as to the
expectations of many good people, when they are new done, yet turn to an
incomparable benefit and advantage unto them afterward? Or was not the death
of Christ, as a Sword passing through the soul of his Virgin Mother, yea and of
many other holy Luke 2 35.
and gracious persons, both men and women, by which notwithstanding they were
highly raised in peace and comfort afterward, and shall be eternally saved? Or
did not eleven of the twelve Tribes of Israel side with the house of Saul
against David's advancement 2 Samuel 2 10.
over them, being for a time highly unwilling and discontented that he should
be their King, under whose Government notwithstanding they flourished like a
green bay Tree, and saw many years of the greatest prosperity and peace?

VIII.
Whether are not children like to receive better quarter, and terms of love,
care, provision in things necessary and convenient, etc. from their natural
Parents, and such who begat them, then from strangers, or persons not so nearly
related to them? Or is any community of men or body of people, like to be so
naturally regarded and cared for in the things of their comfort and peace, by
any other kind of Ruler, or Governor whatsoever, as by those who, under God,
have been the Preservers of their lives, liberties, and estates, by exposing
their own persons to all the difficulties, hardships, and hazards of war, and
jeoparding their lives themselves in the high places of the field, where death
for the time had his throne? Or does not the Preserving of a people upon such
terms as these, as kindly, as naturally, as affectionately, endear them to
their Preserver, as the act of procreation commends children unto the love
and tender affections of their Parents? Or is not the Act of Preserving of very
near a kin to the Act of Begeting? If the premises will stand, who are more
desirable by a people in the places of Rule and Authority, then those, who
have been their great Preservers?

IX.
Whether are not they rather Back-biters of sin, then Reprovers, who
importunely declaim and cry out against the Sins of those that are Absent? Or
is not this a most unworthy practice of men, to insinuate themselves into the
hearts and affections of simple and inconsiderate people, by causing, or
tempting them to think the better of themselves, whilst others are reproached
and declaimed against in their hearing, as persons more sinful and unworthy,
then they? Or have not daring and bold speeches uttered against Superiors, and
persons in Authority, tending to blemish them, or to impair their honor and
esteem, always been of an affectionate and captivating resentment with the more
ignoble and lower-spirited sort of men, causing them to have the persons of
those, who utter them, in admiration, as worthy Assertors of the Liberties of
the People, and exposing their own liberties, yea and lives also, to make the
purchase?

X.
Whether is there any instance or example to be found in all the Scripture of
any Prophet, or faithful Servant of God, who counted it a pleasure to declaim
against their Rulers before the people; especially against any such Ruler, whom
they acknowledged, or knew, to be a person fearing God, and withal, a man, the
tenderness and goodness of whose Conscience they could not lightly but know to
be such, which made him utterly averse as to any penal vindication of himself,
(especially upon the persons of such men, whom he had the least cause of all to
judge godly,) though highly injured and provoked by them? Or is it not a most
unworthy strain of an un-Christian dis-ingenuitie, to tread and trample upon
those with a foot of insolency, whom we know (or at least have very good
grounds whereon to be confidently persuaded) that they are fast bound in their
judgments, and consciences toward God, from rising up against us, to repair
themselves, or to measure out unto us according to the just demerit of such our
misdemeanors against them?

XI.
Whether does not the Apostle, expressly charge and enjoin every Soul (without
exception of any) to be subject to the higher powers, declaring, That whosoever
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, (Romans 13. 2.) If so, do
not such persons sin against an express Commandment of God, and this with an
high hand, who, under what pretext soever, shall openly teach disobedience unto
the Powers over them, animating and encouraging, yea by all unchristian and
indirect means, incensing and provoking the people against the Powers, which
God, whether in judgment, or in mercy, has most justly placed and appointed
over them? Or can the sin of resisting the Powers, be more pregnantly,
unquestionably, yea or more dangerously and mischievously perpetrated and
committed, then when those, who ought to live in subjection under them, are day
after day, openly solicited, tempted, urged, yea upon Religious pretenses
conjured, to deny or refuse this subjection unto them, and are passionately,
and (as it were) out of an ecstasy of zeal, born in hand, that whilst they
break so signal a Command of God, they do him worthy service?

XII.
Whether do not all Christians stand expressly charged, to make supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, as for all men, so more
especially for Kings, and ALL that are in Authority, that they may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? If thus, do not such
Christians notoriously prevaricate with the scope and intent of their own
supplications and prayers (at least if they supplicate and pray according to
the prescription of the Holy Ghost, now mentioned) who labor in the very fire
without ceasing to make profelytes unto Barabbas, in stead of Jesus Christ,
striving might and main to season all they can, with principles of turbulency
and sedition, and to mold their Christian Brethren into such counsels and
resolutions, which no man can reasonably imagine or expect, but that they
should, or will, exasperate those in Authority into such ways, which must needs
make their lives less quiet and peaceable?

XIII.
Whether are such men filled with the Spirit of God, or with a contrary spirit,
who, in stead of giving thanks unto God for those in Authority (which is the
express Command of the Apostle, as we heard -- that giving of thanks be made
for all men, For Kings, and for ALL that are in Authority, etc.) do little else
upon all occasions but fill the ears of men with their discontents, complaints
and murmurings against those in Authority? And whether are not murmurers and
complainers Jude v. 16.
, and so again, traitors, heady, high-minded 2 Timothy 34.
, and again, men who despise Government [or Lordship, (...)] presumptuous,
self-willed, NOT AFRAID to speak evil of dignities 2 Pet. 2. 10.
, ranged by the Holy Ghost himself amongst persons highly disapproved by God?
And whether is not that wisdom, which is from above, as well peaceable, as
pure, gentle, and easy to be entreated Iam. 3. 17.
, as that which is found in persons, having bitter envying, and strife in their
hearts, earthly, sensual, devilish Iam. 3. 14. 15
?

XIV.
Whether did not Satan (the great Enemy of the peace and safety of mankind)
desire to sift the Apostles rather then any other sort of men, [i. e. to
disturb and trouble their fancies, memories, understandings, etc. for a time,
with an intent and hope by this means to draw out of them some soil or dross,
some unworthy carriages, or other, which coming from them, he knew must needs
be more serviceable for his ends, then the same, or the like, coming from other
men.] Or does he not in these days labor in the very fire to disturb the
principles, distemper the imaginatives, disorder and confound the reasons,
apprehensions, and understandings of such men, whose disordered actings and
miscarriages he supposes will be of highest conducement to his ends, which are
known to be, the trouble, misery, and destruction, of the poor creature called
Man? Or are not such men, the men of this character, whose zeal has so highly
commended them to the opinions and thoughts of many devout and well-meaning men
and women, that they judge their thresholds to be much nearer the threshold of
God himself, then other men's?

XV.
Whether is there any kind of zeal more ecstatical and fiery, then that which
is blind, and without knowledge? Or was it not such a zeal as this, which made
the Apostle Paul himself, whilst yet a Pharisee, exceedingly mad against the
Saints, in so much as to persecute them even unto strange Cities Act 26. 11.
? Or were not the Jews, to whom notwithstanding Paul bears this witness, that
they had a zeal of God, the fiercest enemies of all others, to the most worthy
and faithful Servants of God? Or was it not a spark of this unhallowed fire,
that provoked the two Disciples, James and John, to demand of Christ, whether
they should not command fire to come down from Heaven to consume the
Samaritans, because they received them not? Or did not the Lord Christ upon
their motion turn himself toward them, and rebuke them in these words; Ye know
not what manner of Spirit ye are of Luke 9. 53. 54 55.
? Or do they understand and consider of what spirit, they either are, or ought
to be, who (in effect) call for fire, not only from Heaven, but from Earth also
(I mean, from the vulgar, and less considerate sort of people) to destroy, if
not the persons, yet the power and Authority (which must needs endanger the
persons also) of such Rulers amongst them, who do not receive their notions and
Doctrines about Government, and submit to an investiture from them, and such as
they please to join in the Act of this investiture with themselves?

XVI.
Whether is the assertive or high-bearing confidence of men, any demonstrative,
yea or competent, argument or ground of truth, in what they deliver and avouch
upon such terms? Or did any man, or any sort of men, ever fly an higher pitch
of confidence then the Jews when they notoriously belyed the Lord Jesus Christ,
expressing themselves thus: Say we not WELL that thou art a Samaritan, and have
a Devil? Or did they not speak very ignorantly, wickedly, and falsely, when they
pleased themselves with an high and confident conceit, that they spoke WELL,
and nothing but the truth? Or, are not the grounds of most men's confidence,
rather ignorance, or want of consideration, of such things, which are strongly
objectionable against their notions and apprehensions, in conjunction with a
vain glorious humor of being thought Demi-prophets, and persons of a more
familiar converse with God, then other men, then any well-grounded knowledge or
comprehension of the certain truth of those things, which they affirm?

XVII.
Whether is the Epoch, or time of the first entrance beginning, or setting up
of the fifth Monarchy in the World, fixed and determined by God in the
Scriptures, so that no humane endeavors or contributions toward such a thing,
are any ways available to accelerate or hasten this period of time, nor (on the
other hand) any humane opposition or obstructions or unworthy actings of men,
any ways able to retard or set it back? If neither, why should any men trouble
the World round about them, and abuse the simplicity of inconsiderate people,
by an importune bearing them in hand, that if they were but permitted to umpire
the sovereign Affairs of their State and Nation, they would out of hand bring
the said blessedness of the fifth Monarchy upon the head of the world, even
before the day thereof? Or why should these men, or any others, clamor day
after day in the ears of poor people, against such persons, who themselves
acknowledge to be truly Godly, as if they stood in Christ's way, and would not
suffer him to set up his Kingdom, or this fifth Monarchy, in the world, only
because they cannot be satisfied about the truth or soberness of their notions,
and refuse to steer a course, threatening ruin and confusion to their Nation?
Or is it not the sense and declared opinion of these men, that the day and
hour, at least the year, wherein that Great Jubilee of the Monarchy they speak
of, shall begin, is unchangeably, unalterably, unremoveably fixed by God?

Postscript.
I.
MAy it not be yet further queried, Whether such persons, whether Ministers of
the Gospel, or others (but especially the former) who publicly undertake or
pretend to know, and predict unto the people, how long the present Government
shall stand, and after how many months, or years, it shall presently be
dissolved and fall, do not impose a kind of wretched necessity upon themselves
to turn every stone for the raising of Tumults and Insurrections in the Land,
and to enrage the people against the present Government and Governors, thus to
make a covering for their own shame, and to prevent the dishonor and reproach
of false Prophets from lighting upon their heads? Or did not the Wizard in
France, having engaged the reputation of his Art in foretelling the death of
Duke Beron by a Bungurdian on a certain day, and finding no likelihood, the day
now approaching, of the event otherwise, resolve to make himself a true Prophet
by doing the execution himself, and accordingly murdered him?

II.
Again, Are not these passages ensuing (published in print and subscribed by Mr
John Simpson, Mr William Greenhill, Mr Thomas Brooks, Mr Hanserd Knollys, Mr T.
Harrison, Mr Christopher Feak, Mr Richard Wollaston, Mr Henry Jesse, with
several others, about two years since, viz. in November, 1651.) worthy to be
engraven with the Point of a Diamond, and written in letters of Gold; If Caesar,
and Pagan Rulers under him in Judea, and elsewhere, were to be honored and
submitted unto, as both Christ taught, and his Apostles (Mat. 22. 21. Mark 12.
27.) (AND YET THEY CAME IN BY THE SWORD, AND KEPT GODS CHURCH IN BONDAGE,) how
much more should our Governors be honored by all people in our Nation? The same
Authors soon after express themselves thus: In our days, wherein persons truly
fearing God are of diverse forms, dissenting in Church Government, etc. some
that are termed Presbyterians, some Independents, some Anabaptists, and some
that are not so resolved with any of these; the power of choosing Rulers, or of
being chosen, should not be limited to any one of these forms, or persuasions,
to the excluding of others, [excepting such, WHO EITHER DENY PROPRIETY, or
Magistracy, or who assert carnal liberty, or Polygamy, whom we have witnessed
against in our former declaration; or such, AS HAVE OPPOSED, Or DO NOT OWN,
THIS PRESENT GOVERNMENT.] A little before (in the said printed paper) having
solemnly professed thus; With one consent we do thus declare, as in the
presence of the Almighty, who is the searcher of all hearts, before whom the
wicked and deceitful shall be confounded at the day of Judgment; they lay down
this Proposition; That all people in every Nation, as well members of Churches,
as others, ought FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE to honor such, as by the wise disposing
Providence of God, are their PRESENT RULERS; and are to submit to the civil
commands, not only of such Rulers as are faithful, but even to Infidels, (to
omit several other things of like import in the said paper.) Are not the
contents and substance of these sayings clearly and expressly founded upon the
good Word of God, which (as the said Authors worthily, and most truly inform
us) is the Rule and Standard for Faith and obedience? If so, must not all such
men of necessity be false Prophets, casting snares upon the people, and leading
them out of the ways of truth and peace, who are so far from HONORING THEIR
PRESENT GOVERNORS (though no Infidels, but partakers of like precious faith
with the Saints themselves, though no keepers of Gods Church in bondage, but
most zealous and faithful Assertors of the entire liberties thereof,) that with
open mouth they pour contempt upon them day after day, consulting with their
spleens, or worse spirits, how to make their savor to stink in the eyes of the
people, and so to arm them with discontents and indignation against them? Or is
this in the dialect, or sense, of the Holy Ghost, to, HONOR GOVERNORS?

III.
Whether, a man's conscience bearing him witness in the Holy Ghost, that his
heart is upright with God, and that he unfeignedly purposes and desires to do
all the good upon Earth, whilst he abides amongst men, which God shall any
ways enable him unto; ought not such a person, even in conscience toward God,
and out of love and genuiness of affection to his generation, embrace and
accept of all such opportunities, and advantages of standing, for the promotion
of his work, which God shall by any providence of his offer unto him? Or when
God called Moses up to the top of the Mount (Exodus 19. 20.) had it been meet
for him to have answered, Nay; but I will serve thee faithfully beneath in the
valley? Or is it not a grand detriment, or loss, unto the world, when Princes
(as Solomon speaks) walk as servants on the Earth; i. e. when men of noble
Principles, of public Spirits, whose hearts and souls are in travel with the
wealth, peace, and prosperity of the world round about them, who are shaped and
formed (as it were) on purpose by God himself for Rule and Government, shall
want a stage whereon to act like Princes, or be persuaded to enjoy themselves
in privacy and retirement? Or in case the Sun should be overruled to change
place with the Moon, should not the world have cause in abundance to lament the
change? Or had his tabernacle been pitched in any inferior Orb, beneath that,
wherein it is now placed by God, could the Earth have rejoiced in his light at
that rate, which now it does? Or had He been in any capacity to enrich the
inhabitants thereof with his treasures, as they are now enriched by him? Or if
a candle should creep under a bushel, when there is a candlestick provided and
set on the table for it, should not they in the house have much more reason to
be offended at it, then well pleased? Or is it not a secret guilt or
consciousness in the generality of men of their own narrowchestedness, and
self-ward propensions, which make them jealous that other men are, and will be
found, in the same condemnation with them; and that no man coming where he may
without much danger serve himself, will be much intent upon the service of
other men further then his own secular interest shall superintend and advise
him?

FINIS.

