Peace Protected, AND Discontent Dis-armed. WHEREIN The seventeen Queries (with
the addition of three more, Postscript-wise) lately published, partly to allay
the discontents of some about the late Revolution of Government, but more
especially to guide every man's feet into the way of Peace, as well his own, as
the public, are reinforced with Replies unto, and Animadversions upon, such
Answers, which some (it seems) have given unto them, to invalidate their
purport and intent.

Together with four new Queries superadded.

By the Author of the said seventeen Queries.

Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation. Mat. 12. 25.
The wisdom which is from above is first pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and easy
to be entreated. James 3. 17. (...); Chrysostom. Semper enim sunt tumultuosi
spiritus, qui regnum Christi non been extolli credunt, nisi aboleantur omnes
terrenae potestates. Calvin. ad Roman. 13. 1. -- Non si quid turbida Roma
Elevet, accedas. Persius. London, Printed by I. Macock, for H. Cripps, and L.
Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THere were a while since a few Queries delivered out with the right hand unto
the people of this Nation, but it seems that by many they have been received
with the left. It was David's complaint, that for his love, men became his
adversaries, and rewarded him evil for his good Psa. 109. 4, 5.
. And the Apostle Paul was jealous that he should be looked upon as an Enemy by
the Galathians, for telling and teaching them the truth. Yea the Lord Christ
himself, by reason of his familiar and free converse with men, although it were
in due order to the saving of their Souls, yet purchased unto himself from
many, the blot and imputation of being a man gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber, a
friend of Publicans and sinners Mat. 11. 19.
. Notwithstanding he had this to balance his loss in this kind; that his
Wisdom in such deportments of himself was justified by those, who were capable
of the true nature thereof, and of the express and clear tendency in it to
those worthy ends projected by it. But Wisdom (says he) is justified of her
children. I am all thoughts made, that there is no man of a single eye, that
can discern any thing in the said Queries of an oblique or ignoble tendency, or
which comporteth with any end, whereof such a man, who daily expects to
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, needs to be ashamed; or which
savoureth of any thing in the Author, but of a public spirit, and Christian
desire to see the Jerusalem of his God in the Land of his pilgrimage, in peace
and prosperity all his days, and in this condition to transmit it to posterity.

Notwithstanding some, upon consultation had with some froward and seducing
Oracle, have pretended to see a Vision of darkness in those Queries, by which
they have been admonished, to pronounce this hard sentence against their
Author, that he is a Time-Server; a Worshipper of the Greatness of this World.
If by, Time-serving, they mean, a subjecting a man's self to serve with all
diligence and faithfulness the common Interest of the men of the times, wherein
he lives, as well Great, as small, as well high, as low, rich as poor, I
plead, Guilty, to the Indictment: I have (in this sense) been a Time-Server of
a long time, well nigh ever since I was capable of such a service. But if by,
Time-serving, be meant, any unchristian, or unmanlike compliance, either with
the head, or tail, of this world, for any secular accommodation or Interest of
mine own, I can wash my hands in the Laver of David's Innocence, and with an
erect Conscience profess and say, They lay to my charge things that I know not.
And herein I suppose that all those, who have fully known my principles and
practice from the beginning, will be my Compurgators. This I confess, that from
first to last, I have stood close and fast, by the present Authority for the
time being, and have contended with the best of the strength of my
understanding, for an universal subjection of the Nation, in all things lawful,
unto it. When there were two Authorities conflicting, that of the late King,
the other, of the Parliament, in which case I judged it not meet, either to
neutralize, or amphibolize, I joined the small strength of my hand with that,
which upon consideration I judged best pleadable, and withal most promissory
of Civil, yea and of Religious Happiness also unto the Land. To this Authority
I have constantly adhered all along without the least regret, or relenting, not
only in the lowest ebb thereof, when its Competitress, like a stood, was ready
to have overwhelmed it, but likewise under all that hard measure, and those
discouraging and sad requitals, wherewith it recompensed all my service and
faithfulness unto the Interest of it. For as on the one hand, I still was a
zealous Assertor of this Authority, and compelled, as far as my tongue, pen, or
example had any compulsive power in them, all sorts of people in the Land to
submit for conscience sake unto it; so on the other hand I was as zealously
faithful in declaring and asserting the just and lawful bounds of this
Authority, testifying and persuading it to contain it self within its own
sphere, witnessing and protesting, that if it should prove like Jordan in the
time of Harvest, and overflow its banks, this would endanger the cutting off of
the waters, and laying the channel of it dry: which thing also we all know is
come to pass now some while since. And, though I love not to be too positive in
matters of this nature, yet I very much incline to conceive, that one Reason
why God took no more pleasure in the Parliament of the last sitting, was their
assuming of a Power notoriously incompetent to them, as viz. to make that
Adultery in Parents, which God never made Adultery: and that illegitimacy in
children, which God never, made such; yea which common reason and equity might
have taught them not to be such. Yea in these cases they assumed a Power, which
we may say (without the least reflection of dishonor upon God, or the
straitening of his Prerogative) is incompetent unto God himself. For God cannot
make things to be such, or such, without that which is essentially and formally
requisite to make them such; He cannot make a man without a reasonable Soul,
nor a wall white, without whiteness; nor that to be fraud or deceit, which in
the essence of it is honesty and plain dealing; so neither that to be adultery,
which is naturally and essentially an honest and lawful conjunction. If they
had repealed the former Law, which (with a like inconsiderateness) made
adulteries of such marriages, which were not solemnized by the Clergy (then so
called,) and the children born in such marriages, illegitimate; and had only
provided by mulcts and penalties, or what other means they judged meet, against
all clandestine and unworthy proceedings in the affair, leaving the transaction
of the solemnity free for persons of any rank or quality, without making that
Adultery, which God and the Law of Nature make an honest and honorable
conjunction, or that illegitimacy which these make an honest and blameless
propagation, they had done well and worthily. But now by appropriating the
business we speak of unto Justices of Peace, upon the same, or like, account,
on which it was before appropriated to the Clergy, is to cleave a bad knot with
a wedg as bad as it; and though, not formally or intentionally, yet
constructively and consequentially, to claim a Power beyond, or above, the
Power of God himself; a claim, against which, it was no otherwise like, but
that God himself would declare first, or last. Men in places of Power and
Authority, can hardly be sufficiently jealous over themselves, lest they
conceit their Power to be larger and more extensive then it is, or that in the
administration and exercise of it they do not entrench upon some or other of
the appropriate Royalties of God. But my faithfulness in endeavoring to
preserve that Authority I speak of from dissolution and destruction by it self,
and its own exorbitancies, was of so hard a resentment with it, that it did not
only quench all remembrance and regard of all those other services, wherein I
unfeignedly and with all my might sought to prevent the disturbance and
annoyance of it by other men, but further kindled a spirit of unkindness, yea
of frowardness, and hard (that I say not, unjust) proceedings, in the breast
thereof, against me. For upon this account I cannot but presume it was, that I
was so generally frowned upon, and smitten with the tongue, by this Authority;
that some of my Writings (as I was informed) very narrowly escaped the double
doom of the hand of the common Hangman, and of the fire; that I was (to my no
small trouble) time after time summoned before the Consistory (surnamed, the
Co^mittee for Plundered Ministers,) and this by the procurement, abetment, and
contrivance of some of the Members themselves of the Authority I speak of, that
here I was coarsly handled, disgracefully entreated, my Accusers, though but
few and less considerable, countenanced, my Friends, who appeared with me, and
for me, neglected; and that at last I was compelled to drink the cup, prepared
only for Malignant Ministers (so called in those days,) being not only
sequestered from my Living (the best means I had for the support of my self,
wife, and seven children) but denied the liberty so much as ^f preaching in my
wonted place. Nor was there, as far as my memory is able to recollect the terms
and circumstances of these high proceedings against me, any ground or reason to
this day given by the said Commit, of that so severe a sentence awarded
against me. This I verily believe, that from the first to the last of the
sitttng of that Parliament, there was no example of any Minister in the Land
who had so constantly, and cordially, and with so much activeness in the
promotion of their Cause, adhered to them, as was, and is, sufficiently known
(yea and was acknowledged by some of themselves) that I had done, and upon whom
they had so little to charge otherwise, who received the like measure from
their hand. I confess that after several years total Sequestration (between
four and five as I remember) the Presbyterian Interest somewhat damping (I
remember not now upon what revolution, or occasion) and the Person hitherto
gratified with the hard measure measured unto me in my Sequestration, falling
under some Parliamentary dislike, with much ado I was again restored to my
place in Colmanstreet. But (as the saying was) Jam seges est, ubi Troia fuit;
at my return I found only a piece of a Skeleton or bare Anatomy of those Means,
which at my enforced departure I left a fair and full Body. The chief men upon
the place, during my absence, had (it seems) irrevocably transferred their
devotion-benevolence, together with their devotion it self in hearing, upon
him, who had all that while served their turns, and his own, in my Pulpit; who,
what he wan in this kind, wears to this day. So that if I should estimate the
damage and loss I sustained by the hard measure of my Sequestration (without
valuing the disparagement and disrepute accompanying it) at 500l. I should (I
believe) cut short the account by the one half. Notwithstanding all these grand
disobligements, and Dragon-like dealings with me, yet did I not behave my self,
either frowardly, or faultringly, in that Covenant of loyalty and service,
wherein God, and mine own Judgment and Conscience, had engaged me unto the men,
who thus requited me.

So that if I have been a Time-Server (in the sense of my Accusers) I have
served very hard Masters, from whom I never received any thing for my work or
service, but only in some such coin, wherein Paul five times received forty
save one of the Jews 2 Cor 12. 24
. Nor have I yet ever known, unless by theory, and hearsay, that the Great Men
of the times, have, or have had, so much as the value of the ninth part of a
farthing wherewith to reward the services of those who have served them. But I
know by experience that they have had rods, yea scorpions, wherewith to
chastise their servants without a cause. Nor do I now write these things,
either out of any effeminate or querulous disposition, or out of a desire, or
expectance, that the Masters of the present times should repair the breaches
made upon me by their Predecessors (the Masters of the times lately past) but
rather out of a desire to stop the mouth of that unworthiness, which is opened
against me, as if I had thriven in the world so well by serving the times
formerly, that still I meant to follow the same occupation. The truth is, that
I do intend, and am resolved (God assisting me) to serve the present times upon
the same account and terms, on which I served the former; yea and judge my self
bound in conscience, both to God, and my generation, so to do. There shall be
no more Wars in the Land, nor bloodsheds, nor tumults, nor plunderings, nor
depopulations in my days, no nor yet in the days after me, as far as I shall be
able, whilst I live, by my uttermost interposures to prevent them. But as
Daniel, though free and willing to gratify King Belshazzar in his desire, yet
spoke thus unto him, Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy rewards to
another Dan. 5. 17.
: in like manner, I can, and shall be free and faithful to serve men in
Authority (and in them, the Nation) and yet leave them at perfect liberty to
dispose, as well their faces, as their places, to whom they please. I desire
neither, but in order to their own better service, and the service of those,
whom they are bound to serve as well as I: and if they please to deny me both,
I shall serve them as well as I can without them. It may be it is a Maxim of
Policy amongst Statesmen, to make use of their countenances, and opportunities
of preferment, as ordinary men make use of their money, who do not bestow or
lay it out upon what they have already, but upon what they want, and desire to
have, and withal have reason to believe that they are not like to have,
without it. Men of ordinary discretion cannot be offended that rattles and
babies should be given unto froward children, to content and keep them quiet:
and it is the sense of more then one (though I am neu^ral in the conjecture)
that the discontent and frowardness of the Paul, figuratively so called, in the
Answer to the second Query, might have been way-layed and prevented, by a
rattle when time was, put into his hand. They are, or may be, good horses, and
good mules, whose mouths may be, though they must be, held with bit and bridle,
lest they come near thee, [viz. with their mouths, to bite and mischief thee,
as Janius and Tremellius gloss the place, Psalm. 32. 9.] And they (possibly) may
be none of the worst men for the use and service of a State, whose mouths must
be held with golden bits and bridles from falling foul upon them. My great
design in giving unto Caesar that uttermost of what I know to be Cesars, is,
that hereby I may purchase (...), so much the better and freer standing, the
more equitable liberty, to deny unto Caesar, or take from him, that which I know
is not his, when ever he assumes it. I have heard it from the mouth of a
Soldier in our late Wars, as a Maxim in Martial Discipline, Pay well, and hang
well. And Job stopped the mouth of his discontented wife, with this demand; What?
shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Yea
God himself by allowing the marriage bed as honorable, invests himself with so
much the greater equitableness of power to judge whoremongers and adulterers
with severity, Heb. 13. 4. And if Caesar, who ever he be, cares not to be
served upon such an account, as that specified, he must wait for his relief
until I be dead. For I am resolved to serve him, and yet not to serve him upon
any other terms, whilst I live.

But (Reader) I have prefaced above the proportion of the discourse. I have
nothing further to inform, but that a Friend of mine presenting me with the
sight of some brief Answers (sent unto him) unto my Queries lately published, I
conceived it might be of some concernment to further satisfaction, briefly to
vindicate the truth of what is constructively asserted (for there is little or
nothing asserted formally) in them, against the allegations suggested in the
said Answers, which I think are as material, though brief (at least some of
them) as can readily be made, and withal to add three or four Queries more
upon a new account. Is it not good if peace and truth be in thy days, and mine;
who am

Thy Friend, heart and Soul in the Truth, JOHN GOODWIN?
From my Study in Colemanstreet, London. March 6. 1653.
PEACE PROTECTED, AND Discontent Dis-armed.
Query I.
WHether does not the Apostle expressly affirm (Romans 13. 1.) That the Powers
that be [i. whatsoever they be, and however, in respect of second means,
compassed, attained, or procured by men, who stand possessed of them] are
ordained by God [i. orderly, regularly, wisely, and righteously in respect of
his providential interposure about the vestment of them, disposed of, and
lodged in the persons, whosoever they be, who are the present Ministers, or
Administrators of them?] Or were not the highest Powers in the world, when the
Apostle spoke this, viz. That the Powers that be, are (...), ordained of God,
vested in Nero, not only a Monster of men (as he is commonly termed) in respect
of his bloody cruelty, unnatural lusts, etc. but likewise advanced to the
Empire, neither by the orderly way of the suffrage or election of the people,
nor yet by the less disorderly way of the choice of the Roman Senate, but
partly by the wickedness of his mother Agrippina, who caused her husband
Claudius to dis-inherit his own son Britannicus, to make way for the Adoption
of her son, (this Nero) partly by the overruling interposure of the Cohorts
and rest of the Soldiery, The Senate (says the Story) as men affrighted with
amazement, not once contradicting the same?

To this Query some answer; That the Powers that be are indeed Answer.
ordered by God, even when these Powers do give their power and strength to the
Beast, and make War with the Lamb. Yet have they been, and ought to be in their
so doing, witnessed against, by those that are called, and chosen, and
faithful, Rev. 17. 12, 13.

But this Answer, 1. Reaches not the intent or purport of the Reply.
Query. For this querieth not about the unlawful or sinful exercise of any
authoritative Power (of which only the Answer speaks,) or whether this may
not, yea and ought not, to be witnessed against by those who are called unto
it; but of the Power it self vested in the supreme Magistrate, considered
simply as Power, and as disposed unto him by God. This Power ought not to be
resisted, or witnessed against, by any person whatsoever; nor can it be, either
resisted, or witnessed against, but by resisting, and witnessing against, the
Ordinance of God. The Kings of the Earth, who give their power to the Beast,
are not to be witnessed against for being Kings, nor for their accepting of
Kingly Power (supposing it duly cast upon them,) but only for the
maladministration of this power. Yea the power of the Beast himself (whoever,
or whatsoever, be meant by the Beast) whereby he now makes War against the
Lamb, but might, if he pleased, employ and use for the Lamb, is not to be
witnessed against by any man, as being the Ordinance of God; but only the
enormous and most desperate abuse of this Power in fighting against the Lamb,
which is the Ordinance of the Devil. And when the Beast by being witnessed
against in the wicked exercise of his Power, comes through the just Judgment of
God in putting it into the hearts of his servants to make War against him, to
be despoyled and deprived of his Power, his Power (properly) is not resisted by
these men, but only the horrid abuse of this Power; which abuse the Justice of
God judges meet to punish, and to prevent for the future, by the utter
subversion and ruin of it. And the reason which the Apostle gives, why Christ
shall put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, before his delivering up
the Kingdom to God the Father, is, because he must reign, till he has put all
his enemies under his feet (1 Cor. 15. 24. 25.) which plainly shows, that
Christ has no quarrel, no controversy, with, or against, any Power, as such,
but only as bent and acted in the exercise of it against him. Therefore they
who clamor, or witness against, any Power, simply as such, resist the
Ordinance of God; and they who witness against any such Power, which is
subservient to the affairs of Jesus Christ in the world, resist not only the
Ordinance, but the Interest also of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Query II.
Whether is it any way necessary in point of reason, or conscience, that they,
who quietly obey, and submit unto the present power, or the persons actually
invested with Authority over them, should either justify, approve, or own the
terms, method, way, means, or manner, either of their attaining unto, or their
investiture with, this Authority and power? Or did the Apostle Paul justify,
or approve of, the way or means by which Nero obtained the Imperial Dignity,
in submiting and appealing unto him, or unto his Authority, yea or in his
injoyning all Christians Act. 25. 10. 11.
(as we heard) to be subject unto him, and this not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake Romans 13. 9.
? Or do we ever read in the Scriptures, of any person either punished,
threatened, or reproved by God, for doing things simply, and in themselves,
lawful, at the command, or in obedience unto, any Magistrate or Person, seated,
and settled in Authority, how unduly so ever advanced to his seat of power?

To this Query some judge this a sufficient Answer: let the Reader judge between
the Query, and the Answer, whether if the one be an Harp, the other be not an
Harrow.

We will suppose Paul and Phelimon engaged, the one by War, Answer.
the other by Faith and Prayer, in the Work of this present generation. If
Phelimon conquer, and take the power, Paul will expect that Phelimon should so
behave himself, both in the taking of the power, and in his using of it, as
does become a Christian, and the promise he is under, and not so as did Nero,
or William the Conqueror, or others, who went a warfare for themselves, and did
so declare it.

1. The Query does not at all enquire after what manner, or Reply, or Anim
adversio^.
upon what terms, Phelimon, upon his conquest, takes the power, nor does it
suppose him to have taken it orderly, as neither on the other hand does it
suppose the contrary; but purposely decl^^^th his question as impertinent to
the business, which it (the Qu^ry) desires to promote.

2. Neither does it at all query, whether Phelimon uses not the power well,
which he has taken, there having been little or no opportunity to judge of
this, when the Query was drawn up. But,

3. The Query only interrogates, whether Paul may not with a good Conscience,
quietly submit and subject himself to that Power, which Phelimon has taken
unto himself, whether he has taken it orderly and duly, yea, or no. And
supposes, that Paul the Apostle, the true Paul, when he lived, did submit, yea
and enjoin submission unto all Christians, unto such a Power, which was
altogether as disorderly and unworthily taken, as Phelimon, with all the
assistance of envy or dis-ingenuity, can be imagined to have taken his. But
concerning this the Answer is profoundly silent. Yet,

4. Concerning Phelimons, as well taking, as using of the power now vested in
him, if we had the true Paul, Paul the Apostle, Paul the infallible, in stead
of a personated Paul, to determine the question, whether Phelimon has done
well and like a Christian, or otherwise, either in taking, or using his power,
we should have cause to reverence his decision, yea though Phelimon should fall
by it. But in case Paul so called shall arbitrate the case against Phelimon,
unless he can satisfy us that he has ploughed with the heyfer of Paul truly
so called, about the grounds of his arbitration, we are Judgment and
Conscience-free from his decisions.

5. Whether Phelimons taking the power was any ways repugnant to any promise he
was under, is the consideration of another Query following, not at all moved in
this.

6. (And lastly) If by the work of this present generation, the Answer means,
either such a work which is incumbent by way of duty upon the present
generation, or such a work which is beneficial or commodious for this
generation, (although the former and the latter be materially the same,) I do
not yet understand how Paul is engaged, either by Faith, or prayer, about it.
If we may estimate the work about which he is engaged, by the tenor and
tendency of his actings, it is a work as well of sin, as of sorrow, to the
present generation.

Query III.
Whether is it not the gracious Counsel and intent of God, in declaring, That
whatsoever Powers be, they are ordained by him (as we have heard) and again,
that ALL that are in Authority, should be prayed and Interceded for, yea and
thanks also given for them, etc. Whether (I say) is it not the gracious intent
of God in these, and many other like Declarations made by him, to provide for
the peace and quiet of States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, by cutting off al
occasions and pretexts from the people, of quarrelsome disputes about the
Rights and Titles of those, who are in present possession of the Sovereign or
ruling powers Ac sane hoc verbo mihi videtur Apostolus voluisse tollere
frivola^ hominu^ curiositate^, qui saepe solent inquirere quo jure adepti
fuerint potestatem, qui rerum potiuntur. Satis autem nobis esse debet, quod
praesunt. Non enim conscenderunt sua ipsi virtute hoc fastigium, sedmanu Domini
sunt impositi. Calv. ad Romans 13. 1. Cum igitur quaeritur cui parendum, non est
spectandum qualis sit qui potestatem excercet, nec quo jure vel injuria quis
potestatem invaserit, quave ratione eam administret, sed tantum si potestatem
habeat. Si enim quis potestate pollet, jam indubitatum est illum a Deo eam
potestatem accepisse. M. Bacer. in Romans 13. 1.
? And do not all they reject this gracious counsel of God against themselves,
and against their Nation, and labor to defeat it, who set themselves with all
their might (yea, with more might, it is to be feared, then their own) to raise
a Spirit of disloyalty and disobedience in the people, unto the present
Government and Governors, upon pretense, That those who are in power, did by
undue and unworthy means possess and invest themselves with it?

The intent of God in that counsel by Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. is that Answer.
supplications, prayers, and giving of thanks should be used as a first or
chief means to carry on the Gospel work committed to Paul, and by him given in
charge to Timothy. And all sorts of men, both those in Authority, and others,
should be interceded for, or given thanks for, as they are Opposers, or
Accepters, of the Gospel. And all sorts of those in Authority are no more to be
given thanks for, then all sorts of men are.

2. It needs to be no man's doubt but that all the Powers of the four first
Monarchies are all of them Usurpers, even from Nimrod, the mighty Hunter, who
was the first, to the little Horn, who has the eyes of a man, and is the last.

3. Have not the servants of God, who have held forth his testimony concerning
their work in their present generation, been always counted movers of Sedition,
and disobedient to Authority, when yet they have walked in the power of the
Spirit of God? Ezra 4. 15. Luke 23. 2. John 19. 12. Acts 24. 12.

Although here be words enough, whereof, in respect of their Reply and
Animadversion.
numbers, to make many Answers, yet here is no word that savors of any steady,
or direct Answer to the Query. This enquires after these two things; 1. Whether
it was not the gracious intent of God in the two Scripture passages there
mentioned (as in many others) to provide for the peace and quiet of States and
Commonwealths, by cutting off all occasions and pretexts from the people, of
quarrelsom disputes about the rights and titles of those, who are in plenary
possession of the present Power: 2. Whether all those do not reject this
gracious counsel of God against them selves, and their nation, who set them
selves to raise a spirit of disloyalty and disobedience in the people, unto the
present Government, and Governors, etc. Now the pretended Answer speaks not
so much as one word, either negatively, or affirmatively, or by way of
distinction, to either of these points; nor are the particulars thereof any
ways relative to the main business intended, either in the present, or in any
other of the Queries; nor so considerate in themselves. For,

1. If all sorts of men, b^th those in Authority, and others, are to be
interceded, or given thanks for, as they are opposers, or accepters of the
Gospel which yet is an il-advised asse^^ion in as much as accepters of the
Gospel may be interceded for as well, if not rather, as the opposers of the
Gospel, why do not the men, whose cause the Answer pleads, give thanks unto
God for those in Authority amongst us, who are no opposers, but cordial
accepters, of the Gospel, instead of murmuring, and venting bitter
discontents, with many unchristian and hard sayings against them?

2. Neither is it true, that those in Authority, when faithful and upright
hearted in their trust are no more to be given thanks for, then other men.

3 A though it should be granted, that all the heads of the four first
Monarchies were Usurpers (which yet may be the reasonable, at least the
tolerable doubt of any man in as much as one of the heads of the first of these
Monarchies was by God himself represented by an head of gold, Dan. 2. 38. where
likewise it is said, verse. 37. that God had given him a kingdom, power, and
strength, and glory etc.) but be it (as I say) granted that all these heads
were usurpers, in respect of their domination over such nations upon whom hey
made war without any justifiable ground and cause, oppressing them by force
of arms, exercising dominion over them against their wills, etc. Yet,

1. It follows not from hence that therefore any of the heads of these
Monarchies should be usurpers in respect of any such kingdoms, territories, or
nations, unto the Soveraigne^ and rules whereof they were called by the free
vote or desire of the people; Or,

2. That all Kings or chief Magistrates in the world, who were contemporarie
with these Monarchies (respectively) should be usurpers. For many of these
might be (and some, questionless, were) freely called or chosen by their
people into the places and trusts of kingly Sovereignty. Nor were either Saul,
or David, or Solomon, etc. (who were Kings during the first of the said four
Monarchies) Usurpers, because Kings.

4 (And lastly) Though it should be granted that the servants of God, who have
held forth his testimony concerning their work in their present generation,
have been ALWAYS counted movers of sedition, etc. (however Always is not
sufficiently proved by three or four instances, nor can be proved by all the
instances that are produced yet this at no hand proves, either 1. That all
they who have been counted movers of sedition, were the servants of God,
witness Barabbas, Theudas, Judas of Galilee, etc. Or, 2. That all such, who,
being by profession, and by common esteem also, and possibly in truth, the
servants of God, were counted movers of sedition, were counted such without a
cause. And if this misdemeanour had not been incident to professors of
Christianity, yea and reputed believers, doubtless the Apostle Peter would not
have cautioned those, whom he calls Elect according to the foreknowledg of God
the Father through sanctification of the Spirit 1 Per. 1. 2.
, upon such terms as these; But let none of you suffer as a murder er, or as
a theif, or as an evil doer, or A BUSY BODY IN OTHER MEN'S MATTERS b. Nor should
the Apostle Paul have had any competent occasion in his address to the
Galathians, to have reminded them of sedition, amongst other works of the flesh
Gal. 5. 19 20
. And it is the notion of the generality of our best Protestant Expositours,
that a disposition observed by him in many christians in his days to move
sedition, and stir up people against their rulers, occasioned from him that
discourse concerning subjection unto Rulers and Magistrates; which we find.
Romans 13. 1. 2, 3. etc. Calvin upon the place informs us that there are always
some troublesome and tumultuous spirits [meaning in the Church, or amongst
christians] who never think that the Kingdom of Christ can be duly advanced,
unless all earthly power be abolished; nor that they ever enjoy the liberty
which he has given, until they have shaken off the yoke of all human
subjection Su^t eni^ semper ^umultuosi spiritus* qui regnum Christi non been
extolli credunt, ^isi aboleantur omn^s terr^nae potestates: nec ^^ertate per
ips^m data se^^ui (...)si quodvis humanae servitut^^ jugum excusseriat.
Call(...) ad Romans 13. 1.
. The substance and truth of this observation is confirmed by the pens of many
others, and by the experience of all ages. Nor, 3. (and la^ly) does the
aforesaid concession suppose, or so much as intimate, that the servants of God,
either always or (indeed) at any time, were counted movers of sedition, by
their fellow servants, (the true holy, and faithful servants of God) but only
by the wicked and perverse generation of men in the World, unless they
deserved to be so counted, and were movers of sedition indeed. Therefore though
sober and zealous Christians have frequently been counted movers of sedition
without a cause; yet may it very well stand also, that many Christians have
been justly so counted, having given too much cause of such an imputation.

What the Answer means by men's work in their generation (as likewise by their
holding forth Gods testimony concerning the same) I confess I do not well
understand. Certain I am, that praying, supplicateing, interceding, and giving
of thanks for all in Authority; and so strengthening the hand of worthy rulers
and magistrates, by a peaceable subjection unto them, and by persuading others
into the like subjection, is the work (if by work, we mean, the duty) of every
man's generation. And in this sense of the word work to curse the ruler of a
man's people, is the work of no generation.

Query IV.
Whether is, or ought, the letter of the Law, to be observed in all cases
whatsoever? or is not ratio Legis, anima Legis, i. e. the reason, or end of the
Law, the soul of the Law, which is in all cases to be preferred before the
letter, which is but as the body of it? Yea or has any Law whatsoever any
binding force, further then the execution of it, or subjection unto it, are
consistent with the public safety and good Omnis lex ord^natur ad communem
hominum salutem, and in tantum obtinet vim and rationem Legis: secundum vero
quod ab hoc deficit, virtutem obligandi non habet. Vnde Juris peritus dicit,
Quod nulla ratio juris, aut aequitatis benignitas patitur, ut quae salubriter
pro salute hominum introducuntur, ca nos duriori interpretatione contra ipsorum
commodum perducamus ad severitatem. Contingit autem multoties, quod al quid
observari communi saluti est utile, ut in pl^ribus, quod tamen aliqu^bus
casibus est maxim nocivum Aq^. 12. q. 96. a. 6. Vnde si emergat casus, in quo
observatio talis Legis sit damnosa communi saluti, non est observanda. Ibid.
Necessitas dispensationem habet annexam; quia necessitas non subditur legi.
Ibid.
? Or are not such men Judges of evil thoughts (as the Scripture speaks James
2. 4
) who condemn such persons, as violators or transgressors of the Law, who in
order to the public peace and safety, act besides, or contrary to, the letter
of the Law, and in such cases only, wherein the observance of this letter
visibly threateneth the said common peace and safety? Or whether are private
men, who know little of, converse little with, State transactions and affairs,
the more competent judges, when, or in what cases, the observation of the
letter of the Law is of a dangerous and threatening import to the public
safety, or such persons, whose daily residence is in the mount of
State-negotiations, and who by the advantage of the ground, where they stand,
may very reasonably be conceived to be in a full capacity perfectly to discover
and understand on what hinge the public Interest and Safety turns, and what
means and interposures are most promising of their procurement, promotion, and
establishment?

The Dis-satisfied, as they are called, are fully satisfied in this, Answer.
that the reason, or end, of the Law, is to be preferred before the letter:
which caused their closing with, and owning the affairs of this nation when as
some, which are now in present authority, did turn their backs upon it, and
le^t the work, not being able to bear it, because it was contrary to the
letter.

It is not the height of a man's Station alone that will enable him to a true
discovery of things, but the singleness of his eye, together with the
trueness of that light, in which he walks. Jeremie knew the means of Isreal's
safety better then the King, and all the Princes.

First, If the Dis-satisfied so called, be only so called, and Reply and
Animadversion.
not such indeed, though the Querist rejoices not (as neither ought he) in the
formalitie of his mistake, yet does he much re^oyce in the matter of it. But if
there be none really dis-satisfied, what means then the bleating of the
sheep, and the lowing of the oxen? the weak complaints of many simple ones, and
the louder vociferations of others great in their own eyes, against the present
Government?

1. If some now in Authority, turned their back upon, and left the work of the
nation when time was, as not being able to bear it, because it was contrary to
the letter of the Law, it is a sign that had they been satisfied, as the
Answerer acknowledges himself with the rest, called Dis-satisfied, to be, that
the reason or end of the Law, is to be preferred before the letter of it, they
would not have turned their backs upon it, because of any contrariety in it to
the said letter. Therefore this turning the back in them, whether in it self
just fiable, or not justifiable does in no degree justify, or ease the guilt
of a like practice in them, who profess themselves satisfied in that, which
occasioned that failing in them. He that turns his back upon a dut^e, only
through a mistake of an unlawfulness to perform it, rather condemns, then
any way excuses him that shall neglect it, being perfectly satisfied about the
lawfulness, and much more the necessity of it.

3. Though it be not the advantage of a man's station alone that will enable him
to discover things, either near at hand, or further off, yet where there is the
same, or a greater, singleness of the eye, and with all the same trueness of
light, the advantage of a standing must needs be a proportionable advantage for
discovery. If the Answer could prove that his Paul, either has a more single
eye, or walks in a truer light then his Phelimon, I should without much contest
grant, that these advantages in this Paul, might very possibly balance
Phelimons advantage in point of standing. But the Paul we speak of, is too full
of wrath (as is much to be feared) to have a clear or single eye. The common
saying is, Impeditira animum ne possit cernere verum; i. e. By wrath so
hindered is the mind,
That truth it cannot see, or find.




And the Scripture it self says, that The wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God: the chief reason whereof is, because it discerns not,
or apprehends not this righteousness. Therefore,

4 (And lastly) The reason why Jeremiah knew the means of Isreal's safety
better then the King and all his Princes, was, because he was a Prophet
immediately and extraordinarily inspired by God. If the Answerer can satisfy
us that his Paul plougheth with this heyfer, we will acknowledge him more able
to declare the riddle we speak of, then Philemon, and all his Princes. But as
in Micah's days men, walking in the spirit, and falsehood, might Mic. 2 11.
notwithstanding be Prophets, or Jeremies, unto that people; in like manner, he
that will with a zealous confidence prophecy men's minds and desires unto them
in these days, shall be a Prophet, yea a Jeremie, a great Prophet unto them.
Yet if the Answerers Paul be a Jeremiah also, I confess the Query was not
aware of it. For this estimateth the abilities of men for discoveries of a
politic nature and import, by the general presumption of the wisest men
amongst us, and (as I suppose) in the world, touching the present state of
things in the world, and not by the private supposition of any one person, or a
few, as viz. that Jeremy should be risen from the dead, or now alive in
England, or that any other person should now be found of a like prophetique
anointing with him. Whosoever now shall undertake to preach for Doctrine, or as
the mind or purpose of God, any thing, which he cannot substantially prove from
the Scriptures to be indeed the mind or purpose of God, especially if he shall
pretend revelation hereof from God, otherwise then by the Scriptures, we cannot
but judge him a blasphemer of the blessed fullness and sufficiency of the
Scriptures, and very near (at least) unto that curse; If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book.
Rev. 22. 18.

Query V.
Whether are such promises, engagements, or protestations, binding upon the
Consciences of those, who have made them, yea or lawful for them to observe or
keep, which, by reason of an alteration and change of those circumstances and
terms, under which, and in consideration of which, they were made, cannot be
observed or kept, without the imminent danger, or damage, of those, unto whom,
and for whose sake, wealth, and safety, they were made Ad hoc quod teneatur
^omofacere, quod promisit, requiritur quod omnia immutata permaneant: alioquin,
nec fuit mendax in promittendo, quia promisit quod habebat in mente,
subintellectis debitis conditionibus. Nec etiam est infidelis non implendo,
quod promisit, quia eaedem conditiones non extant. Senec^. D Benefic. l. 4. c.
34.

Ad quintum decendum, quod ille qui aliquid promittit, si habeat animum
faciendi quod promittit, non mentitur: quia non loquitur contraid, quod gerit
in mente. Si ve^o non faciat quod promisit, viditur (...)fid liter agere per
hoc, quod animum mutat. Potest tamen excusari ex duobusVno modo, si promisit
id, quod manifest est illicitum, quia promittendo p^^cavit, mutando autem
prepositum, been facit. Alio modo, si sint mutatae conditiones personaram and
negotiorum -- Vnde and Apostolus non est mentitus, qui non ivit Corinthum, quo
se iturum esse promiserat, ut dicitur, 2 Cor. 1. Aqu. 22. q. 110. a. 3.


? Or in case, a man having borrowed a sword of his Friend, and promised to
deliver it back again into his own hand within a months time, this Friend of
his in the interim falling into a delirium or phrenetique distemper, and so
continuing till the said month be expired, is this man bound in conscience to
perform his promise notwithstanding, by delivering the sword into his friends
hand at the time appointed? Or is not the sad providence befaln his friend in
this case, to be interpreted by him, not only, or simply, as a discharge from
God in respect of the performance of his said promise, but as an Item, or
engagement laid upon him by God, at no hand to perform it? Or has there not
within these few years past, been an alteration or change in the politic
terms and circumstances of this State and Commonwealth, as considerably great,
as well can be imagined?

To this Querie, mis-notioned as an objection, we have this, Answer
said, in stead of an Answer. This Objection is of no force, except it had
proved that all they were fallen into a delirium, who from the beginning of
these divisions in this nation, have been the pursuers of the publigue
liberties thereof; excecting only those, who have abetted, and do approve of,
this last late change, which as yet appear to be very few, except the base
spirited Cle^gie, and the oppressing Lawyers, and those that are Baptized into
their spirit.

First, This Answer mistakes in the very first words of it, calling that an
objection, which is only a question, propounded to those Reply, and
Animadversio^.
who are dis-satisfied, for this end, that by bethinking themselves of a
reasonable and direct answer unto it, they may be brought to reflect upon the
unreasonablenesse of their dis-satisfaction.

2. Whereas it spends it self upon the particular instance of a person calling
into a delirium in the case specified, it declines the dint, and plain design
of the Querie. For this supposeeth in the main bod^e of it, that there may many
changes of circumstances and terms, besides the falling into a delirium in
those, to whom a person, one or more, has engaged himself so or so, interveen
or happen, which may render the performance of a promise or engagement (in the
letter of it) very incommodious unto those, to whom they have been made; and
consequently, unlawful. But to this the Answer opposes nothing at all. The
case of a person falling into a delirium, was only subjoyned in the querie by
way of illustration, or exemplification of the said general Supposition.

3 It is a grand mistake to think that the force or strength of the Querie
lies in a supposall, that all the pursuers of the public liberties (except
the excepted) have fallen into a delerium. For as the Scripture speaks of a
gift, that it blinds the eyes, not of mad or foolish men, but, of the wise,
yea and perverteth the words, not of hypocrites, deceivers, or the like, but,
of the richteous Deuteronomy 16. 19.
; so may it be said of any corrupt, yea or mis-notioned or mis apprehended,
Interest, that th^s also very frequently entangleth the judgments and
understandings of men otherwise, and in other cases prudent and politic (it
may be, more then) enough, yea and of such, who in re^pect of their ends and
actions are not the worst of men. So that the dis-satisfied may very possibly
be mistaken about the natural and direct tendency of the late change of the
government, without being supposed fallen into a delirium. But,

4. If the Answer w^ll needs enforce a necessity upon me, to suppose, either
the satisfied, or dis-satisfied party in the land, to be fallen into a
delirium, or any distemper of some affinity therewith, I must plainly and
ingenuously profess, that I should offer much less violence to my judgment,
to suppose the latter much more obnoxious in this kind, then the former
Discontent or dis-satisfaction, especially about the providential interposures
of God, argues a much nearer neighborhood to a delirium then a mind patiently
and composedly apaid and satisfied herewith.

5. If by a betting and approving the last late change, the Answer means, the
abetting it in the travel of it, as viz. by furthering, and assisting the
production or bringing it forth; and so, the approving, or justifying of all
the ways, means, or considerations, which contributed toward the production of
it, I confess I question whether so many abetted and approved it, as the Answer
supposes. For I presume that this, terming the Clergy, base-spirited, and the
Lawyers, oppressing, intends these epithites, not as individual, but as
specifical (respectively.) If so, I can hardly think that either the Clergy, or
the Lawyers (i. e. all in both of these kinds) ever did abet, or do approve,
of the said change. If by abetting and approving, the answer means, a
willing, patient and quiet subject on unto it, approving it so far, as
lawful to be thus subjected unto, doubtless there are far greater numbers,
then what the answer speaks of, who thus and in this sense abe^ and approve
of it. The commanders of the ships of this Commonwealth at sea, withal under
their command (respectively) most of (if not all) the Regiments of the Army on
land, as well in Ireland and Scotland, as in England; and so again, very many,
if not all, the more considerable Cities and buroughs, and greater towns in
England, have declared themselves abettors and ap^rovers (in the sense
distinguished) of the change into the present Government.

I confess that in the proper and usual sense of the word, approve, viz. as it
signifies, to like well of, to justify, or commend, I know very few, scarce
any (though very possibly there may be many) who have declared themselves
approvers of the said change, viz. so far as this change was the contrivance,
procurement, or work of men. Nor do I conceive that, in this sense, it ever
was, or will be, pressed upon any man's conscience to approve it. It will serve
for all politic, peaceable, and public ends and purposes, if it be approved
by men so far as God has had his hand in it, it being more appropriately his
work, then men's; according to that of Daniel, He [i. e. God, not man, or men]
removes Kings, and sets up Kings Dan. 2. 21.
, [i. e. changes and alters both Governors, and forms of government] I
presume all that will be required of the people of the land, is, to approve of
the present Government as lawful to be submitted unto [simply, and in the
generall] and as necessary to be submitted unto by them, whilst God shall
please to continue it over, or among, them:

6. The answer yetunder hand, as it falls somewhat unchristianly foul upon the
Clergy (so called) in terming them, base-spirited, and so upon the Lawyers, in
st^leing them oppressors; so on the other hand it makes them some kind of
recompense, though (I presume) at unawares, and as much besides intention, as
truth, in numbering them amongst the pursuers of the public liberties of this
Nation since the beginning of our divisions. I believe that the far greater
part of both generations have no conscience of this honor. But though my heart
be not with the generality or bulk of either profession, yea I judge the Nation
very deplorobly miserable in being so dis-furnished, as it is, with men of
worth and conscience, in both; yet, 1. I believe we have Israel's proportion of
good men, in both, one of a City, and two of a Tribe Ier. 3. 14.
which consideration mediated (though, it seems, it could not obtain, or
prevail) for somewhat better epithites to be bestowed upon the respective
members of both professions, the base-spirited upon the one, and oppressing,
upon the other. 2. If the persons meant by, the Clergy, have of late times
declared against, and rejected, the appellation, because of the offensivenesse
of it (which, as I remember, they have done) it is not ingenuous to reproach or
twit them with it. 3. (and lastly) I believe that some of those, whom the
Answer stigmatizeth, as base-spirited, have of the incorruptible seed of the
Word of God begotten most of the most truly noble and heroique spirits in the
land.

Query VI.
Whether was that supposition of Moses without sufficient reason, or gronnd,
when, upon his avenging one of his Brethren by smiting the Egyptian, who
oppressed him, he SUPPOSED that his Brethren would have understood how that God
by his hand would deliver them? Or were not his Brethren dull and slow of heart
in not taking the kindly impressions of such a providence, and not
understanding, that pregnant intimation from God, that his Counsel and Will
was, to appoint and make his Servant Moses a Prince or Ruler over them, and
this in order to the vindication of their liberties, the freedom of their
persons from oppression, and to their further benefit and good otherwise? or do
not they show themselves to be altogether unexperienced in the speech and
language of high Providence, or at least to be either but dull and drowsy, or
else cross and froward, Interpreters of the most signal dispensations of God,
who do not understand that his will and pleasure is, to appoint such a person
toties quoties, by whose hand he vouchsafes unto a People a long continued
series of extraordinary deliverances, for a Prince and Ruler over them? Or do
not that people reject the Counsel of God against themselves, who say unto a
Person so commended unto them, and appointed over them, by God, who made Thee a
Ruler or a Judge?

For answer to this Query, we have another, but altogether irrelative Answer.
to it; viz. this, Whether had Moses been worthy the name and honor of a
Prince and ruler, if, instead of guiding the people into Canaan, he had for his
ease and pleasure sake turned again into Egypt? If Moses had built again the
things, which he had destroyed, he had made himself a Transgressour.

Here is nothing at all in this answer, to the tendencie or purport Reply and
Animadversion.
of the Query. And i^ had been (upon the matter) as much to the purpose, to
have answered by querying thus; If Moses had been a martherer of his Father,
and of his mother, and had committed inc^st with his sister, had he been meet
to be appointed a prince or a Ruler over the people of God? For doubtless he
was as far from turning back again into Egypt for his ease or pleasures sake,
as he was from committing these abominations. Indeed the foolish, froward, and
discontented people, were laying their heads together, and consulting, to make
them a captain, who should lead back again into Egypt. And they said one to
another, let us make us a Captain, and return into Egypt Number. 14. 4
. But Moses was a man of another spirit: he was only for the leading them
forward toward Canaan, not for the carrying them back to wards Egypt. Or,

2. If the intent of the said Anti-querie be to insinuate against the Person
minded in the parallel of Moses, in the Queree, any such unworthiness, as if
he were a man, who for his ease and pleasure sake meant to re^i^s^ave the
people of this nation, the reflection is not only groundl^sse (and in this
respect, scandalous, and un-christian) but likewise is, 1. Contrary to the
verdict of common sense, which dictateth, that there is neither ease, nor
pleasure, but care and trouble, and wearisomnesse both of flesh and spirit, to
be expected in that station of Government, wherein God has placed him; and 2.
To the very tenor and purport of those Articles, or Constitutions of the
Government, to the observation whereof he has solem^ly sworn; which are
calculated and framed as it were on purpose for the preservation and
maintenance of the public liberties of the people, and this with as much
wisdom and contrivance, as can reasonably he expected from men; of which
somewhat further in one of the additional Queries.

3. (and lastly) It is not necessary that he who builds again the things, which
he destroyed, should make himself a transgressour by his new building them. It
was said of Paul to his great honor, by the Christians of his times: He which
persecuteth us in times past, now preaches the Faith, which once he destroyed
a Gal. 1. 23.
However, if these words in the Answer, If Moses had built again etc. be
reflexive upon him, whom God has given (Moses-like) for a Ruler unto this
Nation, as if he should now be about to build again the enslavement of the
people, which he has heretofore destroyed, the reflection (as has been already
said, in ^ffect) is papably and putidly calumnious, and not fit either for the
heart, or mouth, or p^n, of a Christian.

Query VII.
Whether did not God send THAT Moses to be a Ruler and a deliverer unto his
People, who was refused by them saying unto him, who made thee a Ruler and a
Judge? Or is it not a matter of frequent occurrency and observation in the
Providential Administrations of God, that such things are brought about and
done by him, which, though as contrary to the minds and desires, as to the
expectations of many good people, when they are new done, yet turn to an
incomparable benefit and advantage unto them afterward? Or was not the death
of Christ, as a Sword passing through the soul of his Virgin Mother, yea and of
many other holy and gracious persons, both men and women, by which
notwithstanding they were highly raised in peace and comfort afterward, and
shall be eternally saved? Or did not eleven of the twelve Tribes of Israel side
with the house of Saul against David's advancement over them, being for a time
highly unwilling and discontented that he should be their King, under whose
Government notwithstanding they flourished like a green bay Tree, and saw many
years of the greatest prosperity and peace?

The dis-satisfied are fully satisfied in this, that all things work Answer.
together for good to those that love God. And so shall the present change: it
shall discover the thoughts of many hearts, and make manifest whether men walk
in the power of the spirit, which is of this world; or in the power of that
Spirit which is of God: which is a blessed business, and of great advantage.

Though there be little or nothing in this Answer to the purport Reply, and
Animadversio^.
of the Query, yet let us animadvert somewhat upon it.

1. It is good tidings to hear that the dis-satisfied about the late change in
government, will be satisfied, especially fully satisfied, with any thing.
There is the more hope that in time they will be satisfied with that also. But,

2. If they be so fully satisfied with the Word of God, why are they not,
competently at least, or however, tolerably, satisfied with the works of God
also? Or is it not his work (as we lately heard from Daniel) to remove kings
and to set up kings; and consequently to make all the changes and alterations
in Government that are found in the world? Or is any work of God, compared with
his word, so heterogeneall or dissonant to it, that he that is fully satisfied
in the one, should be capable of no satisfaction at all in the other? And

3. If the present change shall work together for good to those that love God,
why do not those who love God, especially being fully satisfied in the truth
and certainty hereof, rather (according to the Apostles exhortation, in every
thing to give thanks 1 These. 5. 18
) give thanks unto him for the change, at least so far, and in such a
respect, as it works for good to them, then murmur or complain against it, or
suffer Satan to fill their hearts with wrath, discortent, or indignation,
because God has either brought to pass, or however, suffered it to come to
pass? I believe that Jobs wife would not have uttered her self in such
passionate discontent, as she did, because of her husbands sufferings, though
deep and grievous, had she indeed believed that they would have wrought for
good unto her. Should men be offended at their Benefactours?

4. It is confessed that the present change has already discovered the
thoughts of many hearts, and may (probably) discover many more. But that it
should make manifest, whether men walk in the power of the spirit of this
world, or of the Spirit which is of God, is in no degree probable, scarce
possible; unless (happily) it be by some such after fruits or consequents of it,
which at present are hardly imaginable. For it is a clear and manifest case,
that they do not all walk in the power of the spirit of God, who murmur and are
offended at it, and oppose it (witness the walkings of the Conspiratours
against it, lately discovered and apprehended) and so again that all they, who
are satisfied with it, and who live peaceably, and with comfort under it, do
not walk in the power of the spirit of this world. For if they who tremble at
the Word of God, and dare not rebel against it, and th^s Word expressly
charge, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; and, that the powers
that be, are ordained of God; and again, that whosoever resists the power,
resists the Ordinance of God etc. if such men (I say) as these walk in the
power of the Spirit which is of God, and not of the spirit of this world, then
all those who for conscience sake are subject to the Government brought in by
the late change, cannot so much as with any face of reason, or of truth, be
judged to walk in the strength of the spirit of this world, but of the Spirit
which is of God. So that if the present change be a touchstone of persons
walking in the power of the one Spirit, and of the other, the dis-satisfied are
much more like to be found walkers in the power of the worser spirit, then of
the better. But is a very inconsiderate and ill digested notion, to conceive,
that either a going on the right hand, or on the left, in political questions
or disputes, should make it manifest whether men walk in the power of the
spirit which is of God, or of the world. I am strongly inclined to think, that
men of this notion, understand but little what it is to walk in the power of
the spirit of God. There are other manner of touchstones for the discovery of
the two sorts of walkers mentioned, then a State quod libet, or the adhering in
judgment to one side or other of a Dialectical question about a form of
Government, which yet are very insufficient to manifest the one kind of these
walkers from the other. I confess that a very great number (I suppose I might
safely say the far greater part) of th(...), who walk in the power of the
spirit of the world, are manifest more then enough, without being manifested,
either by their satisfaction, or dis-satisfaction, about the present change.
But the manifestation of so much as a considerable number of those, who walk in
the power of the spirit which is of God, is hardly procureable or attainable,
not only not by the said, either satisfaction, or dis-satisfaction, but not by
symptoms of a far more searching and important signification, then these.

5. (and lastly) The fruits of the blessed business, and great advantage, of
which the cloze of the answer speaks, are no more like to grow upon the tree
pretended (in the former part thereof) to bear them, then grapes are to grow
upon thorns, or figgs on thistles.

Query VIII.
Whether are not children like to receive better quarter, and terms of love,
care, provision in things necessary and convenient, etc. from their natural
Parents, and such who begat them, then from strangers, or persons not so nearly
related to them? Or is any community of men, or body of people, like to be so
naturally regarded and cared for in the things of their comfort and peace, by
any other kind of Ruler, or Governor whatsoever, as by those, who, under God,
have been the Preservers of their lives, liberties, and estates, by exposing
their own persons to all the difficulties, hardships, and hazards of war, and
jeoparding their lives themselves in the high places of the field, where death
for the time had his throne? Or does not the Preserving of a people upon such
terms as these, as kindly, as naturally, as affectionately, endear them to
their Preserver, as the act of procreation commends children unto the love
and tender affections of their Parents? Or is not the Act of Preserving of very
near a ^in to the Act of Begeting? If the premises will stand, who are more
desirable by a people in the places of Rule and Authority, then those, who
have been their great Preservers?

To this Querie we have only this petty impertinency for answer: Answer
but for this brevi^y we shall have consideration in words in the answers to
some of its fellows following. It seems the Government is placed even where the
Querist would have it. But let us be patient till we see the fruit, and then we
shall know the tree thereby of what kind it is.

1. Oh that the Answerer could persuade himself and his dis-satisfied party, to
hearken to the voice of his own Christian admonition and exhortation here, and
to be content and patient, until they see the fruits of that Government, which
with so masculine an effeminacie they decry without end? How blessed a
business and great advantage might this patience of theirs probably prove unto
the nation! But

2. How preposterously irregular and unreasonable is the Answerer, Rely and
Animadversion.
with his dis-satisfied party, to labor in the very fire, as they do, for
the hewing down a tree, as corrupt and naught, whilst as yet they confess
they know not of what kind it is, nor what fruit it will bear! The words of the
Answer are of an express import this way; Let us be patient till we see the
fruit, and then we shall know, etc.

3. If the sig-tree in the parable (Luke 13.) instead of being diged about and
dunged to make it fruitful, had by the dresser of the vineyard, been mangled,
chopped, hackt, dismantled of her bark, principal boughs, etc. the native
fruitfulness, or that which by an orderly digging about, and dunging it, it
might have been brought unto, could not be estimated, judged of, or known. As
oppression is said to make a wise man mad a; so may mis-usage or mis-handling,
make a good and a fruitful tree, barren, or the fruit of it, degenerous, and
not answerable to the native goodness of the tree. Neither can the real worth
of a good government, or Governor, ever be, experimentally, or by their
fruits, sufficiently known, if those, who live under them, and should live in
subjection unto them, be continually quarrelling and provoking, and by all men's
weakening the hand of both from being lift up unto those ways and methods for
public benefit, which are in their hearts. A tree is known by the fruit;
[viz. if it be planted in a soil proper to it, and has that culture and
husbandry bestowed on it, which the nature and kind of it requires.]

4. (and lastly) If the Querist would have the Government placed even where it
is, although the Answer casts the very seeming, or appearance, of such a
thing, as a blemish or blot upon him, yet he knows no reason why he should be
ashamed of the comportment of his will with the will of God. Certain he is,
that God is willing that the Government should be placed, even where it is; yea
he judges, and ver^ly believes that God is not merely or barely permissive in
this his will, having been operative with so high (I had almost said,
miraculous) an hand toward the accomplishment and effecting of it. In which
respect the Querist cannot but judge, that God is willing that the Government
should be placed even where it is, etiem voluntate approbante, even with his
will of approbation. However, if the Answeret shall pretend knowledge of a
wiser, or better, disposition of the Government, then even where now it is
placed, the Querist must profess that he knows not how to submit his
apprehensions of the wisdom and goodness of God, unto any conceit whatsoever,
whereof, either himself, or any other; is capable, of the wisdom or goodness
of men.

IX.
Whether are not they rather Back-biters of sin, then Reprovers, who
importunely declaim and cry out against the Sins of those that are Absent? Or
is not this a most unworthy practice of men, to insinuate themselves into the
hearts and affections of simple and inconsiderate people, by causing, or
tempting them to think the better of themselves, whilst others are reproached
and declaimed against in their hearing, as persons more sinful and unworthy,
then they? Or have not daring and bold speeches uttered against Superiors, and
persons in Authority, tending to blemish them, or to impair their honor and
esteem, always been of an affectionate and captivating resentment with the more
ignoble and lower-spirited sort of men, causing them to have the persons of
those, who utter them, in admiration, as worthy Assertors of the Liberties of
the People, and exposing their own liberties, yea and lives also, to make the
purchase?

Instead of an answer to this Querie, this is said, No doubt the sins of those
that be absent, may be upon many occasions spoken against, or else the
Scriptures had never kept upon record Answer.
the sins of Noah, David, and others to be spoken of even in all generations.
Yea there are many cases wherein we are partakers of other men's sins, if we do
not in our places bear witness against them. No doubt many servants of God in
this nation have spoken against the sins of the late Court, and supertitions of
the late Prelates, when as yet none of them were present: and yet were not
accounted by the Saints to be transgressors, but faithful in their generation.

This answer gives the Querie a goe-by, in stead of an encounter with a broad
side: and looks a little toward it on the backside of it, nor careing to look
it in the face; The Querie is far from Reply, and Anim adversio^.
supposing that the sins of those that are absent, ought in no case, or upon no
occasion whatsoever, to be reproved, or witnessed against. The truth is that no
sin at all can be reproved, but what is like to be, as well the sin of some
that are absent, as well as of any that are present. That miscarriage, and
unworthiness which the Querie strikes at, is the importune, restless, and
day-after-day declaiming against the sins of those who are absent, especially
of their Superiors, and such who are in authority, and this in a way to
gratify and feed the corrupt and froward humors of those that are present; as
when a ministry spends it self more in making those that are absent, worse
then they are, then in making those who are present better then they are; ye in
making those that are present worse then they would be otherwise, by making
them judges of evil thoughts, and speakers of evil words, against those who
have neither done them, nor (as they have raason enough to be confident) intend
them, the least harms. The Querie witnesses against such a practice as this,
as unchristian and sinful; and suggesteth, that, of the two, it may rather be
termed, a backbiting of sin, then a reproving. And this (I presume) cannot be
opposed, either with Scripture, reason, or truth: nor does the Answer lift up
so much as the least iota against it.

If it be here rejoyned, that speaking these things, I put good men to rebuke
without cause, reflecting upon them as guilty of such misdemeanors, whereof
they are innocent and free; I Answer,

That if these good men do not put themselves to rebuke by practicing the
things imported in the Querie, as unworthy, neither does the Querie put them to
rebuke. For this names no offender; neither does it particular^ze,
characterize, or point at any person, more, or otherwise, then the Scripture it
self, when it says; Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of
thy people Exodus 2^. 28
. He that does not revile the Gods, not curse the Ruler of his people, is not
at all reproved, or condemned, by this Scripture, but rather justified, and
commanded, in his innocence from these great offenses. Nor should the Querie
beat the air, unless it should suppose some persons now in being, guilty of the
crimes therein censured. If the Genius and tendency of it be as proper to keep
men innocent, as to bring them who have transgressed, to repentance, this is
enough to assert the usefulness of it, though there were no person upon the
face of the Earth touched in a way of reproof by it. Yea they who can wash
their lips in innocence from the foulness there specified, are vertually
praised, and not at all disparagingly reflected upon, by it. If the Answer
could have justified any thing, either by the Scriptures, or by the approved
practice of the Saints in any generation, which is made sin, or censurable, by
the Querie, it had deserved the Name and acknowledgment of an Answer. But the
Answer having nothing to lay to the charge of the Querie, neither shall the
Querist be further troublesome to it.

Query X.
Whether is there any instance or example to be found in all the Scripture of
any Prophet, or faithful Servant of God, who counted it a pleasure to declaim
against their Rulers before the people; especially against any such Ruler, whom
they acknowledged, or knew, to be a person fearing God, and withal, a man, the
tenderness and goodness of whose Conscience they could not lightly but know to
be such, which made him utterly averse as to any penal vindication of himself,
(especially upon the persons of such men, whom he had the least cause of all to
judge godly,) though highly injured and provoked by them? Or is it not a most
unworthy strain of an un-Christian dis-ingenuitie, to tread and trample upon
those with a foot of insolency, whom we know (or at least have very good
grounds whereon to be confidently persuaded) that they are fast bound in their
judgments, and consciences toward God, from rising up against us, to repair
themselves, or to measure. out unto us according to the just demerit of such
our misdemeanors against them?

This Query has produced us a larger Answer then any of its Answer.
fellows. There is no doubt many instances to be found: but some come to hand
with little search. Amos he declaims against the sins, foretells the judgment
that should come upon Jeroboam, and that to the people of the Land, and not to
his hearing. And therefore Amaziah the Priest sends to the King (no doubt to
curry favor with him) accusing the Prophet, telling him that Amos had conspired
against him, and that the Land was not able to bear his words. Am. 7. Again,
Jeremie sends Baruch to read the roll, which contained the sin, as well as the
Judgments of the Princes and people of Israel, to read the same to the people
in the House of the Lord, the King not being present, but the Princes afterward
told the King thereof, Ier. 36. Again, Am. 1. the Prophet does declaim against
the sins of several Countries with their Princes. Now surely he could not be
present with them all at once. Again, the Prophet Ezekiel likewise being in
Babylon with the first that went Captive, does even at that distance by Gods
command, set his face toward Jerusalem, and declaim against the sins
thereof, and in particular against the sins of the Princes. Ezekiel. 31. 22. Jesus
Christ himself called Herod, Fox, behind his back. Yea it is hard to be proved
that the servants of God were present with the Princes, whose sins they
reproved.

2. This supposition is born out of due season: for the patience gloriedin, is
not so fast bound, as is supposed. (These last words relate unto the latter
passage in the Query; Or is it not a most unworthy strain, etc.)

1. There is not within the large circumference of this answer, Reply and
Animadverti.
any oneline, or clause, that joins issue with the main import of the Querie,
which is, whether there be to be found any instance in all the Scripture, of
any Prophet, or servant of God, who counted it a pleasure to declaim against
such their Rulers before the people, whom they acknowledged, or knew, to be men
fearing God, and with all etc. To this point of the Querie, which is the heart
and soul of it, the answer offers nothing at all, but turns aside to some
examples of Idolatrous and wicked Princes and Rulers, as Jeroboam, Jehojakim,
etc. against whom, together with their people partakers of their sins, some of
the Prophets of God, by immediate, particular, and express revelation, were
charged to prophecy, and to denounce the judgments, which he had determined
to bring upon both, in case they did not timely repent. And because these
expresses from God, concerned, as well the people, as their Princes, and the
people being many, were the more considerable party concerned in these
messages; nor had the Prophets entrusted with these messages, always
opportunity to conveene the people and their Princes together, therefore
sometimes they delivered their burdens, or messages from God unto the people,
the Princes being absent. But they always set down, or caused to be set down,
in writeing, the tenor of these their prophecies (respectively) that so they
might be presented unto the Princes upon occasion; as is evident in the case of
Jeremies roll, (mentioned in the Answer) which was read in the ears of the
King, Jer. 36. 21. and this after the sum and substance of it had been made
known unto him before.

What is there then in any, or in all, the examples insisted upon in the
Answer, that does so much as colourably parallel, or justify, the practice of
those, who with turbulencie of passion and discontent, prophecy the visions of
their own hearts, (made of bitterness and blood) not against Jeroboams,
Jehojakims, Herod's, Idolatrous or ungodly Rulers, but against David's,
Hezikiahs, Josiahs, men zealous for God, lovers of righteousness, hating
covetousness, etc. with open mouth, and in a clamourous manner, restlesly, and
without crasing, pouring contempt and disparagement upon them, laying to their
charge things which they know not, calling their light, darkness, making their
straight things, crooked, traducing their faithfulness under the odious names
and mispresentations, of promise-breaking, falsifying of words etc. and all
this in the ears (for the most part) of an ill-spirited and inconsiderate
multitude, with menacing or disparaging glances at all such being present, who
shall make report of the words spoken unto him, or them, who are most concerned
in them. So that the practices and deportments of the men now described in the
business under consideration, have as little communion with the behavior and
carriage of the Prophets alleged in the Answer, as light has with darkness,
or righteousness with unrighteousness, or that which is from God, with that whih
is from men. All circunstances (well nigh) in the proceedings of the one, and
of the other, are diametrally opposite. 1. The Prophets, though they mentioned
or named the sins of their Rulers before the people, yet they sought not
hereby to render them odious to their people, or to incense the people against
them, but rather to admonish the people, that if God were determined to punish
their Kings and Princes for such and such sins, if in time they repented not,
much less would ht spare them, being partakers with them in their sins, in
case they remained stubborn and impenitent. But the men, whose justification is
attempted in the Answer, insist upon matters of oblequie and charge against
their Rulers, before the people, not to admonish them of any communion in sin
with their Rulers, nor of any judgment of God hanging over their heads for
such communion, but only, or chiefly (as is too too apparent) to create and
work an odium or distaste in the people against their Rulers.

2. The Prophets insisted only upon such sins of their Rulers before the
people, whereof they were truly and really guilty, and which either by the
light of nature, or the express Word of God, or both, they certainly knew to
be sins indeed. Whereas the men we speak of, arreign their Rulers at the bar
of their hearers, for matters of cavillation, and for such things, under the
names of enormous crimes, or actions, which both by the Word of God, and by the
Law and light of nature, are, under such circumstances, as under which they
were transacted by them, not only or simply justifyable, or warrantable, but
also, (as far as sober men, and of best and soundest understandings, are able
to judge) worthy commendation.

3. The Prophets (specified in the answer) were not only willing that the
Kings and Rulers, whose transgressions together with the judgments threatened
against them, they had occasion to declare in the ears of the people, should
come to the distinct and perfect knowledge of what they declared in this kind,
but likewise endeavored and procured it. Goye (says Christ; and tell ye that
Fox, Behold, etc. (meaning Herod.) So the Prophet Abijah, 1 King. 14. 7. See
also 2 Chrn. 21. verse 12. Whereas their preposterous Imitatours, are wont to
reprove, disgrace, or threaten those, that shall inform their rulers of the
truth of those things, which they (at their pleasures) speak of them before the
people.

4. The said Prophets never disparaged, or poured contempt upon their good,
godly, or worthy Kings or rulers, in the presence or hearing of the people, but
upon their Idolatrous, wicked, and unjust Kings only. But the tongues of their
competitours are as drawn swords in the midst of the people, against such
rulers, who themselves cannot but acknowledge to be men of a gracious anointing
from God, Just, and Holy, and Good.

5. (and lastly, that which is as much, or more, as all the former) The
Prophets indeed, had a particular and express commission and charge by way of
immediate revelation from God, in all things to speak, as they spoke, and do
as they did in the premises, in which respect a necessity lay upon them in
both. Whereas the by prophets, eyed by the Querie, and countenanced by the
Answer, ^an upon their angry message without being sent from God, nor can they
give any sober, or substantial account, that they were any ways led, or
inspired by him, to speak the tenth of those revilings and hard sayings against
the Rulers (one, or more) which God has set over them, wherewith
notwithstanding they have dareingly adventured to pollute their lips, and
consciences, together, yea and the minds end thoughts of many others.

2. Whereas the Answer pretends, that it is hard to prove that the servants
of God were present with the Princes, whose sins they reproved; I rejoyn, that
if the Scriptures be of sufficient Authority, it is easy to prove, 1. That
Samuel was present with Saul when he reproved him for the business of Agag and
of Amalek, and so again, for his offering sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13. 11. 2. That
Nathan was presenr with David, when he reproved him for his murder and
aadulteris 3. The Prophet who reproved Jeroboam standing by the altar in Bethel
to burn incense, was present with him, 1 King, 13. 12. 4. Eliah was present
with Ahab, when he reproved him, 1 Kiogs 18. 18. And a another time, 1 Kings
28. 10 20. 5. That in like manner there was a another Prophet present, when he
reproved him 1 Kings 20. 42. 6. That Michiah also was present with him, when he
reproved him, 1 King. 22. 17. 28. 7. that Elisha was present with Jeboram, when
he reproved him, 2 King. 3. 13 8. That Hanani the Prophet was present with Asa,
when he reproved him 2 Chronicles. 16. 7. 9. that Jehu the son of Hanani was present
with Jehosapha^, when he reproved him. 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. 10. That the Prophet who
reproved King Amaziah, was present with him, when he did it. 11. That the
Prophets were present with Manasseh, when they reproved him. 2 Chronicles. 33. 18.
compared with 2 Kings 21. 10, 11, 12. 12. that John Baptist was present with
Herod, when he reproved him, Mat. 14. 4. 13. That Peter and John were present
with Annas the high Priest, and the rest of his Assessors in council when they
reproved them, Acts 4. 19. 14. that Paul also was present with the High Priest
Ananias, when he reproved him, Act. 23. 3. So that it is not hard to prove that
the Prophets and servants of God were present. (either formally, or
equivalently, and for the most part, formally with the Princes, whose sins they
reproved: but it is very hard, if not impossible, to prove, that ever they
reproved the sins of good Princes or Rulers before the people, but only when
themselves were present.

3. (and lastly) The supposition [viz. concerning the tenderness, goodness,
Patience, etc. of the Persons most declaimed against] which the Answer says,
is born out of due time, as if it had had no being till the publishing of the
Queries, had (undoubtedly) received birth and being long before this, and lived
(I verily believe) in the breasts of those very men, who now seek to slay and
destroy it; or if not in theirs, yet in other men's, where it is as much made
of, and delighted in, as it could have been in theirs. And whereas the Answer
(inconsiderately, and with a little ven^m) adds; For the patience gloried in,
is not so fast bound, as is supposed; I rejoyn, 1. That here is no glorying in
any man's patience, but only the patience of a man, modestly and with truth
attested, or (more properly) supposed. 2. That the patience of a Magistrate, or
chief Ruler, is not to be estimated by his regular and necessary severity in
order to the public peace and tranqaillity of his people, but by his habitual
deportment of himself under such personal wrongs and provocations, which may be
pardoned or put up without the prejudice, or danger of other men. Therefore
notwithstanding any thing yet acted or done, the Patience, which the Query
supposes, may in the language of the Answer) be as fast-bound, as it is
supposed.

Query XI.
Whether does not the Apostle, expressly charge and enjoin every Soul (without
exception of any) to be subject to the higher powers, declaring, That whosoever
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, (Romans 13. 2.) If so, do
not such persons sin against an express Commandment of God, and this with an
high hand, who, under what pretext soever, shall openly teach disobedience unto
the Powers over them, animating and encouraging, yea by all unchristian and
indirect means, incensing and provoking the people against the Powers, which
God, whether in judgment, or in mercy, has most justly placed and appointed
over them? Or can the sin of resisting the Powers, be more pregnantly,
unquestionably, yea or more dangerously and mischievously perpetrated and
committed, then when those, who ought to live in subjection under them, are day
after day, openly solicited, tempted, urged, yea upon Religious pretenses
conjured, to deny or refuse this subjection unto them, and are passionately,
and (as it were) out of an ecstasy of zeal, born in hand, that whilst they
break so signal a Command of God, they do him worthy service?

This Query (it seems) has by an equivocal generation, begotten two more,
which Conjunctim call themselves an Answer to it. The former, this: Did the
Authors hear those Teachers, which he does defame? The latter this: Does the
Author judge Answer
that all commands of all Superiors, are always to be obeyed? Surely no: for
then they should be found transgressors, who shall exercise the vengeance
written against Babylon, when the kings of the earth their Superiors shall b
wail her burning, as wholly avers to those providence: and they also who shall
come at call to the Supper of the great God to eat the flesh of Kings and
Captains, etc.

To the former of these Questions I answer.

1. That it rejoices in a thing of naught, building it self upon Reply and
Animadversi.
the sand, in ead of a foundation, and supposing, that there are some Teachers
in being, whom the Author of the Queries defameth. For if there be any such
Teachers now upon the stage, whose protraicture is truly drawn in the last
recited Query, they cannot be said to be defamed thereby, unless men may be
defamed by the truth. Men may be ill reported of by the truth: It is no good
report I hear of you (said Eli to his sons:) but John the Baptist did not (I
conceive) defame the Pharisees and Sadduces, when he styled them a generation
of vipers: nor did Christ defame Herod, when he called him, a Fox; nor Paul,
Nero, when he termed him, a Lion. Or if there be no such Teachers amongst us,
as that Query purporteth, there is no ground to complain that any are defamed
by it. For those who are not such, it neither makes, nor supposes, to be
such. Or if there be any, who are in part, though not altogether, such, as are
there represented, and so likely in time to prove altogether such, the Query is
so far from defameing these, that it is of a very proper calcalution to
prevent their infamy (at least in the growth and increase of it) by presenting
them, as in a glass, with such a face, the deformity whereof they cannot
light^y but abhor, and so be far from making their own like unto it. Review
also the latter part of the Reply made to the answer of the 9 Query.

2. Whereas the said former Question interrogates, Did the Author hear those
Teachers etc. I answer: the Author heartily wishes that there were no such
teachers, as are there described either for him, or any others, to hear. Yea he
hops, that there neither are, nor ever will be, such Teachers, whose
unworthiness will hold out, length and breadth, with that description; only he
is more then jealous, that though he knows no men amongst us, yet there are
sturdy striplings amongst us, likely in a short time to make men, of that
generation.

Or if the said interrogatory catches at any such advantage as this, that the
Author of the Queries must needs go beyond the line of his Christian
commission, in reproving, or blameing such Teachers, from whom he has not
personally heard the things, for which he reproves them; his Answer is, that
an accusa^ion even against an Elder may under two or three witnesses be
entertained, how much more under double and treble the number? But more of this
in our progress.

The latter of the two questions, may well be a question indeed. For doubtless
the Author is every whit as far as the Answerer, if not somewhat further,
from judgeing, that all commands of all superiors are always to be obeyed. Nor
can he well imagine why such a question as this should be put. By, resisting
the powers, neither does the Apostle, nor the Query, understand, a
non-complying [obedientially, or practically] with all those that are in power,
in whatsoever they shall command; I never knew, nor heard of, so much as any
one man, who was thus minded; but, by the phrase of, resisting the powers,
[viz. which are, and are (...), sovereign or supreme] the Apostle
(questionlessely) means, a denying subjection to these powers, as such, [1. a
refuseall of obeying them in such commands, which they have a right o^
authority, to impose upon men, which right extends only to things lawful.]
For no Power or powers whatsoever, have any right to impose any such command
upon any person, which the person commanded has not a right or liberty from
God, to obey. It Is true, the powers we speak of may be resisted in a worse sense
then that now opened; as viz. when they are not only rejected in their lawful
commands, but their subversion and ruin attempted also, whether by force, or
by politic insinuations or counsels. He that either disobeys the lawful
commands of the powers that are, or by force endeavors, or by subtilty
contrives, their abolition, may very properly be said to resist the powers. But,

2. The instance of the execution of the vengeance upon Babylon, is very
improper to prove, that Superiors may be resisted in unlawful commands. For
evident it is from Rev. 17. 16. that those who shall execute the vengeance that
is written against Babylon, shall have the concurrence of their Kings, or
Princes, with them therein. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast
(interpreted to be the ten Kings, who at first gave their power and strength to
the beast, and made war against the Lamb. v. 13. 14) these [viz. amongst
them, some, if not all, of them] shall hate the whore, shall make her desolate,
and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire. And for the Kings of the
Earth, spoken of chap. 18. 9. here said to have committed fornication, and
lived deliciously with her, and to bewail and lament for her, when they behold
the smoke of her burnings, etc. they either are such of the former Kings, who
shall not join with their fellows in hateing the whore, making her desolate
and naked, eating her flesh, etc. but persist in their adulterous league with
her to the very last; or else they may be, the Cardinals, and Great Bishops of
the Antichristian Sea, who in respect of their wealth, power, pomp and external
magn^ficance, may be termed, Kings or Princes of the earth.

Query XII.
Whether do not all Christians stand expressly charged, to make supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, as for all men, so more
especially for Kings, and ALL that are in Authority, that they may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? If thus, do not such
Christians notoriously prevaricate with the scope and intent of their own
supplications and prayers (at least if they supplicate and pray according to
the prescription of the Holy Ghost, now mentioned) who labor in the very fire
without ceasing to make proselytes unto Barabbas, in stead of Jesus Christ,
striving might and main to season all they can, with principles of turbulency
and sedition, and to mold their Christian Brethren into such counsels and
resolutions, which no man can reasonably imagine or expect, but that they
should, or will, exasperate those in Authority into such ways, which must needs
make their lives less quiet and peaceable?

To this Query, this bi-membred Answer is given. 1. Kings Answer.
and Governors that do oppose the testimony of Jesus, that breaks forth and is
proper to their generation, are indeed to be interceded for, but not to be
given thanks for, no more then we are bound to give thanks for thieves and
murderers, because the Apostle has commanded thanks to be given for all men.

2. The Author should have declared what those principles of sedition be. Paul's
principles were counted seditious, and yet they were only such things, as
concerned the kingdom of God, and name of Jesus.

For the first member of this answer, it is quite besides the matter Reply, and
Animadversio^.
of that part of the Query, to which it pretends the relation of an Answer. For
this speaks of the prevarication of Christians with the scope and intent of
their own supplications and prayers, in case they pray according to the
prescription of the Holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 2. 12. The Answer excepts nothing
against praying or supplicateing for any sort of men, but against giving of
thanks for some men; concerning which the Query moves nothing at all, further
then the bare citeing of the words, giving of thanks, amongst others, in the
passage transcribed from the Apostle.

What testimony of Jesus it is, which this part of the Answer supposes to be
proper to a generation, and more especially to this generation (for this is the
emphasis of the busine) he Answerer should have declared, as he says to me
concerning the principles of sedition, of which I speak. It seems there were
some in Paul's days, who troubled the minds of many with this not on or
Doctrine, that the day of Christ was at hand, 2 These. 2. 2. Yet this was no
testimony of Jesus proper to that generation; with what confidence soever it
might be pretended to have been such. And to set a few people a gogg with a
conceit, that if they might choose and set up such or such Persons in places of
power and Authority over them, they should lay the foundations of the fifth
Monarchy, and suddenly bring the Kingdom of Christ (so much spoken of) upon
the world, is no testimony of Jesus proper to this generation. For Jesus has
no where declared such a propriety as this, to reside in such a Doctrine, or
testimony of him, as that now mentioned. If by, proper to a generation, the
Answer means, commodious, useful, or necessary to a generation, certain I am
that the Doctrine of subjection unto the Higher powers is very proper to this
generation.

But concerning what the answer speaks (though eccentrically to the Querie)
against giving thanks for thieves and murderers; Doubtless in such a sense as
we ought, or may, pray, or intercede for them, we may and ought to give thanks.
For, for whatsoever good thing we may, or ought, intercede, or pray for on
their behalf, we may and ought to give thanks, when God vouchsafes to give it
unto them. The matter of our prayer or interceding for them, ought not to be
any thing sinfully evil: nor ought the matter of our giveing of thanks for
them, be any such thing (I mean, that is sinfully evil in them,) but only
that which is good, as being some expression or testimony of the goodness of
God toward them. But this is more against the Answer, then for the Querie.

Whereas the latter part of the Answer, instructs me in my duty, and tells
me that I should have declared what those principles of sedition be, whereof
the Query speaks, considering, that Paul's principles were counted seditious,
which yet were only such things, which concerned the kingdom of God, etc. I
repone (by way of excuse for my oversight, or failing, in this point,) 1. That
I was rank of belief, that no person, who would vouchsafe to cast his eye upon
the Query, could look upon, either the Querist himself, or any other person in
the least degree considerable amongst us, as no more able to distinguish
between principles of sedition, and things which concern the kingdom of God,
then those Pagans and professed Infidels were, who so broadly mistook Paul's
principles, as the Answer suggesteth. If my confidence in this kind did ill
become me, I do accept of the blame, and shame, of it. But, 2. (to redeem my
oversight in the premises, and obey the voice of the admonition given me) I
declare, 1. (in the negative) that by, principles of sedition, I did not mean
things concerning the kingdom of God; nor, 2. things of a doubtful disputation
whether they were (I mean, principles of sedition) or no; but (in the
affirmative) such Doctrines, Tenants, or Conceits, which in the eye and
judgment of any considering man, not intoxicated with the cup of the same
notions and designs, have a manifest tendencie in them to disturb the course
of the present Government, to alienate the hearts and affections of people from
those rulers and Governors, which God has judged meet to set over us, and
consequently to prepare them for tumultuous counsels, and practices, and for a
conjunction with disaffected persons, who shall at any time appear in the
least degree considerable for the re-imbroyling of the nation in order to an
alteration, of the government, or Governors of it. Besides, I verily believe,
that there is not one of many but sufficiently understands what the Querie
means by, Principles of turbulencie and sedition, without any such
Declaration, as the Answer seems to require.

XIII.
Whether are such men filled with the Spirit of God, or with a contrary spirit,
who, in stead of giving thanks unto God for those in Authority (which is the
express Command of the Apostle, as we heard -- that giving of thanks be made
for all men, For Kings, and for ALL that are in Authority, etc.) do little else
upon all occasions but fill the ears of men with their discontents, complaints
and murmurings against those in Authority? And whether are not murmurers and
complainers Jud. 1. 6.
, and so again, traitors, heady, high-minded Tim. 3 4.
, and again, men who despise Government [or Lordship, (...)] presumptuous,
self-willed, NOT AFRAID to speak evil of dignities 2 Pet. 2. 10
, ranged by the Holy Ghost himself amongst persons highly disapproved by God?
And whether is not that wisdom, which is from above, as well peaceable, as
pure, gentle, and easy to be entreated Jam. 3. 17.
, as that which is found in persons, having bitter envying, and strife in their
hearts, earthly, sensual, devilish Jam. 3 14. 15.
?

To this Query, this Answer tripartite is given.
1. It were better to try the spirits, then by Querying of what spirit some are
of, to gratify the carnal world, who is always Answer
ready to reject that Spirit which is of God. 2. To reprove the sins of
Government, is not to despise Government, but to remove from it that which
makes it desspiseable. 3. The wisdom from above, is first pure, then
peaceable.
To the first member of this Answer; 1. That the main design Reply and
Animadver.
of the Queries, both divisim, and conjunctim, is to try spirits, and to
discover who are the persons that in their deportments about the present
Government and Governors, are acted and led by the spirit of God, and who, by
their own spirits, or by the spirit of the World. Therefore if the trying of
spirits be so commendable a work, the Answerer has no cause ^o blame the
Queries, at least in respect of their projection, or end. If they have not
quitted themselves in their undertaking with that dexterity, or regularnesse of
proceeding, which was to be desired, nor done their work to satisfaction, there
is this to be said for them; that their will was good, only how to perform it
they found not.

2. I do not at any hand understand, how the Querying of what spirit some men
are of, should be any matter of gratification to the carnal world. It is a
greater and more dangerous gratification of them, either so to speak, or so to
do, that they may be encouraged or persuaded, that such persons, who are of
their spirit, are of the Spirit which is of God.

3. Nor is it always, or universally true, that the carnal World is ready to
reject that Spirit, which is of God, if by carnal world, be meant all persons
at present un-regenerate. For how then should the world in any part of it
become regenerate? Doubtless no man becomes regenerate by rejecting the Spirit
of God, nor by a readiness to reject it, no nor whilst either of these are
found in them. But this is little to the business before us.

The second member of the Answer, in directnesse of terms contains nothing but
a most true and worthy sentence: only a little explication would strengthen
the claim of it to this honor. To reprove the sins of Government, [with a
Christian gravitie, and with a discovery of an honorable esteem of that
Government it self, the sins of which we reprove] is not to despise the
Government; but it is a matter of easy miscarriage, to reprove the sins of
Government after such a manner, as herein to betray our selves that we are
despisers of Government, yea and to encourage those that hear us to despise it
also.

2. It is one thing to reprove the sins of Government; another, to asperse it
with the imputations and charge of such sins, of which it is not guilty; and
then to fall heavy and foul upon it for such sins, of which, either the
strength of our disaffections only, or the weakness, of our understandings, or
both, have made it guilty.

The words of the third and last member of the Answer, are of too great an
inspiration to be questioned. But 1. it is no impurity not to reproach, revile,
or curse, the ruler of a man's people. 2. From the express tenor of the words,
that wisdom, which is not peaceable, whatever it may pretend to purity, is
evicted not to be from above. But (says the Apostle James) if ye have bitter
envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth [by
saying or thinking, you are men truly wise, when as you are nothing lesse] This
wisdom descends not from above: but is earthly. etc.

XIV.
Whether did not Satan (the great Enemy of the peace and safety of mankind)
desire to sift the Apostles rather then any other sort of men, [i. e. to
disturb and trouble their fancies, memories, understandings, etc. for a time,
with an intent and hope by this means to draw out of them some soil or dross,
some unworthy carriages, or other, which coming from them, he knew must needs
be more serviceable for his ends, then the same, or the like, coming from other
men.] Or does he not in these days labor in the very fire to disturb the
principles, distemper the imaginatives, disorder and confound the reasons,
apprehensions, and understandings of such men, whose disordered actings and
miscarriages he supposes will be of highest conducement to his ends, which are
known to be, the trouble, misery, and destruction, of the poor creature called
Man? Or are not such men, the men of this character, whose zeal has so highly
commended them to the opinions and thoughts of many devout and well-meaning men
and women, that they judge their thresholds to be much nearer the threshold of
God himself, then other men's?

Against this Query, this Answer magnifies it self.

We find none of the Apostles that Satan had this advantage Answer
against, but Peter, who was so confident of his own abilities that he thought
none so able to stand, as he. And they are nearest unto Satan's sieve, who
count themselves the masters of wisdom, and rationality, in their generation.
And as Satan had the greatest advantage upon men of that temper; so when God
stirrs up instruments to bear forth any testimony of his in their generation,
he cl^useth the weak and the foolish things of this world. Not that they are
foolish: for there is no wisdom like to that which is from above. But so they
are called, because so esteemed by the world, in which they live, and with
which they contend to the loss of their honors, names, estates, and therefore
are counted fools. But notwithstanding they are known to be of God by those
poor souls, that walk in the light of the same spirit of God which they walk
in. To these things,

1. The Scripture will not allow it for truth, that Satan had Reply and
Animadver.
not the advantage of sifting against ANY OF the Apostles, but Peter only. For
presently upon the apprehending of Christ by the multitude, that were sent from
the chief Priests and elders with swords and staves against him, it is expressly
said, that all the Disciples (as well as Peter) forsook him and fled (Mat. 26.
56. This was an effectual sifting. Yea Peter (it seems) in case it be supposed
that he fled also, immediately repented of his flying, and showed more courage
(at least for a time) then any of his fellows. But,

2 If Peter was therefore more obnoxious to Satan's sifting then the rest of
the Apostles, because he was so confident of his abilities, that he thought
none so able to stand, as he, this is fully concurrent with the design of the
Query. For I verily believe that there are no men more confident of their
abilities, or that think they are more able to stand, then the Persons looked
upon by the Query, and admired by the Answer.

3. If they who count themselves the masters of wisdom in their generation, be
the men that are nearest unto Satan's sieve, I believe the same Persons will be
found to inherit the relation of this proximi^y too. Nor can I easily persuade
my self, that the Answerer himself, whoever he be, one, or more, is able to
persuade them out of a corceit that they are equal (at least) to the first born
sons of wisdom in their generation.

4. It is the sense of wiser men then I, and these not a few, that the men,
whom the Answer would make contenders with the world to the l^sse of their
honors, names, estates, and upon this account, to be counted fools, are
rather gainers in all these, then losers in any, by that contest, wherein they
have lately appeared (and which they still prosecute) I can not say, with or
against, the World, but with Persons of as much Christian worth as I know any,
so that by considering men, they are counted rather subtle, then fools, in
entering the lists of their present contention.

5. I confess that those souls, who walk in the light of the same spirit with
them, may very probably be exceeding confident, and imagine that they know,
that they are of God, in as much as every man's ways seems right in his own
eyes; and consequently, other men's ways, which are the same with theirs, must
needs seem right also.

6. (lastly) Neither does God always choose the weak and foolish things of this
World, for his instruments to bear forth every testimony of his in their
generation. Luther, Melancthon, Calvin (with many others of like note about
their times) were none of the weak or foolish things of this World, but men of
great endowments, guilts, abilities of learning, knowledge in tongues, arts and
sciences etc. and yet these were chosen by God to bear forth a great testimony
of his in their generation. Not to speak of Moses, his great Instrument of old
for the service and purpose here mentioned, to whom the Holy Ghost himself
speaking by the mouth of Stephen, gives it is testimony, that he was learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and that he was mighty in words, as well as in
deeds; Paul himself, who was a chosen vessel a Act. 7. 22.
unto him to bare his Name even befors Kings Act. 9. 15.
, had nevertheless been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, (a Doctor of the
Law, and a man of great reputation in his generation Act. 5 34.
) and was taught according to the perfect law of the Fathers Act. 22 3.
; yea, and immediately before his being stirred up by God to bear forth his
testimony, was by the great men of the world in his generation, highly
esteemed, and judged meet to be employed in their greatest affairs. Therefore
neither was he any of the weak or foolish things of the world. The rest of the
Apostles, however before, and at, the time of their calling to be Apostles,
they might be numbered amongst the weak and foolish things of the world, yet
before God sent them forth to bear his great Testimony unto the World, they
were extraordinarily and miraculously endued with strength from on high, with
wisdom and great understanding, with the knowledge of tongues, and much other
learning, as is to be seen in their writings. Nor do I believe that God ever
stirred up any instrument to bear forth any testimony of his in their
generation, in any solemn or public manner, but only such, whom either he
found men of worthy gifts and abilities at the time of his stirring them up,
or else whom he furnished accordingly, in or upon their stirring, before he
employed them in any such service. The Scripture indeed says, that God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to confound the things that are mighty, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
[speaking (as is evident from the context) of the mean condition, and esteem of
the generality or greater part of Believers in the world, in comparison of the
great and numbers of rich men, learned and prudent men, men in high places who
oppose or reject the Gospel, according to that of Christ, Mat. 11. 5 the poor
receive the Gospel, as the former translation read it] but it no where says,
with the Answer that he has chosen the weak and foolish things of the World to
bear forth his testimony in their generation in a ministerial and public way.

XV.
Whether is there any kind of zeal more ecstatical and fiery, then that which
is blind, and without knowledge? Or was it not such a zeal as this, which made
the Apostle Paul himself, whilst yet a Pharisee, exceedingly mad against the
Saints, in so much as to persecute them even unto strange Cities Act. 26. 11
? Or were not the Jews, to whom notwithstanding Paul bears this witness, that
they had a zeal of God, the fiercest enemies of all others, to the most worthy
and faithful Servants of God? Or was it not a spark of this unhallowed fire,
that provoked the two Disciples, James and John, to demand of Christ, whether
they should not command fire to come down from Heaven to consume the
Samaritans, because they received them not? Or did not the Lord Christ upon
their motion turn himself toward them, and rebuke them in these words; Ye know
not what manner of Spirit ye are of b? Or do they understand and consider of
what spirit, they either are, or ought to be, who (in effect) call for fire,
not only from Heaven, but from Earth also (I mean, from the vulgar, and less
considerate sort of people) to destroy, if not the persons, yet the power and
Authority (which must needs endanger the persons also) of such Rulers amongst
them, who do not receive their notions and Doctrines about Government, and
submit to an investiture from them, and such as they please to join in the Act
of this investiture with themselves?

This Query is presumed satisfied with this bimembrous Answer.

1. If zeal without knowledge, be bad, surely knowledge of, without Answer
zeal against, the sins of our generation, is much worse, and shall receive the
greater condemnation. 2. The people that know not the Law, are cursed, said the
Pharisees of the hearers and followers of our Lord Jesus.
To the former part of this Answer, thus. First, the Answerer Reply, and
Animadversio^.
had small cause to reflect upon the Querist, as a man without zeal against the
sins of his generation. His Queries themselves are, with the best strength he
could readily put to them, bent against some of the greatest sins (at least in
his judgment, and as far as his knowledge extends) of his generation; as
viz. turbulencie of spirit, running without sending, revileing Magistrates,
murmurings and discontentments against the gracious and wise dispensations of
God toward the Nation, believing of spirits without trying whether they be of
God, or no (with others of affinity with these.)

2. Zeal, being nothing but the strength and fervor of desire to accomplish
some end, it may expressed otherwise then by blustering, or by crying out,
either in the streets, or temple. Christ showed as much zeal, or strength of
desire, to propagate the Gospel and save the precious souls of men, by not
striveing, nor crying, nor causing his voice to be heard in the strets, when
time was; and so in not breaking a bruised reed, in not quenching smoking flax,
etc. as he did in terming the Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, serpents, a
generation of vipers, and thundering out woe after woe against them. And when
the sins of our generation are more likely, according to principles of sound
reason and judgment, to be redressed by a spirit of meekness, or private and
affectionate applications unto those, who are the great offenders, he may be
every whit as zealous for the redress, who in such ways as these attempteth
it, as he, who with bitterness of spirit, and a Stent^^ean voice declaimeth
against the said sins upon the house top. Nor did the Apostle Paul intend,
either to quench, or to abate, Timothies zeal against sin, when he thus
instructed him: And the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, instructing with meekness those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance -- and that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil etc. 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. etc.
.

3. (and lastly) Although (possibly) knowledge of the sins of others, without
zeal against them, be simply worse, then zeal without knowledge, considered
only as such, and apart from its fruits and actings; yet never did the
knowledge of other men's sins without zeal against them, produce the like sad and
grievous effects, at least directly, in the World, yea or amongst the Saints
them selves, as zeal without knowledge, especially when indulged, and commended
by others in the blind and irregular actings of it, has frequently done.

To the second prrt of the Answer, I rejoyn;

1. If the Pharisees had spoke truth of the hearers and followers of Christ, in
saying, that they knew not the law, they had spoken nothing but truth, in
saying, they were cursed, notwithstanding their hearing and following Christ.
For they who not long after, cried, crucify him, crucify him, had been hearers
and followers of his formerly.

2. Were it granted, that the hearers and followers of Christ were unjustly and
untruly charged by the Pharisees (who were enemies to Christ, and his Doctrine)
that they knew not the law; this is no proof, so much as in color, that
therefore all those, who are hearers and followers of a fallible spirit, and
subject unto error (how importunely soever it may pretend to be from Christ)
are falsely, or unduly, charged to be ignorant of the Law, especially when they
are thus charged by persons that are friends to Christ, and love his Doctrine,
and know the truth. As because Moses and Aaron were unjustly charged with
murder, or killing the people of the Lord, by the congregation of murmurers a,
it does not follow that therefore David was unjustly charged by Nathan (the
Prophet of the Lord) with killing Vriah the Hittite b. So that this part of the
Answer also being touched, vanishes like the apples of Sodom, into nothing.

XVI.
Whether is the assertive or high-bearing confidence of men, any demonstrative,
yea or competent, argument or ground of truth, in what they deliver and avouch
upon such terms? Or did any man, or any sort of men, ever fly an higher pitch
of confidence then the Jews when they notoriously belyed the Lord Jesus Christ,
expressing themselves thus: Say we not WELL that thou art a Samaritan, and have
a Devil? Or did they not speak very ignorantly, wickedly, and falsely, when they
pleased themselves with an high and confident conceit, that they spoke WELL,
and nothing but the truth? Or, are not the grounds of most men's confidence,
rather ignorance, or want of consideration, of such things, which are strongly
objectionable against their notions and apprehensions, in conjunction with a
vain glorious humor of being thought Demi-prophets, and persons of a more
familiar converse with God, then other men, then any well-grounded knowledge or
comprehension of the certain truth of those things, which they affirm?

This Query is conceived to be balanced with this Answer.

True; but yet an high bearing confidence, grounded upon the threatenings and
promises that are in the Scripture of truth, is Answer
ground enough to bear up the Assertors against the world round about. It is
not will to bear the World in hand, that the men of your opposition have no
grounds of their confidence.

Surely there are some men of more familiar converse with God, then others are.
Let us cope with this also.

1. It is not sufficient that our confidence be grounded upon the threatenings
and promises that are in the Scripture of truth, unless Reply, and
Animadversio^.
1. they be grounded upon them rightly understood: and 2, unless they be also
grounded upon them regularly, i. e. after such a manner, and with such evidence
of reason, that any sober and considering man may say and conclude thus: these
threatenings, and promises, being true, in such, or such, a sense, he that is
confident upon their authority of such or such an event to come to pass,
cannot possibly be deceived. If the high-bearing confidence so much indulged in
the Answer, were brought to this touchstone, it would neither prove to be gold,
or silver, or any precious stone. All the errors and mistakes, that are found
at this day amongst professors of the Christian Religion, are grounded (as the
respective Assertors or abettors of them call, grounding) upon such sayings in
the Scripture of truth, which are altogether as certain and unquestionable, as
well in their sense, and meaning as their truth, as those threatenings and
promises hinted (...) the Answer, whatsoever they be, or can be. Yea

2. Men of un balassed, injudicious, and hasty spirits, and that are not,
either extraordinarily quick and apprehensive suddenly to descry all
circumstances, under which the threatenings and promises are made, on which he
builds, or grounds, his confidence, or else of very industrious and patient
spirits, that can sit by an intense contemp^ation, or consideration, of a
matter, for some good space of time may as easily mistake in drawing
conclusions touching future events, from threatenings and promises in the
Scriptures, as in arguing any other passages herein whatsoever. This truth
would (I conceive) have been much more possible on al hands, then now
(possibly) it may be, had we generally treasured up such experiments of the
mis-conjectures, yea mis-confidences of men, which our present age, and that in
the later years of it, has afforded.

3. Whereas the answer further says; It is not well to bear the World in hand
that the men of my opposition have no ground of their confidence; I must
oppose; that either I must bear the World in hand that these men have no ground
[i. e. no sufficient ground] of their confidence, or else confess unto the
World, that I have no sufficient ground of my opposition. Of the two, certain I
am that for my conscience (whatsoever it be for my credit) the former is
better, then the latter.

4. (and lastly) The Answerer, and I, shall not make two about this, that some
men are of more familiar convers with God, then others. Only herein probably
we may differ. The Answer seems to suppose, that those men are likliest to
have the pre-eminence in that familiarity of converse, now mentioned, who
appear most in earthquakes, whirlwinds, and fires; whereas I conceive, that
many times those, who walk in a still voice, are equal therein unto the other,
and sometimes before them. Doubtless they who are of more familiar converse
with God, are likest unto Moses, who was the meekest man on earth in his days;
and so likest unto Christ, in that, wherein he more pecularly commended himself
for a pattern unto men: Learn of me: for I am meek, and lowly in heart^: and so
again, are likest to abound with heavenly wisdom, which (as the Apostle James
informs us) whosoever pretends unto, must show out of a good conversation his
works with MEEKNESS and wisdom.

XVII.
Whether is the Epoch, or time of the first entrance, beginning, or setting up
of the fifth Monarchy in the World; fixed and determined by God in the
Scriptures, so that no humane endeavors or contributions toward such a thing,
are any ways available to accelerate or hasten this period of time, nor (on the
other hand) any humane opposition or obstructions or unworthy actings of men,
any ways able to retard or set it back? If neither, why should any men trouble
the World round about them, and abuse the simplicity of inconsiderate people,
by an importune bearing them in hand, that if they were but permitted to umpire
the sovereign Affairs of their State and Nation, they would out of hand bring
the said blessedness of the fifth Monarchy upon the head of the world, even
before the day thereof? Or why should these men, or any others, clamor day
after day in the ears of poor people, against such persons, who themselves
acknowledge to be truly Godly, as if they stood in Christ's way, and would not
suffer him to set up his Kingdom, or this fifth Monarchy, in the world, only
because they cannot be satisfied about the truth or soberness of their notions,
and refuse to steer a course, threatening ruin and confusion to their Nation?
Or is it not the sense and declared opinion of these men, that the day and
hour, at least the year, wherein that Great Jubilee of the Monarchy they speak
of, shall begin, is unchangeably, Answer
unalterably, unremoveably fixed by God?

This Query is enterteined with this Answer. Surely it is every man's duty, to
look for, and hasten to, the comeing of the day of God a^ says Peter. Neither
does it become this Author to bear the world in hand, that all things that God
has purposed, shall come to pass, however we behave our selves.

The Religious World were Christ's greatest enemies at his first comeing: and
its probable will be so to his second comeing.

Embraceing the Monitory of the Apostle Peter in the beginning of the Answer,
to the remnant we return, Reply and Animadver.


1. That the Author, which the Answer charge, is so far from being guilty
of the crime here laid to his charge, viz. of bearing the World in hand that
all things etc. that 1. there is not a word, syllable, letter, or iota sounding
this way in all the Queries; nay 2. he has publicly, and this also very
frequently from from time to time, declared his judgment to the contrary, and
that his sense, is, that God purposes and intends many things (in such a
sense as the Scriptures attribute purposes and intentions unto him) which never
come to pass, sometimes by reason of the good, other while by reason of the
evil, behavior of men. The present Query indeed does little less then
suppose that the judgment of the Authors looked after therein, and
corresponding with the Answerer, stands at that point, at which the Answer
(untruly) places mine: and how great a rejoyceing of soul would it be unto me,
if it did not, or if it could be removed thither, where the judgment, both of
the Querist, and of the Answerer also (as it seems) stand together. Yet.

2. Though my sense be, that many things purposed (as has been said) by God,
may not, yea will not, come to pass, by reason, either of the holy, or of the
sinful, behaviors of men; yet I believe withal that the coming to pass of
some things, yea of very many things, purposed by him, is wholly and solely
depending upon his own will and power; and that consequently that all such
things as these, shall come to pass infallibly and irresistibly, and which way
soever men shall behave, or not behave themselves. No interposure of the
deportments of men in one kind or other, can hinder but that the purpose of God
concerning the putting an end unto the world, and this by fire, and so
concerning a day of judgment concerning a raising again from the dead, both
good and evil, concerning the salvation of those who have lived and died in
the faith of Christ, the condemnation of those, who have died impenitent and
unbeleeving etc. I believe (I say) that the purposes of God concerning all
these things (with many others of like consideration, shall most certainly come
to pass, let men do, or be, whatsoever they can, or will. Yea,

3. If it may any ways accommodate the Answerer, I declare my self very much
inclineing to believe, that the time of the e^ecting the fifth Monarchy in the
world, may either be hastened, or retarded, at least in the portch or first
fruits of it, by the different or contrary behaviors of men, comporting with
the one, or the other. But I am far from thinking, that, or conceiving how,
those deportments of men justified all along the answer, should have any part
or fellowship either in the erection of the said Monarchy, or in expediting
the season of it; unless (happily) it be in such a way, which the Answerer (I
know) cannot endure to hear of.

4. (and lastly) If it be probable that the Religious world will be the
greatest enemies of Christ to his second comeing, how will the Answerer quit
himself, or the men of his approbation, from the danger (at least) of dashing
their foot at this stone? For they (doubtless) lay claim to the honor and
happiness of being members of the Religious world. Nor are there any more
worlds, then the Religious, and irreligious. They will not (I presume) endure
to have their names written amongst the citizens of the latter; nor do I know
any man, that has so much as a thought to write them here. Therefore they must
of necessity accept of the fellowship of the world Religious. Or if the
meaning of this part of the Answer be, that as in the great body of Professors
of Christian Religion, the best and greatest friends of Christ are likely still
to be found, so are his greatest enemies also, I have nothing to oppose, but
only to propose, and suppose, that they are not like to be enemies to Christ,
much less his gretest enemies who desire and endeavor nothing more, then that
they, who are his friends in many things, may be so in all.

Postscript.
Query I.
MAy it not be yet further queried, Whether such persons, whether Ministers of
the Gospel, or others (but especially the former) who publicly undertake or
pretend to know, and predict unto the people, how long the present Government
shall stand, and after how many months, or years, it shall presently be
dissolved and fall, do not impose a kind of wretched necessity upon themselves
to turn every stone for the raising of Tumults and Insurrections in the Land,
and to enrage the people against the present Government and Governors, thus to
make a covering for their own shame, and to prevent the dishonor and reproach
of false Prophets from lighting upon their heads? Or did not the Wizard in
France, having engaged the reputation of his Art in foretelling the death of
Duke Beron by a Bungurdian on a certain day, and finding no likelihood, the day
now approaching, of the event otherwise, resolve to make himself a true Prophet
by doing the execution himself, and accordingly murdered him?

This Query is put off with this Answer, (consisting in a great part of
quotations of Scripture, more in number by the whole ^e^inue, then in
pertinencie to Query.)

No; no more then the Prophets and servants of God, who Answer
from the sin of their Princes and Governors foretold their ruins and
judgments, lay under any necessity to further the same; but rather sought to
repent the judgments by provoking to Repentance. 1 Samuel 2. 27. 1 Samuel 13. 14.
2 Chronicles. 18. 16. Es^. 6. 11. Jer. 22. 24. to the end. Ezekiel. 6. 12. Ezekiel. 7. 27.
Dan. 5. 25, 26, 27. Hos. 5. 10. Joel. 1. 4. Am. 1. 15. Am. 7. 10. to the end.
Mic. 3. the last. Nahum 3. 5, 6, 7. Hab. 2. 10. Zeph. 1. 8. 9. Z^c^. 1. 9. 4.
Mal. 1. 5. Luke 21. 6. Act. 21. 11.

Here are texts of Scripture enough to prove something; yea (questionless)
many things: but here is not so much as one, Reply and Animadver.
nor a piece of one, to prove that which the Answer affirms; v. z. That uch
persons, who publicly undertake and pretend to know, and predict unto the
people, how long the present Government shall stand, how many months, years
etc. do not impose any other necessity upon themselves to bring to pass these
their predictions, th^n the Prophets and servants of God lay under to bring
theirs to pass, who prophesied ruin and destruction unto their Princes and
Governors, because of their sins. For,

1. It is not true, that the Prophets or servants of God here spoken of,
fortold the ruins and judgments of their Princes, merely from their sins, but
from the mouth of God, i. e. by particular and express order from him, and
this delivered by immediate and extraordinary revelation, in one kind, or
other. It is true, the sins of these Princes were the ground and reason, why
such messages of threatenings were put into the mouths of the Prophets by God
against them, in which respect they were (for the most part; for in the case of
Jonah's prophesying against Niniveh, and in some others, it was otherwise)
enjoined by the tenor of their commissions (respectively) to set those their
sins and provocations before them, for which God was so highly displeased with
them, and was resolved according as they from his mouth signified unto them,
without timely repentance, to judge, or destroy them. But these sins of the
Princes, were not the basis or ground, upon which the Prophets by their own
wisdom or understandings, calculaced or built the particular determinations of
times, which are found in many of their prophesies, wherein the said Princes
were judged punished, or destroyed, by God for their sins; but all such
determinations were pitched and fixed by God himself, who communicated his mind
and counsel in this behalf unto the said Prophets. So that these Prophets
having matters expressly and in particular revealed unto them by God, ran no
hazard at all of their credits or reputations, in declareing and predicting
when, and after how long a time, the sins of such, or such, Princes should be
recompensed in judgment upon their heads; and consequently, lay under no
necessity at all, by any unworthy or indirect interposures, to salve their
honors, or the truth of their predictions. Whereas the Persons thought upon in
the Query, calculateing their predictions of the short continuance of the
present Government, only by a presumption of their own wisdom, conceiting that
they see beyond, and above, what is written in the Scriptures without any
special revel^tion from God, do apparently lay the honor of their
Propheticalls at the stake, and consequently expose themselves to a temptation
to redeem it, and this by sinister and indirect practices, if the feat cannot
be done by those, which are honorable.

2. It is no easy matter, if at all possible, for the Prophets, or servants of
God in these days who have no vision from God, but the Scriptures, and what is
written there, exactly (as to a month, year, or the like) to calculate the
times of Gods patience toward Sinners in any kind, by any light or direction
from the Scriptures, or from the judgments or punishments of Transgressors,
recorded there. The reason is, because, though the sins committed in these
days, may be known to be the same, in respect of the kind and external act in
the perpetration of them, with those, whose perpetration, and judgment, are
recorded in the Scriptures, yet the circumstances of aggrava^ion, and
extenuation, which are of main consideration with God in ordering as well the
time, as degree of their punishments, are so numerous, and various, yea and
sometimes so secret and inaccessible to the understandings of men, that it is
next to an impossibility for men even of greatest abilities, and insight into
the Scriptures, so much as to take a steady aim by those Scripture records, how
long the patience of God will endure these, or these sinners, ^n these days.
And besides, the Scriptures inform us, that the wisdom of God is (...), i. e.
multifarious, or manifold; in respect of which, upon a good account, and in
order to some end worthy of him, he may respit the judgment of an offender
beyond the term of his patience toward another, equal in demerit unto him, and
this without the least touch of a breach upon his justice.

3. The Spirits dealt with in the Query, were at their work of denouncing
judgment against the present Government, and of limiting and determining the
time of the standing of it, well-nigh as soon as ever it was born, and whilst
yet it had scarce done either good, or evil; whereas the Prophets and servants
of God of old, were seldom or never sent to denounce judgment against any
person, Prince or other, especially not after such, or such a prefixed time,
but only after a continuance and progress in sin sor some considerable space.

4. (And lastly) The sins of the Princes, against whom the Prophets and
servants of God of old were sent with threatenings of judgment for these sins,
were not imaginary sins, or sins, which through the ignorance, or mistake of
the Law, which only makes sin, were so called, but were sins really, indeed,
and unquestionably. Whereas (as we have formerly signified) the sins, upon the
credit and Authority whereof the Query-Prophets have adventured to prefix a
time for the dissolution of the present Government, are only sins so called,
or at the utmost and worst, disputeably such. Yea, they that clearly understand
the Law of nature, in such cases, yea or the Law of God, cannot adjudge them
such. Therefore those texts of Scripture mustered in the Answer have neither
hand nor heart to strike a stroke in that battle, for which they were levied.

II.
Again, Are not these passages ensuing (published in print and subscribed by Mr
John Simpson, Mr William Greenhill, Mr Thomas Brooks, Mr Hanserd Knollys, Mr T.
Harrison, Mr Christopher Feak, Mr Richard Wollaston, Mr Henry Jesse, with
several others, about two years since, viz. in November, 1651.) worthy to be
engraven with the Point of a Diamond, and written in letters of Gold; If Caesar,
and Pagan Rulers under him in Judea, and elsewhere, were to be honored and
submitted unto, as both Christ taught, and his Apostles (Mat. 22. 21. Mark 12.
27.) (AND YET THEY CAME IN BY THE SWORD, AND KEPT GODS CHURCH IN BONDAGE,) how
much more should our Governors be honored by all people in our Nation? The
same Authors soon after express themselves thus: In our days, wherein persons
truly fearing God are of diverse forms, dissenting in Church Government, etc.
Some that are termed Presbyterians, some Independents, some Anabaptists, and
some that are not so resolved with any of these; the power of choosing Rulers,
or of being chosen should not be limited to any one of these forms, or
persuasions, to the excluding of others,[excepting such, WHO EITHER DENY
PROPRIETY, or Magistracy, or who assert carnal liberty, or Polygamy, whom we
have witnessed against in our former declaration; or such, AS HAVE OPPOSED, OR
DO NOT OWN, THIS PRESENT GOVERNMENT.] A little before (in the said printed
paper) having solemnly professed thus; With one consent we do thus declare, as
in the presence of the Almighty, who is the searcher of all hearts, before whom
the wicked and deceitful shall be confounded at the day of Judgment; they lay
down this Proposition; That all people in every Nation, as well members of
Churches, as others, ought FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE to honor such, as by the wise
disposing Providence of God, are their PRESENT RULERS; and are to submit to the
civil commands, not only of such Rulers as are faithful, but even to Infidels,
(to omit several other things of like import in the said paper.) Are not the
contents and substance of these sayings, clearly and expressly founded upon the
good Word of God, which (as the said Authors worthily, and most truly inform
us) is the Rule and Standard for Faith and obedience? If so, must not all such
men of necessity be false Prophets, casting snares upon the people, and leading
them out of the ways of truth and peace, who are so far from HONORING THEIR
PRESENT GOVERNORS (though no Infidels, but partakers of like precious faith
with the Saints themselves, though no keepers of Gods Church in bondage, but
most zealous and faithful Assertors of the entire liberties thereof,) that with
open mouth they pour contempt upon them day after day, consulting with their
spleens, or worse spirits, how to make their favor to stink in the eyes of the
people, and so to arm them with discontents and indignation against them? Or is
this, in the dialect, or sense, of the Holy Ghost, to, HONOR GOVERNORS?

To this Query the Answerer only says; These men no doubt Answer
are of the same mind even to this day. It is not good to bear witness against
what we did not hear with our own ears.

1. If the men specified in the Query, be of the same mind, Reply, and
Animadversio^.
at this day, which their sayings here cited, do import, it were well that
their minds, and their mouths, would go together. How would the peace of the
nation rejoice over such an agreement, as this? But to labor in the very fi^e,
by reproaches, by revileings, by hard sayings in several kinds, to alienate
the hearts and affections of the people from the present Governors and Rulers,
is this for conscience sake to honor our present Governors and Rulers? He
that can thus interpret, need not care what text is given him.

2. Whereas the Answer thinks it not good, to bear witness against what we
hear not with our own ears;

1. To give sentence against a matter, is more then simply to bear witness
against it. And how few Judges throughout the world, have heard those words,
whether treasonable, or of other demerit, with their own ears, which they have
sentenced according to the Law?

2. A Query, or question is not properly or directly, especially in our English
dialect, either bearing witness against, either thing, or person; nor yet a
giveing sentence against either; but rather the searching out of the truth in
some case, or other, in order to a sentence.

3. How few Ministers of the Gospel have heard with their own ears the wo^ds of
those errors or heresies, against which notwithstanding they bear witness in
their ministry from time, to time, and are blameless?

4. An accusation even against an elder, may under two or three witnesses,
lawfully be received; how much more under twenty?

5. (and lastly) Suppose a man were present, where words are spoken within his
hearing, yet may he possibly mistake, and verily think that he hears, such, or
such, words spoken, which yet were not spoken. There may be deceptio audi^us,
as well as visus. And I know no reason but why the consonant report of a
considerable part of a full auditory touching such or such words spoken in
their presence, should be altogether as good a foundation for me to build a
belief upon, that the words were indeed spoken, as an hearing of them with mine
own ears, according to the usual manner of my hearing. But this is of very
slender aff(...)i^y with the main design of the Query.

III.
Whether, a man's conscience bearing him witness in the Holy Ghost, that his
heart is upright with God, and that he unfeignedly purposes and desires to do
all the good upon Earth, whilst he abides amongst men, which God shall any
ways enable him unto; ought not such a person, even in conscience toward God,
and out of love and genuiness of affection to his generation, embrace and
accept of all such opportunities, and advantages of standing, for the promotion
of his work, which God shall by any providence of his offer unto him? Or when
God called Moses up to the top of the Mount* (Exodus 19. 20.) had it been meet
for him to have answered, Nay; but I will serve thee faithfully beneath in the
valley? Or is it not a grand detriment, or loss, unto the world, when Princes
(as Solomon speaks) walk as servants on the Earth; i. e. when men of noble
Principles, of public Spirits, whose hearts and souls are in travel with the
wealth, peace, and prosperity of the world round about them, who are shaped and
formed (as it were) on purpose by God himself for Rule and Government, shall
want a stage whereon to act like Princes, or be persuaded to enjoy themselves
in privacy and retirement? Or in case the Sun should be overruled to change
place with the Moon, should not the world have cause in abundance to lament the
change? Or had his tabernacle been pitched in any inferior Orb, beneath that,
wherein it is now placed by God, could the Earth have rejoiced in his light at
that rate, which now it does? Or had He been in any capacity to enrich the
inhabitants thereof with his treasures, as they are now enriched by him? Or if
a candle should creep under a bushel, when there is a candlestick provided and
set on the table for it, should not they in the house have much more reason to
be offended at it, then well pleased? Or is it not a secret guilt or
consciousness in the generality of men of their own narrowchestedness, and
self-ward propensions, which make them jealous that other men are, and will be
found, in the same condemnation with them; and that no man coming where he may
without much danger serve himself, will be much intent upon the service of
other men, further then his own secular interest shall super-intend and advise
him?

This Query, being the last, is supposedly slain by the sharp sword of this
Answer. The flattery of the present power does not become the Author, who has
often times approved himself not to be the servant of men. But oh! who has now
bewitched him to appear in this kind to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and
to make their heart sad, whom God has not sadded.

This Answer, like the head of a polipus, has a mixture of good, and bad, in
it. The first words of it contein a worthy and Christian admonition; viz. that
the flattery of the present power does not become the Author; only the
application of it is reflexive, if not aspersive, without cause. The next
words, that this Author has often times approved himself not to be the servant
of men, contain a friendly and Christian testimony. But the words remaining are
gall and vinegar given unto me, and my betters, to drink; But oh, who has
bewitched him etc. But might not I, had I pleasure in such hard sayings, upon
much more equitable grounds, admiringly complain, and demand: But oh! who has
bewitched the Answerer, to appear in this kind to weaken the hands of the
righteous, and to make their heart sad, whom God has not sadded? More
particularly;

1. To the employed charge of flattering the present power, it is a burden laid
upon my sound shoulder: in which respect it little pincheth, or paineth me.
Where the skin is whole, vinegar poured on smarteth not. The truth is, that I
am, both naturally, and supernaturally, so far indispoto flatter any inch of
the greatness of this world, that I am still put to my supernaturals to afford
unto great men, so much as common and meet respects and civilities. Luther
professed that for twenty years together he never felt the least motion in his
heart toward covetousness: I may, as in the presence of God, Angels, and men,
profess and say; since I first knew what the world, and the greatness of it,
meant, I never found my heart tempting me so much as to such a compliance with
any great Person whatsoever, which yet is warrantable enough, and which I am
far from, either reproveing, or disliking, in another. Yea I have been
inclined (and am not yet much altered in my inclination) to look upon the
Generality of great men, rather as faeces mundi, the dreggs and retriment of
the world, and the reproach of mankind, then as worthy the applications of
sober men unto them. And they who have best known me from my youth up until
now, will (I presume) very freely give this testimony of me, that what other
weakness or undue cariages soever they have ob, served in me, they never found
me adulterously inclinedto familiarities, or correspondings, with great men,
much less to any adulatory comportments with them. This notwithstanding I must
confess, that when I have met with any thing of the divine nature, any thing
worthy a Christian indeed in a great man, I have, occasionally, and according
to the best of my understanding to avoid offense, endeavored to nourish,
strengthen, and increase it; and (possibly) in doing this, I have made the most
of it, and (probably) more, then some others judge the true value, or extent of
it to be. Nor do I think that the Apostle Paul himself was very far from such
a strein, as this, when he addressed himself thus to Agrippa: King Agrippa,
beleevest thou the Prophets? I KNOW THAT THOU BELEEVEST.

2. Although it be most true, that flattery of the present power does not
become the Author, yet the representing of the present power, unto others, and
especially unto those who ought to live in subjection to it, in the true shape
of it, and with those desirable and commendable things in it, which are proper
and likely to render this subjection, the more niturall, willing, and free, is
nothing but what well become both the Author of the Queries, and the Answerer
also. And what the present Query does more then this, the Answerer may with a
much better judgment and conscience, number amongst things which are no^ then
term it, slattery. Therefore,

3. The Answerer had very little cause to demand with an, oh! who has be
witched me? I am able to give a reasonable and sober account unto any man, of
what I have either done, or said, in the Query. This account I have given
already in part, and am ready to account further, when required. Therefore if I
was bewitched, when I conceived and drew up the Query, it was, not Satan, or
the greatness of this world; but God, or the Spirit of soberness and truth,
who bewitched me.

4. The Person, whose hand (as I suppose) I am charged to strengthen, deserves
both from the Answerer, and from the whole household of faith in the land, a
far better style, then that of, Wicked. But the common saying is; Regium est
male audire cum been f^ceris; It is Prince-like to be evil spoken of, when a
man has done well. Or if the term, wicked be specificall, not personal, so
that the meaning of the charge be, that I strengthen the hands ^f the wicked
party of men in the land; my defense is, that the strengthening of the hands
of a good Migistrate to execute judgem^nt and justice in his place, is not to
strengthen the hands of wicked men, at least not in wickedness. Yet (to speak
the truth) my arch-design as well in this, as in all the rest of the Queries,
was not to strengthen the hand of any magistrate, good, or bad, but to
strengthen the hand of the great body of the people in the land to that
subjection under the present Government, which upon good grounds, and next to
u^questionable, I know w^ll be if universally exhibited, at least their
[civill] happiness and peace.

5. (And lastly) Whereas I am charged, to make their heart sad, whom God has
not sadded; my plea is, that certainly God is willing that their heart should
be made sad, who will be sadded with the truth; yea, in as much as he is the
Author not only of the truth, but of all seasonable speakings of the truth, he
may very properly and truly be said to make the heart sad of all such, who a^e
sadded by such speakings of the truth. The heart of the Corinthians was made
sorry, or sad, by that Epistle which* Paul wrote unto them concerning their
incestuous member: butought Paul in this case to be challenged, that he made
the heart of those sad, whom God had not sadded? If either the Answerer, or any
other in his behalf, can fairly show and prove, that any thing asserted, or
(necessarily) supposed, in any of the Queries, is either contrary to the Truth,
or unseasonably delivered, the Author is well content that all that shall die
by the hand of the Demonstration; neither shall he make lamentation over it,
but rather over his own ignorance, or inconsiderateness, in delivering it

Four New QUERJES super-added to the former.
I.
WHether are not the just rights, liberties, and Interest of the people,
better, and more clearly asserted and secured unto them, by the present
Government, and by the published articles and constitutions hereof, then ever
they were formerly? Or is not the truth hereof in all the material points or
parts of Government, as in the choice of their supreme or legislative Authority
(I mean, their Parliaments) from time to time, the absoluteness of this
Authority, being disincumbered and freed from the obstructions
super-intendencie of a negative voice in another, in the choice of the members
of the council of State for the future (and after the conveening of the next
Parliament) and so again, in the Militia (with some other particulars) is not
this truth (I say) that the liberties and interest of the people, are, in all
these particulars, with as much care, wisdom, and saithfulnesse of
contrivance, as readily can be imagined, provided for by the constitutions of
the present Government, demonstrated above all reasonable contradiction in a
discourse lately published, under the title of, A true state of the case of the
Commonwealth?

II.
Whether was there, or is there, any other way, course, or means, so promising
in the eye of humane probability, and discourse, whereby the Army and the
Principal members thereof, who stood, and still stand, most signally and
solemnly engaged by many promises and public declarations, to contribute
their utmost endeavors to settle the Nation in righteousness, freedom, and
peace; might, or yet may, perform their engagements in this kind to the best
advantage, as by reducing the Nation, and Commonwealth thereof, to that form,
or kind, of Government, unto which by the good hand of divine Providence it is
now reduced, considering how un-successfull in respect of any competent
satisfaction given to the Nation, our late Parliaments have been? Or, in case
the late Government by Parliaments only, continuing, the tranquillity, peace,
and safety of the Nation, or the liberties of the people of God in it, should
have miscarried, or deeply suffered thereby, could the Army, or the said
Principal members of it, have given any tolerable account, either to God, or
men, of their oscitancy, neglect or sitting still, considering 1. Under how
many sacred engagements they were to do their uttermost for the prevention of
these evils, and 2. That God had now entrusted them with an opportunity of
great hope for their prevention, as viz. directing them to some such change of
the Government, as that which is now in being? Or in case it should be supposed
that it is not the sense, or judgment, of other men, that the Government now
erected is any whit more promising of such a prevention, then that by
Parliaments only (however our late Parliaments have not prospered in the work)
is it reasonable or meet to desire, that the Army and the chief heads thereof,
who were contrary-minded, should walk by the light of other men, in opposition
to their own?

III.
Whether is it the kind, or form, of the present Government, or any excess, or
extent, of power, or revenue, state-splendor, or the like, conferred upon one
man, at which the dis-satisfied, or the greater part of them, find themselves
so much aggrieved and discontented, as the Person, in whom the supreme place,
or office, in this Government, is vested? Or would they not have been very well
apaid and satisfied, had there been some man according to their own hearts, and
of whom they might have had hopes that he would have fulfilled all their
pleasure, invested with all that dignity, power, and all other State
accommodations, which are now cast upon him, who has the pre-eminence in the
present Government; yea though the terms and constitutions of the Government
had been the same, which now they are?

IIII.
Whether was there the same reason to plead subjection to the power of the late
King, especially when the Parliament had declared themselves in opposition to
him, which there is now to plead subjection to the present power; Considering
1. That the sovereignty, or supremacy of power, was never regularly, or
according to the law of nature, vested in the person of the King, but in the
people, whose lawful agents and trustees, the Parliament were; 2. That the
people, to whom the supremacy of Authority and power (as has been said)
regularly appertains, having in Parliament questioned their chief Steward, or
Servant (the King) for maladministration of his trust and power, and declared
themselves in Arms against him, he (the said King) was not in a plenary or
peaceable possession of that power, which had been committed unto, or vested,
in him; whereas the power vested at present in him, who is the head, or Chief,
in the Government that now is, is fully, peaceably, quietly, and without any
forceible contest or opposition, possessed by him? Or in case it be, or were,
lawful, when and whilst, two adverse powers are st^iving for mastery in a
Nation, to comport with, and strengthen the hand of, that, against the other,
the prevailing of which he truly judges to be most expedient for the public,
does it follow from hence that the refore it is lawful to deny subjection unto
such a power, which God so far countenanceth, and blesses, as not to suffer
any competritresse to rise up with any strength considerrble against it? Or had
it been regular and justifiable, for the power it self of the people in
Parliament, (how much less for any other) either it self to disobey, or to
countenance, or abet disobedience in any others, to the Authority of the said
King, in his lawful command, in case he had walked in the execution of his
trust and power, with that due comportment with the public good, which became
him? Or had the Trustees of the people in Parliament been responding, or
faithful to their trust, had they interrupted, opposed, or dissolved such a
Government, under which the Nation had lived, and was (in all good probability)
likely still to live, in wealth and peace, with the enjoyment of all their just
liberties and freedoms?

ERRATA.
Page 10. l. 8. read Junius. 25. l. 29. r. withal. 29. l. 6. r. palpably. 35.
l. 11. r. superstitions. l. 33. r. reason.
39. l* 8. r. ceasing. l. 21. r. which. l. 29. r. he.
41. l. 3. r. and. l. 12. r. adulter^.
43. l* 13. r. Author. l. 26. r. portraicture.
44. l. 2. r. calculatio^. 47. l. 3. r. business. 53. l. 21. r. this. 54. l.
11. dele, and 55. l* 32. r. may be. 58* l. 31. r. they build, ground their l.
39* r. passible. l. 3. dele from.
61. l. 21. dele that. 64. l. 3. r. prevent.
FINIS.

