The coming of GOD IN MERCY, IN VENGEANCE; Beginning With fire, to Convert, or
Consume, at this so sinful City London: Oh! London, London.

Amos the 3. verses 6, 7, 8. Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the
people not be afraid? Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his
secrets to his servants the Prophets. The Lion has roared, who will not be
afraid? the Lord has spoken, who can but prophecy? (this to you I must or
perish.)

Printed for the Author WALTER GOSTELO, dwelling in Broad-street London. 1658.

To OLIVER CROMWELL Lord PROTECTOR; To this City LONDON; To the People of these
three NATIONS, and CHRISTIAN WORLD, is this matter of so high concernment
Dedicated.
AFter how Miraculous a manner God is Coming in mercy to his, in vengeance to
Evildoers, this Book, made up of truth and good affection (as the Author ought
to be for his Countries Good) will tell you, which being sent as an Herald to
declare the Coming of God. It does not Crave, but Command protection; And
though I may not dedicate it, to any other then to whom God Almighty has
directed the matter of it; Primarily to you of this so sinful City London,
subsequently to all the people of the three Nations and Christian World, yet is
it good manners fairly to entreat of you, Oliver Cromwell Protector, that it
suffer not by any prohibition of yours, in sale or otherwise.

Indeed I do not doubt of that from your Lordship which I beseech from all, its
good acceptance. Especially if you did know or do remember, those two so
Considerable passages, both which not long since fell out at White Hall.

A person well known to your Lordship, E. C. gives to one near you, (but
purposely for your perusal) A paper, of which you were to take Cognizance. That
paper he or they Burnt; Now to let you or them see clearly Gods dislike of that
wicked act, his Fire of displeasure not long after flamed out of the Chimney,
it was near you; its rage frighted some, it was visible to very many: in vision
was it said to the party that gave the Paper, they have burnt thy Paper, but go
forth, and thou shall see their Chimney on Fire: the party did so, and saw it
so on Fire.

At another time, the same party endeavors to set a Paper on the Chapel doors
of White Hall; White Hall still, the matter of that was, (as much of this Book
is) what God would have speedily done, for his injured King, and despised
Church: of all which your self, Chaplains and others under that roof, were to
take special notice, and conform unto. The Chapel Officer would needs hinder
the setting up of that Paper, for some time he did so; in fine he boldly said,
if ever it was set up, he would pull it down. He was then forewarned and
charged not to do so, lest God took vengeance on him; he slighted the counsel,
and when it was set up, not fearing God but men, he pulls it down. The next news
heard and seen of him is, that very right hand of his, so misimployed as to
pull it down, is suddenly bound up, becomes unuseful, and withers, a very few
days after, some 15. or 20. himself dies. These things are true, I can prove
them. My Lord, it is very seasonable here to remind you of what so sadly befall
Mr. Whaley Mayor of Northhampton in the very year of his Majoralty, on Tuesday
Easter next it is but two since, mark it well I beseech you, for these things
are clearly of God, yea clearly so.

That Presbyter Whaley, an Early Complyer with the worst times, most falsely and
shamefully belyes me, he traduceth and Endeavors to suppress the so Miraculous
proceedings of God Almighty afforded in that Town of Northampton, on behalf of
his own prophecy, my unworthy self, and what past the very night of my
enlargement from prison there. After I had wrote to him, and followed him close
to know his grounds or reasons of those his ugly practices, but could never
receive any from him: at last I wrote to his fellow-Iugler, and brother
Presbyter Ball Minister in that Town, Charged him that he should let Whaley
know, if I received not speedily from him in writing, he should from me in
print, yea both of them should; On Goodfriday I finished what I intended to
print against them: The Tuesday follovving God takes the business into his own
hand, Whaley sinks down and dies suddenly in his Clothes. Indeed I was
unalterably resolved not to endure them or any to belie, endeavor to suppress,
or oppose the proceedings of my God, and his Prophecy (for so this is) if I
could help it: and because I could not, God did it for me.

The Manuscript which your Lordship had of mine declaring their bad practices
against Gods so wonderful proceedings in that place of Northampton, because I
could not get Printed, I left it in the University Library of Oxford; My Lord,
it is worthy your Remembrance for ever; I shall one day get most of it Printed,
the world must know what is in it. For Ball his minister he is now become a
Pulpit-defender in Print, (the World has too many such) not long known to be
so; but he sees early and comes round with the first: I have desired him, Ball,
by word of mouth, that his repentance be sincere, early, and public, the
rather because his aberrations were public and with the first. Oh Presbytery,
Presbytery! Thou have not hitherto done Gods Church and this kingdom many good
offices, mend for shame Presbytery.

Reader, I must therefore Print these Precedents of truth, that they may deter
all Presbyters or others, from belying, or impeding, the Revealed Decrees of
Heaven, in favor of Gods King and true Church; which decrees he is pleased now
to have made public, and by all are to be conformed unto.

But why complain I of ill offices done to me or others in these three
Kingdoms, seeing I know very well (yea this Book tells you truly as much) that
to remedy all this and more, God is coming? Whose Almighty fire sent out up on
the Eight of April, is gone before him, Commissioned to begin at this so sinful
City London, Converting or Consuming the Enemies of his King and Church.
Believe it Reader, our appeal is heard in Heaven, and we shall shortly have a
Court on Earth to remedy what is amiss: For God has revealed from between the
Cherubins, where he is said to dwell, That the Restoration of our King is of
God: and then all those lesser devils, waiting upon this Kingdom of darkness
will suddenly become invisible.

To conclude, why should I in a Preface tell thee what I have therefore made so
very short in the book, on purpose, that it should be Read, be Believed, and
practiced by all? all are infinitely concerned to do so; Certainly, happiness
will be had thereby.

Reader, distrust me not, there is a storm and change at hand, a greater, or
any like it since our Saviors time, I firmly and warrantably believe has not
been on Earth: After which will ensue Golden times and days. A Church more
conspicuously glorious then ever: for the defense and Protection of which, God
will afford his Nursing Kings and Queens, as promised of Old, but in his wisdom
reserved for the fittest time.

In Good Earnest I do pray for all men, duty binds me to it; yet can I not but
fear A very General Confusion of the most. This is what I must faithfully let
you all know, and stand to when I have done. So help me O God, as I ever own,
in all times and places, thy Prophecy I formerly printed, and this book I now
publish to the world, being both of thee; Witnessed and sealed unto by me
Walter Gostelo dwelling in Broad-street London, at which Church officiated as
our pastor, The so deservedly beloved Doctor Oldsworth. Men and Brethren,
Divines learned, Good, and of holy life like him, ever taught their Auditors,
to be peaceable sons of the true Church, so is faithfully to serve you of this
City and his Country,

Walter Gostelo.

CIty London, the Protector whom God will ever direct and bless, has now put
the Militia into your own hands purposely, That if you will ruin, your
judgment shall be of your selves. I will likewise now send or put into your
Mayor, Sheriffs, Aldermen, every of your Ministers and Common Council men's
hands one of these Books, for I do tell you truly, Gods Menace and Decree is
gone forth against London for its destruction; continue your Rebellions but a
little longer against God and your King, who are both coming to you, and if you
perish not, cut off my head, as you have done your chief Magistrate and
Ministers, God give you Repentance and Life.

W. G.

THE Unquestionable Restore of OUR KING Charles St. Is Revealed and assured by
God Almighty.

C. R.


His restore is of God.

He has Revealed it, he has Assured it from between the Cherubims, he did it,
where he is known to dwell. God save the King, and Oliver Cromwell Protector.

The Introduction.
SOber men know very well, that amongst us most sort of villainies have been
committed by a Law, God coming as now he does, to give deliverance to his
people, commanding them to lift up their heads, for their Redemption draws
nigh; it remains, what will become of such wicked Lawmakers as ours have been,
in that day, whose sad fate being showed me, and very short also, like their
continuance, Read that first I beseech you, for so I received it, and the
rather read it, for as much as I am to let you see and know clearly, that the
sign by which my self and you are given to understand, when the deliverance and
redemption does draw nigh, is their sudden dissipation, and trouble, yea
perpetual rejection, as to Lawmakers, or Rulers, and that it is now come to
pass in this place where it was showed me.

In this City London, near two years since, particularly upon the eighth of
March 1655. God showed me with others this Vision, which I presently wrote to
the Protector; he that believes it not, may see my Manuscript, left near two
years since in the University Library of Oxford assuring it, there left,
because I could not get it printed. As for the Vision it self thus it was: I
first saw the wicked Governors and mis-Rulers of these people met as in a
Convocation or Parliament House: That wicked Council was no sooner set, but
some of them hastily rose up, and bearded their fellow members, telling them
you were for Presbytery: others upbraid them with lying, cheating, and wicked
practices. They go on to wrangle and discontents, agree not at all, nothing but
Animosities amongst them. Indeed they there behaved themselves just as our
Glorified King prophesied it should come to pass: you that agreed in nothing
more then to make me and this kingdom miserable, shall agree in nothing less
then to make your selves happy; so his Majesty prophesied, and so God will
certainly now fulfill.

In this wicked assembly of Black Saints and Justiciaries, (for I heard not a
man amongst them, condem himself,) though guilty, and stunk at stake (their
looks discovered as much, yet, see I beseech you, even to admiration, how God
brought truth from their own mouths, (they then charged themselves, to be most
culpable) not the people: Oh the ways of God are past finding out! God will
one day set the saddle upon the right jade; when this disorder was at the
highest, in comes a person very hastily as sent of God, Oliver Cromwell is this
person sent of God, and looking boldly upon them spoke thus, Our Lord Jesus
Christ is at hand: presently these Grandees startled, and looking pale as
death, like Cowards and villains, fastened their ghastly eyes and looks upon
that messenger; the messenger reiterates the words, Our Lord Jesus Christ is at
hand; he after added, he is at the very door, I saw him, he comes with
Flagons: when this was spoken and heard, those dirty fellows, and misgovernours
of the people, hastily and confusedly broke up house, stayed not at all,
disappeared immediately, whither they hasted to their own home, or their last
home swallowed them quick, I cannot tell, but this I am most sure of, they were
all made invisible in an instant. Oh wickedness, wickedness in Governors can
not stand in the day of Gods coming, though it be acted by a law of their own;
of which vile nature these men's wickedness was, and doubtless more should have
been had not God so scattered them by his sent messenger Oliver Cromwell; I
told you it was but short, God having done with them because they were Dirt. I
have done with them also.

For a further confirmation of this thing, time, and persons, as Iam alive I
shall declare truth unto you: Upon the first day of January last, being on a
Friday and New Years day, my unworthy self then in retirement, (after I had
passed my most infirm devotions of prayer and meditation that day by the side
of the River Meade in Kent) I was thus wonderfully dealt with.

The Lord carried me in vision to this City London, set me down in the inner
Chambers and places where the people of this City performed their devotion or
sacrifices, and being there I was showed the Close hypocrisies, most irreverent
and damnable irreligious practices of the ungodly people of this City and
Nation, committed in those very places where they pretended to worship God; for
which their great impiety and fornications, I then saw some of them carried
away and thrown into a Bed, but it was a Bed of destruction, for in it was a
pit out of which they never rose nor appeared more, yet was it like a Bed. This
terrible sight made me make haste from amongst them; Going into other Chambers
I saw more, but nothing that pleased me, Earthen vessels, goodly to look on,
Paintedboxes, but nothing in any of them; at which I being much troubled, some
of them persecuted me from place to place, out they drove me into the street;
Looking behind me to see if the Persecutors still followed me, I then saw them
no more, but I did see a man making great haste, coming after me with a
Mete-wand, rod, or rule in his hand, it was about the length of six foot; by
his side came only a harmless little boy, very Beautiful, and in appearance
very innocent. Being then in the streets of this City, I suddenly saw the
people all of them wonderfully affrighted, and being so afraid, they run every
man of them to my left hand, astonished at the suddenness of it; I asked what
frighted the people, and why they run so to the left hand: I was forthwith
answered by the man with the measuring Mete-wand in his hand, or rule, Their
Sacrifices are dirt; or thus, they offer dirt for sacrifices.

In good earnest when I had heard the words I looked up to heaven, and I there
saw such a Cloud of Blackness and Dirt, as could not possibly arise from any
place but Hell, it was a Cloud made up of nothing but Devilish Dirt, and thick
stinking Darkness; which Cloud almost totaly obscured a very great light, that
was in the Heavens above it, so that there appeared no more of that great
light, but as a Quarter Moon. So soon as the Lord had showed, it me perfectly,
he scattered that dirty cloud with a vengeance, it was done immediately, and the
place of it no more seen. What I saw afterward of Beauty and wonder, as well
in this vision as in the former, belongs not to these wicked ones, these were
all to be first scattered and made invisible as well the wicked Oaks chosen for
their Lawmakers or rulers, as the Briars and Thorns (being the people,) which
sent them up, for so they are all termed in the word of God, and they must
perish together. It is impossible in this depraved age of ours to have a good
Parliament, if the people must choose, who are now so generally Bad; and here
is the Reason the Lord gives me, of this dirty Parliaments and this suitable
peoples dissipation and scattering, for a sign and signal watchword, by which
we were to know when our Redemption did draw nigh, and when we were to lift up
our heads, as in the next Section I shall, and am to declare unto you.

And now tell me Reader, was there not such dirty wicked Lawmakers as these in
this last dissolved House? What think you, not to particularize any of that
Rabble, were not the most of them (too many at least) bad from the Beginning,
and did they not so continue all along, did they not divide? which of them
repented himself of his former wickednesses? Find me the man that ever took the
blame to himself; they suddenly divided and fell to wrangling, they would have
us believe, it is you, and you, him and him that committed the wickedness, none
condemned himself; were there not the highest Animosities imaginable amongst
them? I dare say they would have fired, and imbroyled the Kingdom in a New war,
rather then some of that faction, should seem other then a true Saint, or White
Devil, (I still speak of the major part.) I beseech you, what number of them
ever agreed to make themselves or the people happy, by returning to every man,
or but to any man, his own inheritance? They spoke well of the covetous and
deceitful person, whom God abhors; that they did, themselves being so: is it
not high time think you that such Miscreants as these be scattered? Thanks be
to God, who sent Oliver Cromwell hastily in amongst them, as in the vision, to
do so; in great haste he did come in upon them, yes he did so; so in the
vision, so in thefulfil.

Reader, did not Oliver Cromwell come in upon them in haste? did he not then,
or at their sitting down tell them plainly (most sure he did) That our Lord
Jesus Christ was at hand, and now at the very door, and that he saw him coming
with Flagons also? as in the 85. Psalm, Namely to establish peace, to have
mercy and truth meet together, that Righteousness and peace may now kiss each
other, and that glory may dwell in our Land, did he not further say unto them,
that he (our Lord) was coming to break in pieces all powers that were not of
God, and for God, alluding to the legs and feet of Nebuchadnezzars Image,
which being Iron for oppression, and dirt for irreligion, was now to have its
end. Thus was his speech, thus were his words to them, he told them, that both
these prophecies were now fulfilling, he advised them so, and so instructed
them: to this end he did it also, that they might now apply themselves to be
subservient thereunto, here is what he directed unto, also what they should
have done; I told you before what they did, now see this very Prophesies
fulfill; first, it must break in pieces the Powers that are not of God, I am
sure it points out them to be broken (point Blanck) and more also if Principled
like them; they and such as they broken to pieces, in comes that power and rule
of Gods, under which we shall be blessed, and our land happy for ever, as in the
former prophecy, and other part of his speech taken from the 85. Psalm: here is
what he said, here is what he did, broke them to pieces, they are both of God, he
did it in haste also, so in the vision so in the fulfill.

O God, this thy signal sign given me, and then vision showed me, having thus
undeniable, in all Circumsiances had its now fulfill, and being, as I may truly
say, the very watchword, and acting, by which I was to know when our
Redemption should draw nigh, and when we were to lift up our heads, Our heads,
to whom the vision was showed with my self; your heads, your with an Emphasis;
none of theirs, theirs, are to be Broken; the words lift up your heads, were
not spoken, nor heard by me and them, until those wicked ones were all
dissipated and gone. Truly I had been blind and most unfaithful to you, if I
had not thus proceeded for an introduction; I now see clearly the reason why I
could not get this book printed as I intended before Christmas, I penned it
early, as once I did the like, for the Good of the world, and a Parliament then
ready to meet and sit, entitled it Charles St. and Oliver Cromwell united, so I
have already printed, which I will ever stand to, and so will God certainly
fulfill, let things seem to the world never so contrary, for it is of God. But
I could never get that book forth, until those, as these, were turned out of
Doors, because good for nothing. Indeed the work of the Lord, as his secrets,
is chiefly for those that fear him, and such the Lord will certainly now in
merey give us for rulers, for Lawmakers: We have no reason at all to doubt it.
You may well wonder and stand amazed to read what the Lord showed me as to this
last Parliament sitting, on purpose he did it, that I might know the approach of
my signs fulfill: the first of January it is showed me, the 20. they sit,
also, why the Lord would so dissipate and over-turne them, because there
sacrifices were Dirt.

I must give you a short review of the whole, and then I get out of this dirty
subject, in which dirt I am to stick until I make you as clearly sensible as
my self, that God has fulfilled to a tittle, the sign given me for
Assurances, when deliverance to his Church, King, and people, (the Israel of
God) was to be afforded, also when commanded to lift up their heads, redemption
and deliverance being come unto them.

On March the 8. 1655. this very sign and signal watchword is given me. [That
I then declared it to the Protector you have read, and he that doubts of it may
read what I left almost two years ago in the University Library of Oxford.

January the first 1657. on Earth, and in Heaven, is it first showed, then said
unto me, their sacrifices are dirt, that very new Moon, year, and day, points
out their New Moons and dirty sacrifices, both which God abhors.

January the 20. this Dirty house meets, and falls to wrangling immediately, so
in the Vision, so in the fulfill.

With in 15. days after God sweeps away this Dirty house, by his sent
messenger Oliver Cromwell coming to them in haste, so in the vision, so in the
fulfill.

If all these visions prove not themselves to be real Visions of God, and that
we have warrant and good occasion also now to lift up our heads, as the next
section will fully show you, then cut off my head, and reckon me a liar for
ever; I Beg not your favor, but your Repentance. These things I have wrote to
the Protector presently after they were showed me; you have them more exactly
in print, make therefore the best use of it.

C. R.
HEAD and CROWN be lifted up, for deliverance is come to Carolus Rex, also to
his good subjects the Servants of the Ever-living God.
Section the first assures it. Sect. I.
IMmediately after all those miscreants were swept away, my self with
someothers plainly heard sung by most Angelical voices, these words, lift up
your Heads, for your redemption draws nigh: Our Lord Jesus Christ is at hand,
he comes with Flagons; Those Celestial voices continue singing, and reiterate
the words, lift up your heads, still your, with an Emphasis, for your
Redemption draws nigh.

Ravished with the Excellency of the voices and the matter, I turned my head
toward those Heavenly Aires, (being faced about) I then saw many glorious
Angels moving toward us in good order, two by two, they were all clothed in
white, having on them Girdles of Gold, and in some of their hands were Flagons
of silver. The place they so appeared in, Then seems a Church, up the middle of
that Church they come, when advanced to the Table, which was covered with fine
and clean Linen as themselves, they there set down those silver Flagons; that
done, they stand round about the Table, in a most reverent posture and comely
beauty, fit for devotion, on which Table, near those Flagons; on a silver plate
was placed one Mauchet cut and prepared as at our best ordered Communions; this
done, they altogether began and sung these words, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up a
mighty salvation for them. This heard and seen, the vision and sign assuring
deliverance upon their dissipation and rejection, as in the introduction upon
the 8. of March, 1655. ended, the rest of New Years day follows.

After the man with the Mete-rod or rule in his hand had said unto me, their
Sacrifices are dirt, and God has scattered with a Vengeance that dirty
stinking hellish cloud, (gotten into the face of that great light) as in the
Introduction and Vision of last New Years day, forthwith the Lord drew my eye
to look again up into the Heavens, but it was more upon my right hand: I then
perfectly saw a wondrous high hill, upon which high hill was situate a very
thick and high Wall, the wall was made all of diverse Colored stones, richly
shining as painted Glass, the Mortar or Cement which held those several
colored stones together, appeared rich also, as the dust of Gold. At the end
or entrance into that wall, (for it was like the wall of a great City) yet I
saw no house within it; without the wall I did see many houses, but the stood
at good distance from that wall, and all those houses were New, the Foundation
and building was raised some few yards above the ground, being all of perfect
white stone, but not finished; indeed the man with the mete-wand or rule to
measure with, that answered to me, they offer dirt for sacrifice, that man and
innocent boy appeared unto me among those New foundations which were on both
sides of a largestreet. At the end of that Rich wall, there stood a Tree or
Trees, which were full as high, or higher then the Rich wall.

Within the wall, (and just over the place the wall surrounded) I did see a
wonderful Great light, very Glorious it was, and of a Chrystaline Color, for
bigness it appeared ten times as big as the Moon. This light showed me a Lamb,
and diverse other clean Creatures, as sheep and kids. What I saw afterward,
when I had wept and prayed to God that he would be pleased I might understand
the whole Vision, I will not now tell you what that was, the obtaining of it
cost me dear; I am sure I lay so long weeping and praying with a resolution I
would have no denial, until the Lord was pleased to let me fully understand the
Vision, that it is his unparalleld goodness to me I am alive at this time. But
this I will tell you, serve you God, desire and endeavor from the bottom of
your hearts, to live wholly to his Glory, and you may see it also; I pray you
may, nothing is more Worthy to be desired. What think you now, is not this one
good ground more to believe that our Redemption does draw nigh, and that we are
now commanded to lift up our heads? you will say and believe as much presently;
read what follows, for I have done with what was showed me on New Years day as
in the Introduction. The rest I told you concerned not those were scattered,
but the Redeemed of God. As I am a live and a Christian, I continue to set
forth truth unto you; I was at Oxford when the news came to me of the
Protectors dissolving that house of miscreants, he, Oliver Cromwell, was that
very man the Lord sent in in haste upon them, as in the sign and introduction,
now mark and well consider, what immediately succeeds upon their dissolution.

Tuesday night, which was February the 9. just 5. days after this house was
swept, I came home to my own house from Oxford; Being come home, God then
showed me a very great and Glorious people, standing orderly in the Heavens,
they were a people richly shining; in the head of this so Glorious body after a
short time, there comes slowly moving, but in very great state Princelike, the
most Transcendently Glorious person that ever my eyes beheld, he was clothed in
a very Rich Coat or long vest, which Coat or Rich vest was girt about his
Middle with a broad Girdle of Gold, in his hand there was an extraordinary long
and Broad naked sword, which great sword he held upright; this Transcendent
person had such A Head, face and countenance, for beauty, Majesty, power, and
wonder, as I can never express or set forth unto you, the figure of his person
being of a Wonderful height, yet very straight, having no defection in any
part, but Tale beyond compare: this Rich, Glorious and wonderful person stood
so long in the head of that beautiful and shining people, that I had a full
view of him and them to my great contentment. The vision ended, my sinful self
fell a weeping, and praying that God would be pleased to afford me the
understanding of it; Reader, in good earnest, thus it was, and no otherwise:
for clear satisfaction, I was referred unto the twelfth of Daniel, at the
beginning of which chapter, you also, as well as my self, may read and know the
import of that so Great Princes standing up in the head of his people, now to
be delivered, the Israel of God, be they here or throw the world: And thus in
these several ways and times (all agreeing to Gods word, and assured of God) I
am instructed, and sent to assure you, that deliverance is come unto you, Gods,
the Kings, and your Enemies are now to be scattered.

Upon so glorious Visions as these are, declaring the coming of God in Mercy to
the Redemption of his (for that is what I am upon) and that he thus comes with
Flagons also, what can the world expect I should say to all of it? The gift of
Vision and Prophecy is given to one man, the gift of discerning and
interpretation of them and Scriptures to another. (Friends) I have here dealt
with you of this land and our times, as Zachariah, and the Prophet Daniel dealt
with the people of their land and times, Truly told you what I saw, Truly told
you what I heard; wonder not I beseech you, if I cannot tell you what it all
means, Or set you the very time and day for deliverance: I often tremble at the
Visions showed me, and words then spoken to me; I read not some places of holy
Scriptures without amazement, though I do it for the better understanding of
what is showed me in Vision, unto and by which word of God, all prophecy must
come for trial and Conformity, no thing that's Contrary to it can possibly be
true, yet for all This, I may not from them hastily conclude. I beseech you let
this truly spoken by me, keep you, my self and all men from rash speaking, and
determining of things or times, both which to my understanding have Gods
appointment, if not limitation, upon our Repentance, but if we despise his
premonitions, A swifter motion to execute vengeance. Prophecy is prophecy, and
vision is truly showed of the Lord to Zachariah, and Daniel, yet Zachariah
confesses in his fourth Chapter and fifth verse, That he saw, but he knew not
the meaning or import of what was showed him in that vision. Daniel in his 12.
Chapter and 8. verse tells us, he heard, but he understood not what he heard,
(in that his Prophecy, yet both Gods prophesies.)

Tell me, O now tell me, you Worthies of our Church of England, I speak to men
of clean conversation, Wise, studious, and of holy life also, with such I may
not doubt the secret of the Lord is, because they fear him; there are those
that have forsaken all to keep God and a Good conscience, such as those are now
to lift up their heads; for their Redemption draws nigh. I enquire not of,
neither expect resolve from, the unsent and unblest number of Vagabond Bablers,
who like unfaithful bows in the day of Battle have started aside, to the
scandal of the true Church, dishonor of our Nation and the Protestant Religion;
from such villains as those I neither expect or seek for any true
interpretation of the word or vision of God, their sacrifices being Dirt, a
Mystery of iniquity they shall carry on, but no true sense of Scripture, Wisdom
and Counsel is not found with him that must perish.

Worthies sent of God, pray tell me, does not these visions lively express and
warrantably assure us, us I say, though hitherto persecuted and despised, are
not We now to be invested in what was promised of old by our Lord himself, as
in the book of Canticles Chapter the 2. verse the 45. he brought me into his
house of wine, Covered me with his Banner of love, and Comforted me with
Flagons?

In the several Evangelists he likewise assures us, how for ever happily blessed
they shall be, that Eat bread, and drink the fruit of the Vine, when New, with
him in his Fathers kingdom: certainly those very times are now at hand, who can
doubt it, that has trusted in the ever-living God, which has now sent his so
Blessed Angels, as Ministering Spirits to command us, that we lift up the head,
with an Emphasis, your heads, Lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws
nigh: he further comfort us, adding he is at the very door, and that he
comes with Flagons. What think you Worthies, can we wish for more assurance of
happiness, or could I see more and live? All this being true, What manner of
persons ought we to be in all Godliness and holiness of conversation? Here I
could be content to lie down in happiness; but I must go on to let you clearly
see, how God is coming in vengeance to evil doers; that's at hand also, and
comes next to be considered, but for his Church, King and people, them he will
deliver, their Enemies he will convert or confound, Michael that great Prince
and Deliverer of his people is risen and now stands up, having his sword in
his hand, himself being in the head of those he will desiver, therefore King
and people fail not to lift up your heads, Redemption being come to both.

THE Coming of GOD IN VENGEANCE To evil doers.
Sect. II.
AT that time when Michael the great Prince stands up, which is the deliverer
of Gods people, as the foregoing Section assures to that purpose he is now
risen, And I have seen him: The next thing the world is to look for, is, what
they may read in the same verse, of Daniel 12. Chapter, the words are these:
and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there began to be
a nation: upon whom, and in what place, that day of trouble and vengeance will
fall, that's the Considerable Question; to which I reply.

At Bridges in Flanders December 1656. the day Gloomy and darkish, the people
surprised with fear, stood gazing and looking up into the Heavens; hastily they
called to me, saying, Sir, come hither, and behold what we do, of wonder in the
heavens; being placed at more advantage to well observe, but still in that City
Bridges, I then looked up, and plainly saw (at good distance) coming from the
North or North-west, very many small bodies of horse, having on them the best
appointed Riders. Those horse and Riders Came toward the South and South-East;
as they came nearer to me, they seemed to increase, so that very much of the
Hemisphere was suddenly overspread with them; that part of the Heavens they
moved in was all over of a perfect Fire color, since I came into the world, I
never beheld such horse and Riders, for Strength, Courage, and Resolution; they
came fiercely Trotting on, stamping also with their feet; their Hoofes and
Shoes, which I perfectly saw, looked like Flint, or something Harder then the
nether Millstone; they were shod, for the Lord knows what service and
Execution, I do not. Horse and Riders had unparalleld strength in every part,
Their heads all Lift up, not a Man or Horse of them that had any defect, or
apprehension of danger; what speak I of danger? there was nothing could stand
before them, so sure as the Lord lives, they were an Host that shall not fail
to effect whatsoever the Lord of Hosts shall Commission them for, That is, to
Execute his vengeance on evildoers.

Whilst with astonishment I looked upon all this, I prayed, and praying,
besought the Lord that he would be pleased to let me know what all that force
signified, forthwith I heard a very strong voice, coming directly down from
Heaven, before the Horse came up to me, which strong voice spoke these words
only, It is the coming of God, It is the coming of God. I neither saw more nor
heard more, but I shall tell you what I Read more, and it is the word of God,
which suites in all things very well with this vision of Gods, in the second
Chapter of the Prophet Joel you have these words: A day of Gloominess, Clouds,
and thick darkness: A Great and strong people, There has not been ever the
like, the land is as the Garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
wilderness, nothing shall escape them; The appearance of them is as the
appearance of Horses, and as horsemen, so shall they run to be avenged on his
Enemies: this is in Joel the second, in the 11. verse of that Chapter you have
these very words, and the Lord shall utter his voice before his host: so in the
head of the Host was it said unto me, it is the coming of God: the verse
concludes with these words, The day of the Lord is Great, and very terrible,
who can abide it?

For that word which came to Jeremiah the Prophet with command then to him, as
now here to me; That it be proclaimed to the people of his time then ripe, as
now you, for vengeance and destruction; decline to Read it him that dares, I
dare not but observe it to you, Make ready the Horses, let the Horsemen get up.
Come up you horses, and rage you Chariots, for this is the day of the Lord God
of Hosts, and a day of vengeance, in which he will be eased of his adversaries.
To others, there follow these words of Comfort, But fear not then my servant
Jacob, neither be thou afraid O Israel, none shall make you afraid, as you have
it at large, in the 46. Chapter of the Prophet Jeremiah: but what is all this
to Evil doers? Good things profit us not in their being, but in our enjoying
them: That happy Condition is not yours of London, for the very next thing
showed me, and I am to proclaim it also, assures you of this so sinful City
London, That Gods judgments begin at London, therefore look you to it, God is
in earnest with you, and I must not flatter you; Repent or Burn, you and your
City London.

I have a few words to the Church of Rome, which I dare not but observe to them
before I quit this Section. Church of Rome, deceive not your selves, but
warrantably believe, and patiently provide for, your sad share of sufferance in
this coming of God to take vengeance on Evildoers; therefore Church of Rome
Read, and well consider my Reasons, it highly concerns you, for with your
Church all is at stake.

First, these Horses, and Host of the Lords, which came from the North, and
North-west, moved so hastily as if they would be with your Church presently,
having their faces directly set against the South and South-East, and so from
thence, not only Rome, but the proudest part of that Church lies (South and
South East) is not only the Eagles nest, but that Brood also of Vultures, now
to be deplumed, dashed in pieces, and made invisible.

Secondly, not long before this was showed me, I was also showed the Altars of
Rome, and the Priests of Rome, both of them in their Richest adorn and most
suitable dress; at which time their Priests boasted of themselves and Altars,
Proudly saying to me; see, is not this to the Glory of God? In answer to which
words, I presently heard a voice which desended from above, and said, The
Altars of Rome are not fitted for the worship of God. These words heard by her
Priests also, the Priests Cried out, this is Gostelo that has Prophesied and
Printed, Our Church shall fall; Away with him, Away with him: The multitude
derided me, and strove who should be foremost to have me out; the Priests in
their Rich habits, followed and helped to drive me out, when forced out of
their Churches; for out went multitude, my self, Priests and all. I then looked
behind me, and saw the Priests still in their Rich habits; but very strangely
Metamorphosed, for all their heads were then as the heads of Wolves, Foxes,
Dogs, and Swine; which whilst I stood wondering at, immediately in the
twinkling of an Eye all of them were struck down flat to the Ground, on which
they helpless lay Grovelling and bleeding, wounded only on the heads; at which
wounds, and at the snout of their unclean heads, (for they still retained them)
they there and then, on the Ground, Expired and Bled to death; I saw not the
hand that struck them down, nor a man of them that ever rose from the Earth
again.

My third Reason is, in the Prophecy I printed; which Prophecy I give you for
the word of God (agreeable thereunto certainly it is) there it is said in that
Prophecy the Church of Rome shall fall; and put me to death, if ever one word
of that Prophecy go unfulfilled; Flatter not your selves you of the Church of
Rome: to some of your more sober ones, men in Orders also, to such I have
already imparted much that has been showed me of that Churches sad fate: those
sober ones have replied to me, that truly they had reason to expect and fear,
God was coming to punish them and their Church also, but that she should fall,
that could not be admitted; the Court of Rome possibly might fall, nay they
believed, it should fall, but for the Church of Rome, they believed, it was
built upon that Rock and foundation which could not fall; would to God they
were so. The Court of Rome acknowledged (as well it may) to be infected, now
sick, and may fall; certainly the body which already totters can not stand
long: hear the words again you of the Church of Rome, Men in Orders and others,
for clearly there is many of you, that I love well, and there is too many of
you that merit not to be beloved, the very words of the infallible Prophecy
agreeable to the word of God also, are these, The Church of Rome shall fall;
the words heard in the vision are these, The Altars of Rome are not fitted for
the service of God; you have read what her priests suffered, suddenly struck
down to the Ground, wounded on the heads only, as Prophesied of Old, the seed
of the woman shall Break thy head, when a deceitful Serpent, on no part else is
the wound visible, what those heads were all unclean; Wolves, Foxes, Dogs and
Swine. Lastly how they bled at them until they Expired. And now believe me you
of the Church of Rome, if all the men on Earth keep your Church from falling,
put me not only to death, but put me also into your Roman Calender in Great Red
letters, and let my name stand there as a son of Belial and a liar for ever, if
that I have Prophesied of your Church come not to pass, and I fear suddenly
also, I would you did the like: A few years will make it visible to all, that
she is a Church may fall, shall fall, and never rise again: and this not
raising against you, but as a friend I early tell you, and will for ever stand
to; I believe I shall shortly come amongst you, I intend so, and to this very
purpose that you may turn from sin and do your first works, for what you do now
is abominable and God abhors it, and you shall smoke for it. This digression
made I return to my purposed method; To London, and against you of London God
is coming also; but how think you? the manner follows; Repent or Burn, for he
comes, for he comes to judge the Earth, and with righteousness to judge the
world, and the people with his truth, Psalm. the 96. 13.

C. R.
GODS FIRE Sent out on the eight of April shall Convert or Confound the enemies
of God and our King CAROLUS REX.
Sect. III.
ARrived in Flanders, December 1656. I there find the forces his Majesty was
raising, full as glad that action was at hand, as those already sent by his
enemies to keep him from the coast and Port-town: I parted last with Norfolk
and Yarmouth. To be enriched by violence is that too many soldiers on both
sides wait for; such firebrands and delighters in war God there shows me in a
Vision; wherein they deride any man that does but speak to them of peace, they
having made themselves ready for war, would have war, being impatient and
enraged, they began to scuffle, would not be parted: Whilst this was so, and no
persuasions of mine could prevail with them for quiet, a woman suddenly
appears, and steps in between them; at which instant of time I heard these
only words, Wait until the eight of April. These words spoken, the Soldiers
presently desisted, strove no more; the saying I kept to my self, knew not what
it might import.

Christmas ended, I humbly took leave of his Majesty and most Heroic Brothers,
with full resolution to go to the Court of France, to those four persons of
Majesty and Royal birth, so highly concerned in this Prophecy of Gods; but with
this full resolution I parted, that I would be back again by the Eighth of
April, firmly believing that Vision and those words (Wait until the Eighth of
April) was showed and spoken to me for his Majesty's interest: To Flushing I
came; the wind serves not; after long stay some shipping goes off, but by
contrary winds are made to return, several times they did so, my self never
went off with them; God so overruled me, my Port-mantell, in which were my
Papers, once did, at which I was wonderfully troubled, but suddenly I was
quieted, believing in a day or little more, I should be repossessed of my
papers again: the very next morning I met the Master of the vessel returned.
After all these vicissitudes and changes March came on, and truly then I
considered with my self, should I now go for France, I could not return by the
Eighth of April, at which day I durst not be absent from my King; back I went,
I could have no quiet until I did so; when come to Court, I most humbly
besought his Majesty and Princely brother the Duke of York, that in private I
might speak with them, and with them only; being in private I imparted to them
much of Gods so miraculous proceeding with me at Flushing, as to the Kings
interest: wonder upon wonder, you will read them in my last Section; at last
this came from me, the chief occasion of my return was to attend the Eighth of
April, which until then I concealed: of this his Majesty and Heroic Brother
took full notice; but what would fall out upon that Eighth of April, God only
knew, I did not, so I told them, wait I must until then, I durst not depart
till the Eighth of April was past.

At Bridges in the morning of the Eighth of April Stylo novo, about day, I
clearly saw our sovereign Lord the King sitting in Counsel with some six more,
the Duke of York one of the Counsel, and whilst they so sat in Counsel, there
came down from above, into the midst of them, a very lively and wonderful
bright Fire of Coals; Clear it was as the best Charcole fire when all of a
Glow; No smoke about it, no ashes under it: this fire was no more in compass,
then what might well be contained upon such a Censer or plate of the Altar, as
His Majesty and Heroic Brothers offered their Alms upon the Sabbath day
before, being Easter day, on which they all received the Most Blessed Communion
of our Lords Body and Blood, by them received with that due Reverence, holy
fear, and apparent contrition for sin, that upon my very conscience I may most
warrantably say' their prayers and Alms reached Heaven; and to witness
acceptance, their God sends down the very next Sabbath, That his fire in their
behalf, to do what you shall presently read it commissioned for.

This fire so fallen in the midst of them, first moved round, discernable to
all, next it comes to a stand at the feet of our Sovereign Lord the King,
pointing him out to us, to be the servant and for ever beloved of God Almighty:
after it had stood some short time there, I heard these words Commissioning it
to go forth; Begin at London, and go throw all his dominions. Fear all that
read it, and you that hear it, I say fear and Tremble, for they are the words
of the Lord Almighty, and his also is this sent-out fire. So soon as the words
were spoken, Begin at London and go through all his dominions, the fire
immediately removed from between the Kings feet, to a distance some three yards
from him, and there stood, but still kept in a right line before him; there and
then, that fire suddenly became dilated, and forthwith was big as the Sun in
appearance; when so dilated it had then ashes all under it, which ashes were of
the thickness of a pocket- Bible, fire, ashes, and Bible are made up of the
word and power of God, who so contems his word, his fire makes ashes of them;
contemn God and the King, and you perish together.

Certainly on purpose is it thus showed me with ashes under it, that I may let
you all see and know its readiness to Execute Gods Command, first upon you of
London, Begin at London, then his three Kingdoms and Christian world: Men and
Brethren, either suffer your Corruptions and Rebellions of all sorts of which
you are Horridly Guilty against God and his King Charles Stuart, (your
Sacrifices are Dirt, your hypocrisies are the Greatest, your Rebellions have no
compare) suffer all these things and whatever more to be burnt up and consumed
in you by his sent-out fire of mercy; which if you shall madly neglect to do,
deceive not your selves, it shall suddenly do its other work commissioned, for
to make ashes of you and all those mountains of opposition that men or Devils,
have, can, or dare, raise up to obstruct the way and rule of Gods Vicegerent,
Charles Stuart, your only lawful King and Sovereign.

God is irritated, and you have done it, look to your selves, when the Almighty
kindles and sends forth a fire as here he does, read I beseech you to what
purpose he does it; The Prophet Amos assures evil doers, no less then six
several times in his first Chapters, which are but very short, yet most
admirable full to this very purpose, there he says, That the Lord will send a
fire, that the Lord will Commission a fire, That the Lord will kindle a fire.
And to what purpose I beseech you is all this? even as here, it shall devour,
it shall burn up, it shall consume, if not sin, then sinful persons: Do you ask
me what it shall do? I answer, you and all for I fear no man; do? what shall it
not do, when commissiond and sent out by God as this is? what shall it do? why,
it shall burn up his enemies on every side, if they repent not; Ps. the 97. 3
verse, There shall go a fire before him, and Burn up his Enemies round about:
The Army of Horses went before, this fire comes next after, that nothing may
escape.

I dare not yet leave this Commissioned fire of the Lords, sent out upon this
particular day the Eighth of April; what I have now to say in this so
wonderful proceed of God Almighty, is to you Oliver Cromwell, Protector of
these three Kingdoms (pro Tempore) Sir, well look about you; and best bethink
your self, and know Sir, That for more then three months it was my continual
meditation, and amaze to think why it was dictated, Wait until the Eighth of
April; why to that day, I could never give his Majesty and Heroic Brother any
clear or certain reason for it, but having upon that day seen the vision, and
then heard the words of Commission to the Almighties fire in our Kings behalf,
I can now give His Majesty, his Brother, you and all such a certain and true
reason for it, as will astonish the world; there is in it Wonder upon Wonder,
it looks like the Children of Israel being brought out of Egypt upon the very
day, both the Lords own doings: O that I were with you, your Lordship should
find, I would speak to you as sent of God, not flatteringly; Examine your self,
Sir, did not the Lord some two years since, Easter next it will be so, I again
say, did he not then in mercy send to you Oliver Cromwell the wife of Thomas
Chalener, a freeholder dwelling on the Edge of Sussex? whose Commission was to
this very purpose:

First, to ask you whether or no the Vineyard you yet gathered the fruit of,
was yours or Gods; if it was yours, then to say so; if Gods, then your duty
forthwith to give the fruit of it to his Steward, Charles Stuart, for God had
given it unto him by inheritance; if you refused forthwith to submit, or
doubted his right of inheritance, she tells you that God had vouchsafed for the
decision of his right three ways; Choose you either of them: God would appear
for him, whose unquestionable right it was, for in the Court and justice of
Heaven, the Father having paid the debt, the Son was to have the inheritance.

Her first offer to you is, to cast Lots, and by lot you should see on whom the
Lord would resolve it: to that you wisely considered, and said, what if the lot
should go against me? she truly told you it would: your answer was, that way of
lot you would decline.

Her second offer was, would you fight personally with Charles Stuart, and so
decide it? to that, as I have heard, you gave no answer; indeed God forbid that
any such damnable thought or word, should ever be found in your heart or mouth:
An impiety of that ugly nature, I print to the whole world will never be found
in you, as ill as men generally speak of you: who was most Culpable before, God
knows, I do not.

The persons of Kings are sacred, Appointed of God, and anointed by his
Prophets, wise and honest men know it well, their persons are rarely to be
exposed; Crowns, not to be worn by any but whom the Lord sets apart; with us
it must be so, the law of God and our Land best directs in that particular; and
I firmly believe, That as you said nothing to that second offer of the Lords
(for they are all his offers, not hers) so upon that very consideration, let
the world say what they will, you have hitherto declined, and ever will do, to
put on his Crown: they were fools that said, you were afraid of the Army when
it was offered you; no no, you were afraid of God, and your King; do well and be
so Ever: I commend your wisdom in that you put that Dirty assembly upon trial
what they would do with the Crown, whereby you might clearly see and discover
the Enemies of God and the King, also the haters of Monarchy; how could you a
served your King better? you have outwitted all those Arrant Good subjects.
The Lord showed me before their sitting, and told me when they were to sit,
their sacrifices were Dirt, you had it before, those were the very Men, that
was the Dirty Parliament; his Crown, I say and print to the world, you will not
touch it, nor meddle with it upon any ill account, indeed upon no account,
except it be to settle it upon the right head. I have heard of a King who being
at Sea, and his Crown on his head, by some unhappy accident his Crown fell into
the Sea; a most Excellent swimmer dives after it, recovers it, brings it above
water; which being too proud of, he staid there and put it on his own head; at
last the Crown came to the right hand and owner, the King Commands that the man
should be Royally rewarded for his swimming so well, and recovering the Crown,
but withal strictly charged he should be forthwith Hanged, for putting the
Crown upon his own head. I speak not this to deter you, you know very well that
the Crown was none of those upright just dealing men's to give, neither were you
to take it, it is Gods only to give, and our lawful declared Kings Charles
Stuarts only to receive; God and our Laws, have both pointed him out, during
life, and prohibited all others to be Capable of it. God save the King, Even
Ours Charles Stuart, yea God will save him for Ever.

Her third offer was, (you having been so well advised as to refuse the two
former) Whether or no you would set apart persons on both sides, and let them
persons so presented fight for the right of inheritance and future receipt of
the profits belonging thereunto; if you would so fight, that you then declared
when you would fight: (here was a most merciful proceeding of the Lords.)
David's three offers for choice were of another nature; To this last also you
decline to answer. I am Glad to see now the power is in your own hand, that you
are not for imbroyling the Kingdoms in a new war: Upon that very consideration
it may fare much better with you, then it has with those that set you to work;
God assures us in his word (in this Prophecy of mine also) that he will scatter
the men which delight in war; and I praise his name for it, he has done very
much by your hand and wisdom, to avoid the shedding of any more Innocent Blood.
She tells you, she is not to quit you, until you do answer to this last offer,
following and importuning you for it. In fine, after some short demurre, These
very words, or words to this purpose come from you; If fighting could not be
avoided, and it must be so, then be it, upon Monday come twelvemoneth: other
answer until then she might not expect nor stay for, but be gone: To all
which, as her self has since told me, She then replied, God certainly would
fight or appear in the behalf of his and our King Charles Stuart, before that
time, so sure as the Lord is in Heaven; there was Prophecy in these, her last
words, and she knew it not.

My Lord, and all that read this, Now observe very well and see what God does.

The Monday come twelvemoneth you set for fighting or further answer, was with
us of this Nation April the 6. 1657. and the very next day after Low-Sunday
last; Where God shows me this Vision, at Bridges in Flanders, Low-Sunday last
fell out to be upon the Eight of April 1657. just one day before that Monday
come twelvemoneth. Oh all that read! see here, how miraculously does this make
good what she said and Prophesied, but knew not of, just as of old, to the
children of Israel, whom the Lord wrought for, and by his mighty hand brought
out of Egyptian Bondage, the very same day as promised, is not this our Eighth
of April? so likewise, God lets it alone until the very last day before that
set Monday. Then he does it, the very next day before, none betwixt, and on
that very day he does it; as I foretold his Majesty it should be done on the
eighth of April. Who sees not now clearly, we were all overruled of God, even
you Oliver Cromwell also in your replies? For my unworthy self, in good earnest
I profess unto you, I could never tell the King what he might expect on that
day; I deal clearly with you, I did in a very great measure expect, that some
sudden judgment from Heaven would that day visibly have fallen in England upon
incorrigible sinners; but see, and for ever praised be Gods holy name, it is
the clean contrary for the present. This fire from Heaven must first burn up
our corruptions, and make many of us true servants of God and our King Charles
Stuart, in whose behalf it is sent out. This is that I am to let you all know,
and came hither for, I warrantably tell you, neither Men nor Devils shall be of
power long to keep out Gods Anointed and our lawful King Charles Stuart: God
will not longer be mocked, undeniably thus it is, none shall prosper that
opposes him or his King; he that but pulled down her Paper from the Chapel
door, his arm withers; God indeed suffers him to live some 15. days after,
but it is to carry about with him a withered Arm, that the judgments of God
may appear the more public, and sure to come upon evil doers, affording yet
more time for him and us to repent, and amend for shame. In the Epistle you
have read when Whaley of Northampton Belies, Traduceth, (and I fear) endeavors
much more, to suppress Gods so miraculous proceedings in that Town, on my
behalf Prophecy and Book, he drops down and dies in his clothes immediately
without any more a do. The Preface to the Reader tells you as much, he that
fears man more then God, and to lose an estate on Earth more then Heaven,
Certainly his impieties are of the worst nature and illest consequence: God
would convert you, and you abuse his mercies, despise and persecute his sent
Messengers; Oh, mercy abused, leaves room for judgment, warning not taken is a
certain presage of destruction; if often we receive pardon, as you have done,
to expect it longer is desperate.

Look back a little and well consider, what this fire of mercy has done
amongst us, and the Kings Enemies, since sent out by God on his Majesty's
behalf, being but the Eighth of April last; did it not before or upon the
fifteenth day of that very month of April, defeat and bring to naught, that so
bloody and damnable design, of the Annabaptist fifth Monarchy men, and
Levellers, all sworn Enemies to Monarchy, all mischievous brethren? in that
intended Rebellion did it not do its work also at London, as Commissioned,
Begin at London, after go through all his dominions? (So that visibly you shall
know it) in stead of setting up their standard, and Arming of thousands, which
they were provided of, and for, together with the spreading of their seditious
Pamphlets for a new Rebellion, which the better to dispose others to join with
them, they had well provided by specious pretenses, and sharing of other men's
estates, not willing that any should be poor amongst those only Saints, which
as they said and printed, were undonbredly the just ones that should now rule
the world, us of this part of it, at the least; so that if Gods sent-out fire
on the Eighth of April had not prevented it, These Saints, Martin Webb^rs, or
John of Leydens, all of them (call them what you will, are the most implacable
haters of all Kings and Monarchs in the whole world) had suddenly or in a
short time molded and Gathered an Army of thirty or forty thousand, whose
business certainly was to have embroiled this kingdom in a new and most
dangerous war; the principles of those men, with the now poverty of the most
men, would a made mad work, had not this fire of Gods burnt up, and prevented
the confusions.

As I am a Christian, God showed me in a vision that whole Rebellion; Their
contrivances, their actings, and their ruin; he showed it me in Flanders, the
wednesday before Easter 1657. On Goodfriday I told the King, after that I wrote
it, and set my hand and seal unto it, that it was a true vision of Gods, Given
by the Lord, for a sign that it should all so and so Come to pass by that day
month, and this God did, to satisfy some that defired a sign of God, to the
end belief might be created in the hearts of many that doubted. Nay I was so
empowered of God, that after I had wrote it and sealed unto it, I laid it upon
the Communion Table, and there received the Communion upon it, That this was
Gods vision, and he would fulfill it that day month, when as I am alive, I knew
nothing of it, but what the Lord showed me of vision, from thence I wrote to
the Protector here, that he should fear nothing, for God would disappoint the
designs of wicked men who were working mischief, and that he would do it
before the twentieth of April. Indeed I told the King the very day he would do
it on, that wednesday month on which it was showed me; for so was it said unto
me, after the vision ended, this day month this vision shall have its fulfill;
Eight days before that day month came, was it said unto me by vision also,
what shall be done that day is not of man, but that God may be Glorified, God,
my King, and His two Princely Brothers, are my witness, I told them of it long
before; and all this I now see is Gods working fire, which on my Kings behalf,
shall Convert, defeat, or Consume his Enemies. This is that stone cut out
without hands which shall now do that Great work of the Lords, Break in pieces
the powers that are not of God, Prophesied of old by Daniel, but now
fulfilling: and thus by the power of God, these men's Arms, Ammunition,
standard, books, design and persons, came all by that day month, (nay your own
books tell you in print, that very morning, they came all) into and under the
Protectors hand and power. Come I say he shall do the work of God and his King,
he shall subdue the enemies of Monarchy, yea his Kings enemies he shall subdue,
root out, and make them incapable to offend or hurt; and this he shall do,
because his heart does or shall fear God and the King: And this I will ever
stand to, this I have related unto you was the initiatory part and fulfill of
that Great vision, but the latter, and completory part of it is and will be the
wonder of the world; bur I must yet conceal that part of it from the
nonconcerned; a few shall know it, and but a few.

For a second work of this Fire sent forth in the behalf of our King, in May,
the very next month after, six thousand men in arms are sent for France, a
short time after them four thousand more, in all ten thousand men; pray tell
me, are not these men, being so great a number, Converted or Consumed? how many
of them now live the Kings Enemies? Add to these, no small number sent, others
blown back again from the cost of Swedeland, to let us see God is not pleased
with these warriors of ours, if Gods and the Kings Enemies. I have heard some
of them say, they repent themselves of their former disservices against the
King: many of them dead also; to-say nothing of the miscarriage by sea, wherein
perished Colonel Reynolds, with others, Captains and Officers.

As for that blow at the Hermitage, and sudden burst by Gunpowder, was it not
given you and me, as a warning-piece to look about us? it fell out so soon as
ever I came over to Print unto you, that God had sent out his Fire in behalf of
our King, to Convert or Consume: in good earnest I looked upon that Blow,
though a judgment, yet a mercy, a few men killed, many houses much defaced; I
viewed it well, and in sober judgment with neighbors and inhabitants there
abouts; we allowed fifteen hundred houses to be torn and damaged by it: All
this is showed me, and you, what your City should be, if you repent not, an
heap of Rubbish and Chaos of Confusion. For that so general sickness, which
went almost through the whole kingdom the last summer, taking away very many,
Truly it was no other to my understanding, then the merciful shaking of Gods
Rod over the whole land for amendment, for a Menace if they amended not; and
look to it that you do Amend, or assure your selves sudden Death, Plagus,
Sword, Fire, Violence, what not, shall in a very short time burst in upon you,
to devour, to burn up, to consume, and to lay waste. And this brings me to the
now sad fate of this so sinful City London.

Oh! London, London, Read and well consider it, its judgment with a witness,
nay many witnesses agree in this thy sad fate: Thy Sacrificers, and Sacrifices
are both Dirt, The first Generally, Canting dirty fellows, the lowest and worst
of the people, (neither Scholars nor Honest men) the latter altogether the
abominations and horrid practices of this most sinful world. Thy Dirty
Parliament, Gods sent out Fire, did this very month scatter and bring to
nothing; are not all these a very great number of mercies and warnings for one
year? London, go on still in thy presumptuous wickednesses, Put the evil day
far from thee, and Repent not, do so London, but if Fire make not ashes of thy
City, and thy bones also, Conclude me a liar for ever; stand out London against
God and thy King but a little longer, and then it will be high time for me to
have done with that Rebellions City and People, whose sins of all sorts
unrepented of, have made them cease to be a City or a People. But I know you
deride me; therefore read on.

Oh London, London, sinful as Sodom and Gomorrah, the Decree is gone out Repent
or Burn, as Sodom, as Gomorrah.
Sect. IV.
AT Bridges in Flanders, upon Whitson Monday last, the morning of that day
bright and clear, I saw my self placed on the North-fide of this so sinful City
London, the people of this City then appeared before me very fine, very
numerous, Bargaining also, and full of jollity, every man putting the evil day
far from him, deriding to the purpose my self or any that durst tell them they
should see Change or alteration: when all this jollity, security, and trade was
at the highest, on a sudden the day over-cast, and became dark, that occasioned
us to look up into the Heavens; looking up, I saw over the East part of this
City London, in the Air, many strange figures of furious Satyrs, as
Executioners of Gods Wrath and Vengeance; they had all shapes like Devils, not
like men. At this Horrible sight, the people suddenly looked Pale and Trembled;
The day, that grew darker, and withal in an instant Soultry hot. Looking up
again, the whole City then appeared to be surrounded with those furious Satyrs
and Devils, so was it then surrounded by those Executioners of Gods Wrath and
Vengeance, that there was no place left for escape, or to get out at. This sad
and ugly appearance so possessed the People with fear and amazement, that they
stood Trembling, and bereft of all understanding, even as those that expected
sudden destruction: when this was so, and the darkness become greater, I looked
again upon the City, and then I saw Lights shining in most parts of it, which
Lights clearly discovered to me the Ruinous condition of the Cathedral Church
dedicated to Saint Paul; these lights were placed to so wonderful advantage,
That they laid open to me, Close Corners, Warehouses, Shops, dark places,
places of Sacrilege, Theft, Murder, damnable uncleanness, Hypocrisies as
deep as Hell; indeed I cannot express all I saw, but so much was showed me,
that my heart smote me, and put me thus to reason.

O Lord, thought I, What art thou now searching this City London, as once thou
did Jerusalem with Candels? must this so sad day be a day of Wrath,
destruction, and desolation? shall this place now be devoured and Consumed by
the fire of thy jealousy? While I thus sadly contemplated, there suddenly
appeared, standing by me on my right hand, a very great number of Black and
White Ensigns, which Ensigns had in every of them, Ten times as much Black as
White. Here and there a Pearl or Diamond of White, as in the Flag: but a very
few that shall find deliverance, his Jewels shall, in that day of Vengeance.
The place these Flags so appeared in, was the very place your Ensigns of
Rebellion were held up in, against your King, Law, and good Conscience, when
you usurped the Militia from his Majesty's hand, The North-side of this City
London, near the Winde-Mills, (which fitly resembles your empty turning pates)
there were so many of these mourning Ensigns, that every Street, Alley, and
close Corner of iniquity was provided for, whilst with admiration I looked upon
them, first as being so vast a number, next as being all Black and White, and
my Eye fastened on them, suddenly all of them were raised up from the Ground,
to such a height were they raised, that they might go over the highest Wall or
Bulwark, observe with me if the Devil be gotten as high as Heaven, seeming an
Angel of Light also, yet there Gods hand reaches him, and whirles him thence,
I saw not any hand of Man raising those Ensigns, no man's hand touched any one
of them; being raised they moved all of them toward this City London, and just
as they moved, I also was taken up from the ground, but my face was then turned
toward the North (from the City) still I saw and beheld the Flags moving
toward the City, and those Ensigns passing on by me they went the nearest
way, at which time as they moved, I heard these words and no more, Now the King
marches: When the words were spoken, Now the King marches, Immediately, I
also by that power which took me up from the ground, was in that very instant
of time carried away with my face from the City, I neither heard more, nor saw
more, what so sadly and in an instant followed me, is most Tragical and full of
Lamentation, as to this so sinful City London. There presently overtook me such
a Stink, yea such a damnable stink, of Fire and Brimstone, that truly I thought
it would have choked me, certainly the stink of Hell can not exceed it; for my
own part I was not suffered then to pity you, nor once to look behind me. What
think you now, have not your sins exceeded those of Sodom? I would to God your
non-repentance, together with your certain punishment, might not answer theirs
also; But I have done with you.

This seen and heard, I could not be quiet until I privately imparted all to
his Majesty and both his Heroic Brothers, Indeed whilst I weeping imparted it
to my pious King, I was forced to beseech him, not to mournimmoderately for
them, to forgive them I told him it was his duty, and to pray for their souls,
but certainly God would be glorified on them, whatsoever became of their Bodies
or Estates, and that sink of wickedness, Brothell City of all sin and
Rebellion, now ripe for Judgment. That done, I took leave of them, and hasted
hither, whither I am come on purpose to let you of this so sinful City London,
know these sad things, that if possible, you might Repent, Live, and find
Mercy.

It is very true, I saw no hand of man in the whole vision, nor do I think
other of those only words heard, Now the King marches, but that the workings
against this City London, as well as the words, will be the workings of the
Almighty King of Kings, he it is, The Lord of Hosts, that will so powerfully
fulfill in the behalf of our King Charles Stuart. Alas our good King is not
rightly known to you, nor owned of you, but God owns him, and that you shall
suddenly know and find, he is misrepresented to you, and you are pleased with
it, you are wilfully blind, and how should you know him? you continue to injure
him daily, beyond all compare, you traduce him still, as you did of old his
glorified Father, too many of you would willingly rid the world of him, as you
did of Charles the first; and to what purpose is all this mischief and villainy?
only. That you might the better enjoy his inheritance, with those also which
you have stolen from the Church and others; In this City London all this
villainy, with the Lord knows what more, has been committed by a Law and Laws
of your own making. Yet good* King for all this he mourns for you, he daily
prays for you, and on my Conscience he does it from the very bottom of his
heart, Praying for you in the Lords own words, That God would forgive him his
Trespasses, as he forgives those that have trespassed against (his Father and
him) he sees clearly judgment is hasting to you, and sorrows for it, you
continue blind, and will not so much as once see it moving toward you, by
your non-repentance it appears so. Oh take your King for a better pattern.

His Majesty's charity, and sweetness of soul, in imitation of the highest
example and best of patterns, his ever blessed Savior, and lately Glorified
Father, according to both their precepts, has begot in him our King, such a
well grounded confidence, in the unchangeable favor of God Almighty toward
him, and to his just cause, notwithstanding, all those late inundations of
Evil, and other improbabilities of his Restore, That in good earnest, when none
present with his Majesty but my most unworthy self, He has been pleased
cheerfully to tell me, several times, even to me has his Majesty said it, That
he doubts not at all, but firmly believes, The Lord will Restore him to his*
Right of inheritance; indeed he needs not doubt of his Restore, nor any thing
else that's best for him, God having given him a heart to refer all things,
whether in matter of Restore, or Revenge, Time or manner, to his merciful
Father and Omnipotent God, most wisely considering that to God only it belongs
to take Vengeance, to us not at all. As for you of this City and three Nations,
Were your Repentance what it should be, God would assure you of forgiveness in
Heaven and Earth also, but Hypocrites cannot trust him, they have, So Irritated
So dissembled with; your Sacrifices are Dirt, and your selves are not other.

C. R.
His restore is of God. UNQUESTIONABLY SO, The Lord has Revealed and Assured
it, from between the Cherubims, where he is known to dwell.
Sect. V.
SAint Peter writing to the men of his generation concerning the coming of God,
forewarnes them of scoffers and deriders, letting them know they should meet
with such in the last and worst days, Saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? surely such as those, we have amongst us now, who do not only Deride
what I have already said as concerning the now coming of God, to take Vengeance
on Evil doers, but are as ready, if not more ready, to scoff and deride at the
Restore of our King, Seeing things continue as they were, Laws and Militia in
their possession still; No God yet appears coming to avenge, no King as yet in
any likely way of Restore, be it so, this startles me not, it may them; Gods
unexpected coming brings to such mockers and deriders unavoidable judgment.

At Flushing February last, God shows me such miscreants as those, mockers,
deriders, and persecutors, met and Congregated in a Church, come thither to
hear if any thing would be said in defense of him they had seemingly killed,
which man had printed the Restore of the King, to which they were declared
Enemies, as well as to him they had long since murdered, this Rabble of Evil
doers, being come into the Church, the Church suddenly became much darker then
formerly, by and by, in the upper part of that Church, which we call the
Chancel, there shines forth a most glorious light, the color perfect Aurora,
or fire color like the Sun when he rises most gloriously; This light terrible
to behold, shows me all the upper parts of the Battlements, and Pillars in the
Chancell, full beset with Cherubims, placed all of them just one against the
other face to face, but such was the transcendent Beauty of their faces, heads,
and wings, that my eyes never beheld the like: this light also showed me those
mockers and deriders of the Kings restore, standing afar off toward the lower
end of the Church, my self with great admiration looking upon what then
appeared, and my eyes fastened upon the Cherubims, suddenly there glides in a
light wonderfully transcending the former; indeed that last light was so very
glorious, and withal so beautiful piercing also, that I have often thought and
said, a man could hardly look upon such a Visio. twice and live: whilst this so
miraculous light appeared, all the Cherubims, which still kept their places and
postures of face to face, then softly moved, and Reverently bowed their so
glorious heads, at the same time also they slowly shook and hovered their
Seraphical and snow-white wings, heads and wings were fuller of beauty then I
can express.

Oh the order of their worship, whilst that unexpressible light continued
there, it was Heaven, so sure as I live it was The Vision of God, Gods Vision it
was, that is undeniable, the words I then heard were only these (it was of
God:) all which those mockers and deriders of the Kings restore no sooner saw
but they turned about, and immediately hasted out: Here is a Conviction of
mockers, haters, and deriders of our Kings Restore, (astonished all of them)
God here appeared for his and our King, as once he did on Mount Sinai, at the
Promulgation of the Law, when he would have the incredulous and Rebellious
Israelites know it was his, and obey it also, Then (on the Mount) the appearance
of the Lord was in the eyes of the children of Israel as Flaming Fire: I now
cease to wonder any more, that your brother Rebels the Jews desired Moses
only to go up and near, for they could not approach the place, nor twice see
without danger of Life; for those Rebels as bold as they were at first, yet
when it came to this Vision, God made you stand afar off, you were not only
ashamed, but then afraid, yea sore afraid also, your haste to be gone shows it,
for not a man of you durst look behind him, or stay so long as I did; it will
shortly be all or many of your portions, hastily to run away, or hide your
selves: be gone, be gone, all you mockers, and deriders of the Kings restore,
for God has set you packing, and rid me of you.

Now come near and rejoice ye blessed of the Lord, lovers of God and your King,
and be for ever comforted; first observe with me, Where does God appear in
behalf of your King? he appears as he did of old in the Holy of Holies, now
with us a Chancell: Next, why there? there his Mercy-seat, our Communion Table
stands. Thirdly, in view of whom? he that must declare it, and will ever stand
to it, neither run away, nor hide himself, his most unworthy yet sent Messenger
Walter Gostelo. What other witnesses? all the Cherubims: Lastly, how know you
this to be an appearance and Vision of Gods, and that he will fulfill it?
because it is showed me between the Cherubims, and he has spoken it that
cannot lie, whose dwelling is between the Cherubims. From whence his Prophets
formerly received, as here, the so lively Visions and Oracles of the Lord, in
the behalf of his King, Church and People; In Exodus the 25. verse the 22. it
is there said, From between the Cherubims I will declare my self unto thee,
yea, I will there tell thee all things which I give thee in command unto the
children of Israel.

In good earnest some Eight or Ten days after when I was at Middlebourough,
and came to some better sight (for my eyes were much impaired) I there read
those very words in Exodus, and if there be any truth in me, then considering
again the Vision it self how it was showed me, in what place, and before what
witnesses, (the Cherubims) suddenly an overjoy took me, that I hardly knew
where I was, or what to do. Therefore Reader expect not that I should say more
of this and live.

Men, Women, and Children, of the Christian World, if God restore not our King
Charles Stuart, and make him not the greatest in the whole world, Then let my
name for ever perish off the Earth. Now Men and Devils do your worst, Gods
Viceroy, His Beloved Standard Bearer on earth, our King, Charles Stuart comes,
he comes to reign, I see him coming, and God comes with him, of whom his
restore and strength is: Make your forces Ten Millions, and take Twenty
millions more into your assistance, God Converts, Scatters, or Confounds them
all; I have for this time done with you: God prosper it to you.

Finished upon Good Friday. 1658.
CIty London, Therefore have I made all possible haste to publish this, That
Repentance might come early into your hearts, and this Book at a very cheap
rate into all your hands. To your Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, every of
your Ministers, and Common Council men will I give one, to your Militia, to
the Officers of the Army also will I give them, that you may return to your
duty, Repent and Live.

I must yet Print what God has showed me, referring to the Jews, who shall now
know the Lord, receive mercy, and go into their own land.

God save their and our King
The End.

