PHILADELPHIA: OR, XL. QUERIES Peaceably and inoffensively propounded For the
Discovery of Truth in this Question, or Case of Conscience; Whether Persons
Baptized (as themselves call Baptism) after a profession of Faith, may, or may
not, lawfully, and with a good Conscience, hold Communion with such Churches,
who judge themselves truly Baptized, though in Infancy, and before such a
Profession?

Together with some few brief Touches about Infant, and after-Baptism.

By J. G. a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius. -- And I
baptized also the boushold of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized
any other. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. 1 Cor.
1. 14, 16, 17.

For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 4. 26. For
in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but Faith which works by love. Gal. 5. 6. Circumcision is nothing, nor
uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the Commandments of God. 1 Cor.
7. 19. Deus nobis imperavit congregationem: sibi servavit separationem. August.
in Mat. 13. 47. Infantibus minime negandus Baptismus, quos Deus adoptat, and
filii sui sanguine abluit. Calvin. Harm. p. 253. London, Printed by J. M. for
Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at their Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1653.

QUERIES ABOUT Lawfulness of Communion, with Churches deemed unbaptized; As
also about Infant and after-Baptism.
I.
WHether is there any Precept, or Example in the Gosp^l, of any person, how
duly soever baptized, who disclaimed Christian Communion, either in Church
fellowship, or in any the Ordinances of the Gospel, with those, whom he judged
true Believers, upon an account only of their not having been baptized,
especially after such a manner, as he judged necessary for them to have been?
Or in case there be neither precept, nor example found in the Scriptures to
warrant such a practice, upon what ground are the Consciences of such men, who
practice it, satisfied or emboldened, in their way? Or if it be replied, that
there were no Believers in the Apostles days, who were not baptized, and that
truly, and consequently, that there was no occasion of scrupuling communion
with any Believer in these days; 1. How can this ever be proved, (viz. that
there were no Believers unbaptized in the Apostles days,) the contrary being
apparent (as may be touched hereafter?) 2. Be it granted, that there were no
Believers unbaptized, or unduly baptized, in the Apostles days, upon what
ground notwithstanding can the practice now queried, be justified, or
maintained, unless the Practisers certainly know, and can satisfy themselves,
that in case there had been such Believers in these times (I mean, who had been
un-baptized, or unduly baptized) those duly Baptized would have declined such
communion with them, as that specified; especially considering that positive
actions (such is a declining, or withdrawing from, communion with the Saints in
Church Fellowship) cannot be justified upon negative grounds, at least not
further then in point of mere lawfulness, or indifferency, no nor thus far, in
case of scandal; which is the case of those, who withdraw from Church Communion
to the offense, both of that Church from which they withdraw, and of many
others?

II.
Whether can it be proved from the Scriptures, or by any Argument, like, or
meet, to satisfy the Conscience of any tender and considering Christian, that
the Apostles or other Christians in their days, would have declined
Church Communion with, or denied Church Communion unto, such persons, whom they
judged true Believers in Christ, and Partakers of like precious Faith with
themselves, only because they had not been Baptized or dipped in water, after a
profession of their believing; especially in case they had been baptized, and
solemnly consecrated by washing with water, unto the service of Jesus Christ
before, considering that the Apostle Paul expressly says, that in Jesus Christ
[i. e. under the Gospel, or profession of Christ in the world] neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, BUT FAITH which works by
love Gal* 5. 6.
: And again; That Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of the Commandments of God 1 Cor. 7. 19.
? meaning, that under the Gospel, and profession thereof, neither did the
observation of any external Rite or Ceremony [Circumcision, by a synecdoche
speciei, being put for all kind of external Rites, or Ceremonies] avail or
contribute any thing toward the commending of any person unto God; nor yet the
want of any such observation, discommend any man unto God, or prejudice his
acceptance with him: but that which was all in all unto men, and which availed
any thing, in, and under the Gospel, that which being sound in men, rendered
them accepted and approved of God, and the want of it, disapproved, was such a
kind of Faith [not such, or such, a kind of Ceremony, or such or such a kind of
Baptism] which by the mediation or interveening of that heavenly affection of
love, utters and expresses it self in keeping the Commandments of God, [viz.
so far as they are made known unto them, and as humane infirmity will well bear
and admit.] Or is it to be believed, that either the Apostles, or other
Christians taught by them, would have rejected those from their communion, who
were weak in the Faith, and were not convinced of every thing that was in any
degree necessary for them to know, and to do, only for want of such an external
observance, of the lawfulness whereof they were unconvinced, and which, had
they submitted unto it, would have availed them little or nothing?

III.
Whether can it be proved by any text, or passage of Scripture, either
directly, or by any tolerable consequence, that Christian Churches were (in the
Apostles days) constituted by Baptism, or that none were reputed members of
Churches, or admitted into Christian Communion with those who were Baptized,
but only such who were Baptized likewise; considering that that text Acts 2.
41. [commonly, and only, as far as I know, pretended for proof of such a thing]
does not so much as color, much less cotton, with such a supposal, or
conclusion; the tenor of the place being only this, Then they that gladly
received his word, were baptized: and the same day there were added unto [them]
about three thousand Souls? For, 1. It is not here said, that all they that
gladly received the Word, were baptized; but indefinitely only, They that
gladly received, etc. Now indefinite expressions in Scripture are not always
equipollent to universals, but sometimes to partitives, or particulars. When
the Apostle, speaking of Believers under the Old Testament, says, that THEY
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, etc. [Hebr. 11. 33,
34.] he does not mean, that they all did either of these; nor indeed that many
of them did either. See Mat. 27. 34. compared with verse. 48. (to omit an
hundred instances more of like import.) Yea many times universal expressions
themselves are to be understood with limitation and restrain. These things are
sufficiently known to persons any thing conversant in the Scriptures. 2.
Neither is it here said, nor is it a thing in it self much probable, that ONLY
they who were baptized, were added unto them, [i. e. to the pre-ex^stent number
of Disciples,] but only and simply that there were the number of three thousand
added the same day. Within which number it is the probable opinion of some,
that the children, and families, of those, who are said to have gladly received
the Word, are comprehended; it being no ways likely, scarce possible, that 3000
men should distinctly hear the voice of a man speaking: especially unless we
shall suppose, that these 3000 stood nearest unto him that spoke, and with the
best advantage to hear, there being many thousands more present; which can
hardly be the supposition of any considering man in the case in hand. Nor, 3.
Is it said, or so much as intimated or hinted in the least, that any of the
whole number of the three thousand who were added unto them, were added by
means, or upon the account, of their being baptized, although this addition be
not mentioned till after their baptizing. It is ten degrees more probable, that
their believing, or discipleship, which according to the principles of those
Brethren themselves with whom we now argue, were precedent to their baptizing,
and not their being baptized, were the reason and ground of Luke's saying, they
were added unto the Church, or former number of Disciples; considering, 1. That
the original, main and principal foundation of the holy brotherhood amongst the
Saints, and that which makes them fellow members, or members one of another,
is, not the Ceremony of their external Baptism, but their fellowship and
communion in the divine Nature, and inward relation unto the same Christ by one
and the same precious Faith. 2. That it cannot be demonstratively proved from
the Scriptures, that those hundred and twenty Disciples [Act. 1. 15.] unto
which it is here said that three thousand were added, were, or had been, all of
them baptized, in as much as (as will presently appear) there were diverse
members of Churches in the Apostles days, who were unbaptized; no, nor can it
any whit more be proved from Scripture, that the Apostles themselves mentioned
Act. 1. 13. had been baptized, then that John the Baptist was baptized. 3. (And
lastly,) That had the Church, or persons, unto whom these three thousand are
said to have been added, been estimated by their having been baptized, (which
must be supposed, if those who are added to them, are said to have been added
upon the account of their being baptized,) their number must needs have far
exceeded an hundred and twenty, considering the great numbers and vast
multitudes of persons, that had been baptized by John, Mat. 3. 5, 6. compared
with Mark 1. 5. Luke 3. 7, 21. as also by Christ himself and his Disciples,
Joh. 3. 22 26. Yea had the Church been estimated, or constituted, by Baptism,
the Evangelist Luke, intending (questionless, Act. 4. 4.) to report the
increase of the Church and progress of the Gospel, with as much advantage as
truth would afford, had prevaricated with the cause, which he intended to
promote, in reporting their number to have been about five thousand only; when
as, upon the said supposition, and the tenor of the late premises, he might
with as much Truth have reported them about forty thousand, yea and many more.
Howbeit many of them which heard the Word, BELIEVED: and the number of the men
were about five thousand. In which passage, the increase of the Church, or
addition unto the former Saints, is with much more pregnancy of intimation
ascribed unto their believing, then in the other place it is unto their being
baptized. Therefore both men and women, who are indeed tender of Conscience in
things appertaining unto God, had need have a better foundation to bear them
out in their practice of rending and tearing Churches [or, if this name will
not pass, of rending and tearing holy Societies and fellowships of Saints] then
any thing that can be so much as tolerably inferred from the Text now argued,
Act. 2. 41.

IV.
Whether did not the Church of Christ at Rome in the Apostles days, and so also
the Churches in Galatia, hold Church Communion with some, who were not
baptized, considering, 1. That the Apostle to the former writes thus: Know ye
not, that SO MANY OF US as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
his death? Romans 6. 3. and to the latter (after the same manner) thus: For AS
MANY OF YOU as have been baptized into Christ. Gal. 3. 27. 2. That this
particle, (...), as many as (used in both places) is, in such constructions as
these, always partitive, distinguishing or dividing the entire number of
persons spoken of, some from others, by the character or property specified, or
at least supposes a possibility of such a distinction. (...), as many as
touched [the hem of his garment] were made whole, (Mat. 14. 36.) This clearly
supposes, either that there were some, or at least that there might be some,
who did not thus touch. So again: They brought in all AS MANY AS they found,
etc. Mat. 22. 10. So, AS MANY [i. e. as many men and women] as are of the works
of the Law, are under the curse. Gal. 3. 10. See also Mark 3. 10. and 6. 11,
56. Luke 4 40. Ioh. 1. 12. Act. 3. 24 (with others more of like tenor and
import, almost without number.) Therefore is it not without controversy and
dispute, that the Apostle saying to the Church at Rome, and to those in
Galatia, As MANY OF You as have been baptized, etc. supposes, either that
there actually were, or at least that (for ought he knew to the contrary) there
might be, sundry of their members, who had not been baptized? And if he had
either known, or so much as by conjecture supposed, that all the members of
these Churches had without exception been baptized, is it credible that he
would have expressed himself thus unto them (respectively,) As MANY OF You As
have been baptized, and not rather, You having all been baptized, or the like?

V.
Whether did not the Church at Corinth (in the Apostles days) entertain
members, and hold communion with those, who had not been baptized; considering
that he demands thus of this Church: Else what shall [or, what will] they do,
which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then
baptized for the dead 1 Cor. 5. 29. V^. Cameron. Myroth. p. 229. and Ambross^m
in locum. I know the place is much vexed with Interpreters and interpretations,
but certain I am that the sense here supposed and argued upon, is the m^st
grammatical, and best comporting with the propriety of he words and phrase^.
? Or does not this imply, that there was a corrupt and superstitious practice
on foot in this Church, to baptize one or other of the surviving kindred, or
Friends, in the name of such persons (respectively) who dyed unbaptized, and
that this Church thought and supposed, that such Baptism was available for good
unto the deceased in such a case; which practice and opinion of theirs the
Apostle here insisteth on as inconsistent with that most dangerous and
pernicious Error of denying the Resurrection of the dead, which had now gotten
head amongst them? And if there were such a practice as this in this Church, I
mean to baptize some of the living members, in the name and stead of some that
were dead, is it not a plain case that there were some of these members, who
lived and dyed unbaptized?

VI.
Whether, when Paul, soon after his conversion, assayed to join himself to the
Church and Disciples at Jerusalem (Act. 9. 26.) did this Church make any
enquiry after his Baptism, as whether he had been baptized, or no, in order to
his reception amongst them; or did they know that he had been baptized? Or did
Barnabas, in giving satisfaction to the Apostles and Church concerning his
meetness to be admitted into communion with them, so much as mention his being
Baptized, but only declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and
that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the
Name of Jesus? Acts 9. 27.

VII.
Whether, upon a supposal, that it cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that
any unbaptized, or unduly baptized person, was ever admitted into
Church Communion by Christians in the Apostles days, or that any duly baptized
person held communion with a Church, the greatest part of whose members he
deemed either unbaptized, or unduly Baptized, is such a defect of proof
sufficient to justify a withdrawing of communion by a person, who conceives
himself duly baptized, from such a Church, the generality of whose members he
supposes are either not baptized, or unduly Baptized; considering that very
many things may be matter of duty, and necessary to be done, which are not
warranted for so much as lawful, by any example in the Scriptures of like
action in all circumstances? It is the duty of Churches, and of every member
respectively, to admit their women-members to the Lords Table; yet cannot this
practice be warranted by any example recorded in the Scriptures. Yea in case at
the time of this Sacramental Administration in a Church, all the men-members
should occasionally be absent, except only the Administrator, and (it may be) a
Deacon or two, and only the women-members present, there is little question to
be made, but that the Administration ought to proceed notwithstanding, and the
elements be administered unto this female Congregation, though there be no
example of such an Administration as this in the Scriptures. There is no
example in Scripture of any person worshipping the Holy Ghost: yet it is a great
duty lying upon Christians to worship him. When David, and the men with him,
entered into the House of God, and did eat the shewbread 1 Samuel 21. 6
, he had no Scripture-example to justify his action; no more had the Disciples
to justify theirs, when they plucked the ears of Corn as they passed through
the Fields on a Sabbath day: yet were both these actions lawful, and (to a
degree) necessary. The reading of the Scriptures translated out of the Original
Languages into English, Welsh, Dutch, French, etc. is not only lawful, but
necessary, in the Christian Churches in these Nations; yet is there no example
extant in Scripture of any such practice in the primitive Times, no nor so much
as of any Translation of the Scriptures at all. It were easy to add more
instances of like consideration.

VIII.
Whether is an action or practice, suppose in matters relating to the service
or worship of God, upon this account evicted to be unlawful, because it has
neither precept [I mean, no particular or express precept, and wherein the
action or practice it self, with all the circumstances under which it becomes
lawful, is named,] nor example, to warrant the lawfulness of it? Or has the
practice of admitting women to the Lords Table, any such, either precept, or
example, to justify it? Or in case a Minister shall preach to a Congregation
consisting of young men only, and from Rev. 22. 3, or 4* etc. would such an act
as this be unlawful? or is there any such precept, as that mentioned, or
example in Scripture, for the warrant of it? Or when David, and those that were
with him, went into the House of God, and, contrary to the letter of an
Institution, eat the shewbread, had they either such a precept, as that
mentioned, or any example, to bear them out in such a practice? Or does not our
Savior in the Gospel justify that action of theirs notwithstanding? Or if the
case, or law of necessity, or of peril, either of health, or life, be pleadable
for the justification thereof; is not the same Law altogether as, yea and much
more, pleadable, on the behalf of such persons, who being of tender, weak, and
sickly constitutions, dare not tempt God, or expose themselves to the imminent
hazard of health or life, by being doused in their apparel over head and ears
in the water; especially considering that God has testified from Heaven his
dis-approbation of the practice, by suffering some to be grievously afflicted
in their bodies, and some also to miscarry in life it self, by means (in all
likelihood) of the temptation? Or has not God sufficiently and plainly enough
declared his mind and pleasure in all such cases as this, in saying, I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice Matt. 12. 7
? Or if it be pleaded, that all danger of miscarrying in either kind, may be
prevented, by choosing a warm room, and warm water, for the transacting of the
Baptismal Dipping, is it not queryable hereupon, whether this be not to alter
and change, to new-mold, shape, and transform the Ordinance of God, as men
please, and this under a pretext of observing it? Or is there not as much
difference between hot water, and cold, as is between a child, and a man?

IX.
Whether, when God has by Faith purified the hearts of a people walking in a
Christian Brotherhood and Fellowship together, has he not sanctified them? And
in case any person shall now despise, or decline their fellowship, as unholy,
does he not sin against that heavenly Admonition delivered by special
Revelation unto Peter; What God has cleansed [(...), i. e. sanctified, or
purified] call not thou [or, make not thou] common Acts 10. 15
? Or can a man (lightly) call, or make, that common, which God has sanctified,
in a more opprobrious and contumelious way, then by fleeing from it, as
polluted or unholy?

X.
Whether does, or needs, a man contract any guilt of sin before God, by walking
in such a society of men, who being otherwise confessedly Christian and holy,
have only some practice amongst them in the judgment and conscience of this man
not approvable, in case, 1. he shall at any time openly declare his dislike of
this practice; and, 2. Be no ways constrained, or solicited to communicate in
this practice? Or, when men may separate that which is precious from that which
is vile, and enjoy it thus separated, and apart, without suffering any
inconvenience by that which is vile, is it a point of wisdom in them to deprive
themselves of the enjoyment of what is precious, because there is somewhat,
which they suppose to be vile, near to it?

XI.
Whether may persons, who are weak in the Faith, be rejected by a Church from
communion with them, in case they desire it, only because they question, or
dissent from, the sense of the generality of this Church, in some one point of
doubtful disputation? Or is not the practice of a man, who pretends to be
strong in the Faith, in renouncing communion with a Church (or, which is the
same, in rejecting a Church from his communion) which he judges weak in the
Faith, only because they more generally dissent from him in a matter of
doubtful disputation, a practice much more unchristian and unwarrantable, then
the former? Or is not the practice, especially the necessity, of dipping, after
Infant-ablution, or Infant Baptism, a matter of doubtful disputation; unless
(happily) by matters of doubtful disputation, we mean, not whatsoever is
questioned, opposed, or denied by any man, or any sort of men, being asserted
and held by others; but only such things, which are controverted and disputed
with good probability on either side, by men of gravity, worth, soberness of
judgment, thoroughly versed and expert in the Scriptures? etc. And whether, in
this sense or notion of matters of doubtful disputation, is the necessity of
the said practice of after-Baptism so much as matter of doubtful disputation,
the generality of Christians so qualified, as has been expressed, unanimously
agreeing in the non-necessity, yea and (which is somewhat more) in the
irregularity of it?

XII.
Whether did the Lord Christ, pointing to any river, or water, say, Upon this
water will I build my Church? Or did he not, speaking either of himself, or of
that great Truth, viz. that He was the Son of the living God, which Peter had
confessed, say, Upon this Rock will I build my Church Matt. 16. 18
? Or is there the softest whisper, or gentlest breathing in the Scripture, of
any such notion, or opinion, as this, that a true Church of Christ cannot be
constituted, or made, no not of the truest and soundest Believers in the world,
unless they have been baptized after their believing, how, or after what manner
soever, they have been baptized before?

XIII.
Whether is an error, or mistake, about the adequate or appropriate subject of
Baptism, of any worse consequence, or greater danger, then an error or mistake
about Melchisedec's Father, as viz. in case a man should suppose him to have
been Noah (which he must be, in case Melchisedec were the same Person with Sem)
when as he was some other man? If so, how, or wherein does the excess of the
danger, or evil of the consequence appear? If not, whether is it Christian, or
any ways becoming the Spirit of the Gospel, to abandon communion with such
Churches, which (being interpreted) is to proclaim them polluted, hated and
abhorred by Christ, only because a man supposes them to lie under the guilt of
such an error, or mistake?

XIV.
Whether may not the importune contest, or question, about the appropriate
subject of Baptism, as it is stated by the Brethren of New Baptism, in
opposition to the judgment and practice (almost) of the whole Christian World,
justly be numbered amongst those questions, which the Apostle calls foolish,
and unlearned, and advises both Timothy and Titus to avoid, as being questions
which engender strife 2 Timothy 2. 23
, and are unprofitable and vain Tit. 3. 9.
; considering, 1. That the experience of many years in the Reformed Churches
abroad, and of some years amongst our selves at home, has abundantly taught
and informed us, that the said question has yielded little other fruit unto
those that have set their hearts to it, yea and unto others also, but
contention, strife, emulations, evil surmizings, distractions, confusions,
alienations of mind and affections amongst Christian Brethren, evil speakings,
vilifyings, revilings, needless and wastful expense of time, loss of many
precious opportunities for matters of greatest consequence, unprofitable
disturbings and turmoylings of weak Consciences, shatterings, scatterings,
rendings, and teerings of such Churches, and Christian Societies, who, till
this root of bitterness sprang up amongst them, walked in love, and with the
light of Gods countenance shining on them, holding the unity of the Spirit in
the band of peace, edifying one another in their most holy Faith, etc. 2. That
the said Question, in the nature and direct tendency of it, leads unto very
little that is considerable, or of much consequence for Christians to know; and
that what is brought to light (of moment and consequence) by occasion of the
ventilation of it, is nothing but what might arrive at the knowledge of
Christians, in a more peaceable, and less troublesome way: And, 3. (and lastly)
That those who are most confident that they have found the treasure of Truth,
which the Question we speak of, seeks after, are no ways, as far as any ways
appears, or can be discerned, spiritually enriched by it, but rather
impoverished (at least the generality of them) losing by degrees, that
Christian sweetness, meekness, humility, love, patience, soberness of mind,
fruitfulness of conversation, etc. which were observable in them before; as if
their new Baptism had been into a new, or another Jesus, altogether unlike unto
him, whom Paul preached?

XV.
Whether is any Member of a Christian Church, or Society, at any more liberty,
or under any greater necessity, to excommunicate, cut off, or separate this
Church, or all the members of it, from his communion, only upon his private
conceit or persuasion, suppose according to truth, that they walk not in all
things according to Gospel-rule, then this Church is to excommunicate him, upon
a true and certain persuasion, that he walks not in every thing according to
the rule of the Gospel? Or if Churches either be at liberty, or under an
obligation by way of duty, to excommunicate every of their members
(respectively) because they judge them not to walk in all things according to
the Gospel, are they not at liberty, or bound in duty and conscience, thus to
cast out all their members one after another; considering, that not in some
things only, but even in many things (as the Apostle James speaks) we offend
all? Or has any single member of a Church any more liberty, or authority, to
adjudg and determine without the Scriptures, upon what grounds or occasions,
his departure from a Church is justifiable, then a Church has to make Laws and
Constitutions of her own for the ejecting of her members? Or is it any where a
case adjudged in the Scriptures, that if a Church in any part of the world,
suppose under the frozen Zone, shall not practice dipping after sprinkling, or
other washing, in the Name of Jesus Christ, every member thereof stands bound
in conscience, yea or is so much as at liberty, to reverse, or disoblige
himself from, his solemn and sacred engagements to it?

XVI.
Whether did not Paul and Barnabas hold Christian Communion with those
Christian Converts which they made at Antioch, Acts 13. 43, 48, 52. and with
those also, which they made soon after in great numbers at Iconium, Acts 14. 1,
4? Or does it any ways appear from the Scripture, that these Converts, during
the continuance of Paul and Barnabas with them, yea or at any time after, were
baptized? If not, is it any ways necessary that we should believe, or ought it
to be any Article of our Faith to believe, that they were baptized? If it be
not necessary, then we are at liberty to believe, that Paul and Barnabas did
hold Christian Communion with unbaptized Christians; especially considering,
that the tenor of the History diligently consulted, especially concerning
those, who were converted to the Faith at Antioch, and the short abode of Paul
and Barnabas with them after their Conversion, together with the troublesome
oppositions which the Jews of the place made all the while against them, makes
it probable in the highest, that they were not baptized, at least whilst these
men continued with them?

XVII.
Whether, in case any member, one or more, of any Christian Church, or Society,
which he judges faithful in the main, and willing and ready to walk up to
their light, shall verily think and be persuaded, that he has discovered some
defect, or error in this Church, may such an one lawfully and with a good
conscience give himself a discharge from all care and service otherwise due
from him unto it, by renouncing the communion thereof upon such a pretense, or
occasion; especially before, or until, he has with all longsuffering and
meekness, and with the best of his understanding, endeavored the information of
this Church in the Truth, and the rectifying the judgments of the members
thereof; considering, that as in the natural body, so in the spiritual or
Church-body, the members ought to have the same care one for another, and if
one member suffers, all the members to suffer with it 1 Cor. 12. 25
, (as the Apostle speaks,) and consequently no one member, being healthful
and sound, ought to desert its fellow members being sickly and weak, especially
whilst there is yet any hope of their cure and healing?

XVIII.
Whether ought a company of true Believers, concerning whose lawful Church
constitution there can no other thing with reason and truth be objected, to be
vilified, or separated from, as a false Church, or no Church of Christ at all,
only because, either, 1. They do not practice contrary to their judgment and
conscience, such things, one, or more, which some men conceive it meet they
should practice; Or, 2. because, either God has not enlightened them to see
every thing, which some other men see; or else because Satan has not blinded
them, so as to make them ignorant of such Truths, one, or more, whereof some
others are ignorant, judging them to be Errors?

XIX.
Whether is it reasonable or Christian, that a company of true Believers, who
have met together in the simplicity of their hearts in the fear of God, in the
Name of Jesus Christ, mutually engaging themselves, as in the presence of God,
to walk together in all the Ordinances of the Gospel, as far as they shall from
time to time be revealed unto them, and walking accordingly, should be
infamously stigmatized as no Church, no true Church of Christ, and consequently
be esteemed but as a rabble rout of the world only pretending Churchship, and
this by some one, or a few persons, only because they cannot see with their
eyes, or practice that as necessary, the necessity whereof, after much and
earnest prayer unto God, after much enquiry and search, and this with all
diligence and impartialness, in order to their conviction and satisfaction,
does no ways to them appear?

XX.
Whether is it Christian, or meet, for any one person, man, or woman, to bid
defiance unto an whole Church or fellowship of Saints being many, and who are
otherwise sober, grave, and conscientiously faithful in all their walking,
only because they cannot with a good Conscience say Amen to every notion and
conceit, which these persons themselves judge worthy of reverence and honor,
and particularly, because they cannot, against the sense, Judgment and
practice, as well of all Christian Antiquity, as of all the Reformed Churches
(very few, if any, excepted) in the Christian world, thus spiritually court
their private apprehensions about the time and manner of an external
Administration; especially considering, that they neither have, nor can, either
show precept, example, or any competent ground otherwise, from the Scriptures,
to commend these their apprehensions unto the conscience of any man? Or is
there any precept, which injoyns baptizing, or dipping, in the name of Christ,
after a baptizing in infancy into this name? Or is there any example in
Scripture of any baptized after profession of Faith, who had been baptized, or
who judged themselves, and were generally so judged by others, to have been
baptized, before? If neither, is it not a clear case, that here is neither
precept, nor example in Scripture, which reaches home to the case, or which
warranteth the practice, of the Children of after-Baptism amongst us? And as
for any competent ground otherwise to justify the practice, has such a thing
ever seen the light of the Sun hitherto?

XXI
Whether do not they, who magnify the ceremony or external rite of Baptism to
such an height, as to estimate Christianity by it, or to judge them no true or
sound Christians, who are without it, stumble at the same stone of danger and
peril of Soul, at which the Jews stumbled, when they practiced and urged
Circumcision as necessary for Justification; to whom, upon this account, Paul
testified; Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, [meaning,
with an opinion of a necessity of your being circumcised for your Justification
before God,] Christ shall profit you nothing Gal. 5. 2.
? considering, 1. That Circumcision was an Ordinance of God, yea as great and
solemn an Ordinance, as Baptism; and 2. That when Paul threatened those who so
magnified it (as was said) with lofing their part and portion in Christ, it was
as Lawful, though (happily) not so necessary (and yet in some cases it was
necessary too) as Baptism it self; yea and the Apostle himself administered it,
as well as he did Baptism, yea and pronounced it profitable, (rightly
understood and practiced?) Romans 3. 1. 2. Or might not the same threatening (I
mean, of losing the great blessing of Justification and Salvation by Christ)
have been with altogether as much truth and necessity, administered upon a like
occasion and account, unto persons so opinionated of circumcision, as the
Galathians were, even when, and whilst, the use and practice of it was every
whit as necessary (or rather more necessary) as the use of Baptism now is?

XXII.
Whether is there any precept, or example in the Scriptures, of any person
Baptized after many years profession of the Gospel, or after any considerable
measure of assurance of the pardon of sin obtained, or at any other time, save
at, or about, their first entrance upon a profession of Christ? Or is there any
competent ground, either in Reason, or Religion, why either such a thing should
have been practiced by Christians in the Apostles days, or why it ought to be
practiced by any in these days; considering, 1. That it is uncomely, and
contrary to the Law, which God has established, both in Nature, and in Grace,
to return or fall back from perfection to imperfection, from that which is more
spiritual, to that which is more carnal; And, 2. That types and figures, which
are not rememorative (as the Passover was, and the Lords Table now is) but
either only significative, or obsignative (as Baptism is) should be used, after
the substance of the things typified and figured by them, have been of a long
time exhibited unto, received, and enjoyed by those, who use them; 3. That a
profession of the Name and Faith of Christ by an holy and blameless
conversation for many years together in the world, by a long continued course
of mortification, self-denial, fruitfulness in well doing, etc. is the truth
and substance, the heart, life, and soul of that profession, which is made by
being externally Baptized; 4. (And lastly) That that which is a duty at one
time, in respect of such and such circumstances, may cease to be, or may not
be, a duty at another time, when circumstances are changed, many instances
whereof might be readily given?

XXIII.
Whether ought not the Law of Edification [1 Cor. 14. 26.] to overruled all
Laws and Precepts concerning spiritual and Church-administrations, as the Law
of Salus Populi ought to umpire and overruled all politic Laws and
Constitutions, in their respective Executions? If so, ought not the
Administration of Baptism to be rather appropriated unto Infants, then unto
others, considering, 1. That God himself adjudged the Administration of the
Ordinance of Circumcision (an Ordinance the same with Baptism, though not in
the shape and form of the letter, yet in strength and substance of the Spirit,
as evidently appears from Romans 4. 11. well understood, and diligently
compared with Mark 1. 4. Luke 3. 3, etc.) unto Infants, to be most edifying in
the Church of the Jews; otherwise it must be said that he ordered the
Administration of it to the spiritual detriment and loss of those, to whom he
gave it; And, 2. That there can no reason, nor color of reason be given, why,
or how, the Administration of Baptism unto Infants in Christian Churches,
should not as well be more edifying unto these, then an after-Administration of
it would be, as the like Administration of Circumcision was unto the Jews; 3.
(And lastly) That whatsoever the wisdom of men may pretend u^de multi post
Baptismum proficientes, and maxim qui Infantes vel pueri baptizati sunt, etc.
Aug. de Baptismo contra Donatistas lib. 4. c. 14.
and plead colourably and plausibly to the contrary, ought to give place to the
determination and resolution of God himself? Be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord, Zech. 2. 13. The Lord is in his holy Temple; let all the Earth keep
silence before him, Habak. 2. 20. although it be demonstrable enough, even by
clear grounds and principles in reason, that to Baptize in Infancy, must needs
be more edifying to the Church, then to transfer the Administration to maturity
of years.

XXIV.
Whether is not the Baptizing of Children, by the Apostles and other Baptists
appointed by them in their days, sufficiently signified and employed in those
passages (especially in conjunction with the known Law and Custom of
circumcising children amongst the Jews) where they are recorded to have
baptized households, or families, without exception of any person in any one of
them? as Act. 16. 33. 1 Cor. 1. 16. Act. 16. 15. etc. Or can there any
arguments or conjectures be levied from the Scriptures to prove the contrary,
which will balance or hold weight against these; considering, 1. That it is at
no hand probable, that God, who had made a Law against him, that should open or
dig a pit in his field, and not cover it Exodus 21. 33 34
, would, not only have left the precept and perpetual example of circumcising
Infants by the Jews, as a pit uncovered for Believers, both Jews and Gentiles
under the Gospel, to fall into, by baptizing their Children, without giving the
least notice of the alteration of his mind in this behalf, but also have dug
this pit yet broader, deeper, and wider, by causing the baptizing of several
families to be recorded in the New Testament, without the least mention or
intimation of the passing by children in the Administration; 2. That that which
is commonly replied to disable these passages as to the proof of
Infant Baptism, is extremely weak, and no ways satisfactory; viz. that it is
elsewhere said of whole households and families that they believed, which (say
the Replyers) does not imply, that children are here included, or that they
believed, this (I say) is unsatisfactory; in as much as, 1. Children may in a
sense (and this very frequent in the Scriptures) be said to believe, i. e. to
be in the state and condition of Believers, in respect of the love and favor of
God, in title to the Similia similium occupait nomina. Hur. Grot. in Act. 13
33. Multa offi^mantur simpliciter and formaliter, quae per equivalentiam seu
comparationem tantum sunt intelligenda: Vid. ^ai, 66. 3. 1 Timothy 5. 8 Matt. 19.
12 Romans 11, 15, etc.
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. yea and are by Christ himself (in these respects)
expressly said to believe, Mat. 18. 6. And, 2. Were it granted, that children
are in no sense capable of believing, and in this respect cannot be included,
when it is said of whole houses, that they believed; yet are they as capable of
being Baptized, or (as our Brethren will needs have it) of being dipped (yea in
some respect more capable hereof) as men; and consequently can upon no
tolerable account be thought to be excluded, when it is said of whole houses or
families that they were dipped; as (for instance) because, when John's Disciples
said, And all men come unto him, [Joh. 3. 26.] Children must needs be excluded,
and not contained in the word, (...), all men, in as much as they were in no
capacity of coming; it does not follow from hence, that therefore when the
Apostle says, that Christ by the grace of God tasted Death for all men, [Heb.
2. 9.] and so again, that it is appointed for men (meaning, all men) once to
dye, [Heb. 9. 27.] Children must be here excluded also, and not be comprehended
in the general term, all men; in as much as they are as well capable as men, of
such a grace, as Christ's dying for them imports, and so of dying themselves,
though they are not capable of coming unto any man to be baptized: 3.
Considering, that men ought not to contend with God, or to reject any part of
his Counsel or Will, because it is only somewhat sparingly, and with some
scantness of evidence, discovered in his Word, but to rest satisfied with that
measure or degree of revelation of things, which he judges meet to vouchsafe
unto them, until further light shall shine: 4. That they who are dissatisfied
with that discovery, which learned Paedobaptists make unto them from the
Scriptures, of the will and mind of God for the Baptizing of Infants, do
readily embrace and entertain many other notions and opinions upon far weaker,
and less lightsom grounds of conviction, as viz. the common Doctrines or
Tenants concerning Original Sin, admission of women to the Lords Table, the
observation of the Sabbath on the first day of the week (yea some of them on
the last day,) the reception of the Soul into Heaven, and happiness,
immediately upon death, (with many other things, which we shall not now
mention,) not that I mention these with dislike of the common opinion about
them all, but only to show, that as the generality of the Jews rejected the
true Messiah notwithstanding all the true and real Miracles which he wrought
amongst them, and yet entertained false Messiahs one after another, with their
counterfeit and lying miracles; so do the generality of Anti-Paedobaptists
reject Infant Baptism, notwithstanding the many real and substantial proofs, by
which it is commended and confirmed unto them, in the mean time bowing down
their Judgments and Consciences to such Doctrines, which have little but hay
and stubble to support them. 5. (And lastly) That God does expect, that men
should dig for the treasure of Truth, and of his Counsel, even where it lies
much deeper underground, then Infant Baptism does in several of those Texts of
Scripture, which have been argued by learned men of that Judgment, in proof
thereof; yea and has reproved men for their unmanlike oscitancy, and neglect
in this behalf? Peruse and consider diligently these Texts and Passages at your
leisure (because it would be too long to argue them,) Mat. 12 3, 4, 5, 7. Mat.
23. 16, 17, 18, 19, etc. Mat. 22. 29, 31, 32, etc. Luk 24. 25, 26. Acts 7. 25,
26. (to omit others.)

XXV.
Whether is the practice of demanding, or submitting unto, a Baptismal dipping,
after a solemn dedication unto the service of Jesus Christ by a baptismal
sprinkling, or ablution, any where countenanced in the Scriptures, or enjoined,
either by particularity, or expressness of precept or example? If not, is not
the practice of it traditional, and the product of humane discourse, as well,
and as much, as the Baptizing of Infants? And do not they who practice it,
presume every whit as much, or rather far more, upon their own judgments and
understandings, in making Infant Baptism to be a mere nullity or nothing, the
Scripture no where giving any such sentence, nor any syllable, letter, or
tittle of any such sentence, against it, as they who make it an Ordinance of
God, or rather (to speak more properly) a meet and necessary administration of
an Ordinance of God? considering, 1. That Baptism it self, i. e. the external
act of Baptism, rightly so called, (whether it be dipping, washing, or
sprinkling, is not material to the case now in hand, Infants being alike
capable of them all) is by expressness of Scripture, an Ordinance, or
appointment of God; And 2. That Infants (at least, of Believers) not only, are
no where excluded by God from part and fellowship in the Administration, but
are in several places and passages more then overtured as the most proper and
meet Subjects of it?

XXVI.
Whether, was not a dying the death of the uncircumcised Ezekiel. 28. 10. 31, 18.
32. 19. 21.
under the Law, and so a being punished with the uncircumcised Jer. 9. 25.
Ezekiel. 32 19. ^1 Samuel 17. 26, 36.
, matter of threatening, and an intimation of anger and displeasure in God;
importing, that the lives of uncircumcised persons in the world, were nothing
so precious in his sight, nor so tenderly watched over, nor so carefully
protected and preserved by him, as the lives of those who were circumcised? yea
did not the threatening of the uncircumcised man-child, that his soul should be
cut off from his people, because he had broken Gods Covenant, (Genesis 17. 4.)
plainly signify, that children uncircumcised, were much more obnoxious unto
the stroke of death from the hand of God, then they would have been, or need to
have been, if circumcised? If then it be supposed, that Baptism is altogether
as necessary, or of as high esteem with God, under the Gospel, as Circumcision
was under the Law, can it reasonably be judged, or thought, that he is as
tender and providentially watchful, over the lives of children or others,
unbaptized, as he is over the lives of those who are baptized? And if so, do
not they who neglect or refuse, the baptizing of their children, reject the
counsel of God against their lives and preservations, depriving them of that
Interest in the special Providence of God for their peace and safety, which
they might, and ought to, entitle them unto by Baptizing them? And when
children unbaptized are taken away by any sudden or strange hand of death, have
not the Parents just cause to question, whether they were not accessory to
their death, by leaving them amongst the unbaptized ones of the world?

XXVII.
Whether were not the children of Israel, notwithstanding the express and
strict Institution and command of God for the circumcising of the Males amongst
them on the eight day, blameless under their non-Circumcision for forty years
together, upon the account of that bodily inconvenience and danger, whereunto
Circumcision, during their journying and travel through the wilderness, would
in the eye of Reason have exposed them? Or had they not sinned, by tempting the
Providence of God, if under a pretense, or plea, of the commandment of God for
their circumciseing, they had caused either themselves, or their children, to
be circumcised, during such their travel, how long soever it had continued? If
so, do not they sin by tempting the Providence of God who are Authors, either
to themselves or others, of being dipped over head and ears in water, where,
and when, and whilst, such dipping cannot, both according to the principles of
Reason, the natural course and operation of second causes, yea, and frequent
experience it self, but endanger either their healths, or lives, or both; yea
though this be upon a pretext, or plea, that such dipping is the Institution,
or command of God?

XXVIII.
Whether does the requiring of Faith, or a profession of Faith to be made by
men and women in order to their being Baptized, by any better consequence
prove, that Infants without such Faith, or Profession of Faith, ought not to be
baptized, then Paul's injunction, which he commended to the Thessalonians, viz.
That if any would not work, neither should he eat 2 These. 3. 10.
, proves, that neither ought children to eat, unless they work too, as well as
men or women, who are healthful and strong, and so capable of working? Or then
this prohibition of God of old concerning the eating of the Paschal Lamb, No
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof Exodus 12. 48.
, proves, that his intent was, that no person of woman kind, whether young, or
old, though daughters of Abraham, and otherwise sanctified, should eat thereof?

XXIX.
Whether, if dipping, or a disposing, or conveying of the whole body under
water, be of the essence and necessity of Baptism, are not they rather
Se-Baptists, or Self-Baptisers, then Baptized (according to the order of
Christ) by others, who themselves convey or dip under water their whole bodies,
leaving only their heads above the water to be bowed down, forced, or thrust
under water, by the Baptizer? Or is there either vola or vestigium, little or
much of such a practice as this to be found in the Scriptures, where they speak
of Baptism? Or can he in any tolerable sense or construction be said to be the
Architect, or builder of a Turret, or Steeple, who only sets the
Weathercock on the top of it, and not rather he, who builds the rest of the
body and Fabric hereof?

XXX.
Whether, is there any particular or express Institution of Baptism to be found
in the Scriptures; I mean, any such Institution, as there is of Circumcision,
and the Passover in the Old Testament, or of the Lords Supper in the New; or
which prescribes and determines all circumstances essential unto Baptism, as
all the other do prescribe and determine all circumstances essentially
requisite to their administrations respectively? If not, do not they (...),
make themselves wise above that which is written, and (constructively) obtrude
upon the consciences of men an Institution of their own, in the Name of the
Ordinance and Institution of God, who undertake to prescribe and determine,
either particularity of subject, or manner of Administration, in Baptism?

XXXI.
Whether did not they amongst us, (or at least the generality, and far greater
part of them) who have accepted and entered into the way of new-Baptism, and at
present walk in it, receive that precious Faith from God, together with all
those Graces or fruits of the Spirit, whereby they are, whatsoever they are in
Christ, and toward God; did they not (I say) receive all this blessedness from
God, under the dispensation of their Infant Baptism? Or is there one of a
thousand of those engaged in this new way, who have added so much as the
breadth of the least hair of their heads unto their former growth and stature
in Christ, I do not say, by virtue or means of this their new Engagement, but
since, or after it? Or is there not a visible and manifest change for the worse
in very many of them, and this (in all probability) occasioned by an
overweening conceit, that by means of their new baptizing, they are more
excellent then their Neighbors, and too holy and near unto God to suffer
themselves to be numbered amongst the members of other Churches? Or do such
things as these any way favor or strengthen the claim, which their way of
Baptizing makes of being a Divine Ordinance, yea the only true Baptism of God?

XXXII.
Whether, amongst men and women, whose consciences have at any time been
surprised with a Religious conceit of a necessity of new Baptism, and have
accordingly submitted to it, have not the most Christianly-meek and humble on
the one hand, and the most Judicious and Learned on the other hand, upon a
little experience of this way, grown cool, and very indifferent in their
thoughts about it? yea and many of them repented of their surprizal and Vide
Scultet. Annal. Anno 1521, and 1525, etc.
weakness in this kind, as Johannes O^colampadius, Johannes Denkius, Johannes
Gaster, men of great learning, worth, and humility, (with several others) about
Luthers days; yea and some of like Character, of late amongst our selves, who
might be named, if it were necessary or meet?

XXXIII.
Whether, because Baptism is termed the Baptism of Repentance (...), i. e. for,
or toward, the remission of sins, (Mar, 1. 4.) does it a whit more follow that
children ought not to be Baptized, either because they cannot repent, or
because they have no sins to be remitted unto them, then it does, that children
ought not to have been circumcised; considering that Circumcision, the nature
of it, and counsel of God in it, considered, may as truly be called, the
Circumcision of Repentance, for the remission of sins, as Baptism, The Baptism
of Repentance for the Remission of sins; yea, the Apostle Paul himself gives a
definition of Circumcision, for substance and import of matter, the same with
that of Baptism, when he calls it, the seal of the righteousness of Faith,
(Romans 4. 11.) and however, Children are altogether as incapable of Faith, as
they are of Repentance; and have no more need of the righteousness of Faith,
then they have of remission of sins, these being but one and the same thing?

XXXIV.
Whether, when the Apostle Peter speaks thus to his new Converts, Acts 2. 38,
39. Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: For the
promise is to you, and to your children, etc. Does he so much enjoin or exhort
them to Repent in order to their being baptized, as encourage them both unto
the one duty, and the other, upon the account of the Promise relating both to
them, and their children, and the certainty of its being fulfilled and made
good unto them both, upon their Repentance, and submission unto Baptism,
respectively? And if their title unto, and interest in, the Promise, be a
ground or motive unto them [the Parents] to be baptized; is not the like title
and interest, in the children, a ground and motive also why they should be
baptized?

XXXV.
Whether does God smell the assemblies [or, in the assemblies] of those, who
judge themselves the only Baptized persons under Heaven, with any such pleasure
or delight, as he smells many the assemblies of those, who are called
Unbaptized, by the other? Or are the Church-meetings of the former filled with
the glory and presence of God at any such rate, or to any such degree, as many
the holy assemblies of the latter are? Or are there any such manifestations of
the Spirit, either in gifts, or in graces, in the tabernacles of the Baptized,
as there are amongst those, who bear the reproach of Unbaptized? Or are the
powers of the world to come any ways so busy, active and stirring in the
Churches, which call themselves Baptized, as they are in many the
congregations, which are cast out to the Gentiles, as unclean and Un-baptized?
Or is not that good word of God, (the Scriptures,) as a sealed book in many the
assemblies of the former, whereas even the deep things of God contained in it,
are by the Holy Ghost revealed in many Churches of the latter? Or are such
differences as these, of no authority, interest, or import, to umpire or decide
the controversy depending between the two Baptisms?

XXXVI.
Whether are not children oft-times in Scripture comprehended under, or with,
their Parents, men and women, etc. where they are not expressly mentioned, or
named; and particularly Jos. 25. 26. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2 See also Mat: 4: 4: and
12: 12: (besides many others.)
even as Subjects are under the names of their Kings, and Families and
Descents, under the names of their Heads? etc. Yea, are not both women and
children to be understood, where men only are named? (See Mark 6. 44. Joh. 6.
10. compared with Mat. 14. 21.) If so, does not this argument or plea against
Infant Baptism, halt right-down; In the Scriptures we find no mention of the
Baptizing of Children, either by Christ, or his Apostles, or any others:
therefore no children were Baptized by them? Indeed if we could here find no
mention of the Baptizing either men, or women, then the non-finding any mention
neither of children baptized, were an argument of some authority and credit to
prove, that there was none of this capacity, or age, baptized.

XXXVII.
Whether, in case it could be proved (which yet has not been proved, nor, I am
full of belief, ever will be, the proofs lying much more strong and pregnant
for it, then against it) that there were no children baptized during the
Apostles days, does it by any whit better consequence follow from hence, that
therefore children ought not now to be (or might not then, as to point of
simple lawfulness, have been) baptized, then from the non-circumcising of the
Jewish children for forty years together (Jos. 5. 5.) viz, during the whole
time of their journeying through the wilderness, it follows, that neither ought
they to have been circumcised afterward, especially considering, 1. That there
may be many more, and more weighty, reasons (though possibly unknown unto us)
why neither Christ, nor his Apostles, should baptize children in their days,
though the lawfulness, yea and necessity of their baptizing, at other times,
and in some cases, be supposed, then there was why the Israelites should omit
the circumcising of their children for those forty years together, which were
specified; And, 2. That the Apostle Paul says, that he was not sent to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel; [meaning, that baptizing, whether
personally, or by commissioning or delegating others hereunto, was not only not
the principal, but not any considerable end of his sending, but the publishing
and preaching of the Gospel,] for if he was not sent to baptize [meaning,
neither one age, nor one sex, or other,] neither could he be sent to baptize
children; and if he was not sent to baptize, either one, or other, [in the
sense declared,] neither was the Lord Christ himself, nor the rest of the
Apostles sent about this work (in such a sense,) What marvel then is it, that
Persons sent about matters incomparably greater and more weighty, should not be
so thoroughly intent upon things of a secondary and lighter consequence, as to
prosecute them to the uttermost of what they lawfully might, yea and in case of
a lighter burden upon their shoulder in those more important affairs, had been
bound to do? Or are there not many cases, wherein a man may break a Law, [i. e.
a standing Law, or a Law provided for ordinary cases] and yet be blameless? yea
and some cases, wherein he may do it with commendation? See Mat. 12. 3, 4, 5. 2
Cor. 11. 17, 18, 21. 1 John 3. 16.

XXXVIII.
Whether is not that principle, or humor, in the children of new Baptism, of
making such sacred treasure hereof as generally they do, estimating
Christianity it self, and acceptance with God, by it, counting all persons
unclean and unholy, and not meet for Church Communion, who submit not unto it
etc. thus making Gods Nothing, their All things; is not this humor (I say) the
express character of such persons in all ages, who have unduly, and without
cause, broken the bands of unity, love, and peace, wherein they had been
sometimes bound up in a sweet bundle of Christianity with other Churches, to
walk in some crooked and byway of particular choice by themselves, to the
offense, grief, and reproach of those Churches, from which, upon such an
account, they rent themselves? Or did not Eunomius the Heretic, who
maintained this Doctrine (by way of dissent from the Churches of Christ) That
the Son of God is altogether unlike the Father, and the Holy Ghost unlike the
Son, notwithstanding the groundlessness and erroneousness of it, yet attribute
this high and sacred privilege unto it, that whosoever believed it could not
possibly perish, how wickedly soever he lived Eunomius -- defendit hanc
haeresin, dissimilem per omnia Pa^r^ asse^ens Filium, and Filio Spiritum
sanctum. Fertur etiam usque adeo fuisse bonis moribus inimicus, ut asseveraret,
quod nihil cuique obesset quorumlibet perpetratio ac perseverantia peccator
rum, si hujus, quae ab il o docebatur, fidei particeps effet. Aug. de Haeres.
c. 54
? Or did not the Donatists ascribe all Christian worth and excellency to their
Sect and Opinions, denying that there was any true Church of Christ in all the
World, but only amongst them, and despising all other Christians, but
themselves, and yet giving entertainment to most vile and wicked men in their
Communion Nam illi [Donatistae] dicebant universum orbem Christianum Ecclesiam
non habere -- Deinde, qui prae le omnes alios Christianos condemnabant,
severitatem censurae in suos relaxaverant, and in suis coetibus homines
impurissimos, ut Optato^, Gildoniano^, Primianosque patiebantur. P. Mar^y^,
Loc. Class. 4. c. 5. sect. 15.
, as if the giving of the right hand of fellowship unto them in their way,
rendered men religious and holy, in the midst of the practice of all
wickedness? Or did not Theophanes attribute so much to the use of Images in
Religious Worship, that he censured Constantine the Emperor (by-named,
Copronymus) as an Apostate from God, for opposing Images, and Idol-worship
Theophanes Miscel. l. 21. c. ult, and Joseph Mede, Apostasy of latter times. p.
131
? Or did not some Jewish Teachers labor to possess men with such an high
opinion of their Tradition and practice of washing hands before meat, as that
they ought to look upon him, who should neglect or not observe it, as one that
lies with an Harlot Ainsworth in Levit. 15. 12
? Or did not the Author and Abettors of that hideous Doctrine, That God sees
no sin in persons justified, pronounce all those Traitors to the Blood of
Christ, that held the contrary P. Gunter, Sermon of Justification, printed anno
1615. Preface to the Reader, p. 3.
? Or did not the Monks, who (generally) were the compilers of the Histories of
this Nation in former times, place so much of the very essence (as it were) of
Religion, in reverencing Bishops and Monks of these times, that (as Daniel, a
late English Historian observes) they personated all their Princes, either
Religious, or irreligious, as they humored, or offended, the Bishops rochet,
and the Monks belly Smectymnuus Vindicat. p 8.
? Or did not Theodore the Abbot, give this advice to a Monk, who (as himself
informed the said Abbot) was threatened by the Devil, that he would never cease
vexing and molesting him by temptations unto fornication, until he left
worshipping the Image of the blessed Virgin; did not (I say) this Abbot give
this advice to the Monk in his case, that it were better that he frequented all
the stews in the City, then not to worship Christ and his Mother in an Image
Mede, Apostasy of latter times, p. 140
? Or do not all these instances (with many more that might be added unto them,
of like consideration) plainly show and prove, that to conceit and speak
glorious things, of any private opinion, or by-practice, is an argument of very
great probability (at least) that this, both opinion, and practice, are men's
own, or from themselves, and not from God, or agreeable unto his Word? Or are
there not several grounds, and these near at hand, very material and weighty,
to strengthen this conjecture? yea and when the Apostle Peter says, that those
that are unlearned and unstable, pervert, or wrest, the Scriptures, to their
own destruction, does not this great danger or misery arise from hence, that
they who do wrest the Scriptures, are inordinately conceited of, and
confidently rest and build upon, such notions, senses, and opinions, which are
engendered and begotten in their minds or consciences, by this
Scripture-wresting?

XXXIX.
Whether, is not the Testimony of that worthy, zealous, and learned Martyr Mr
John Philpot (recorded in a letter written by him to a friend of his, a
prisoner in Newgate at the same time) worthy credit and belief, wherein he
affirms, that Auxentius, an Arrian heretic, (with his adherents) was one of
the first that denied the Baptism of children, and next after him, Pelagius the
heretic? Or can Augustine be suspected, at least by those who have any
Competent knowledge of his unparalled candor and ingenuity, to speak any
thing but the truth, when he says that the Baptizing of Infants was a custom
of the Christian Church in his days, Salubriter firmata, wholsomely ratified
and confirmed De peccatonum meritis etc. lib. 3. c. 13.
: in another place, That the universal Church of Christ always held, or
retained the custom of Baptizing children even from the Apostles, and that it
was not instituted by any Council; and that no Christian would say that
children were impertinently, or in vain baptized Quod traditum cenet
universitas Ecclesi^. Cum parvuli infantes baptizantur, nullus Christianorum
dixerit eos inaniter baptizari. Et si quisquam in hac re authoritatem divinam
quaerat, quanquam quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed
semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime
creditur, tamen veraciter continere possumus quid valeat in parvulis baptismi
sacramentum ex circumcisione carnis, quam prior populus accepit, etc. Aug. de
Baptismo contra Donat. l. 4. c. 23.
(with much more to like purpose.) Or is not the testimony of Jerome worthy to
be received, who affirms, that he (with the Orthodox Christians in his days)
held one Baptism, which they affirmed ought to be administered in the same
Sacramental words unto Infants, and those of riper years. Baptisma unum
tenemus, quod iisdem sacramenti verbis in insantibus, quibus etiam in
majoribus, asserimus esse celebrandum. Hieron. t. 4. Symboli explan. ad Dama^um.


XL.
Whether can it proved from the Scriptures, or by any argument whatsoever, that
either Faith, or a profession, of Faith, is either the only, or the best
ground, either divisim or conjunctim, whereon to build a Baptismal
administration? Or whether did not the Apostles and those who baptized by their
direction and order in their days, insist upon believing, and profession of
believing, with men and women, who were willing, or desirous, to be baptized,
only for want of better, and of better assured grounds, whereon to proceed to
the baptizing of such persons? Or did they insist upon either of these
qualifications, in reference to the said Administration, simply and merely, as,
or because, they were such, or in respect of their positive and absolute
nature, and not rather, in respect of their relative natures, or properties,
viz. as they were significative, or declarative unto them [the Baptizers] and
unto others, of the happy estate of those in whom they were found, as being
persons in Grace and favor with God? Otherwise, how could the Lord Christ
himself, having no such Faith, as that which the Apostles and their Baptists
required (together with the profession of it) in those, whom they Baptized, be
a meet or duly qualified subject of this Administration? Or will any man
presume to say, that he was Baptized, either contrary unto, or besides, the
rule, or mind of God, touching persons meet to be Baptized, especially when as
himself renders this account why he submitted himself unto, and desired,
Biptism, viz. that it became him to fulfill all RIGHTEOUSNESS Mat. 3. 15
? And besides, is it not altogether irrational to imagine or think, that Faith
should be required in order unto Baptism, simply for Faiths sake? or profession
of Faith, merely for this Professions sake? Or that God, or Christ, should
enjoin a requirement of them upon such a slender account as this? Or that they
would ever have been nominated by them for qualifications unto Baptism in men
and women, unless they had been so significative or declarative, as has been
said, I mean, of the gracious acceptance of such persons, in whom they are,
with God? Yea or unless they had been declarative in this kind, upon the best
terms, whereof persons newly converted from ways of sin unto God, are capable,
there being no other way, or means, more effectual or proper for such persons
to make known their standing, or being, in the favor of God, unto others, then
by a profession of their believing in Jesus Christ; how ever it be most true,
that even such declarations as these, many times deceive those, who accept of
them, and trust to them, though without sin in those, who are so deceived? Now
then, if Faith, and profession of Faith, qualify for Baptism, merely in
respect of their relation, and as they report (with such credit as appertains
to them, and is meet to be given them by men) the persons in whom they are, and
from whom they proceed, to be in an estate of Grace and Favor with God, is it
not as evident as the Sun at noon day, that all persons of mankind, who are, or
may be known by more assured testimonies and declarations, then any man's own
profession of his own Faith amounts unto, to be in the same, or like grace and
favor with God, to be every whit as regularly, and as completely qualified for
Baptism, as the greatest and loudest Professors of their Faith under Heaven? If
so, are not Infants and Children before the commission of actual That Children
are in favor with God, and so declared, see briefly Redemp. Redeemed, p. 330,
516, 517.
sin, to whom God himself has given a loud and express testimony from Heaven,
that they are in grace and favor with him, and that to them, and such as they
are, belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. are they not (I say) upon this
account fully declared to be, not only or simply, regular and meet subjects of
Baptism, but subjects in this kind of the highest, and most unquestionable
qualifications?

For by one Spirit [not by one, or the same, water, or dipping] we are all
baptized into one Body. 1 Cor. 12. 13. What therefore God has joined together,
let no man put asunder. Matt. 19. 6. Baptismus sine impietatis scelere
conte^mni nequit: and gravissimam reprehensionem coram Deo and hominibus
merentur, qui tantum beneficium differunt, vel sibi, vel suis liberis accipere.
B^za Opusc. p. 334. Tingimus pueros, tingimus provectioris aetatis: -- Nullam
aetatem praecepit Baptismo Christus, sed neque ullam vetuit, Ecclesiae
Norlingensis Pastores. Scultet. Annal. Anno 1525. FINIS.

