Thirty Queries, Modestly propounded in order to a Discovery of the Truth, and
Mind of GOD, in that Question, or Case of Conscience; Whether the Civil
Magistrate stands bound by way of Duty to interpose his Power or Authority in
matters of Religion, or Worship of God.

By JOHN GOODWIN, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The servants said unto him, Will thou then that we go, and gather them up? But
he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the Wheat with
them. Let both grow together until the Harvest, etc. Matthew. 13. 28, 29, 30.
Man, who has made me a Judge, or Divider over you? Luke 12. 14. Let them alone:
they be blind leaders of the blind: Matthew. 15. 14. Dei lex nos docuit quid
sequamur: humanae leges hoc docere non possunt. Extorquere solent timidis
commutationem: fidem inspirare non possunt. Ambros. Epist. 13. LONDON, Printed
by J. M. for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd, 1653.

Some Queries concerning the Duty of the Civil Magistrate, in, and about his
public Interposure in matters of Faith, the Worship of God, and the promoting
Christian Religion.
I.
WHether any thing be incumbent by way of Duty upon the Civil Magistrate, being
Christian, simply in respect of his Office or place of Magistracy, because of
his being Christian, which would not have been matter of Duty to him, in cafe
he had been Pagan, and not Christian? Or whether the Office and Work of the
Civil Magistrate, as such, be not entire within it self, and consisting within
its own appropriate bounds and limits; so that nothing more accrues unto him,
by way of Duty, in his Office, by his being Christian; nor is any thing, which
is matter of Duty unto him, as a Magistrate, diminished or taken off from him,
by his being, or turning, Pagan? And if so, whether does God require of a Pagan
Magistrate, that according to his present Judgment and Conscience, he should
interpose and umpire with his Authority in matters of Christian Belief, or in
things appertaining to the Worship of God?

II.
Whether does it appertain to the Civil Magistrate, as such, to provide by
Civil penalties, as by disgracing, fining, imprisonment, death, etc. for the
observation of any other Law in his Territories, but of the Law of Nature only;
and of this so far only, as either it clearly dictateth or prescribes the
doing of such things, which have a rational connection with the welfare, honor,
and prosperity of that community of men, which is under his inspection and
government; or as it, with like clearness, restrains the doing of such other
things, which are in the eye of Reason contrary hereunto; considering that
matters of a more spiritual nature, and such which relate either by way of
sympathy, or opposition, only to an holy and humble walking with God, and not
properly or directly to the Civil Interest, are of another cognizance, and
committed by God to the care and faithfulness of Ecclesiastical Magistrates, in
conjunction with the Common Council of such Christian Churches, which are under
their inspection, respectively?

III.
Whether is the consent of the generality of the inhabitants of many Nations,
in one and the same principle, (especially relating to the maintenance and
upholding of their respective Idolatries and Superstitions,) any competent or
sufficient proof, that this principle is agreeable to the light, or Law of
Nature, or safe for Christians to practice and walk by; considering, that the
Devil (the God of this world) laboreth in the very fire to corrupt the
Judgments, to blind the Understandings, to pollute the Consciences of Men in
matters appertaining to the Worship of God, and has so sadly prevailed over
the world herein, as we generally know he has done? Or whether is that
principle of Mahometanism, according unto which the men of this Superstition
judge it lawful to put a Christian, or any other person, to death, who shall in
any of their Territories, call Mahomet, Accursed (wherein probably many other
Idolatrous Nations accord with them, in reference to their respective Gods, so
called) a sufficient ground for Christians to put a Mohammedan to death for
calling Christ, Accursed, in their Dominions? Or in case a Christian State
should thus practice, would it not be a snare of confirmation and obduration
upon the Mohammedan in his way?

IV.
Whether our Saviors intent in the Parable of the tares, where the householder
forbids his servants to GATHER up the tares, lest whilst they gathered up
these, they PLUCKED UP the Wheat also Mat 13 29.
, was not to prohibit such Magistrates, who are Christian and Orthodox, the
exercising of any degree of severity against Blasphemers, Seducers, Heretics,
erroneous persons, etc. simply as such, for this reason, lest by such an
example they occasion, or be accessory unto, the exercising of much greater
severity by Idolatrous and Heretical Magistrates upon Christians, and godly
persons, that are Orthodox and sound in their Judgment? And whether is not this
sense of the said passage, argued and asserted from the Context it self, and by
other Arguments, against all reasonable contradiction, in a Discourse (not many
years since published) entitled, Hagiomastix, etc. page 88, 89, 90, 91, 92,
93, 94, 25. as also in another Discourse printed not long after, and with
relation to it, entitled, a Postscript, or Appendix, p. 14, 15.

V.
Whether is that right of power to interpose in matters of Religion, as in
punishing Idolaters, Seducers, false Prophets, etc. which seems to have been
given to the Civil Magistrate amongst the Jews under the Mosaical Dispensation,
any reasonable or competent ground on which to judge, that Civil Magistrates
now, under the Gospel, and amongst the Gentiles, ought to assume (yea, or
lawfully may assume) the like power? Or are there not many reasons, and these
pregnant and undeniable, to prove the contrary, extant in the Discourse
mentioned, entitled, Hagiomostix, page 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, etc.

VI.
Whether the Lord Christ himself, did not strictly charge his Disciples
themselves, as well as others, not to accept of the title of Rabbi, or Masters,
from men, in these words, But be not ye called, Rabbi Mat. 23. 8.
? and again, Neither be ye called Masters? And whether they do not much more
then accept of these titles, even compel men to give them unto them, who under
civil Mulcts and Penalties shall exercise a Magisterial Jurisdiction over the
judgments and consciences of men in matters appertaining to God, requiring of
them either to believe such or such doctrines, or to submit to such or such
practices, whilst their judgments and consciences remain unsatisfied and
unconvinced of the truth of the one, and lawfulness of the other?

VII.
Whether may the Civil Magistrate, who derives and receives his power of
Magistracy from the people, lawfully exercise by virtue of his office, any
other kind of power, or any further degree of power, then may lawfully be
delegated unto him, and entrusted with him, by this people; yea, or may he
lawfully exercise any further degree of power then may reasonably be presumed
that the people intended, or at the utmost ought to have intended, to confer
upon him, or put into his hand? If he may, from whom, or by whom, shall this
surplussage of power be conceived to be derived unto him? or upon what account
can be justify himself in the exercise of it? If he may not, then by what
right can he exercise any power in matters of Faith, or over the judgments or
consciences of men, in as much as the common people from whom he receives the
entire body or sum of that power, which he administreth, have no right at all,
nor color of right, to delegate unto any man any authority or power to
intermeddle or officiate in one kind or other in the affairs of Jesus Christ,
and his Kingdom, or to regulate (authoritatively) the judgments and
consciences of men (no, not their own) in little or much, in things
appertaining unto God?

VIII.
Whether did not the Lord Christ rebuke his Disciples (and this somewhat
roundly) who desired a Commission or authority from him to call for fire from
Heaven, as Eliah formerly had done, to consume those, who refused to receive
him; did he not (I say) sharply reprove them in saying to them, Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of Luke 9. 54, 55, 56
? [meaning, that they did not consider the nature of the Gospel, and what
lenity ought to be showed toward sinners, in order to the propagation thereof,
above what the severity of the Law admitted.] And does not the reason which he
immediately subjoyneth, plainly show this to have been his meaning; For the Son
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them; as if he had said,
The end (or, one great end) of my coming into the world, was not that any man's
life should be destroyed, or taken from him for my sake, or for any injury done
unto me Ultra naturam aliquid monet, nempe inimicos diligendos esse,
adversarios veritatis tolerandos etc. -- Docet item regnum* Dei non esse regnum
in quo gladiis et fustibus res agatur. Marlorat. Exposit. Ecclesiastica in Luke
9. 55.
; but that I might mediate, persuade, and prevail with those, who otherwise are
severe against offenders, as you are, to exercise all lenity and patience
toward them, and to be tender over their lives, in order to the Salvation of
their Souls?

IX.
Whether, as the ancient saying amongst the Fathers was, Sanguis Martyrum,
semen Ecclesiae, i. e. the blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church, so
it be not altogether as true, and this upon the same account in reason, and
experimented accordingly in all ages, that Sanguis Haereticorum, semen
Haereseos, the blood of Heretics is the seed of Heresy? And whether is not
that saying of Tacitus, Punitis ingeniis gliscit authoritas, Punishment does
but make the authority and credit of any man's wit, or parts, to glow, shine,
and prevail the more, altogether as true in re Ecclesiastica sive Christiana,
in matters of an Ecclesiastical or Christian, as of a Politic or Civil,
import?

X.
Whether had not an Vzzah an honest and upright intention to accommodate the
Ark, and to preserve it from harm by shaking, when he put forth his hand to
keep it steady by holding it? and whether was not God offended with him
notwithstanding, making a breach upon him by slaying him in the place? Or was
the Ark of God in any real danger of suffering inconvenience by the shaking of
the Oxen, in case Vzzah had not intermedled to prevent it?

XI.
Whether might Paul in his days have been lawfully punished by the Civil
Magistrate in Ephesus, for that sedition, or Acts 19. 23, 24, etc.
tumult, which was occasioned in this City, by his preaching the Gospel, and
paricularly of this Doctrine, That they be no gods which are made with hands?
It not, whether may such Ministers or Preachers, upon occasion of whose
preaching Tumults are frequently raised by rude and inconsiderate people, be
punished by the Christian Magistrate upon this account? Or ought not rather the
Heads and Principals in such Tumults be enquired out, and punished?

XII.
Whether are not, Formality, Hypocrisy, Simulation, Dissimulation etc. in, and
about the Worship of God, sins of an high provocation in the sight of God? If
so, is it not simply unlawful, either for the Civil Magistrate, or any other
person whatsoever, either to compel, or to invite or tempt, unto any of these
sins? Or is not the punishing of such persons, for not frequenting the public
places of Divine Worship, who have no sense of a Deity; or others, for not
coming, or joining in, a State-worship, whose Judgments and Consciences
inwardly abhor such a Worship, as much as a compelling of men unto those sins?
Or whether is a Christian State any whit the more like to receive countenance
or blessing from God, for such practices in it as these?

XIII.
Whether was it reasonable, or at all pleasing unto God, that Pharaoh and his
Taskmasters should require of the Israelites their full tale of work, and yet
not give them straw? Or is there any whit more reason or equity, that
Magistrates should require subjection unto such Laws from men, to whom they
neither give (nor indeed are able to give) either wisdom or strength, whereby
they should be enabled to yield such subjection; at least if it be supposed
that they have no sufficiency of strength and power in this kind given unto
them by any other; yea such a sufficiency, whereby they are enabled to yield
this obedience or subjection under any temptation whatsoever to the contrary?
Or is it a thing equitable or lawful to impose Mulcts and Penalties upon blind
men, whose eyes were put out by their parents, because they see not?

XIV.
Whether can there any thing demonstratively, yea or probably, be concluded for
the punishing of Idolaters by the Civil Magistrate, from this passage in Job;
If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness: and my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand; this also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge Job 31. 26, 27, 28.
, etc. considering, 1. That these words, to be punished by the, have nothing in
the Original corresponding with them, but are inserted by the Translators upon
their own account, as the different character, wherein they are printed,
imports. 2. That this latter clause, this also were an iniquity to be
punished by the Judge (upon which the stress of the pretended in^erence lies)
is thus rendered, out of the Hebrew, by Arias Montanus: Etiam hoc iniquitas
judicata; i. e. this also [is, or has been] an adjudged iniquity; meaning,
that such a practice, or practices, which Job had now mentioned and described,
had been adjudged, [viz. by men fearing God] or rather was to be adjudged by
all men, impiously sinful. 3. That though the English Translation of the said
clause be admitted, yet it is no ways necessary that by the Judge therein
mentioned, we should understand the Civil Magistrate, or any Earthly Judge, but
rather the Judge of all the Earth, God himself. 4. (And lastly) That the sin of
Idolatry was not like to be punished by the Judges of the Earth in Jobs days,
being for the most part, if not generally, Idolaters themselves?

XV.
Whether is then a Sword put into the hand of the Civil Magistrate for the
punishment of false Teachers, by this passage in Zechary; And it shall come to
pass that when any shall yet prophecy, then his Father and Mother that begat
him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not live: for thou speak lies in the
Name of the Lord: and his Father and his Mother that begat him, shall thrust him
through, when he prophecyeth Zech. 13. 3.
; considering that many worthy Expositors, as well ancient, as modern,
understand the words in a figurative sense; yea and Mr Deodate, who lived where
High Presbytery had her Throne, as likewise our English Divines, though
desirous to enthrone the same Government also amongst them, yet in their joint
labor of Annotations upon the Bible, plead for the same Interpretation? This
with much more, for the opening the mind of the Holy Ghost in the said passage
of Scripture, is to be seen in a small Discourse written upon this account
only, published some years since under the Title of a Postscript, or Appendix,
being an Explication of Zech. 13. 3.

XVI.
Whether was it not the sense of Christian Antiquity even after Constantine's
days, That the Civil Magistrate, as such, had no right of umpirage in matters
of Christian Religion? And whether does not this sufficiently appear by these
and such like passages of Ambrose in his thirteenth Epistle, written to the
then Emperor, Valentinian. When did you hear, most gracious Emperor, that
Laics [i. e. persons in no Ecclesiastical, or Church Office] did ever censure,
or sentence any Bishop [or Pastor of a Church] in matters of Faith [or
Christian Religion?] And again: Your Father (through the goodness of God)
having lived to maturity of years, said, that it did not belong to him to give
judgment between Bishops, [meaning, as before, in causa fidei, in a case of
Faith, or Christian Belief.] So also: The Law of God has taught us what we are
to follow [or believe,] the Laws of men cannot teach us this. They may extort
from persons timorous a change [of their former profession,] but they cannot
inspire [them with an inward] belief [of what they outwardly profess Quando
audisti, Clementissime Imperator, in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopo judicasse?

Pater tuus (Deo favente) maturicris aevi, dicebat, non est meum judicare inter
Episcopos.

Dei lex nos docuit quid sequamur; humanae leges hoc docere non possunt.
Extorquere solent timidis commutationem; fidem inspirare non P^ssunt.


?] Now i^ the sense of Antiquity was, That the Supreme Magistrate, though
Christian, was not to umpire between Bishops, or Pastors of Churches, in
matters of Faith, evident it is that they were of the same mind touching his
incompetency to judge between other persons also in like cases; and consequently
that matters of Faith did not at all appertain to his cognizance, as a
Magistrate. For the reason why they conceived that it did not belong to the
Emperor to judge between Bishops in cases of Faith, could not be any
consideration of the particular quality, rank or function of these persons,
but only the nature and quality of those things, being spiritual, about which
they were at variance amongst them elves. This plainly appears by the express
specification (in the words cited) of those cases wherein the Emperor (as they
conceived) had no right of decision between the persons mentioned, as viz. in
matters of Faith: which clearly supposes, that in other cases viz. such which
are of a Civil nature and cognizance, they had the right and power we speak of;
however the. Church of Rome has since apostatized from this truth (with many
others) and embraced a lie in stead of it. Of like impott with the former is
that passage of Tertullian, where he says, That it is palpably unreasonable,
that men who are free, should be forced against their wills to sacrifice; when
as it is the willingness of the mind that is required in all Divine Services;
yea it may well be judged ridiculous that one man should be compelled by
another to honor the Gods, when as he stands bound at his peril to render
these propitious unto him of his own accord, Facile iniquum videtur liberos
homines invites urgeri ad sacrificandum; (nam and alias divinae rei faciundae
libens animus indicitur) certe ineptum existimaretur si quis ab ali^ cogeretur
ad honorem Deorum, quos ultro sui causa placare deberet, ne prae manuesset jure
libertatis dicere, n^l^ mihi Jovem propitium, Tertul. Apol, c. 28.
etc.

XVII.
Whether the Lord Christ has not expressly charged all men without exception
not to call any man, Father, upon the Earth, in these words, and call no man
your Father upon the Earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven Mat. 23.
9.
? And whether do not they sin with an high hand against this charge, who shall
receive, or consent unto, any Doctrine, or submit unto any practice in, or
about the Worship of God, upon the account only of such or such a man's, or of
such or such men's judgment or authority, and without any satisfactory ground
within themselves, that such, whether doctrine, or practice, is agreeable to
the Word of God?

XVIII.
Whether are any two, four, or six persons, suppose all of them godly, learned,
and competently (yea let it be, if you please, excellently) quilified for the
Ministry of the Go^^el, competent Judges of the gifts, parts, and Ministerial
abilities of many thousands of their Brethren? Or is it Christian or meet to
make or set up Nebuchadnezzars in the Church of Christ, persons (I mean) who
shall Ecclesiastically slay whom they will, and whom they will keep alive; set
up whom they will, and whom they will, put down? Or in case it shall be judged
expedient for the affairs of the Gospel, that any such number of Persons be
invested with such a prodigiousness of power, who are competent Judges of the
meetnesse, or worthiness of Persons to be entrusted herewith; especially where
there are so many thousands, as this Nation (through the abundant blessing of
God upon it) affords, of very excellent abilities and endowments, amongst
whom it is next to an impossibility for men to single out any two, four, or six
Persons, to whose worth and abilities all the rest shall by any Law of God, or
of equity and reason it self, stand bound to stoop or do homage? Or is it not a
Solecism in reason and conscience, that greater parts, learning, and worth,
should be compelled to go on foot, whilst those which are meaner and more
servile are made to ride on Horses?

XIX.
Whether in case any two, four, or six persons shall be advanced to that Power
and Interest now mentioned, are not they like to be the men, who wear soft
raiment, and live in Kings Houses; I mean, whose applications have been to the
greatness of this World, who by ignoble artifices and compliances have
infinuated themselves into the familiarity and friendship of the anointed
Cherubs of the Earth, and such, who being ascended on High, are able to give
gifts unto men? And whether are such persons as these, who cannot, Charity her
self being Judge, but be judged great lovers of this present World, meet to be
entrusted with that High Umpitage specified, in the affairs of Jesus Christ?

XX.
Whether has not God in his Word directed, prescribed, and enjoined all
methods, ways, and means any ways necessary (at least so judged by him) for
the propagation of the Gospel in the world? If so, is not any additional
course, or device of men in order hereunto (I mean any such course, which is
not reducible to some, or other, one, or more, of the means prescribed by him)
a constructive insinuation, either that men are wiser, or else more provident
and careful, of saving the Souls of men, then God himself? Or is the device of
authorizing a small number of men to commission whom they please for the
preaching of the Gospel, and again to exclude whom they please from preaching
the Gospel, either any of those means, which God has sanctified for the
propagation of the Gospel, or reducible to any of them?

XXI.
Whether since the days of Christ, and of his Apostles, can it be proved, or is
it in it self at all probable, that ever any person, who preached the Gospel,
how faithful and serviceable soever to God and men in his way, was wholly free
from error, or universally Orthodox? Or can it reasonably be thought either
pleasing to God, or profitable unto men, or advantageous to the Gospel, that no
man should be admitted to the preaching of it, but only those, who shall be
adjudged by a few men, and these in some things (without all doubt or question)
possibly in many things, weak and erroneous themselves, to be throughout the
whole circumference of their Faith unspotted with error, and in all their
Tenants and Opinions unquestionably Orthodox and sound? Or, in case some
heterodox or unsound Opinions may be tolerated in those, who shall be permitted
to preach the Gospel, what, or of what nature, or to what degree dangerous, may
these Opinions be? Or who, according to the Word of God, shall be judged meet
to umpire in this so great and difficult an affair?

XXII.
Whether is it meet or Christian, for any man, or any number of men (especially
for any smaller or inconsiderable number of men) to presume so far of their own
gifts, abilities, wisdom, learning, knowledge, insight into the Scriptures, etc.
as to judge themselves worthy or meet to prescribe authoritatively, and to the
exposing of those, whom they shall make Delinquents, to Civil penalties or
inconveniences, unto the gifts, parts, learning and knowledge of other men, and
these (probably) no ways inferior, possibly superior to themselves, in all such
qualifications and endowments? Or is it Christian or reasonable, either to
tempt men into such a conceit, or to indulge men under such a conceit, of
themselves, by delegating such a power, or authority unto them?

XXIII.
Whether is it not generally held, and maintained by our best Protestant
Writers, Divines, and others, against Papists, that even General Councels
themselves may err in matters of Faith? and that there is no infallible Judge on
Earth in Controversies incident to Christian Religion?

XXIV.
Whether is not the manifestation of the Spirit (as the Apostle terms the
manifest gifts of the Spirit of God) given to every man to profit withal? If
so, who can with a good Conscience inhibit such from publishing or preaching
the Gospel, upon pretense of an unsoundness in some disputable Opinions, or for
want of that, which some men call Ordination, whose abilities for that work are
at least competent, and the exercise of them desired by many for their
Edification?

XXV.
Whether did those Christians, who, upon occasion of a great persecution raised
against the Church at Jerusalem, being scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the Word, pass any Acts 8. 1, 4
test of their abilities, or sufficiency for the work, before they put forth
their hand unto it? Or is their fact in preaching the Gospel upon such terms,
and before any public approbation, any ways censurable by the Word of God?

XXVI.
Whether is it likely that persons called to the work of Magistracy and Civil
Government, upon which very thing, if conscientious, they do attend CONTINUALLY
Romans 13. 6.
, and so have little time to wade into the depths of controversal Divinity, or
to inform their Judgments thoroughly on which side of the way the Truth lies in
many difficult and abstruse Questions, much agitated and debated by studious
and learned men, should be able to distinguish (as it were by the face) who are
the Orthodox, and who the Heterodox men? And if this be not likely, whether can
they reasonably claim any such Interest or right of power, whereby to nominate
and appoint men for the trial of the meetness of all other men, for the work
and service of the Gospel?

XXVII.
Whether such persons, which shall be nominated and appointed by the chief
Rulers in a State, to adjudg the meetness, and unmeetness of men for preaching
the Gospel, are not like to be of a State Religion; I mean, to be every ways
conformable in their Judgments to such Tenants and Opinions in Religion, which
that State, or generality of people in that State, consent unto, hold, and
maintain? And if so, whether are they not like to be corrupt, rotten, or
unsound in many of their Religious Principles, or Opinions, considering, 1.
That (for the most part) men in rule, authority, and power, are enemies to
Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 15 24 25. compared.
, and so not like to receive the Gospel in the purity and truth of it. 2. That
the generality or great bulk of people in any State (who generally are of the
same Religion, both for principles and practice, with their Supreme Heads and
Governors, as these likewise are of the same Religion with them in both) were
never known to have embraced, or admitted such Evangelical Doctrines, or
Truths, which are clearly and plainly destructive to the flesh, or whose faces
are directly set against their corrupt, sensual, profane, and vain practices
and ways; nor is it (indeed) in it self a thing any ways likely ever thus to be?

XXVIII.
Whether are not all men bound to pray, that the Lord would send forth Laborers
into his harvest Mat. 9 38.
; and if their prayer in this behalf be (as it may, and ought to be)
effectually fervent, whether shall it not prevail, and consequently will not
the Lord of the Harvest himself send forth Laborers hereinto? If so, are not
such persons, who shall be commissioned with power to Elect and Reprobate whom
they please, amongst those whose hearts shall stir them up to labor in this
Harvest, more like to refuse or keep back those (at least some of them) whom
the Lord shall send forth (i. e. shall stir up their hearts to go) into this
Harvest, then any ways to accommodate him in his way, or to promote the
Harvest-work it self?

XXIX.
Whether is there any whit more ground for the Civil Magistrate to act out of
his sphere, (I mean, in matters which are not of a politic or civil, but of a
spiritual or ecclesiastic consideration) then there is for the Church
Magistrate, or Ecclesiastical Elder to act out of his, and to interpose in
matters of State, and civil policy? And if the Lord Christ refused to
arbitrate in a civil case between Brethren, replying to him that desired it at
his hand, Man, who made me a Judge, or Divider over you; Luke 12. 14.
Whether has not the Civil Magistrate, as much, or more, reason to disclaim
all interposure, as a Magistrate, in spiritual affairs, and to say unto those,
who shall desire or expect any thing from him in this kind, Who made me an
Ecclesiastical Judge, or Spiritual Decider over you?

XXX.
Whether, when the Apostle, speaking of the Civil Magistrate, says of him,
that he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath on him that does
evil, Romans 13 4.
are these words, him that does evil, to be extended as well to him that is a
spiritual Delinquent or Evil Doer only (viz.) that teaches false Doctrine,
reproves or disparageth him that teaches true, worshippeth God in a false
manner, or otherwise then he ought, etc. or to be confined to such Evil Doers
only, who sin against the clear light and Law of Nature, or the lawful
politic constitutions of the State where he lives? Or has it not by sundry
undeniable grounds and reasons been proved, that the said words ought to be
thus limited and understood, in the Discourse formerly mentioned under the
title of Hagiomastix, Page 58. 59, 60, 61, 62, etc.

FINIS.

