The Controversy Between EPISCOPACY And PRESBYTERY: Stated and discussed, By
way of LETTERS, at the desire of a person of Quality and Learning. By J.
Gailbard, A. M. and D.

Have we not all one Father, etc. Malachi 2.10. Ye are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophet Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. Printed for the Author, 1660.

To the READER.
THis piece might so^ner have come forth, had not the indiscretion of some and
the malice of others hindered it: for information being g ven by some busy
bo^y that it was a ^angerous book, the Copy was ^a^ly delivered into the ha^^s
of th^^e (...) it: whereupon I went voluntarily to them who had power t^ examine
the business: but after three weeks atten^an^, perceiving that the design was
only to hinder the printing of it and detain the Copy, I betook my self to a
review of my former draught of it, out of which I ^^am^^ the copy now committed
to the Press, there being little or no alte^ation at all from that which was
kept from me. Resides the former (...) I ha^^: to wit, the discharge of my duty
to God, the re^ ^rd I (...) the Truth, my obedience to the desires of two N
blemen and the i^^^mation of the people; several persons bearing of it did
earnestly (...) me to ^^p^se it to the publi^e (...), whereby the exp^ctation
of th se that heard of it should be satisfied: wherefore, calli g to mind that
(...) pro^^cution was made against me, and interpreting the silence of those
whom the affair was referred to as an a^ putting and clearing of the (...) from
a^^ guilt (and (...) to them) after I had said ma^^ times that I w^^^ t^ (...)
to (...) I deser^^d it, now (...) ^ide^ (...) to the Pre^^^^ I think it
necessary in th^^ (...) ^^st in time though first in order, to acquaint the
world how th^^^ I was very ^^^^lly used in words, yet as to the thing it was
some^hat (...) of three weeks was a sufficient time for any one (...), and to
make a report (...) it (although I confess I did (...) to have such Correctors
of my work) but in the end of that time (...) a promise from one, who knows
whom I mean, to receive it at Whitehall the next day between 10 and 11 ^f the
clock: but he was not (...) to the pre^^^ (...) m^^h, (...) to the (...) I
(...) Rome: (...).

The former Epistle to the READER.
TH^^ (...).

Sir,
I Received (...) deal (...) of you^ wo^^ at (...), I w^^ loath to (...) of
(...) but afterwa^d I have (...), that I ^a^ (...) any (...) ^^cessary to a
piece (...) E^^^ (...), when I ^aw y^^ to ^^^n^h into the (...) of th^^^
D^^^^l^^^s, (...) a (...) ^nternation from you^ in (...) I n^v^^ (...) any
(...) cons^^^ (...) of you^ (...), yet at (...) you (...) wonder by ^^t^cting
more then I expected, w^^ (...) o^ the ^bject, though I (...) behalf, yet I a
count it to be of a more p^^^^^^ (...) to be (...) to the view of a few
parti^^la^ m^n, an^ (...) the (...) est^em which I (...) I do not envy the
advantage that many (...), it, but I ^^^^dence you to b^ persuaded not to
dep^ive the people o^ the ^^^^^^action they shall (...) by. And, it I (...) no
doubt but the (...) of the Noble Lord will do (...) reflect upon present (...),
and how much people will by it be informed of the truth of the c^nt^^verted
Q^^^ions which we (...) before to cl^^ly (...), you^ mode ly I hope will
condescend to the publication of it, o^ ^^e I reserve my ^elf that (...) in
(...) of extremity: grant me therefore that which you cannot deny, and so you^
labor shall come to its perfection, and the cro^ned with the general appla^^e
of religious men: The obtaining of my ^e^^e, ^^ll lay an Obligation from me
upon the public, but the public and I shall receive it as a si^n of your
affecti^n to both: And let others think for a requital, as for me, I will more
then ever be found to be

The 9th. of July 1^60. Yours, etc.


NOtwithstanding the (...) ^etter, to (...) these, I earnestly entreated that
Ho^^^^ble (...) me from it, (...) I never intended (...) only (...) (...)
consequence of i^ I should (...) in the matter, in the expre^^^on, and in the
(...) Arguments. I have further represented (...) in the (...) Tongue for I am
a stran^^ (...) wherefore, (...) Latin Tongue, (...) answered me, he intend^^
(...) people, and therefore though the ^^yle (...) an^ inteli^^ble, such (...)
expressions. With (...) ^e^^ed me to (...) wherefore, (...) be^^^^e I ^o prefer
(...) Pub^^ck, before my own (...) confident (...) Nation who will not be
ashamed to (...) will I ever declin^ (...) the ^^lp o^ God's Grace) wheresoever
(...) I am the more inclined to do at (...) a^^e^ted in p^^^.

The (...) Letter
I (...) State (...) Nation: Now (...), all o^^^^ (...): whence you (...) the
(...) o^ ^o (...): Nay, I ^o (...) con^^tion thin (...) their ay^ at
Reformation in Doctrine and Worship cannot be blamed but by erroneous and
licen^^ous persons; howsoever it is not ^o much their cause as that of God: and
therefore, I make no doubt but that h^ will appear for ^t at the last. (...), I
am con^i^tent that as there is a God, so his work will be done in his do ^^ne,
and if men be blockt in his way he will remove them. In th^^ ^ontroversie
secular persons al^o a e engaged: ^^ne, because Epis^^p^^^ i^ an (...), and
therefore good of b^d they must have it; saying further, it does be^^^^ fit the
temper of the generality of people, which i^ not ab^olutely true, the
Pre^byter^^n party being very considerable. And suppose i^ were so, must we fi^
the ways of God to man's humors: St. Paul is of another min^, E se^k says he,
(...) please men, then am I not the servant of Christ. Others will have
Epi^^pa^^ (even Noblemen, not all, for many prefer conscience to interest)
because their younger sons may thereby become spiritual Lords. Others as
ignorant wid have it, for hereby they are kept and flattered in their
ignorance. And others as licentious, because they are not restrained from evil
Courses, but are suffered to go on in them.

But perhaps I may satisfy you the more, if I do show when these D^visions did
first spring up: In the days of that good King J^siah^ like Edward the sixth,
whose chief study was to work Reformation, as he did in a good measure,
considering how God was pleased to call him out of this life in the sixteenth
year of his age; Then there were th^se who knowing God to be a spirit, they
knew also he would be worshipped in spirit and in truth, John 4. And also, that
Religion does not consist in outward apparel, for it is not to be defiled with
the attire of the Harlot: But it does consist in the inward man, and therefore
their desire was to see Excrements of Popery removed of purged. But blo^dy
Queen Mary his Successor, bringing in again Popery through persecution, all
this good work was at a stand till God was pleased to call to the Throne that
unparalleled Princess Queen Elizabeth, who did a great work in reforming
Doctrine: but as to outward things, as Ceremonies, being thought but
circumstantial, they were not all taken away, either because they were thought
indiffer^nt, or else because it was not thou^ht safe to alter all at once; o^
else, that God would not have one person to work a tho^^ Reformation, unless
the glo y due to him alone were in any way trans^^^ed on h^^ s^^vants and
laborers in his Vineyard. Yet those reli^^^^ (...) ^^oken of in K^n^ ^^^a^^s
tim^, began to (...) of a furthe Reformation which they called Purity, whence
came to them the name (...) but (...) t^^^e th ngs were in a balance till ^ing
(...) them to a conformity, though with no success: (...) against them we^e in
the ^^me of (...) A^^^-B^^hop of (...), who joined the (...) to the (...)
Ministers of State and Patriark, if not (...) and a p^^^ Bishop he was, (...),
he tumult in violence (...) by introducing an ^n^^^^ry (...) and (...) in all
probability, (...) to have followed: ^o^, i^ (...) ^^an^e of Reli^^^n, he (...)
begin (...) they (...) one further* for, (...), as it will appear afterward:
(...) as ^^^er Primate of Ire^ (...) M^rion, (...), a any (...), wherein were
many Po^ (...), that the^e were ^^^nt to p^t (...), as D^^ Man ^^gu^ accused of
(...) cen^^red by the ^in, yet he was (...), while ^othe^ was a Pap^^: (...),
Parliament, (...) the Kin^ ^avour (...), as to be ^^^^ent to the (...) designs
of others, (...) P^^^ts and J^^uit^ being (...) and active (...) to ^^in^ (...)
in^luded) to pre^erve the (...) in Religion: but this (...) well known, I will
come to present (...).

(...) the whole King^o^ of S^^^land, are (...) part of (...) prote^ (...) to
^y, almost hi^^ (...) the Nation, (...) ^^^ng th^e Truth, which is pro^ (...)
even by many P^^ es of the (...) many new Lord have been created: (...) and
really Divine (...) Defenders of that (...) in the maintaining of it, specially
under (...) to ^^we them their dye, they are ge^ (...) of the glory of God:
(...) cannot be given (...) their Adve^^^^, (...) pride (...) and Honors, man
(...) to that superflu^tie to be seen in Princes Courts? Where, I beseech you,
does the pride be either in those that are for Equality, or in them who
contend for Superiority; And for my part, I think that there are these three
kinds of persons stiff for Episcopacy: First, the Learned, who being eminent
above the common, are in hopes of this great preferment, secondly, ignorant,
and thirdly, profane, whose evil works a^e tolerated: Many of your Episcopal
men as I know by conversation with them, a^e of a most revengeful nature, and I
believe, if their power were extended as far as their desires, their cruelty
would be in the height; they talk of nothing but how such has deserved to dye,
another ought to be turned out of his Living: how unbecoming is it in the month
of those professing to be Ministers of Christ, if they speak of Presbyterian
Ministers: to give them the names of Fellow, Dog, Knave, Rascal, Rogue and such
others, which ought to be the language of the Devil more then of men? yet, this
I have heard with mine own ears: where is Charity in this! is not there a
spirit of wrath, hatred, pride? In a word, the spirit of the Devil: but their
iniquity shall reprove them, Jerem. 2.

Being then of this temper, it may clearly be perceived what they aim at, and
indeed their actions do declare it; for before they act in the height if they be
permitted, they will weaken their Adversares party; To this end they turn out,
of banish the most Eminent of the Independents, whose miscarriages I profess I
do condemn, and much more if they have any thing of Error; but the truth is,
they are able and stiff opposers of Episcopacy, although we confess the
goodness of the Presbyterians cause wants no such Defenders, and if it did,
they may find them amongst themselves: (when it will be the Presbyterians turn
God knows.) The other side it is sure, the Episcopal part have thought it
policy to procure the prosering of Bishoprics to two of the most Eminent of
their Adversaries, thinking to bribe them thereby to the betraying of their
trust and Cause, who, I hope will prefer the keeping of a good conscience to
all those worldly preferments: Now, if they did not mistrust the Goodness and
justice of their Cause, would they make use of such proceedings, and perhaps of
worse, which in time may be discovered.

However, we know what they aim at, to bring all to the old way, and that which
from it is to be expected you will hear, they will leave things necessary, as
if they were indifferent: such is the observation of the Lords Day, the
profanation thereof in Banquettings, Revellings, dan^ngs, etc. was ^n^t^^ed
specially about M^^po^^, which are occasion of many Oaths sworn, of
^^un^^nne^s, (...) committed there (...) besides the propinnation of the Day,
to that it was wittily (...) thy ^^e son of a Nobleman, there were (...) C^^^an
(...) the P^pists had taken off the second, and Canterbury the (...) Now (...)
^^ing should be suffere^, and a Pa^^^^ (...) by a bishop (...) wh^^eby they
will r st^a^n the Gospel ^ithin the ^leeve^ of a B^^^^, who upon some
Pointe^^er^, if a (...) be not asked for p^^^^ing in his Diocese, (...) will
call in question a M^nut^^ in Ch^^^t (...) to preach. This, and many other than
(...) the (...) natu e which I am a^hamed to spe^^^ (...) they have the ^a^e to
do them; This I say it the (...).

(...) not ^^tisfied with this, they went another extremity to pre^^ing^ that
are indifferent as necessary including them as a b^^the^ to me^^ con^cien^es:
these are superstitious outward R^tes and Ce^^^^^^e^, (...) Min^sters to preach
once a fo^^night, and this with (...) to baptize with the si^n of the Cross, to
bow at the Name of Je^^, to stoop before the Altar when there is no need of
Altar, to an ^n Procession hal^ a (...) and more out of a Town, to (...) a
Cross, that is nothing but that which a Papist can and well (...) Shall a
Prayer-^^ok ^^afed with (...) of Saints be forced to be read, when there cann^^
but be superstition and Idolatry, de^o^^ting to Christ's Intercession, as if I
expected to be heard the better because of such a Saint* Must I have a Gospel,
a Collect, an Epistle and a prayer, for all this, it is I^olatry to pray to
Saints, and to pray by we (...) of Saints, and of this shall I read the (...)
the people the 2d. I the 3d. the people, the 4th, etc. What, confesion in the
House of the (...) Shall upon the 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Sondayes in Lent read such
and such things? (...) I upon Goodfriday be ^ed to a Letany and th ngs of such
na^^e, (even it being uncertain whither ^uch a Day b^ the day of the Passion)
which I find to be translated (...) o^ the mi^^al? Shall I neglect the (...) of
prayer that is (...), and to grieve the Holy Ghost, and shall we a ways (...)
and helps, and ever be children in Prayer? Shall ^^mitate the Spirit so as to
be bound by things of a (...) institution, i^ not ^nvention? O, shall I be
sufficiently qualified to be a Min ste^ because I can find and read my Lessons
in such a common Prayer Book, which is o^casion of ^ilenesse? Or shall my
conscience be obliged to that book, of the which one of them, the Primate of
Ireland, has said, There are things that ought to be taken off, others added,
and others to be altered.

No^, I hold that Ceremonies ought wholly to be taken away: se^ Mar^, I^^. C^^^
^ap 4 (...) 51. sect. 21. First, because contrary (...) the purity of Go^s
Wo^ship, who will be worshipped in spirit and truth, (...) is the Gospel a
ceremonial Law.) But here he is wo^shipped in outward Apparel instead of an
inward frame of spirit; and can that worship be said to be in truth when there
is not the least shadow of it in Scriptures. But they will tell me, if things
are to be abolished because abused, then meat and drink shall be taken away
because there are Gluttons and Drunkards, but this is not to the purpose: I
confess in things substantial, essential and necessary, the ^^e is not to be
taken away th^ugh it be profaned by Papists. Thus of bread and drink because
necessary for a man's life: but for those things that are circumstantial and
indifferent, if abused, they ought to be taken off, Such are the things now in
question: that they are not necessary, they must confess it, there being not
the least shadow or sign for it in Sc ipture as of Surplice sign of the Cross,
etc. If therefore it be indifferent, why pressed upon a tender conscience, if
thought necessary, then herein lies the superstition. Now any one of these
being come to be superstitious, it is no more indifferent, but to be taken off
altogether: as Ezec^iah, to his great commendation broke the B^azen Serpent,
for the which there was more to plead, then for these sottish Garments, for it
was Erected by Gods command, but the other thin^^ not so.

I wish every one that is so forward for Ceremonies, to perus^ a Preface in the
Comm Prayer Book, wherein it is said, That because Ceremonies were grown
numerous, super fluous, superstitious, and a yoke unto ^^uls, therefore some
were taken away: By virtue of the same reasons, we may desire the abolishing of
all others.

As for the kneeling at the Lords Supper, it being indifferent, must not be
pressed as necessary, so as that one shall not receive the Sacrament exc pt he
kneeles: yet methinks because of the gross error of Papists about it, it will
be well to abstain from that posture, to avoid appearance and suspicion of
Idolatry: As it is the Apostles advice, and it may lawfully be taken in another
posture: for at such (...) a man ought not to be in a praying posture: yet if a
person (...) ^^tisfie me, that he has no superstitious reason to take it this:
I think a man ou^ht to administer it to him. But being gone already beyond the
^^tent of a Letter, and ^ea^ing to (...) you^ patience in the pe^^sal o^ this,
I ^^ave le^ve to b^t^^e my self to my ^^^er (...) till the ^en^ opp^tunity I
shall have, to testify ^ith my father: obedience to your commands how
sincerely I am,

Honorable S^^, Yours, etc. G.
June the ^^ 166^
The third Letter.
(...),
IT i^ an (...) ^^^^nary satisfaction to me, and a sign of your wonted (...),
that you do accept of my weak endeavors which I have (...) the sati^fy^^^ of
your desires, and since you are (...), that I have had the happiness to answer
your expectation i^to (...) a measure, and to give such a deal of contentment
to that Noble person. I take it not as a reward de^erved by my passed l^b^^^,
but (...) ^n encouragement to that which i^ to come: having therefore in the
end of my last, spoken of the judgment (...) men and P^^^by^er^a^s, d^ffe^ in:
abo^^ circumstan^^^l things as ^^^ard Rites and Ceremonies: Now I must show
they differ in (...) of a hi^^er nature, such as Ordination. The P^^l^^^; any
d^^ay that Ordination (...) to be lawful which is not made by a B^^hop, this
is a most uncharitable thought of the^: as if the O^^^nation of ^^^la^^sh
Ministers to France and Holand were no lawful ordination though without
B^sh^^^: Yet, some of the^^ (...) men t^k^ them to be, as they are, lawful
Ministers, and one of them: (...) I wish all ^e^e like to him (...), that a
Bishop ordains no^ ^t a Bi^^^^, but as a P^^s^^^er, and in (...) Scripture
does show that it is done by P^e^^^^^, (...) 4.14. Neither (...) I ^ee any
reason why th y sh^^^^ make any distinction between the ^^^nation of Bis^o^^ in
their s^n^e and Ministers, and to call the one consecration as if by o^^^nation
they were not consecrated, when it is ^ell known that con^^^^^^tion of Bishops
(to make use of their word) (...) called by S. Paul, The ^^^ing on of hands by
the Presbyters: it (...) thy we^^ a Bishop, ^s they assert it. 1 Timothy 4 14. You
see then, tha^ though (...) should (...) Bishops to be different in ^egree ^^om
Ministers which we deny) yet they ought to submit to the ^aying on of h^nds by
the P^^^byter^^, which impo^^tion of hands, it is after the ^iving of the (...)
of Fellowship, as St. Paul speak^, Gal. 2.9. As to the consecration of
Churches, it has no President in the New Testament; and I know of no other
Consecration but the separating of them from a common use, and appointin^ them
to an holy end; As for the na^^ng, or as they call it Christning and baptizing
of Churches and Bells, their authority is from Popery and not Scripture;
howsoever I may observe it as a prophanati^n of that holy Sacrament, and an
adulterating of it is Object.

B^t alas, if there were nothing but this, although it be much, yet it would be
tolerable, but there is that which is a great deal worse, they do d ster in
more then Church Government: it is even in fundamental points of Doctrine: I
fear the ^^d consequences of Prelacy, if it be set up, for the face of the
Church shall be overflown with a stream of Errors and Heresies: I tremble to
think, and I am frighted to say there will be Antichristian Bishops: for if
that way be set up, then those that are most eminent amongst them will be set
up in that Office; and it is known that two sorts of persons are
Antichristians, some being against Christ's Person, and others against his
Grace: and amongst them I know some (whose names charitably I spare, although
there be no need of such tenderness, since some have published in print their
Errors,) Some I know to be Socintans denying Christ's Deity; Others, Pelagians
disowning original sin. Others have, and still do profess themselves
Lutherans in the point of Consubstantiation, which destroys the nature of
Christ's Body, and the Articles of his Ascersion, and sitting at the right hand
of God: As for Arminianism destructive of Grace, it is boldly and publicly
professed by most of them, if not all: For, I confess of those many whom I
know to be of that party; there is none who destroys not Grace, to set up the
strength of man's will which is meet Sci^^pelagianism, owned by them to the
hei^ht: Nay, there be some so impudent as to publish in p^^nt that which is
called Arminianism to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, wilfully, not
taking notice of the 9. Artic. that after the Synod of Dor^ were inserted into
the Confession of Faith of the Church of England by King James his command,
who, as it is known was no friend to Puritans, yea, a great enemy to Armin^ant,
because of their affinity, nay, identity of Doctrine with ^erttius in point of
prescience, whose great Antagonist King James, was, as his writings declare him
to be.

I know well, that to make the Presbyterian Church Government ^^^ous, they much
disclaim against the rigidness of it: saying, the ^^st ^^^er of it to be
heavier then the ^^ins of Episcopacy: but we must cons^^^ in that the^ are ne^d
and (...) it (...) in necessary things: (...) they are to be commen^^^ and not
blamed for th^^ order (...), the necessary (...) it is to restrain
^^^^uousnesse and (...) to (...) Ch^rch-Cen^^res (...) there must be no ^^^ang
be (...), and (...) to be (...) can (...), we ^re^ (...) C^^^monies, (...)
which are necessity, ^s the san^^ifi^tion of the Sabbath, and ^^an like.

I (...) they w ll press that often e ^^ne (...) Maxi^^, No Bi^^^^, (...)
therefore, to^^ P^^r^archie, you destroy Monarchy; (...) appeare^ by the
^^^amp^e o^ the Protestants in (...), who (...) they have no Bishops, yet they
are ^reat lo^^^^ and loyal to their Kin^, even amidst the greatest person
uri^^^ they have p^^^^^d th^i^ fideli^^^ to their Sove^^^^. So ^n (...) of
Gov^rn^en^^ a^ the Pa^a^^^^^, ^^and^^^^^, etc. And to ^o^re ne^^^^ home into
Scotland, ^n the late troubles they had no Bi^^^p^ (in the late sense) yet
their loyalty to their Sovereign, testif^^d by their several attempt^ for him,
at Worcester, etc. do clea^ly evince the^ (...) have been as loyal to his
Majesty as any part of ^^g^and wherefore, I cannot b^t abhor the damnable
sl^nde^ of (...) ^^ainst Pa^itan^, as if they were persons of principles (...)
to the Authority of their P^inces: and their reason it, beca^^^, say they,
Cal^^^ allows it, but al^^, have the Paritans sw^^ upon the (...) Ca^^^^ (...)
they consider him in ^^ed as a (...), who in his time w^ (...) be wonder^^lly
for Reformation; (...) of a man so extraordinary ^^^ed, they will (...) than be
(...) consonant to Scriptures, which he (...) in the mean while he gives them
the lie for (...), in his W^^^ De Mag^stra^^^ the lost of his institution. And
(...) Presbyterians by their pra^^ (...) upon t^^ l^^^ Deliveran^e, and
c^nsider them (...) Royalty do, they (...) where (...) that, they were as low
as (...), let them ^ant now as high as they will. How great (...) M^^^ receiv^
from the ^e^^ who (...) his Army? D d not the Lo^^ (...) a^pear to b^^^ h^^ ^as
not the C^^y, (...) mo^^ P^^t^^r^^s then ^^^ceptal, ^ow (...) and (...) not the
secluded members (...) th^^^ (...), that is was for want (...) no^ yet by the^
(...) to (...) in, by causing the Covenant to be set up in the House, and in
all public places; In a word, the Presbyterians cannot be deprived of the
honor of having brought in the King. And if M. had not herein departed of his
honesty, that Parliament might have made this a happy and settled Nation in
state as it began, but in Church, better then, I fear it will be.

Yet the Presbyterians trusted upon the King's taking the Covenant, the
performance of which they may plead; for, it was not found in Scotland alone,
but also extended to England and Ireland: it was indeed with horror I heard
one of the prelatical party to say, that the King was not obliged to keep the
Covenant, but only to repent o^ it? Is not this, I beseech you, to break all
divine and humane R ghts and Society, and to let the door open to all
perjurie: The Anabaptists say no more, they do not think themselves bound to
observe any Oath; but we hope the King has a better conscience then such
unconscionable persons, or else I tremble to think what judgments are like to
befall his person or Family, or the Land; a Covenant taken in so solemn a
manner, God being called upon as a witness and Avenger in case of perjurie; he
will not be mocked, not suffer to be called a witness to a lie, for he says,
he will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain; No, it is well
known how his Majesty took it, and that therein be s^^^^ to extirpate
Prelacie, and that he is bound to the observation of it no godly person can
deny: indeed there are four kinds of Oaths, which being evil in the substance,
it is evil to take them, and double evil to execute them, as in Herod's oath to
Herodian's daughter: but as to oaths taken about indifferent things, which we
may take or not take, we are bound afterward to observe them, when they are
taken, though, as David says, Psalm 15. they were to our own hurt. The King
was not forced to take it, for if he would not, why did he take it: I heard a
Lawyer say, That a man may bind himself to a post, and if that post can call
him to the performance of his bond, he is bound to perform it: so his Majesty
having taken the Covenant, it in conscience bound (I speak as a Ca^^ist) to see
it performed, since he freely consented to take it when he was yet at Breda
before he came to Scotland, but chiefly because, the end of the Covenant, to
wit, Reformation, was good, yea necessary, as it may clearly be demonstrated
from the danger wherein Religion was when it was taken; I will give him the
Example of Joshua and the Gibeonites, who, although they had belyed him, and
although God had before forb^^^en to ma^e any covenant with them, yet because
they had (...) by the L^^d, (...), I^b. 9. and we know how (...) by Saul upon
the Kingdom in David's ^^yes (...) and then upon Sau^ children: I desire that
C^^enant and (...) p^^alle^ed in all (...) ^^m^^an^es. As for me, I eve^ (...)
upon (...), as one of the ^^ying sins that brought such ^^dgem^nt (...) these
Nations. We be ^e therefore that the King will answer the opinion that every
one ^oth (...) being a con^^^n^^^ Prince: and I find it was a (...) ob^ervation
made by Mt. D^^^la^ at the C^^nation Sermon a S^^^^a^d, (...) the not
per^^man^e of Ki^^ James his ^^th, had been one of the chief causes that
brought ^^ch heavy judgments (...). B^ as to this point of oaths, Hon urable
Sir, I refer you to my (...) upon the third Commande^ent, a Co^^^ he^^ of I now
and you in^losed, which with th^^, will, I fear, (...) have (...) from,

Honorable Sir, Your, etc. G.
Ju^^ ^4. 1^^0.
The fourth Letter.
Honorable Sir,
I Con^^^^ (...) to you, not ^^t of conceit in (...) of any (...) ^^int^ent an^
you^ Commands, or to require the ho^ i^ y^^ la^ upon ^e in things abo^^ which
you might have a (...) from many ^ore ^apable to give it then (...) effect o^
that absol^^^ obedience I have sw^^ to your commands, and that con^^^mmit I
have promised to y^^ plea^^e, (...) where^^, I will endeavo^ at this time to
lay open the (...) con^^oversie between P^^^^^^ans, as they a^e (...) and (...)
salen. The sonne^ do with and maintain the Church ^^ght to be ruled by Elders,
whence they have the name of Presbyte^^^^: for, you kn w that P^^^^^ ^n Greek
signifies an ^lder, and first, there ought to be Cong^^^^^^ Elders in every
Parish, for it b^^ng granted, that the^e ought to be an order in the Church, it
must be that which is grounded upon Scriptures: if now these Elders ought to be
secular men, as it will be proved hereafter. They are sometimes called
Lay Elders (which expression we will make use of because it is the common
expression) for they are chosen from the Layitie of the people, for in pretense
to the Ecclesiastical Office they are not lay men. Truly, besides divine
institutions, there is a great advantage comes this way: in union these
persons that are Elders having influence upon others of the Parish, may by
their example and persuasion bring people into submission of order and
holiness of life; for Elder: must be persons of an excellent knowledge, and of
unblameable life. And secondly, hence discipline will be observed; for these
persons here, being from amongst the people, and changed from time to time,
their censure and judgment shall the more willingly be submitted unto; the
sentence of many is more considerable then that of few, and thereby the hatred
cast upon a Minister in the execution of discipline, and the suspicion of his
being partial may be washed away: besides, that it is easier to bribe one then
many: before these within their Parish, the breach of Gods Law in Religion, as
profaneness and neglect of Ordinances: so the breach of Charity, in quarrels,
divisions, scandals, ought to be judged as our blessed Savior says, Matthew.
18. If thy brother has offended thee and will not be reconciled in the
prisoner of few, till if the Church: that is, the Rulers of the Church; to wit,
the Elders: For first, this cannot be understood of the Minister alone of the
Church, who indeed may be called the Angel of the Church. Secondly, This is not
understood of every individual person of the Church, this would introduce a
strange confusion if all were to be judges, which cannot be, because of the
incapacity and other unqualifications of persons, as of women, children, and
some men: therefore it must be done by the Ministers and Representatives of the
Church, to wit, Elders, as you will see hereafter.

But as sometime such is the quality of the persons and nature of businesses as
they cannot be decided in the Parish, there may be an appeal to the Classis of
those parts, that is, a certain number of Presbyters select for that division,
over which there ought to be a Moderator cho^en by Plurality of Voices and this
only pre tempore. Now this Classis is subordinate to the Synod of that County
or Province, which is the convention of all the classes of that County, over
the which shall also be a Moderator, and this only pro tempore, as Saint James
was in Jerusalem, Acts 15. by Plurality of Voices: and this provincial Synod
shall be subordinate to the National, wh^^e th^^ of high: (...) decided, to the
which, two or more M^^^e is and Pr^^^^^^ o^ every shire a^^ to be ^ent. This
may be called on^e a year, the Provincial once every ha^^ year; the Cla^^^^
(...) every month is ther^ (...) ca^e, and the cons^^ty o^ congregation (...)
b^^tw^^ne every Lord ^ry, eve y forth night. The P^^nate of L^^nd, ^ave his
^^gement (...) as Doctor Bernard does testify; and certainly, (...) of Go^^^n
none has p^^ved so happy as (...) in F^ance, Scotland, parts of Germany and
other places where it is strictly observed, t^^te has been no schism^^, (...)
of wickednesses committed, howsoever not un^^nished) ^o^ hereby they may
presently be re^^ained, if incu^^^, sp^^d out of the Church. I might show the
happiness of the Reformed Churches in France, under it considering their
condition, for they are Subjects to a Popish King, but I have matter enough
b^^^des this.

A^^^e I prove th^^ to be of a divine Institution, I will endeavor to
pro^^^g^te E^^j^^p^^r, which being done, it will be n^ hand matter to acte^s
Pr^^^^ery. But first, Presbyters ^^an^ do allow of Bishops, provided they be
reduced to their former purity: that is, to be a Minister, and not above a
Minister of an ^we^eet, or superintendent, (...) this is the (...) s^^nication
of the ^o^^^^ its o^^^^nal. Now, to be to Overices o^^^ h^^ flock, is
pertaining to every Minister, Acts 20, 28. to you see every Minister is a
Bishop, 1 ^^w. 3. But B^^hops by way of it (...) authority, prima^y, or
dependency of one Minister from a^^bet, is in no (...) grounded ^^on S^^^tures,
but it is Tyrannical, by ^^rpation, and of humane invention: as to the case of
A^^^ Bishop, they must confess it as they do to be instituted of men.

Supremacy therefore in Church is very dangerous, it is a temptation to p^^de
and occasion of ambition which men are naturally prone unto, (...) Saint John
had lived in these our days, (...) many D^^rephe^^ w^^^ he have discovered,
whom he condemns in his three Epistles, (...) he loves to have the
preeminen^e; and sure I am we (...) have a better Pattern for the Role of the
Ch^^ch then the school of Christ, where he was so far from allowing of it, that
he reproved them when they had disputed who should be the (...), he, such
C^^i^^ that will be the greatest shall be the le^^t, where be makes an
opposition between the Government of Church and State; The King of the Nations
exercise lordship ^ver them, and those that are (...) use authority ^ver them,
but amongst you it shall not be so, he that will be the greatest let him be
your servant, Matthew. 20.25. Why shall we so much condemn in the Pope that which
they approve in others? Shall one and the same thing evil of it self, pride and
usurpation be a crime in the Bishops of Rome, and a virtue in the Bishops of
England; an Arch Bishop here that has the precedencie of some of the Kings
sons: is he not an Image of that of Italy; true it is, it is not in such a
Degree, howsoever it is in the nature of it, they ever aspi^ing from one place
to a higher preferment: let one of these Bishops come to Church in a Coach and
six Horses, with a gallant attendance, and be called my Lord here, my Lord
there, Will Christ own him for his servant? Is this his Lesson, Be humble and
lowly, as he was even in washing his Disciples feet? Will not the Lord Christ
say, Have thou left all to follow me? Can thou serve the world and me too?
This is indeed the posture of a man drunken with the pleasures of this world,
more then of those meek and humble Apostles of Christ? What difference, to see
a Minister of Christ in a very low condition, and a Bishop professing himself
to be a minister in the plenty of all worldly enjoyments: but they will say,
this is the liberality of Princes; yet, let them know, that they cannot serve
the world and Christ, and therefore they should not ask it as some do, but
rather refuse these great earthly things, account them but loss and dung, and
say to them who profer these temporal favors, I must not be so cumbred with
the things of this world like Martha, but with Mary I must take the good part:
for all these riches, honors and pleasures are but snares to entrap them.

For, as you will hear in the case of Popes, so it may be in this; Popes at
first were no more then other Bishops: but because Rome was the seat of the
Empire, therefore Christians ever placed in it persons eminent for Piety and
Learning: who, because of their great parts and abilities received a more then
ordinary respect; This being a great bait to ambitious persons, such as their
successors, they began to look upon it as a thing due to their Office, no
consideration had to the person or parts, and thereupon they began to usurp:
so, the Pope having gotten to be the head, those that adhered to him in
foreign parts, assumed much to themselves because of the adoration which in
times of darkness was granted to the Beast: No Protestant can deny but that
this in Popery deserved Reformation, as many Popish great and learned men did
acknowledge? Why then, God sending purity of Doctrine by the conversion of
this Nation to the truth of the Gospel, was not there a Reformation of this
exceeding power derived as streams from that ambitious Antichrist: but no eve^
have seen Reformation wrought by degrees; therefore a great (...) and
opportunity is afforded to his Majesty, in removing that whereby the servants
of Christ are in these days so different from those in times pa^t^ as if there
were a new Gospel brought from Heaven.

That desire of Supremacy does argue a spirit much different from that of Saint
Paul, (...) saying to the Corinthians, 2 Epist. 1. To state you (...) are not
yet ^^me to you, as if this had been too high for a servant of Christ: he
presently adds, not for that we have dominion over your faith, yet it is that
which some undertake, by la^^^ as necessary upon (...) those things that are
indifferent; so that I must account these Ceremonies to be good, becoming and
edifying, not because I believe it, but because they tell it to be so, in
pressing it upon me, even when my conscience persuades me it is not so. And
further, if we look on that place, the scope will show us, that the Apostle
does not mean by having dominion over their says, to have power over things to
be believed for it would have been in vain to have expressed such a thing,
since the same Apostle tel^ in another place, there is one Faith and one Lord,
as I may say by joining them together: one Lord of that says; besides those
whom he (...) write to know this fundamental point, that no man has po^^ over
our faith, and that Saint Paul was too humble to have had any such meaning;
when he says for to snare them he came not, but this I take to have been
sp^ken upon the account of the incestuous, of the toleration of whom be d^^h
complain, 1 Cor. 5. Wherefore, becau ^ they had been neglect^^^ in the
administ^ation of censure a^^in such a man, he would not ^^me, le^^^ he had
been forced to re^^ove them for their neglect. Not, says he, that I h^^ ^^dren
(...) you, but like a brother I ^^ght to rebuke you, even as he (...) Peter
upon a different ^^^^tion, Gal. 2. So the sen^e of this (...) Faith will be
this, as to force y u t^ a thing against you^ e^^ent, o^ which you believe
ought not to be done, that is, to censure or ex^^mmunicate the incest^^^^,
(...) approve of h^^ by not calling of him to an account, whence these two
^reat truths are afforded us: First, Saint Paul confesses to have no power
over their Faith, that is, their profession (for to it is often taken in
Scriptures) in the discharge of Ecclesiastica Discipline, the execution of
which he cannot force upon them.

But the second truth is this, That the Discipline of the Church is and ought
to be administered by the Church, and therefore the Bishop or Minister cannot do
it but by the Church, this case here is clear of of the incestuous, for the
Discipline was not committed to any single person but to the Corinthians, to
the Church, as he calls them, that is, at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. it is not to the
Minister alone, but to the Church, whence it is visible that the Church was to
take course where they thought fit about such a man; wherefore, the Church has
power to choose so ne Representatives (for every one cannot be a judge in it) in
whose hands is the administration of Church Discipline, as here we see it used
in Parliaments, every freeborn English man has right to complain of
grievances, and to indite any one that has injured him, yet it is not fit that
every particular man should go up to be a Parliament man and a Judge of
affairs, but they have Representatives to do it; In the Church these
Representatives can be no others but Elders: That this is in the power of the
Church, it is clear out of Acts 14.23. Paul and Barnabas ordaining Elders, not
whom they pleased, but (...) by the votes and suffrages of the people, whose
maxim it was acco^ding to the custom of the Greeks, to give their votes by
lifting up of hand^; and in the c^se of choosing Deacons, the twelve left it to
the power of the Church, Acts 6. Titus being left in C^^es to ordain Elders,
preaching or Ruling: it is to be understood this ordination was to be made by
the consent of the Church, for it is not probable that Saint Paul would ^ive
that liberty to Titus which he assumed not to himself, to elect Elders without
the consent of the Church* and in all this there was no Primacy, for there was
not a Bishop of a Bishop, or a Pr^sbyter of a Presbyter (to make use of their
distinct words:) so that it is clear, the Keys of Discipline did not belong to
one simple person, as the Minister alone, it would be, says C^lvin, lib. 4.
iu^tit. cap. 11. ^ect. 6. as if the Consu^ had exp^ll^d the Senat^, which name
Martyr gives to the Elders the Sen^te of the Church, in his Com (...) less 4.
loco 1. sect. 1^. To conclude, Honorable Sir, it does appear by things
afo^es^^d, that a Bishop has no prerogative of superiority by virtue of his
Office or place over any other preaching Presbyter, but that every Minister is
a Bishop: for, amon^st themselves they have giv^n the hand of fellowship; And
further, you see that this Bishop that is this Pastor can do nothing as to
point of Church Discipline, without the consent of the Church rerpresented by
the Elders; why should then Bishops be set up again, there being no ground for
their Prelacie in Scriptu^e, and whose e^^irpation has ^in so solemn a manner
been sworn by (...) most of the people, and two Houses of Parliament* but I
t^^n^ it is high time to withdraw from Bishop to g^t P esbyter^, (...) enquire
of what they can say for themselves, and by what a (...) they stand, all which
shall faithfully be communicated (...) Worship by

Honorable Sir, Yours, etc. G.
Ju^e ^7. 1660.
The fifth Letter.
Honou^able (...),
HAving had opportunity to accomplish the design expressed in my l^st, I am now
in a capacity of performing my promise, and to show you that the Government
which Presbyterians do wish in the Church is not prounded upon humane
invention, but it is of a divine institution: all their Adversaries, those only
excepted in whom ^e^^on is subservient to passion, do acknowledge it to be out
of prudence, for some things were left to the Church, say they, to insu^^^^ as
the Church should see occasion; and therefore in some places it sitting well
the temper of persons, it is lawfully tolerated as a thing not contrary t^
Scriptures; but let a man question a Bishop, whether he will t^^erate lay
Elde^^s within (...) D^ocer^s: then (...) this is to restrain their
jurisdiction, they will g ve a denial, not out of any reasons no they have
against it, but only out of (...) that it may be of a bad consequence as a
president to others to withd^aw from the (...) of the Bishop, w^i^h, say they,
^ill introduce con^^^^ in the Church, when it is well known, that the
di^cipl^n^ which P^^^t^te^ (...) ^bserve, does create an order inferior to
none; but Bishops will perhaps out (...) c nsi^e^ation suffer some extremity of
their Wines, ^s some Ceremonies to be clipped, but if you clip (...) to the
flesh, that is their Supremacy, they cannot endure it, yet I hope they will
give us leave (which we shall take, let them give it (...) not) to bring the
t^uth-stone of the Word for informati^n and edification of us and others in
this point: but least we dispute of a thing unknown, we will tell what these
Elders are. They be (...) o^ght t^ be (...), knowing and grave men, given to be
helpers to Ministers in things concerning Discipline, to take notice of
scandalous, ^ebauched and Ordinance-neglecting persons: so in the visitation o^
the sick, for sometimes such will be the number of the sick in great places as
that the Pastor and Deacons cannot afford to be with all, and sometimes
occasion shall require it, when the Minister i^ busied about the Word, either
in preaching, or else preparing himself to it, and in this the Lord Jesus his
Wisdom is to be admired; ^or in certain great places there can hardly be
main^nance for one M^n ster, ^o that the whole burden might happen to be too
heavy for him, for there being no means there shall be no other Mini^^^^, who
must have the fruits of their labors, 1 Cor. 7.11. Gal. 6.6, etc. and the
workman is worthy of his hi^e; and since the things done by ^^^e^s as aforesaid
ought necessarily to be practiced, therefore God has appointed persons, who,
without any such Reward will supply in this kind, that which the Minister
cannot attain unto.

And verily, it is either a gross ignorance of a great malice in the Aversa^^^s
to say, that this was set up within these few years: for those that are
acquainted with the practice of the primitive Church, will find thus in great
Cities, the preaching Presbyters, did from amongst themselves Elect by the
major vote one whom they called Ba^o^, not that he should have any preeminence
over others, but that (...) might be Moderator in their Assemblies, to ask the
opinions and see the Resolves put in execution, which was prudentia^ly
excogitated according to the emergency of affairs and necessity of times, yet
there remained an equality between this and other Pre^byte^s: wherefore, says
Jerome upon the Epistle of Titus, the Presbyter is the same as a Bishop; whence
it does appeear, first, that as men did set them up, so they might take them
down: secon^ly, since it was upon a necessity of affairs, so this necessity
ceasing (...) must cea^e from that function: but this being not properly of the
point in hand, though it conduces much to the whole of the Controversy, we
will come to the new observation. In the same Antiquity, (...) learn that the
people had a share in choosing of Pre^byters and Bishops, as it was confirmed
it should be: so in the Council of Antioch, whence came this maxim; Let him be
Elected whom the major part of the people has desired; for he that is to be
over all the people must be chosen of all the people: so, that when Ne^tarius
was to be ordained in the general Council of Constantinople, the Fathers would
not do it without the consent of all the M^nisters and of the people: whence we
see, that the Fathers of the (...) did not lord it over o^he^ Pre^byters, and
then the rig^t o^ the Church is ^sse^ted, as y^u may ^ee more at la^^^, Cat.
li^. 4 (...) 4 (...) 1^, 11, 12, etc. And there^^re the Church has a th^re in
the Government, consequently it may, as it does (...) it to (...) amongst
themselves: and they did so in the p^imitive Ch^^ch, for they were consulted
about Church Affairs: take for this the te^timony o^ (...) of M^lla^,
complaining of the (...) and slighting of the practi^e upon 1 ^^m. 5.17. The
ancient Syn^ (...), ^^^th he, and the Church after had Elders, without who^^
(...) no^^ing was done, by what neglect this is discontinued I know not, except
through the slothfulness, o^ rather pride of Doctor^, whilst themselves al^ne
would seem to be something. This then shows that aso^^ h^^^^e, there were such
Elders, and because of the neglect of pride of Bishops o^ Pastors, it came to
be ab^o^^ted and wholly ^oote^ out in Popery Wherefo^e, to res^o^e the^ to that
right, is to ^enew the practice of the former primitive Church. And with this
take the Autho^ity of C^p^^a^ Bishop of Ca^^hage, Epist. 10. l^^ ^ ^r^ (...) b
ginning of my being Bi^hop, I ^^^^ved to do nothing (...) the consent of the
people: so that the people were not encluded f^o^ the knowledge of things: I
might further bring some thin^^ o^^ o^ (...) to this purpose, but I will come
to that which is Antiquity it self: yea, of a great^^^ a^thority then
Antiqu^ity, this is Scripture.

And to begin with ^u^ ble^^e^ Saviors A^th^rity, Mat^h. 18. v. 15, 16, 1^. I^
the brother (...) tree pa^s^^g (...) thee does n^gl^ct to (...) thr^^ (...);
This shows that in the Church the^e was one Discipline to do him right: for
^e^e indeed, no (...) is given to the Church, for he ^^de st^ndeth the J^wi^h
Ch^^ch spea^ing to Je^^s, so that in the Church there is a N^^bedren, a Co^ncil
of Senate, where all do not (...) to ne (...) pe ^ons called E de^^ of the
people, Matthew. 1^.^1. and (...) 10.1. and in (...) 5 12 they are called (...)
calle^ on^ of the Rulers: whence I ob^erve, that in the ^yn^ (...) there is the
Church, there we e some R^le^, (...) diss^tent from Levite^ and P^iests in
office; and what is (...) R^lin Elders. Secon^ly, That as in the Synago^^e
there we^e R^lers, so ^ome to be ^^led, and therefore this R^^ng po^^^ was not
^n every member of it Now that these Rulers were ^^ny, it appe^rs, J^^^ ^2.42.
A^o^g^t the chief Rulers many believed on him; ^o that by other places you will
know that there were Rulers in the Synagogue, who h^d the government of (...)
^o that they ^^^^cised an Ecclesiastical Discipline by excluding, (...) for a
time, or altogether, as John ^^ 2^. They (...) a^^eed it any one confesses ^^m
to be the Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. S. J^^n, 16.12. They
shall p^^ (...) of the ^ynag^gu^s: For fear of this, Nicodemus a R^ler of it,
(...) to (...) b^ night. No^ that their Synagogue wa^ th ^ (...) Chu^^^, (...)
cannot b^ doubted, for it was upon the Sabbath day^ that Ch^^^t enter^^ into
their Synagogues, where they were a^sembled for religious D^ties: And that he
speaks nere of the Je^^sh Church, it i^ clear by the Jewish ^ule, Let him be a^
an Heathen and a Pa^^^ca^. The substance of the Lord Jesus his saying is this,
it thou have been offended, so that thou have ought against thy brother,
because he has offended thee, tell it to the Chu^^h, the Senate of the Church,
t^^t he ^pe^^^ here of the Church in ^^^sti^^^tion to the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate; whi h b^th Jurisdictions a^e d^^in^t in Scriptures, it is
clear by what he says in the 17 ver. ^f loosing and binding, whereby the keys
of the Church are signified. It is kn^wn that the Church took notice of such
private offenses, and made reconciliation between distenting pa^ties, for the
doing of which there was no need of the whole Synagogue but only of the Elders:
who as Writers testify were used to do it, in all which ou^ Savior does
express the custom of his Nation in his time, so el^e who could have understood
what he said: The sum of al^ is thi^; In the Church of the Jews, there were
Rulers of the whole Church distinct from Priests and Levites, to reconcile
differences, and to inflict punishments, as censures and excommunication
expressed by putting out: and there was no Tyranny in it* as some at this day
report it to Presbyterians:) For Christ would not have spoken in this manner of
that custom if he had ac^^unted it unlawful; who then is so blind as not to
see here that there were Lay Elders so called, Ruling the Jews Church; and
therefore, let none contest with us for antiquity about Ruling Lay Elders:
since therefore we see nothing since forbidding the continuation of it in the
Ch^istian Church, how lawful is it for us to imitate a Church so well ruled,
which being approved of by Christ in thi^ place, makes it in some respect to be
of a divine institution, specially, if we look upon Scriptures indicted since
the Lord his As^^nsion.

One is Acts 15.2^. Three sorts of persons are assisted in it. Apostles, Elders
and Brethren, who the Apostles were, there is no question: who the Elders the
preaching Elders. By the Brethren, are understood the Ruling Elders so called
for distinction from other Elders, herein the Apostles and the Elders are
clearly distinguished from the rest of the Assembly, and the Letter sent by the
common consent and advice of the Brethren, as of the Apostles and I Elders:
hence I say against the Independents: the whole Church as to every particular
member of it, is not to be understood, for then Proselytes, ignorant women and
children as members should have been admitted in, and what great confusion
would follow from thence: as for women they are excluded from speaking in the
Church, 1 Cor. 24. which I understand of Teaching or Ruling: As for ignorants
and children, how should they be admitted to the considerations of so great and
serious affairs: besides, that it is more then probable that in Jerusalem there
were more then one Church: I not there were so many Nations as we read of, Act.
2.9, 10, 11. besides the Jews, and so every member of the Church would not go,
but they sent some from amongst them, their Elders, and though there had been
but one Church, it must be granted to have been very numerous, and so the same
inconvenience remains, to wit, confusion, and therefore they had their
Deputies, viz. their Elders. But, whether here by the word Brethren, the
Adversaries may conceive it to be meant of Evangelists or Deacons, I know not,
howsoever, there is no ground for it in the place, for it would have been
expressed by that name, as the Apostles by the name of Apostles, Elders by the
name of Elders: so it would have been said, the Evangelists and Deacons as a
more special and honorable Title then the name of Brethren so common and
applicable to all: besides, those called Brethren did sit in the Council, by
virtue and commission from Churches, and the Evangelists would have had place,
not upon this account, through I confess it was not the office of Deacons to be
judges of things that were to be spoken of them, for their chief occupation was
in things of Charity, to which end they were chosen, Acts 6. Nor the
Evangelists whose chief office it was to write the Evangelical History,
Wherefore, I say, there were in the Council some Evangelists and Deacons, or
not, whether there were any, it cannot be affirmed, because they were but few
at that time, for ought we (...) five Deacons of the seven, Steven having been
stoned, and Nicholas becoming an Apostate. As for Evangelists at the time of
this Council, there were but four that we know of, and two of them Apostles,
and, therefore they might have been elsewhere for the Council was held
occasionally; and suppose they had been there as perhaps they were, then they
were included under the name of preaching Elders: for Evangelists did preach
sometimes, inasmuch as one and the same person can be an Evangelist and a
Pastor as Timothy was afterward: so did the Deacons teach, not by virtue of
their office, but accidentally if occasion were offered, to Steven disputed and
taught, Acts 6 and 7. Further observe, they could not be Deacons and
Evangelists, I mean, they could not be called Brethren because they were
Evangelist Deacons, but because they were Deputies o^ the Church: for it is
known, these Brethren took place in the Council, not as Evangelist Deacons, but
as Representatives, that is, as Elders of the Church, for in the 22. ver. it
pleased the Apostles, the Elders and the whole Church; and in the next ver. the
Apostles, the Elders and the Brethren instead of the Church: so that the
business is clear against the Episcopal party, though with the Independent
there seems to remain a scruple; it being said, the whole Church, which seems
to imply every particular member of it; but not so, the Brethren in the name of
the whole Church, like Parliaments here when they do things, they may, and
sometimes do, say the whole Nation, because it is by them represented. But to
conclude, I say, those Brethren were preaching men, or not, if preaching men,
then included under the name of Elders, whereby here are understood Ministers,
and so no need of the word Brethren, which yet is necessary, because inserted
amongst those from whom the Letter came: if they were no preaching men, then no
Evangelists no^ Deacons, who preached occasionally in the absence of Pastors,
so it must needs be Lay Elders: Wherefore, though here be not the name of
Ruling-Elder, yet we find the nature and office of such as were chosen from
amongst the people to assist the Apostles and Ministers with their counsels and
approbation in things to be debated in that Synod, but specially in things not
concerning the Doctrine of Faith, but the welfare and edification of the
Church, and order in it, as in the case of eating blood or strangled things,
which is the occasion of the Letter.

Another proof of Scriptures is from Acts 20.17. He sent for the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus: to know who these Elders were, it is necessary to search
into the whole matter, contained from the 17 to the 28 ver. yea, in the 31.
there is something to be taken (...) wherefore I (...) that, I (...) Es^^^ are
here to be understood, who^^ ^^e things ^^^en ^^re so belong unles; but the
things herein spoken do not belong to preaching Elders but to Rasin^ Elders;
therefo^^, the Elders, ^^^en (...) here are Ruling l^y Elders: the m^^o (...),
^ut the A^^^tle could not so much mistake as to spe^^ to one this which
belon^eth not to the same, but to another, the Min^^ter will appear o^ the
examen of several particulars: First, they are the (...) the Church of Eph^^^,
the word Ch^^ in the ^^^nal being in the singular number may (...) that there
(...) but one Church, I mean, not Temples, (...) perhaps they had more then
one, but one assembly and convention^d of Christians in that place, set there
is not the same reason for Eph^s^us as the Je^usa^^m, because first in
Jerusalem, the number of conrr^ted me^ ^as much greater then at Ephesus; since
there was a suffi ient c^^u^a^^ n three Ap stles, Peter, Jame^ and Je^a, Gal.
2. Secondly, In Jerusalem there were Conve^t^ of several Nations, A l^ 2.^,
etc. which cannot be positively ffi rmed of Ephe^us, a^ therefore there was but
one Church (though perhaps confining (...) Je^es and Gentiles, that is Ephe
^ans) the^e could not be to many preaching Elders of that Church, as that it
should be ^er e^t^^y for Saint Paul to say to them, ver. 25. T^^ a^ am^^g^t
whom I have been preaching ^all see my ^ace no more: when it is very probabl^
that in those days, wh^rein C^ri^tians were not ^^^^t^nanced has per^ecuted,
the lab^^^ers should be so many, as to have two, three, and perhaps four at the
most to preach; Now, why S. Paul sh^^ld s^ea^ so generally to three or four,
^^^ all: I see no reason n^ n^cessity. I^ tho^^ t^ings Ministers we^^ not so
neglectfull as they we^e lately on ^er Epis^^pa^^, to that we think we had
lately reason to complain in Gregory's wor^ s more then h^. The (...), sa^^ he,
C^^ ^t P^^t^r^, yet se^^ lab^u^ers in the Harvest, ^^^a^^^ we (...) that ^^^ce,
and we as (...) the work of the (...), etc. therefor, since ten Min^ters,
(...) vigilant, could carry on the work of the Church of Ephe u^, as to
pre^chin^, which was their ^nter work, and that (...) were the Elders (...) the
Church of Ephesia^ only, which Paul ^entin^, speaking to them as ^o many, it
does necessarily follo^ there w^^e other kind of Elders more in number then the
former (...), perhaps ten of fifteen to a preachin^ Elde^, for affair^ being
un^er ^e ^ an^ disturbed in those days, many were required, where (...) to
look to the order and Dis^^^ne of the Church, while^t Ministe^s minded the
preaching of the Word. The word Elders was common to both, because both sorts
were Elders in quality. But another thing spoken here to these Elders which
could not belong to Ministers, is this, verse 20. I have showed you and taught
you publicly, an^ from house to house. Saint Paul being an Apostle was able
indeed to teach Preachers, but to be taught publicly it is proper to people
and not to Pastors, for in public Assemblies it is the people and not
Ministers that meet to be taught: therefore, the word You may very well be
spoken to the persons of the Elders whom he preached to, and whose duty it is
to be Hearers and not P^eache^s: for Ruling Elders, the Discipline of the
Church set apart, are not different from the rest of the people, they are
appointed not to preach but to hear, specially in public. Secondly, The word
(...), may be spoken of the people, to you, that is, to the people represented
by you to be taught, cannot well and properly be said of Ministers who are in
office: but perhaps they may have discoursed with, instructed and taught in
private, but to be taught publicly is applicable to the people: And not only
so, also from house to house, to teach and instruct Ministers it does imply
this absurdity, They that were judged capable to teach and preach in public,
have need themselves to be instructed in private. That Saint Paul should be put
to go from house to house to teach Ministers, this would argue a great
oversight in them (may be Paul) who had ordained them to the Ministry: and a
great blemish of insufficiency in them that are Teachers to be taught in
public and private: but, perhaps some will say, by Teaching are to be
understood Conferences, and conversation about points of a difficult nature and
hard to be understoo^ even by the Learned, as in the Mystery of the Trinity
and Incarnation, etc. This was not it, for, ver. 21. we will find it to be
ordinary subjects principles of Christian Religion known by any Proselite, as
Repentance and Faith in Christ; and this not for few days, weeks or mouths,
but three years together, I ceased n^^ -- and what? not, to teach as before, but
to warn and admonish, and this, not some hours of the day, but day and night,
and not as if it had been indifferent to me that you had repented and believed,
but with desires, entreatings, beseechings, yea even with tears: every word
you see does carry a strong reason. And, what kind of Minister would this have
been? What could Saint Paul do more to unconverted, ignorant and every
disobedient hearer? And thus he had dealt with all, as after he prayed with
all, ver. 36. And, that these Ministers (if such) should have no more power
over their grief, be (...) grave, and have no more of Ch ^^tian generosity, and
res^^^^tion, and if they had been ^u^pri^^d at th^^, (...) they should weep
(...), ^all on Pa^^ nec^ and (...). This indeed does at^^ the tempe^ of th^^e
who were more ^it to receive instruction then to give (...) And since the
Epi^^le afterward written to the E^h^^^^, is e^ected not to the Ministers but
to the Church and Saints, in it I may then c^^clude, that these words were not
spoken to preaching but Ruling Elders. Yet for all this we do not e^clude
preaching Elders called overseers, whom he gives the charge to, (...) 28. as
in the 29. He does charge the others to watch; for the Ministers went to Pa^l,
accompanied by the Adjutors, Ruling Elders, not only as having a share in the
Church Government, and so to see him and receive some good instructions from
him, but also as Deputies from, and Representati^es of the Church o^ Eph^s^^.
Hence you may ^ee, Hon^^rable Sir, this truth to be prounded upon the
foundati^n of Scriptures: we might say more to it, but (...) we ^ear to attempt
so much upon y^^r patience, when you come to the per^^al of this, we reserve
the conclusion to the next, and crave liberty to be,

Honorable Sir, Yours, G.
J^^^ 30. 1660.
The 6th Letter.
Honourab^e (...),
NOt (...) to (...) my self of in^i^^^e^^ne^s, for then, bec^^^e (...)
^^^itation, it would be to make you accessa^y to (...) my se^f hereby in that
success I have to satisfy (as you (...)) the ju^^^ment o^ so a^ute and one
persons as you and the No^e^^an a^e: In^eed Sir, I confidently pour my heart
into you^ very b^^^om. I have no hundreds of pounds in Livin^s to lose, and
tho^^h I had, I ^ould prefer the keeping of a good conscience to the pain (...)
all the world: Neither do I of the other side, ^^pect in th^^ wo^ld any
advantage by professing this truth, which I am com^^^ced to be according to the
Wo^d of God, therefore, you may look upon me (as you assured me you do) as an
uninteressed person: And I hope through grace, chiefly in things of this nature
to keep from me the blemish of dissimulation, since my warrant for it is out of
Scripture. Without Complements therefore, which you cannot expect from him who
is capable of none, specially in things of this serious concernment: I proceed
to another place of Scripture.

It is, R^m. 12.8. He that rules let him do it with diligence. In this place
the Apostle does enumerate the spiritual Gifts and Offices in the Church: it is
clear from ver. 4.5. which he divides into two kinds, ver. 6, 7. The first is
Preaching, called Prophesying. The second Ruling, called Ministering: which
division is observed, 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speaks, here speaking is for
preaching: If any man Minister, there is Discipline, as in the other is
Doctrine, preaching in this, Romans 12. is lively described: in the two parts of
it, the first is Teaching, the second Exhorting; so that one is the informing
of the judgment, and the other is the moving of the affections, or, if you
will have it, clear Teaching contains explication, and Exhorting
comprehends application: As to the offices of Ministration three are
expressed, ver. 8. One is the Deacon's, he that gives, for he is the
Distributer of alms, which he must do in simplicity without any fraud: The
third is the function of those that were appointed for the care of the poor, by
attending on them; these were Widows spoken of, 1 Timothy 5.9. Let not the Widow
be taken into the number under threescore years old: this is intimated, Acts
6.1. but the second office expressed in this ver. is his who is a Ruler in the
Church, he that Rules, which he ought to do with Diligence and care: Hence
does appear first, that there is in the Church a particular office for the
ruling thereof. He that rules, he implies that there are some who do Rule, or
else the Apostle does suppose a false thing. Secondly, hence it is clear, that
this function of Ruling is distinct from other offices of administration in or
about the Church, as from the the Deacon and from the Widow attending the poor,
and as the office of the Deacon which is to distribute alms to the poor, is
really distinct from the function of the Widow, which is to look to, and be
careful of them, either by looking to their persons when sick, or else by
providing for them things necessary out of the alms given by the Deacon, so
the office of the Ruler is different from both the other two, or else it would
be in vain for the Apostle to express it if it were but one and the same with
the others: and we know, that as the Deacon (...) not the Widow, not the Widow
the Deacon: so the Ruler t^ neither the De^con not the Widow: it so, then much
(...) shall (...) of Prophe^ying (...) an^ this in (...) ^^th which spe^ie^ are
compre^^nded un^er this Gents. (...) so it is Rule^ and Preache^ are t^^
^ifferent offices, the R^ler is not the Preacher, although the Preacher be a
Ruler, but th^s will (...) presse^ on when we shall explain that, (...) N^w,
that there are ^ifferent ^ffi^es it i^ clea^, for the Ap^^tle in the (...) them
(...) differen^, and these several and ^^fferent (...) are upon several and
different persons, which is well represented by the com^^^ion of many members
in one body, and all me be^^ have a different (...). 4. so that the o^fi^e of
the (...) of the oth^^: the ^unction of the eye is different from (...) of the
ear, the one (...) ^ee, the o^he to hear, (...) the oth^^ of the hand is not
the office (...) the ^oo^, whereby it (...) clear that t^^y are several
different membe^s and they have several different offices* in the l^^e manner,
that one b^dy the Ch^^ch (...) ^everal differ^nt members, as Preachers,
Dea^ons, Rulers as in a natural b^^y, we know the han^ is a member diff^^ent
(...) so in the mysti^al b^dy the Ruler is not the P^eache^^: and a^ the
^unction of the hand (...) real^y distinct and different (...) the (...), to
the office of the Ruler is really distinct and diffe^^n^ from that of the
Preacher. But n^^ther it will appear, that a^ the Ruler is different from the
Minister as to the office, so he is (...) kind and order of persons: for, we
see it is (...) amongst the Laymen the word Lay is in opposition to Pasto^s)
Deacons and Widows (...) of the T^^e of Le^^, but selected from the people as
you (...) Act. 6.3. From this it is as clear as t^^ day that there are
R^linglay-Elders in the Church; the stren^th of this the adversaries know very
well, wherefore they are forced to make a (...) of (...) ^ay, for they would
have this to be as a Precept unto all men that are in power, as civil
Magistrates, as well as in Church to rule with diligence, but how poo^ a shut
this is, it appears from the words of the Apostl^, for ver. 5. he speaks of the
Church, by him called the bo^y of Christ, and Scriptures make always a
distinction and difference between the civil and Ecclesiastical powers and
offices, making no con^^^ ^n between them: besides, that in the time that this
Epistle was w^^tten by Saint Paul to the Romans, there being amongst them no
Ch^istian Magistrate, he could not speak this to a civil Magistrate but to them
that were joined to the Pastor as assisting in the Government of the Church.

This same matter is handled more at large, 1 Cor. 1^. By the same Apostle who
has spoken to this Subject more then any of all other holy Writers, so that
minding the Discipline as the Doctrine of the Church, he is in several places
very clear upon this point, so in this Chap. verse. 28. he speaks of
Governments: what we must understand hereby, it will be sai^ a little below;
for introduction into it, it is to be observed, that the Apostle in this Chap.
does speak of spiritual gifts, verse. 2. which gifts are in the Church, verse.
28. and thereupon they are to be looked upon as excellencies wherewith God has
graciously adorned his Church: all which are reduced under these three kinds:
First Gifts, verse. 4. expressed, verse. 8. Secondly, Operations affirmed, verse.
6. described, verse. 9, 10. Thirdly, Administrations, verse. 5. enumerated, verse.
28. Between all which, he makes a difference, and shows a diversity between
them; the two first being not to our present purpose, we omit to come to the
third, that is, Administration, wherein several are expressed, and all easy to
be understood; only this I may observe, that though in some English
Translation: I find helps of Governments, or in Governments by others, as if
one and the same office was designed, Government being the subject, and helps
the adjunct: in which translation, though I find nothing contrary to both, yet
because in the O^iginal I find (...), I take it to be two distinct and several
functions; and by Helps, Interpreters understand the Deacons, and widows
spoken, Romans 12. And by Governments, we understand Presbyters that rule and
govern the Church: But before we lay down the grounds of this which is the
Judgment of Martyr Calvin, Be^^, and other Reverend Divines upon the place, we
must answer an objection that may be made; Whether any of these Offices have
ceased, and whether this of Government is amongst them? To which I say, At
first some Offices were necessary for the planting and propagating of the
Church, and confirmation of the Doctrine: Such were miracles, healings, so the
Apostles immediately called of Christ, and extraordinarily indue? with the
Spirit: So the Prophet not so much to (...) ^uture events, (...) to show the
fulfillin^ of the prophesies con^^^ning the M^^^h in the Lord Jesus Christ; to
these we may add the (...) Writes of the Go^pel, and therein of Christ h^s
^^^h, (...), ^^ath and the c nseq^ nces of it; these I say were (...), because
of the then present condition of the Ch^^^^ (...) there (...) no need (...)
them, because of the growth (...) the Church, the confirmation of the Doctrine,
and that we exp^^^ (...). But as to Teachers or Preachers spoken in (...) ^s
necessa y to have them always; in Mat. 28. Christ sent (...) D^^^ples not to
pr^phe^^e, t^ ^^al, or to work Miracles, but teach the Nations, v rs. 1^ which
function (...) rehearsed, verse. ^0 teachin^ them: To his D^sciples, as
Ministers or Teachers, not as Apostles (...) Prophets h^ promi^ed his presence
until the end of the world, so (...) till then the (...) shall be Teach s in
the Church; and as the Doctrine is to be continued to the Church, to is
Discipline, for (...) ess^^^ to the being, so is the other to the well-being of
(...) as long as the Church shall be Church, as lon^ there shall be a
Government: for the hou^e of God is the h^^se of Order^ t^^^e t^^n^s prea^^e^,
we could not omit, because they are a g od ^^^^lation for what we intend to
say, which is t^^s.

There is an office in the Church of God here called Government, (...) the
objected that office is government. This you see assert^^ (...) G^^ has to
(...) in the Church Governments, that is, (...) ^^^^es, that the afore-^oin^
offices are named in the ^^nc^^te and persons, as Apostles, Prophets, etc. and
this (...) un^erst^^d, I ^^nd th^s Hebratines often used in Scriptu^es, when
^^e (...) of su^^tiantiv^ (...) p^^ (...) the ^^n^^^te o^ (...) is made W^^d^m,
Ri^hteousn^^s, that (...) To deny that there are such in the Church is (...)
the Lord Chr^^t, from whence are administrat on (...) 5 ^n^ in this 2 (...), he
has set this order. Secondly, It (...) to g^ve t^^ lie to the Apostle, and
thi^dly, ^t is to ^^n into the absurd^^y (...) the natu^al body, ve^. 15, 16.
If the so^t shall say, because I am (...) the hand, I am not of the body; is it
not of the body* so, (...) Rule^^ of Governors in the Church shall say,
because I am not a Teacher, therefore I am not of the Church? is be not
therefore of the Church, for if all were Preachers, where were the Hearers, the
Rulers, etc. And to know who, and how these Governors are, I wish it were
taken notice of, that the Apostle makes a comparison between Christ's mystical
body the Church, and a man's natural body, for, as there are several members
that have several functions: so in the body mystical of Christ, there are
several members that have several offices, and as these offices are different
one from another, as ver. 5. so the persons by whom they are administered are
different, and therefore, as the persons, so the offices are not to be
confuted: the one cannot administer the function of another without intrusion
and usurpation: the Ruler must not preach, and if the Preacher does govern, it
is not as he is a Pastor, but as he is a Ruler; let therefore, (as the Apostle
says elsewhere) ev^ry one abide in that whereunto he is called: hence I gather,
that these Governors here do differ in person, and charge from the Teachers
expressed in this place: so, that some may be and are Rulers in the Church
which are no Preachers nor Teachers in it: if so then, they are no Ministers
but they are laymen: so there are laymen Elders and Rulers in the Church, and,
though here the Church be taken for the universal Church of which particular
Churches are members and parts, yet these particular Churches of Congregations
must have in themselves that which is essential to a Church, as it is a Church
and integral to this or that Church as it is such, for else it will not have
the being of a Church, nor the well-being of the same, but we know it cannot
have the being of a Church without doctrine, not the well-being without
discipline: and as doctrine is necessary and administered by Preachers, so
discipline is necessary and administered by Rulers: and as the object of the
Preacher, to wit, Preaching, does differ from the object of the Ruler, which is
Ruling, so that Ruling is not Preaching, neither is Preaching Ruling,
therefore, the person that Preaches and the person that Rules must be two
distinct and different persons: but if they say, these functions may be
administered by one and the same person, I will Reply then, the functions of all
the members of one body may be in one member of the same: so hearing, seeing,
smelling, feeling, etc. may be in the hand or in some other member; the reason
is clear from the comparison of the Apostle, the life and strength whereof does
consist in the diversity and difference of members: and of their functions; and
since this comparison is so much pressed by Saint Paul, we think it ought not
to be neglected by us: but to conclude this, although we confess that in the
Church a Minister may be, and is a Ruler, yet thereby we do not both eye the
Ruling office in the Church which may be and sometimes is in it though there
were no Preachers, as it happens in some places, where though they have no
Min^^ters, yet they love Elders to Rule, and some, either De^^on of other, in
such a case to read the Word before the Congregation: of which places I have
the charity to believe they a^e a (...), (...) though they have not the Word
preached, yet they have (...) read till Go^ be pleased to afford the^.
Ministers.

B^t to draw ni^^ to the end of this whole matter, we will ^ome to that place
which is so s^^l and so clear for this truth, as that whatsoever they an^e^ to
it is but three or four wo^ds, for the which they can g^ve no reason nor
p^esident in Scripture, so that I account it (...) answe^able, the place is
well known, 1 Timothy 5.1^. the words are there, L^^ the Elders that rule well be
counted w^^thy of ^^n^le ^^s^^^^, esp^^ially they who labor in the W^rd and
Doctrine. Hence does appear that there are tw^ ^in^s of Elders, some who do
preach, and some who do not, as Lay Elders: for an int^^du^tion unto the proof
(...) this, we must take notice that Saint Paul does write to Timothy
instructions for the discharge of his office only, of which this Te^^ ^s; It is
^nown that Timothy was a Minister in the Church of Ephe^^^, and an Oversee^,
not (...) other Ministers, as having any (...) over them, but of ^is flock,
which for a time only was committed to his cha^g^, and perhaps he was the
superintendent of others his fellow Presb^ter^^^ Thus (...), a^ to be a
Moderator in their Assemblies, having been pre^erred to it either by Saint
Paul's credit, o^ el^e (which I b^lieve) the rathe^ by virtue of the choice
made of (...) by his fellow Presbyters because of his piety and prudence, he
(...) ^uch: there were some that stood between him and the p^^^le: there were
Elders as they are called here, whom he was to (...) else and she accounted by
others, worthy of double (...) are Rulers whose quality was honour^^^e, of
(...) they Ruled well, b^^ (...) more, (...) be^^^es the other (...)
perfection, well they labo^^red in the word (...) that (...) they were not only
Ruling ^^ders, but al^o (...) El^^^s ^^^m the place I a^, he thus: two sorts of
Presbyters (...) There, but of them one sort ^^^h not preach, and the o^he^
(...) preach, therefore there is a kind o^ lay Presbyters be^^ ^^^^^ed* the
Minor as proved: here are asserted some who role (...) in the word and
doctrine, and some who only rule, but those that only rule and labor not in,
etc. they do not preach, therefore (...) are some Elders who do not preach; but
perhaps they will say, that this is spoken but of one person, in whom this
preaching and Ruling are gradually distinct, that is one and the same person is
a ruling Elder and a labourer: but I argue here is a double subject, one
general, and another special, but every subject here is a person, therefore
there is a double person; the Minor is clear, because universal and special are
really distinct, so here must be a real distinction of persons, and therefore
the same person which is the Elder laboring in the word and doctrine is not
that person that is the ruling Elder only: that general and special are really
distinct it appears, because Genus and Species are such as it is clear from
Aristotle's definition of description of both: as Species and Number are really
distinct because this distinction is between res and res: but to avoid falling
off from the question, we say, hence the preaching Elder may be a Ruler when
the Ruler shall not be a Preacher; as now let us put Elder for the Genus as it
is here, and Ruling with Preaching, the difference or several Species rather as
anon we will prove it to be, then we must draw these true propositions. A
preaching Elder is a Ruling Elder, but a ruling Elder is not a preaching Elder:
this I say in Logic, every man is an animal, but every animal is not a man,
every living thing is a substance, but every substance is not a living thing:
so every Minister is an Elder, but every Elder is not a Minister, because,
although every Species has the Genus, yet the Genus shall not be spoken
equally of both Species in one and the same subject.

But the truth does thoroughly appear from the particle (...) specially, which
is particular restrictive and specificative, but that which is part, rest, and
specif. is distinctive, therefore this particle is distinctive of things, if
joined with things and of persons, if joined to persons, as appears by the
word et qui, this is clear from other Scriptures, where being ordinarily joined
to persons it does really distinguish them, as 1 Timothy 4.10. God is the Savior
of all men, especially them that believe, whether there be not a distinction
between all men and believers? Is not the particle (...) added to restrain and
specify believers from all men? Are all men redeemed and saved? Is not this
proper to believers: and here to say that Believers are not specified from all
other men that are not believers, it is to make a sad confusion between
Believers and Reprobates: so the same Apostle in another place, do good to all
man especially to them that are of the household of faith: whether those of the
household of Faith are not specified from that generality, all men, and whether
they be not a different sort of persons from all men that are not of the
household of Faith, so here in the Te^t? Whether they that are said to labor in
the Wo^d ^ith ^n E pecially, are not persons different from those that are
before ^^^d to Rule well in general without a word of laboring wherefore we
must say, that all those th^^ Rule do not labor in the Wo^d, (...) the the
particle specially is superfluous (which G^d so (...) we should think as it
b^ing distinctive it does not distin^uish where it i^ put: Nay, I say, that
this specification of laboring made (...) some Elders, does imply, that some
Elders do not lab^^^. I hope the A^re^^^te^ have not forfeited their knowled^e
the Rule in Lo^ick, that a particular affirmative does suppose a particular
Negative* thus Some man is good, it does suppo e and ^^me man is not (...): so,
some Elders labor in the word and (...) me, or do preach, therefore some
Elders do not preach, yet (...) Rule, (...) as clear as t e day, and it is the
judgment not only of Modern but also of very ancient Authors, such as
Ambro^^^, (...) upon this place does asse^t, that there were such Elders in the
P^imitive Church, and he does complain that it was neglected t^ have them,
watch in part be attributes to the pride of Teach ^*

Some of the A^versaries whom I have di coursed with upon this ^o^nt, being
^^^ed by the a^o esaid reasons, do confe^t that there are too dan^er
Pre^byters, yet both they would have to be preaching: to wh^^. I an^wer, th s
cannot be that they should be di^^^ct (...) pre^ch, and this inconsistence of
those two asser^^^^ (...) thy (...) one a^^^ment, that which is common to (...)
make a d^fference and distincti^n between both: (...) cannot put a diffe^ence
between Peter and J^hn, (...) they say it c mmon to both, therefore preaching
(...) make a difference between both. (...) that to say that both do p^each,
(...) to deny distinction and difference between both, (...) ass^rted otherwise
then by acknowledging the truth (...), that there are Ruling El^ers who ^o not
preach: but, (...) this answer of theirs* I say, if there be no (...), and they
grant, nay affi^m, that h^^e are two kinds of Elders ready d stin^uished then
besides Ministers, no other kind can be affi ^^^ but Bishops in their sense,
whom they also call Elders: if to them the^e will be Bishops of Bishops that is
plainly Tyranny, or el^e, (...) these two kinds of Elders b^ only Ministers,
and not Bishops in their sense with this distinction, that one shall Rule well
and preach, and the other rule well, yet not preach though a Minister, what
else is it but a lay-Elder if he does not preach, for so h^ cann t be called a
preaching Elder: Or further, if they understand such Elders, as that both shall
preach, yet one shall labor or take more pains (as they interpret it) then
the other. Then this will be to force the word Lab^ur, which being joined to
Word and Doctrine, do not signify to take great pains in it more then othe^s,
but only it properly si nifieth to preach the Word, for Ministers are called by
Christ Laborers and Workmen in the Harvest and Vineyard of G^d. Besides this,
I would put them in mind that (...) Especially, is put between Ruling and
Laboring, and not between preaching the Word and laboring in the Word, so
that the difference is between Rulers and Laborers, and not between Preachers
and Laborers: for every Preacher must labor, as Aretius does very well say in
his Comment upon Acts 20.28. Think not, says he, the word ^ish^p to be a title
of honor and dignity, no, it is a name of labor; Whereupon, with Scripture he
calls speculative Ministers or Bishops, dumb d^gs: wherefore, says famous
Calvin upon this place, 1 Timothy 5 17 Honor (...) due not to the title, but to
the labor, so that there is no Minister but he is a labourer, and he must
spend and be spent in doing the work, the work committed to him (and not be
drones as they were formerly under Pre^acy, for I may name some who preached
but twice in seven years, and othe^s hardly once in two years:) Whether it be
the duty of those who are not laborers in the Word but laborers in
Discipline, as Censors and Senates to Rule well. The order of which persons is
so clear from Scriptures by what has already been spoken, that I dare to say,
none but wilfully b^inded can doubt of the truth of it: And to go further about
the point of illustration of it, it will be to li^ht, as they say, a Candle at
noonday: but, if any one is curious to hear more of this Subject, let him
peruse the writings of that incomparable Minister Calvin, in his Institution,
lib. 4. from ^hap. 4. to the 12. inclusively, and Martyr's C^mmon-place, chap.
4. loc. 1. sect. 1, 2, etc. chiefly sect. 10. and Hindersons Conferences with
the late King: where through the edge of his reasons be concealed, and the
King's put to the height by an E^isco^al Pen, yet truth in it does triumph over
all the reasons and Replies of the Adversaries of that divine verity.

Wherefore, as it is evident out of Scriptures that there is an office in the
Church; if lay Elders to rule it, so it is no less conspicuous that the
Episcopal party i^ to bent upon that Diana, as they would mov^ heaven and (...)
^^ther then to lose any thing by the (...) a^ into (...) ^o them: so that (...)
no ^or^ (...) they (...) H^^^^a Pe^nacie derived in that (...) Popery through
pride and amb^^^^^ (...) thereby t^^ Church has been deprived (...) Christ and
yiel^ed by the Apostles (...) of t^ings of any importance (...) the people of
that (...) a sac^iledge to cut off from the (...), in^tituted in and practiced
by the (...) the Apo tle^ (...) and since. Now to be brief, the sub^tance of
all that has been spoken is this* there ought not to be ^^ch Ruling^ a^ are
spi^i^^al L^^ds and pretend any Primacy over any M^ni^ters, and (...) shall be
in no danger of ^^^our and Heresy, we shall be f^ee from so many innovations
introduced into the Church from Popery; we w^ll bear no more of the strange
(...) Deanes, Chapters, Prebends, Canons, etc. whose mean^ (...) to the
encou^aging of a go^ly able preachin^ (...) of which a^e often to want even of
that which others (...) to their ^ounds: a B shop shall have 4000 or 5000 (...)
a year, when some Ministers that have great Families have not above 25 or ^0
pounds a year: if it be so, then we shall hear (...) expressions, as Presbyters
Overseers of their stock, and not Lord to, or of ^ellow-Ministers, neither
will there be so much (...) given to the Devil of tempting men to pride and
Am^^t^on. But, Honorable Sir,
It is high time for me to ^^as^^me those respectuous expressions I owe to
pe^^ons of your merits and quality, after I have given you the (...) of my
obedience in undertaking that which from the be^inn^n^ I professed my self
incapable of; howsoever, it (...) a small satisfaction to me to have the
opportunity of con^^^^ing that communication and (excuse my boldness)
familiarity which was not only granted me, but ^lse I had encouragement to;
although I confess this boldness of mine is unexcusable without your pardon:
Yet it is a great comfort to me, that though in it I give you a sign of my
temen^y, yet in the same thing my loyalty to your commands is expressed: the
fulfilling of which is the highest pitch of my ambition, chiefly when they are
about things of the serious and weighty nature of those wherein you have in
this occasion honored me with an Employment, testified at several times under
your Hand and Seal which I dearly keep as precious Tokens of your affection to
me in that and other ways usually communicated to me: so, that were it not to
reproach my happiness, I would openly acknowledge it is to be prodigal of your
favors to bestow so continual a series of them upon me; howsoever, when I call
to mind your former tenderness and that good and sweet disposition natural to
you, I take it as an effect of that virtue in you which cannot but be
communicable to me, so, that though it be without merits in me, yet it is not
altogether beyond my expectation: the more when I meditate upon that charitable
disposition in you, to put one or other upon some good work, but above all,
when I perceive these rare parts which nature has produced and Education
perfected in you, to be seasoned with divine grace which stirs within you
that laudable curiosity of being acquainted with things of a sublime nature; It
was I confess with an intent to endeavor the satisfaction of your desire that
I so freely accepted of your Invitations and Encouragements in this matter,
which through grace I have (though weakly) finished. I was the more moved to it
when I considered the earnest desire of Reformation which all along I have
discovered in you, and that strong inclination which at several times you have
manifested to this manner of Church Government, as the best way in your
judgment to restrain al licentious and debauched persons, besides the divine
institution thereof. And I acknowledge, (...) whomsoever I and the (...) to
(...) with you about (...) the tenderness of your years, I was (...) in me a
constant admiration and a desire of instruction, which I hope through Gods
mercy will shine like the Sun in (...) noon when it shall be the Lords
pleasure, (...), To call you to that trust which is committed to a Peer of one
of these Kingdoms, which as I wish, so I hope you will improve to his Glory
and the Edification, or if need be Reformation of the Church. But, to avoid the
guilt of unthankfulness I must express the nature and number of your favors,
since I am altogether disenabled to pay you any use for the same; But I see you
delight to oblige those who to you cannot do the same: and through I be not
worthy of it because of my ^^perfo^^^t, not able to require it in the least
(...) for want of power and ab^^ties, yet I will not cease to (...) it as long
as I live and (if you give me that liberty) to pro^^sse my self,

Hon^^^able Sir, Yours, etc. G.
July 6. 1660.



According to the desire of the same Honorable Person (...) to ^e since the
other piece was upon the Press, I endeavored here to ^ive An answer to the
(...) reason ^^r Episcopacy, un^er the Law, the Priests were above the Levites.
THey can find but fou^ ^easons weak indeed, since two do carry no con^^^^ence,
and th^^ other two are ^rounded upon that which (...) to be, though it be not.

After, I begin to answer, I wish them to remembe^ that to ^^^ve, then Prel^cy
to be o^ a divine Right is to disown the Kin^s S^p^^macy from whom they
acknowledge to receive that prefe^ment.

The first reason therefore is from the Law; The Priests were ab^ve the La^^^^^
we confess, therefore now there ought to be some Min^sters ^^^ve oth^^^: F^rst,
because this super^^^ity was (...) a divine com^and and institution, Numbers 3.
but under the Gospel it is to ^^^e from being commanded that it is forbidden by
Je^^s Ch ^t, Ma^^^. 20.^6, etc. and in other places. Se^^n^ly, It (...) h^w
they were Priests and Levites, we will fin^ it was (...) ^^^sion, the
P^iesthood was given to the Family of Aa^^^, and the (...) to other Families of
the same Tribe ^f (...) that (...) thing of a civil p^iviledge: B^t, n^^ (...)
Men set^ are such, not by su^c^ssion but by He^^^ (...) and Levites ha^
commission for things of a (...) Ministers under the Go^^el have commission for
(...) the same th^n^, (...) w^, to preach the Gospel and admini^^^^ the
Sa^^^ments, (...) that the least Min^ster has this power as f^lly as any of
the greatest Bishops: but as to this, either the A^versaries do not know what
is the nature of Min^sters under the ^ospel, or else I am ignorant of what
Priests and Le^^tes were under the Law, if they make such a confusion; The
Priests were of the successors of Aaron (I mean, as long as there was a due
order observed amongst the Jews, till Jer^b^ams days) who were anointed in the
sight of the people, who explained the Law, made sacrifices and prayers for the
people: As to the Levites, they did neither of these, but they served about
holy things, and had certain things in their charge and custody in or about the
Tabernacle* whence one may see, that if any comparison is to be made, it must
be between the Priests and Ministers under the Gospel, and amongst the Priests
(set aside the high P^iest) there was no superio^ity: when therefore under the
Gospel we shall have Coverings and Va^^es of Tabernacles, Censers, Flesh-hooks,
Shovels, Baking and other Vessels to be k^pt, then there must be some like the
Levites of the Family of Korah to look to it, Numb^rs 4.14. when we shall have
Curtains of the Tabernacle, and the Tabernacle of the Congregation, his
covering of the B^dgers skin, hangings and other burdens to be preserved, then
we must find some like the Levites of the Family of Ge^^on to do it; so of the
Family of Me ari and others, as Numbers 4. but blessed be God we are no more
entangled with the yoke or bonda^e, and therefore such a difference as was
between P^iests and Levite^ ought not to be amon^st Gospel Ministe^. Fourthly,
The chief office of Priests under the Law was about Ceremonial, Typical and
circumstantial things, as offering sacrifices, etc. But, now the office of a
Minister is of another nature, and therefore the consequence from the Priests
under the Law to the Ministers under the ^ospel is of no moment: As therefore
the Covenant then was different from that which now is; so there was a
different Ministry performed by different persons about different things: so,
that to press that there ought to b^ an Archbishop because there was an hi h
P^iest (which ar^ument the Pope will make use of for his universal Bishopric)
is as ^ood as to press a Patriark of a Pope, and it had been as much to the
purpose to have spoken of the A^k of Noah, or of the bottles of Gideon: we know
that the high P^iest was a Type of Christ: so that it is no wonder if some
extraordinary Authority was granted to Aaron; it was to signify the Kingdom
and Priesthood of Jesus Christ whom he typifyed, whose Crown was represented by
the M^ter^; I cannot indeed but wonder that the Adversaries would make use of
such an argument, a si^n they have but few to confirm their Primacy, which
being grounded upon Custom in corrupted years and not upon truth, is, as
Cyprian says, an old Error.

An Answer to the second Reason. (...), the A^^^^^^ (...) ab^^^ the (...)
Dis^^ple^.
I^ (...) they had ^ome particula^ (...) but if they mean any (...) I challen^e
t^^ A^ (...) it will app^^^ the^ (...) any S^^^ema^^ above the seven^^ I^ (...)
t^en (...) have been a^^^^ the (...) Re ^^^^^tion an^ A^^^t^^n (...) and that
the name D^cip^e was common (...) an (...) 12. of I^^^^. (...) that (...) may
a^^ ^he unde^^ (...) A^ (...) D^^^ples (...) sent them, (...) to the Twelve,
(...) (...) in the (...) p 9 and Lu^^ (...) that the Twelve we^e called and
^ent (...) O^ the ^o^ no^ being sent we ^ead I^re 9. (...) deny that the Twelve
had ^een (...) ^pecial and, wh^^ (...) with the Lord (...) ^u^a^ wh^ tell ^^t
(...) many went away (...) the substance of this (...) no do^^^^^n o^ (...) no
^^re of the (...) ^^ethe^ the A^ (...) ^^^^ants o^ Christ which (...) a^^er the
Lo d. A^^^n, (...) the three Apostles, (...) hand (...) F^ll^w^^ip to (...)
when ^e (...) is (...) that was (...) great (...) an^ a f^llow ^ervant.

(...) been ^^ch a diffe^^nce (...) (...) not be drawn in (...) being in the
(...) Plantation to (...) C^^^ch i^ come (...) and p^^^^^t^on (...), ^s not a
go d consequence. Our blessed Savior intending to form a Church, new I may
call it in many respects, because upon the putting fo^th of this Ch^^ch be was
to be taken up into Heaven, so that he could not be with it in his humane and
corporal presence: and knowing how many oppositions and persecutions should
arise against it, because it would be a scandal to the Jews and fo^lishness to
the Gentiles, therefore for the propa^ation and preservation of that Church, it
was necessary to make ^e of hi^h and extraordinary me^nes to that effect^ he
fitted a select number of men, whom he taught from the beginning of ^is
app^^^ing in the work that he was sent about, to be witness o^ his action^ and
sufferings: wherefore, when they were about to ^h^^e one Apostle in the stead
of Judas, Peter said, Of these men that have accompanied with us all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out amon^st us, beginning from the Bapti^m of
John till the day he was ta^^n up, must one be ordained with us to be ^itness
of his Resurrection, A^t^ 1.21, 22. Wherefore, be^^^^e the doctrine of Ch^^^
was by the most part accounted a new doctrine to overcome the h^ dness^ o^ men's
hearts, and to enlighten th^^ un^erstandings, it was necessary to work upon
their senses by miracles, therefore, for the confirmation of the truth there
were done many signs and wonders, to that effect also variety of Gifts was
given to the Church. There were Apostles, Prophets, Miracles, Healings,
^^^v^^si^y o^ Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.2^. But now that the truth is sufficiently
confi^^ed and the Church settled, there is no longer need of such (...) ^^dina^y
(...) there are n^w no Apostles in that sense, no Prophet, in (...), no
Miracles, (...) though, i^ we had now such (...) would ^^^ely ^ender to them a
more then ordinary res^^ct but I say, those that would have the authority,
power and hono^ (...) due to an Apostle, they must prove themselves to be such
Apo tles as the others were. And after all this consider, that the Ap ^^le were
extraordinarily and immediately called by Christ, and we ^^e that after his
Ascension, they ^^^st not nominate and a^p^^n^ one in the (...), but they
committed it to God in ca^^ing the lot: but, no^ in the Church (...) a
Ministry constituted in an ordinary way with a c^^^^ssion eq^^l to all, and as
ample for one as for the oth^^^ so that n^w, to enter a ^^^^^^ority is to go
beyond this commission, and to (...) a difference of order or degree where
there is the same Lord, the same commission, the same office, the same extent
of power, and thi^ in a way of equality (...) ^^llowship as Scripture cal^ it:
this is to ^^b^titute and prefer humane invention to a divine ^^^i^^tion.

Thirdly, I^ we do but consider when he Apostles were, we will find there is no
(...) any on^ in ^^se times conspire to any special (...) which they may ^ave
had, let us but look on them (...) called by (...) be in his School with (...)
all ^^tion^, by the inward opera^^^^ (...) outward and action of their Lord and
(...) great work which they were app^^^^ed (...) we were to be built upon;
(...) 2.20. Ye are bu^^^ upon the f^undation of the Apostles (...) the chief
c^ru^^-stone. They were (...) in point of faith and (...) things being ^oken^
of Go^ (...) ^avour to the Apostles (...) and re^pect from others* now, (...) a
mea^ure a^ to send the Holy (...) upon men; and therefore, out of these (...) I
^^pe men will cease to u^^e that in these times, (...) to have some ^^eeminen^e
over others, because at the (...) o^ respect yielded to the Apostles, neither
(...) the Apostles were above the 70 Disciples, in any (...) that the Apost es
had any superiority by way of office (...) who rever^ed their commission,
orders and instruction. (...), and not from the Apostles, those glorious and
eminent (...) for the promi^^^ation of the Gospel.

An Answer to the third Reason. (...) the ^^^st Bishop of the Eph^^ans.
T^^^ (...) that T^^^^^th^ o^dained the first (...) set own in the ^^p of
Ar^^^^^ (...) in the place ^p^^^^, and so is to be accounted (...) the Author.
The place whence they (...) 2 Timothy alter the last ver. c^ (...) nothing to
the^^ purpose, when they have their (...) to that which is not in the E^^^tle,
though at seem (...) have some relation to it: when I say, that the
subscription (...) ^upposed thing, I shall but follow the judgment of many
learned Commentators, who think it was inserte^^ into it long after the (...)
of the Epistle.

The reasons are these: First, There is not a word of Bishops, and less of
first Bishop in many ancient Copies transcribe^ out of the Original. Secondly,
The Syriack interpretation has not a word of it. Thirdly, the old vulgar
translation does not express it at all. As to the matter it self, Timothy is
exhorted by S. Paul to do the work of an Evangelist, so, that if the word
Bishop does signify Evangelist, then there is some ground for the truth of it,
though not for any such Episcopacy as the Adversaries would urge, neither was
Timothy ordained the Bishop of Ephesus, that is, the Minister residing in it,
for he stayed there but a while the first time he was left in it by S. Paul, as
we may know out of the first Epistle, till S. Paul could come again, 1 Timothy
4.13, etc. then he took him away: in the mean time what Timothy did was by the
Apostles direction, who having found him to be faithful, sound and blameless,
committed to him that charge whilst he was absent: for we know, that Timothy
afterward accompanied Paul in several of his Journeys, and in this place he is
sent for to Rome whence that Epistle was written, for in the last chap. ver.
21. Do thy diligence to come before Winter; so, that it being the Maxim of S.
Paul, to preach where Christ was not preached before, lest he had builded upon
the foundation of others, Romans 15.20. Therefore, going into other places, he
left in that place whence he departed some painful men of his company to set
things in order, and oppose the seed of errors which in those days was very
dangerous from both Jews and Gentiles: so was his Disciple Timothy left at
Ephesus for a time only, and not as a Diocesan Bishop, as they call it, or as
they would have it: and this is enough to clear the matter, whether this
subscription can prove Timothy to have been ordained the first Bishop of
Ephesus.

An Answer to the fourth Reason. Titus was ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of Cice^.
THis argument is the same in nature as the aforegoing, the whole subscription,
excep^ the person to whom it is directed is supposed and false: for, as it has
been observed of the other place, so of th^^, the subscription is not to be
found in the Syriack as the old vulgar translation. T^tus was not left in ^^ret
as a Bishop or Pastor to pes^^e there, he was there only for a t^^^ to order
things and then go to St. Paul to Nic^^^^e, yea with diligence, chap. 3.11.
from whence the Apostle sent him to Cor^^th: Neither do^^ find ^t to be St.
Paul's style, to call Timothy, Titus, Tich^^^, ^^chipus, etc. Bishop: and
surely, if this title were^^ Paul's it would have been better placed in the
superscription where he puts his ^^^k, and of those whom he writes to. They
(...).

FINIS.
ERRATA in the most substantial things.
IN the former Epistle line 2. whose for while. p. 1 l. 6 r. I ever had very
great, for I vever had any; and in the same p. the last (...) publishing for
multiplying. p. 6. l. 16 r. as necessary for (...) the word taken away, and
these, as in the case of the Lords Supper though it be. p. 1^ l. 16 r. Germany
for Governments p. 11 l. 23 (...) some for four. p. 13 l. 5 r. reference for
p^^tence; an^ (...) first for in, and l. 1^ competent for excellent. (...) p.
16 l. 24 ^^spare for snare. p. 20 l. 6 (...) r turn, and l. 29 r. the for no,
an^ l. ^5 that for there, and l. 6 (...) for P^^^o^s. p. 21 l. 3^ reproach for
report. p. 22 l. 1 (...) would, an^ l. 33 there for them, and last l. Nicolas
for (...) p ^4 l 7 r. minor for Minister, and l. 27 r. time for things. p. 25
(...) but 2 r. even for every. p. 26. l. 17 r. too much (...), and l. 22 ^.
happy for hereby: p. 29 l. 17 r. offices for (...) truth for both: p. 30 last
l. but 7 r. whom for w^en^e: p. ^1 l. ^^. confused for confuted, and l. last,
destroy (...) b th eye^ p. 32 l. 18 r. one (...) only, and l. 23 Presbyters for
(...) p. ^5 (...) though for through, and last l. of (...) p. ^8 (...) in for
after etc. and 6 l. after are left out (...) words (...) ^^ny it to be read
just after these above others: p. (...) ba^ing: p. 4 l. ^ offer least r. or
after, etc. (...) 6 t. assert for offer: p. 44 l. 13 r. Jabach for Ja^^^ (...)
2^ r. observe for for ch^^^^^.


