CHARLES STUART AND OLIVER CROMWELL UNITED, Or, Glad tidings of PEACE To all
Christendom, To the Jews and Heathen, Conversion, To the Church of Rome,
certain downfall: The Irish not to be TRANSPLANTED. Extraordinarily declared by
God Almighty to the Publisher, Walter Gostelow.

Psalm 85. verse. 10. 13. Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other and shall set us in the way of his steps. Printed
for the Author. 165^.

OF GOD. C. R. RESTORED, AND OLIVER CROMWELL BLESSED.

READER,
TO Dedicate this Book to any other than to whom God Almighty has directed it,
I dare not, it is first to all you Christian Kings and Princess, more especialy
our own, Charles Stuart, and therein it shows you. That when you govern best and
most pleasing to the will of the Almighty, whose Vice-Royes you are. And of him
made rulers on Earth for the general good, you then live in a general Peace,
into which happy condition he has now put you, that his Temples may be
rebuilded, his Worship and his Ministers restored, with what has been stolen
from both, also your Subjects, Gods people, well educated in his houses by his
Ministers, sent in the ways of Justice, Peace, and Holiness, without which no
man shall ever see the face of God to his comfort: next it shows you that the
so anciently beloved Seed of faithful Abraham, the Jews are now in his best
times remembered, and brought into the Faith of Christ our Lord, the only Son
of God, whom they Crucified, the fullness of the Gentiles coming in with them
also to the knowledge of his Gospel, [his] that is the only Shilo, the only
Messia, by the Heathen not yet heard of, by the Jews hoped for, he, I say,
comes to both, making himself known, in such a manner as they expect not, most
strange and wonderfully affording* them his Viceroy Charles Stuart for their
Defense and Protection, he professing that Gospel now to be Preached to the
whole World, against whose rule and Gospel none shall ever prosper that Rebels,
Disobeyeth, or Schismatically rises up, therefore is the Church of Rome at
this time sentenced to certain downfall. The Church of Rome shall fall.

The poor Irish* whom wicked men would have transplanted upon the same
principles, as obdurate Pharaoh would not let the children of Israel go,
covetuousness and hard-hartedness, God does continue in their own Land, yea,
under his, and their own Kingly Government also, to the joy of their hearts.
That Nation being neither such a Bear, as we misapprehended them, nor their
skin fit to be sold by us that did it, before warrant is given from God to
deliver it: they shall not be transplanted.

God now shows us, That wicked Rebellion was the design, and contrive of a few
in that bloody, and ever Rebellious Church of Rome, not the allowance of the
Nation: this also God showed unto our now happy, and glorious King in Heaven,
whilst good on Earth, it is proved to you in his Letters taken at Naseby,
written to her Majesty. My Heart, you will find the Irish with you Knaves,
(they might deceive the one, they could not deceive the other,) And since that,
how has God fully cleared their Majesty's, as now the Nation, from any
allowance of that hideous Rebellion. Own it Church of Rome, it will match well
with the Gunpowder Treason, thou did both, as many others, Thy Nuntio was in
Ireland, yet thou shall fall. Has not God made his late Majesty's abominating
that wicked act, clear as the day, to be none of his ollowance? you know, or
may, That Sr. Phillemon O'neal, upon his Trial at Dublin, though pusillanimous
and timed in all other things, yet when he was to give an account from whence
he had his Commission, God sent him a courage, gave him abilities to speak
boldly and truly to Gods glory, the honor of the Protestant Religion, and
the Kings just Vindication, he took Heaven and Earth to witness, he had neither
Commission from King or Queen for that Rebellion: he affirmed that himself,
with others of the Roman stamp made them, that he might play the best of his
own Game; it further appears, in that Oath imposed on those he subdued to his
own obedience. These are things I have had from very good hands, when my self
at Dublin, but that Traitor was executed a little before I came thither. Now
see what God does, who is the searcher of all hearts, the King is in Heaven,
the Queen declared for Heaven, the Nation not to be transplanted, the
contrivers and aspersers of both gone to their own home, or truly discovered
to us by the Lord, who now throws down that wicked Church.

Well, you shall now see we must all live together in brotherly love under
Kingly Government also: but you will say how can these things be, considering
what manner of Persons we have been? this book will show you. It proceeds only
from the good pleasure and merciful loving kindness of the Almighty. The Lord
has made our Salvation, not our destruction, his glory, when all we, thy
people, O God, had sinned beyond any help, then, O Lord, thou say, lo, I
come. But after how wonderful a manner, and how certain our deliverance is,
read and know. Actions, salved up with a free forgiveness, are as not done, and
as a bone once broken is much stronger after well setting, so is love after
reconcilement: God forgives us our iniquities, and in mercy restores us our
King again, who deals with us, being guided of God, as Joseph did with his
brethren, when only of God made ruler in Egypt, and had power to punish
according to their demerit, then he treats them kindly, following the example
of our Lord. He forgives all past injuries, he loades them with good things, he
weeps over them, when he tells them he is Joseph, least they, not seeing his
heart, might doubt of their forgiveness, he drops Tears as Blood from pitying
eyes and heart; they well knew what themselves had been to him, unfaithful
brethren, and its not improbable when they saw themselves by God cast under his
power, and dispose, they might fear, tremble, and expect the reward of so high
demerit, for the affronts they had put upon Joseph. But least such fears should
too much sadden their unquiet Souls, he weeps over them more abundantly,
imbraceth them afresh, gives them all they stood in need of, and does not so
much as once remember them of the evil measure they had dealt him, so allows
them no ground at all to suspect their safety, whose injuries he had fully
forgiven; Most happy Reunion and meeting, that sweetens more in its return,
than it imbit^ered in its absence* Protection my book commands, not craves
under Oliver Cromwell Protector, also his conformity thereunto, yet I beseech
both, God has now declared him to be beloved, first in Heaven as you shall
read, then of his King, CHARLES STUART, and all good men on Earth, the Almighty
both deputed him to be highly instrumental for the bringing of great and
strange things to pass in this Kingdom and Christian World, which God will make
marvelous in our eyes. As the promote of the Protestant Religion, and Honor of
his King.

I may not detain you longer, nay, I dare not, from Gods word of Prophecy in
this Book, agreeable to his own, in nothing contrary, Proclaim it I must to all
concerned, and so I do, though the unworthiest of my Lords servants, a
faithful Communicator of his merciful, loving kindness I am commanded to be
unto all the Sons and Subjects of the Protestant Church, and Gods Viceroy on
Earth, CHARLES STUART. To the Church of Rome, and the Rebellious faithful will
I also show my self, that Church shall fall, and no Rebellion ever prosper, God
has said it, and if it come not to pass, put me to Death: I may not for fear,
or favor be unfaithful to my trust, that is a sacrilege of the highest
nature, and therefore in spite of the Devil, or danger, I tell you wickedness
shall not longer prosper on Earth: Did not the ground open and swallow quick
those first Rebels and Schismatics, Corah, Dathan, and Abyram? and did not
Absolons Mule in the midst, whilst he was acting of his Rebellion, go from
under him, leaving him hanging by the head? Such shall no more prosper than
their Church of Rome, which shall fall, good men shall be Honorable, and rule,
but for the ungodly, whilst I pray for their conversion, I fear their
confusion.

WALTER GOSTELO.

THE Protestant RELIGION more conspicuously glorious than ever; the Defendors
of that Faith, CHARLES STEWART and OLIVER CROMWELL United.
Sect. I.
HAving past from Bristol, the Seas; and much foul weather in December, 1652. I
arrived at Cork: Where I heard the sentence of death pronounced upon some 30 or
more of the Irish Gentry and others, for several Barbarous Murders by them
committed.

The last that spoke from the Bench to those unhappy men, after sentence of
death read unto them, was the Lord of Broghill: Who well minded them, that they
were not proceeded against upon the account they shed our bloods; either as we
were English men, or else because not of their Religion; both unwarrantable. We
should not kill him, we conceive, out of the way; but rather show him the way
to walk in. 'Twas murder justly condemned them to suffer, not rash zeal; with
which God is not well pleased: who would that all men should live, and come to
the knowledge of his truth.

But for the Murderer, the Law of God was he should die for it: So they
suffered not as they were Irish, or Roman Catholics.

This I could not but observe passing the rather because it tended, in that so
mixed Assembly, highly to the setting right the judgment (as I conceive) to the
glory of God. And indeed the first I ever saw, or heard pronounced, from those
new erected High-Courts of Justice: Against which I have heard so many bitter
Invectives, that they were like Hell, from whence is no returning. There it was
not so: where I also saw many acquitted.

From thence my business commanded me to Youghill, in March following: A season
more fit for travel and observance. I removed from thence to Lismore, 11 miles
off, cituate upon the Black-water: A Seat very ancient, and not a little
eminent and honorable. Where having well viewed the improvements and good
contrivances of the late deceased Earl of Cork, who had there purchased, caused
to bebuilt and made many fair and commodious Seats; governing in the well
manage of Affairs, as born for the public good; for so he was communicable to
the employ of the poor, to the improve of those Lands, to the good example of
others, and to the honor of this Nation. That had not War prevented, and death
put an end to his days (both broken in upon us as a stream too violent to
withstand, those inundations of evil, heightened by our sins and follies of all
sorts, the only inlets of all Gods judgments upon us) it might be presumed
before this time it had in some measure risen again from the ashes; which
former Wars, I conceive, had buried it in.

A very fair and strong built Scholehouse, with Almes-houses on both sides of
it, that Earl lived to finish there: And now I believe he really intended to
re-build the Church. So that like Him that was a man after Gods own heart, in
this he followed him, that he loved the place where his Honor dwells. And
therefore he would so provide for it, that in public he might be worshipped;
and that youth might early be taught the ways of godliness. Thus being
instrumental to well-accomplish them, he might best serve God and his Nation,
in being communicably good to all; the end for which we were born.

This observing, I sometimes was prone to think, That what he happily begun,
might in future time, by his posterity and others be carried on, to the making
it, what is to be desired, and what it once was (as informed) an University: So
conveniently is it situate, naturally affording the delights and good
accommodations, that may best commode, serve and adorn an University.

As also that part of the Land, in regard of its being well inhabited, and
remoteness from Dublin, called for and stood much in need of, the Church
indowments being there, and thereabouts full for encouragement and invitation,
fit to help on with so good and pious a work: were not the possessors of those
profits more lovers of themselves, than lovers of God and his service.

Is it reasonable that our Forefathers, certainly out of love and zeal ('it is
possible not misguided too) should so largely give and endow, for the Glory,
Worship and Service of God Almighty, and we who have more enlarged Fortunes,
should have more streitened hearts, and more cruel hands? Indeed only strongly
bent, and always ready to pull down: and by Thieving, Sacrilege and
Covetousness, which is the root of all evil, make that ours, which neither God,
Man, or law ever meant should: Nay, they have all forbid it, with a curse to
the Robber: which in the end will prove that Cursed Thing, that will make us
and our posterity most miserable. A Cole from that Altar fires all our ill
gotten nay other) goods; or else fits us and our Posterity for the slaughter,
which is the end of the ill-advised.

Into the remain of this Church of Lismore, Thursday the 3 of March 1652. I
came, (as well might; for it had neither door to keep out the unclean beasts,
nor in it any thing, becoming a House set apart for the worship and service of
God Almighty,) as informed this Church had belonging to it 8 thousand pounds
per Annum, before the War. Out of it I often hunted Beasts of several sorts;
which (indeed) by their dung, recreating themselves in the ruins of it, had
help to make it with their fellows, more like a Den of Thieves, than a House of
God.

This seeing, I could not but lament, and did there kneel down, and supplicate
God Almighty, not to suffer us longer, who pretend to the most and best of
Piety, to carry on a War, and continue such actions, as should prove so
scandalous to the Protestant Religion; deterring from the profession of it,
Such as there lived among us: who could not certainly be drawn to the
profession of it by our so bad example; living as it were like men of
dispositions, only born to cruelty and irreligion: Beseeching that he would be
pleased to return to us in mercy, set every man's sins in order before his face,
to the detest of them, resolving never to return to folly: And that of his
goodness he would cast the^ all behind his back, that we might once more come
into the Houses, built for his Worship and Service, with prepared hearts,
devout Souls; forgiving one the other; all desirous to be taught of God: and
that we might live hereafter more according to his will revealed in his word;
and so knowing his good pleasure, we might readily apply our selves to do it.
Further, that the Ministers appointed to officiate in those places, might be
men sent from God; who, understanding his word aright, might to us so divide
it. And that we might all harmoniously agree together, not only to Preach and
talk down Sin; but that we might all live, for the time to come, to serve him
in sincerity of heart, and in the beauty of holiness: So that others, observing
Gods mercies toward us, and our amendments toward him, might also with us be
drawn, to glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

Sometime of that Thursday afternoon I spent in that Remain of Church; so
praying, meditating and reading; and could not do otherwise. Indeed, the more
I prayed, the more I wept; the more I wept, the more I joyed: and from my
Devotions, I remember not that I ever went away with a better return: being
very highly comforted, and so assured that God would hear, and have mercy; and
from thenceforth, and in that place, bless me; giving me for consolation, that
a wellguided zeal for his House, Worship and Service, made great our own, and
established it also.

That night I went home to a little House, I then and there lodged at, and had
this dream:

Me thought there was a very gross and thick Darkness, over the face of the
whole Earth; dark beyond compare: I then heard a very terrible Thunder, which
more affrighted me: and looking up to Heaven, I saw a glimering Light; not
clear; about the bigness, and of the proportion of a round Table, some two
yards over: In that Light there appeared to me as the Body of an Oak, about a
yard long: Root it had not, nor Top, nor Leaves, nor Fruit: Full of Sangs it
was, and offensive Knots: not fit for Timber, or other use than the Fire: This
soon vanished, yet the darkness continued, but grew greater than the ^ormer,
and the Thunder answerable; indeed so terrible, that it seemed to me, to waken
and rouse up all the people of the Land: which when risen, I prayed in these
words:

O Lord! the people are now risen up, and stand in readiness to do thy will:
would thou be pleased to let them know it: I beseech thee (O Lord) give them
a sign in Heaven, or from Heaven, of thy good pleasure; and we will readily
obey thee.

There then appeared, as formerly, such another Light; not clearer, but bigger;
and (as the former was) over our heads, about the height, or distance of the
Clouds: having in it such a Body of an Oak, as the other; in this only
differing, 'twas bigger and more offensive.

As we stood thus gazing, anon the Heavens began to grow light in the East, as
approach of day and Sun: We standing, as it were, in the midst of the Kingdom
of England, the Light increased and came on: And with it, rose and came toward
us the most glorious Crown ever eyes beheld: the richest for Jewels; the most
transparently cut; every way the beautifullest imaginable: Having in it, and
through it, standing as the three Plumes of Feathers in the Princes Arms, a
bunch of Bays, or small Bay-trees: beautiful for verdure; bearing Berries, as
having Root: Waiting upon this Crown, came many goodly Ships; which Crown,
Bays, and Ships came all along thus together in the Light, from the East,
toward us the people, who with fixed eyes stood looking into Heaven: All which
we perfectly discerning, and being come almost over our heads, we the people
all of us, with one voice, gladness and consent, cried out, O Lord, we praise
thee; this is of Heaven, we will follow it.

I then looked behind me, for the former Glimmering Light, and Offensive Oak
in it, and I saw them flying away so fast, that immediately they were gone, and
no more to be seen: The people, seeing it so gone out of the Heavens,
reitterated the former words, and said all with one consent, Come, this Crown
is of Heaven, we will follow it; so bowed down and worshipped, praising God.

The Light then went over all the Heavens, toward the West, and great was the
Light; the Crown, Bays and Ships continued in the Heavens; now light all over.

After this, immediately from the Heavens, I heard most sweet and pleasing
Sounds, as the voice, or murmur of many waters; and on the Earth shining,
appeared nothing but Beauty and Plenty: amongst the people of the Earth loving
kindness and good affections: all with one consent praising God.

Thus, ravished with an over-joy, I wakened, and found my self very wet with
tears. My greatest joys and greatest weepings seldom are divided. I spent most
of that night in Meditation and casting what this dream might import: for
truly this is but one, though the most considerable (as I conceive) of the
many I have had from Heaven, demonstrating several things.

The next day being Friday, a day in the week, which for some seven years past,
I have set apart (though not always spent, God be pleased to have mercy upon
me and forgive me) as I ought, or should, for fasting and examination of my
self: That, as I am one Friday nearer my end, so I may in one measure, or
another grow fitter for it: in regard of the many mercies God Almighty has
been pleased to afford me, from my Cradle hitherto: As that he has been
pleased to preserve me from the noisome Pestilence, from the violence of the War
(where be pleased to observe, I have been committed and taken into custody
three times on the Kings side, and five times on the Parliaments; yet never was
in action, or employ on either part;) from so many great and eminent dangers,
both by Sea and Land; from Men lying in wait particularly for my blood: And
lastly, that the Lord has not cut me off in the midst of my sins, and already
given me my portion with that so sad company in Hell, from whence is no
returning.

These were (certainly) grounds enough for every man's Fasting and Prayer;
especially living in a Time, when wickedness seemed to be practiced by a Law;
at least, it was not long since it was so: All these together were grounds (I
say) more than enough, to beseech God for redress, to a distracted people, and
a divided Land.

This Friday I repaired to that Church of Lismore: in it, and places fit for
Contempaltion, I passed that day. Saturday, I could not but return thither
again, and there pen the subject matter of my prayer on that Thursday
afternoon; also my Dream that night: And decline I must not, nay could not, to
impart all so penned, to the now most Honorable Earl of Cork, and his so well
accomplished Countess: And home I must press them, forthwith to re-build that
Church of Lismore.

The reasons cannot but be good and many, who considers the Lord should be
publicly served; and the people well instructed, from the mouth of him, whose
lips should preserve knowledge, and tongue speak a word in due season. Such men
are the men (certainly) sent, and deputed by God himself, for the better
turning of sinners from the evil of their ways, to serve the everliving God:
His Temple's the fittest place also, where holiness is injoined us: Beauty and
decency not forbidden. To this Earl and Countess of Cork I apply my self; in
their Garden and private Bedchamber they were pleased to hear me to the full.

I may not here omit to let you know, that in the morning of that very day,
when, going to pray for Gods guidance, in this his business of rebuilding his
House, to his own glory, and good of others; and having omitted that morning,
to read any part of the Scriptures or Psalms, appointed for the day, (the
reading of Gods Word first, a good way to prepare for acceptable devotion, and
praying aright;) from my knees I rose, took the Bible, and there opened to me
the Prophet Haggai; which tied my eye upon the place (a Scripture (God be
merciful to me) I was not at all acquainted with:) Thus opened, I could not go
on to Devotion, nor to read the Psalm, until I had read that Prophet out,
being but two Chapters; directed and overruled (as I firmly then, and now
believe) by God Almighty: For, in the whole Book of God, there is not any place
fuller for the business I had in hand. It is well worth your, and all men's
observe and retention, that have too low esteem of Gods House.

But what speak I of too low esteem? Indeed, none at all that good is, of the
Churches, or Temples, built and set apart to the glory, for the public Worship
and Service of God.

Humble men they seem to be! A Stable, or Kitchen will serve their turns: and
(truly) good enough too for many, who have the impudence to abuse Gods House,
and endeavor there to seduce the more ignorant sort of people.

These Schrich-Owls cannot well endure the light of his House; therefore have
they their corners and sculking places. A judicious and public Auditory, who
love the place where his Honor dwells (which they best love to frequent, and
thither go with prepared hearts, to learn that they may understand what is fit
to practice;) These will not be decoyed by them. With those it matters not what
becomes of the House of God: Yet observe and remember (I beseech you) what that
Prophet Haggai there gives for reason, of all the evils that were sent, and
continued upon the Land; The not-building of Gods House.

The lying of that waste, caused the Lord to have no delight in the people. He
there advises and enjoins to rebuild his House; then he assures them, he will
dwell with them, and bless them beyond all compare: nay, he will take pleasure
in them, verse the 8. He there goes on, He will shake the Heavens, the Earth,
the Sea, and the dry Land: All is his, and to his, for the glory of his House,
that he will fill with his own glory, and bless the Land with peace and plenty;
such as was never seen, until the building, or laying of that Foundation. From
that very time he blesses them, when they rebuild his House, for his public
worship and service. The Lord makes that a business fit for the employ of
another Prophet also, the Prophet Zechary.

Of so much concernment you see it is with God: But lest, these things being
Old Testament, we should conclude they concern us not under the Gospel: so
wicked are we grown, and so out of love with any thing, that costs us ought in
the Service of God, or is most to his glory and honor; that, as any place is
good enough, so indeed any Calf fit to offer. Thus shift we off the thing, in
which our happiness most lies; that we may make our selves most miserable:
Foolish men! why consider we not, that Christ's Courts on earth are his
Churches? And, in representation thereof, he has a Throne in the midst of his
Temple, and sits thereon; before whom all fall down and worship.

But these times call for our lamentation, nay, deep mourning: for in this
business, we deal with the House of God and his Worship (although we pretend
much to both) as Amnon dealt with his sister Tamar; first Ravish her, then
Defile her, and after turn her out of doors. But to return:

Truly, I could not but commend those two short, but most full Chapters of
this Prophet Haggai, to that so Honorable Earl and Countess: for the better
dispose of them; whose affairs of concernment, are wisely managed by joint
consent. Their quick discern a far off, and sound judgment at home, give them
great advantages, for the well-ordering of all their affairs.

Who having heard me out, before I once so much as pressed them to it, the Earl
met me with this readiness to the work; My Father intended the building of that
Church, I will do it: It is only by me, for a short time, deferred; until
these troubles blow over, or time afford a better opportunity, for the carrying
on of the work: for the rebuild of which Church, I have many things already
fitted, etc.

I most heartily wish, and do so pray, that there might be found in all men
this readiness, to make themselves happy here, and so (certainly) blessed
hereafter. You have the way; love Gods House, the place where his Honor
dwells; also his Ordinances with sound judgment; and you cannot but be beloved
of him.

When David and Solomon think to build God an House, to his glory, worship and
service, and do so; see how the Lord declares himself, in the second of Samuel
to the 14. that he will establish their Houses for ever. And are not the best
of Kings, the best of Patterns in Gods service? who can and will do for thee
also, so governing, or assisting to his glory; as shall be most for thy lasting
Honor and happiness here, but everlasting hereafter.

Thus ends all then done, most happily, in nothing disappointed, which God put
me upon. This happy day was Friday, March the 11. 1652.

SECT. II.
A Short time after, I fell into several sicknesses and diseases of that
Country, so that most of the following Summer I past in changes, from one
malady to another: At last I broke out into very many Boyls; so that I may
truly say from the Crown of my Head, to my Foot, I was furnished with them;
forty, or fifty at a time of all sizes: My condition in that, and some other
things too very like that of Job's: which escaped not my observe, in a Letter,
to that so eminently good Countess of Cork: beseeching some of her remedies; of
which she is free, and do heal as Balm, from her munificent and answerable
hand. To God Almighty, and that Honorable Countess, I owe most humble thanks
for recovery, from my so long and tedious sickness.

About Michaelmas I went to Dublin, in the company and safe conduct of that
most Honorable Lord, the Lord of Broghill: where I stayed until near
Christmas; then returned to Youghall.

After six days there, I could not be quiet, until I had sapplied my self, by
Letter, to his Lordship, giving him to understand, I had a Dream at Lismore,
some 9 months past: Which Dream, together with what Observance, or
Interpretation, God was pleased to put into my heart and mind, I was to
communicate to him: Which I could not decline; and therefore besought his
Lordship, that in his presence, and some more persons of Honor, in that Letter
named, he and they would be pleased to lend me half an hours time, and their
attention.

The Gout at that time was violent upon his Lordship, by reason of which
incommode, he was disinabled to sit up: so that his Lordship was pleased to
answer my Letter, that for that reason only he desired my forbearance, until
it past over; of which (when so) I should have notice, and in presence of these
persons desired; also admittance so soon as convenient.

His Lordships Letter I have, and reaped what promised, a few days after.
Being in his Bedchamber (Those I desired, present,) I recited my Dream as
formerly: The Observance, or Interpretation I gave thus:

The customary sins we were guilty of, and had unhappily involved our selves
in, had now begot our security, as in the dead of night and sleep: from which
we were not to be wakened, or rowzed, but by the Almighty power of God: And
therefore, to let us see our condition, and his displeasure for sin, whom our
Impieties had irritated; he therefore came in Thunder; to show us that our
seeming righteousness reached not Heaven, nearer then the Clouds: our
pretentions to good, went not higher: like an Ignis-fatuus they were, or a
Gloe-worm: Light they had, but not substantial, enough to show us we were
strong as the Oak; which we might there see our wicked selves compared to.
Strong we were to work wickedness; Governors and all: to which Oak they, and
we may be compared; as in the Prophet Zechary the 11. and the 2.

Bad we were of choice; so of practice; so for works; so for offense: No Root;
no Top; no Leaf; no Fruit; not so much as virdure; Offensive on all sides, in
regard of the Snags; not fit for Timber, such our Governors; only for the
Fire, such their unprofitableness; just like the Stag's horn, when the velvet
of Hypocricy is fallen from it (as most excellently his Majesty observes in his
Book;) which wicked Governors, when the people once fail them, and truly
understand them, how unprofitable, how offensive, how dangerous, how hurtful;
they would then sufficiently hate them.

When once as this Oak, stripped of his bark, nakedly seen, and well observed;
then fit only for the fire. I command you read the 3 last verses of the first
of Isaiah; and see, if this Interpretation be not of the Lord; yea, his own: I
will give you the words, For they shall be ashamed of the Oaks which you have
desired: Ye shall be confounded; for ye shall be as an Oak, whose leaf fades;
and the strong shall be as tow, and the makers of it as a spark, and they shall
both burn together.

Here are the Oaks ye have chosen, when ye forsook the Lord. Is not this a
Vision, and the Interpretation of the Lord? I made it before I observed this; I
now interline it: It Is of God the Interpretation.

Therefore the Oak abides not, having no allowance, or establishment from God
in Heaven. Fly away it does, when the Light and Crown appear: To both which
they being enemies and haters of, God makes them vanish, and be no more seen.
Though they lift themselves as high as the Clouds, yet their place is below,
whither he throws them. Of his allowance they are not: neither do the people;
when they desire to do the will of God, and he has opened their eyes, to
discern aright, what is of God, as they confess that Light, Crown and Bays,
they then know the Crown, and Him deputed to govern, to be only of God: And
because it has its allowance of Heaven, with one consent (praising God) they
invite All to what themselves are now convinced of; Obedience to Him and It
only: and so breaking forth, they altogether cry, Come, this is of Heaven, we
will follow it.

And that it may have their best affections, and firm allowance, they give it
their Second, the wisest and best Thoughts, resolvingly too; they reitterate
the words, Come, this is of Heaven, we will follow it: And so down to God and
It, and worshipped and praised the Lord.

Now, although this were, and yet is our depraved condition; and that we have
added wickedness to wickedness, and made our selves strong to do so; which the
Second and greater Light, with the offensive and unprofitable Oak in it, fully
implied: yet observe the loving kindness of God Almighty: We no sooner got into
a frame to beg of him inablements to know his Will, resolving then to do it;
and are gotten into a posture of readiness, standing up; but He lets us see,
that his displeasure is blown over: The Thunder, that cease; those wicked
Governors, as offensive Oaks, they are fled; the seeming Light, that is
annihilated. It is his mercy that endures for ever, and his Compassion assures
us, he delights not in the death of a sinner; but rather, that he would turn
from his wickedness, and live: And thus expostulating with us, brings from him
this expression, Why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? Repent, be ye
converted, and return from whence ye are fallen, the contempt of Gods House and
Worship; Obedience unto whom I have set over you for good, would you but see
it; did not your continuance in sin blind your eyes, and deprave your
understandings, yea, could not but be happy.

Bless us he would, and that to the full too; as he assures us in that Prophet
Haggai, and diverse other places; even from that time we rebuild his House, and
obey whom he has set over us for good. And if thus we would readily apply our
selves, and herein obey God and our King, mark and behold, The Heavens they
invite you, and demonstrate their allowance; rejoicing at it, by their pleasant
sounds: the Earth also its gladness, shining with variety of Flowers, and
abundant Fruitfulness: the Seas their over-joy, thinking it no burden, to their
best and wellrigged Ships to give way, and bow down: that all she brings from
foreign and the rich returns of Trade, that plough her Ocean, may, when so
laden, in their best dress also, wait upon the Crown, peaceably attending,
suffering themselves to be led by it; All which they did, being Merchant Ships,
not Men of War.

And now tell me, is it not pity, and the greatest too, that whom God has
made the more reasonable Creature, Man, should only be averse, and stand in
Rebellion; going on in disobedience, to his own undoing?

But I may not complain, as anon: I shall let you see He also is, or shall come
in; for who can resist, when God will have it so? He has in store, nay, he is
now distributing to you the greatest mercy in the world: which I dare not
longer conceal, from all the Sons of Men; but more especially from the so much
beloved of the Lord, the Seed of Abraham, the Jews, Here Is the hope of Israel!
as also to the Heathen, toward whom his Compassions fail not; and to this our
Orthodox, true Protestant Religion, for the honor of it, to the unparalleled
joy of all good men's hearts.

These things observed, I then applied my self to Doctor Mollines; who was one
of the ten Persons, I desired to be present: And because I knew him to be a
person of good life, and believed him of sound judgment; I made it my beseech
to him, That in a short time, he would be pleased, to give us a Sermon, upon
this Subject, or Text; He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but he that
confesses, and forsakes them, shall find mercy. For to me it seemed, that
Gods return is in mercy, was only witheld, by our going on in iniquity.

Here also I may not omit, but observe to you, that before I came to the Lord
of Broghills, I was taken from my knees, and could not go on, to beseech Gods
blessing upon what I had to deliver to him, until I turned to the Reading
Psalms: But, as I was cast formerly upon the Prophet Haggai, with good success
for the rebuild of that Church; so here I was cast upon the 84 and 85 Psalms;
both as full as is imaginable, to any that well considers, and compares, what I
observed out of my Dream, and desire to the rebuild of Gods House. Oh, how
amiable, and how much to be delighted in, is thy House! how should our Souls
long after thy Worship!

Which when I had read, and considered the manner of my being cast upon them;
having already disputed all I intended, or almost all what I would speak to
that Company at the Lord Brougills; I could not but conclude, what I believe
every well-observing man will; That it was the only Providence of God
Almighty; who, for my further confirmation, gave me those Psalms of Scripture,
to strengthen me, and dispose others to their duty; who he was willing should
reap the unparalleled blessings there assured. Pray, well observe it: the one
lets you see, what desires we should have, for the rebuild of, and worship in
Gods House the other his return in mercy; blessing the Land, when we so fear
and serve him: Righteousness, as that Light, shall then go before him; Mercy
also and Truth shall meet together; Righteousness and Peace shall kiss each
other; and so set us in the way of his steps. Full to all.

Having done all of Interpretation, in reference to my Dream, I could not pass
this lightly over, but observe it to them; as also how that God had many times
showed me several things, in and from Heaven; called me to the search, and
often advised the reading of his Holy Word; giving me to understand, that by so
doing, I should be abundantly happy and blessed. In particular, one time it
seemed to me, he took me into a great Light, when all the World was in
darkness; he placed on each side of me an Angel of the Lord; that on the right
hand, opened a great Book to me, bid me read therein, and took an Angel of Gold
off that Book, into his hand, and put it into mine: when received, I folded my
arms and bowed before him; believing it was no other, but (as the Bush of
Moses) the presence of the Lord: He then told me, he gave it not to be folded
up, or hid; but to be improved were his Talents given; and so advised me to
read.

Another time, one night, about the hour ten, walking at the end of
Broad-street (in which I then, and now live,) looking up into the Heavens, and
observing so great a number of Stars, I called to mind the promise made to
Abraham, That his Seed should be as numberless, as the Stars in Heaven: So
praising God, I there stood, in, or near that place, about half an hour; where
I did see the Heavens opened, my Savior on the Throne, the Patriarks,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Saints and Angels, waiting round about it, and to
my comfort, my own Father: This I saw, when I was awake, and really there
standing: Something has been showed me, of our ever-blessed King dead, but in
Heaven glorious: this also I did observe to his Lordship, but made no other use
of it, than this, That forasmuch as all I ever dreamed, or saw, of that nature,
was above in the Heavens, or came from thence; nothing ever from the bottomless
pit, the Earth, or Seas: which gave me to believe it was the further from
Delusion: and much the more to be believed True, because that which is of
Heaven, is Heavenly.

And although the Crown was upon no man's head, yet being waited upon by the
Ships, it implied He was to come from beyond the Seas, whose undoubted right it
was: And who that Man was, to whom it properly belonged, his Star demonstrated,
which at Paul's Cross appeared, when there was a Sermon preached there, upon the
day he was born on, being the same (as I conceive) our Lord rose on; and his
(our Kings) Birth also, early in the morning, as his (our Saviors)
Resurrection, whose Viceroy certainly he, this CHARLES STUART, is, as ye shall
hear anon; his Father (our late King) then present: And as the Gentleman that
preached, about the hour of eleven, was giving thanks to God Almighty, That to
our then Sovereign Lord the King, and to us his Subjects, was that day born a
Son and Prince, in whom our hopes were, and assurance might be, He would prove
most Eminent in his Church on Earth, to Gods glory, and his Majesty's and our
comfort: So thanking God for this (for I present was) I looked up to Heaven;
and there, at almost eleven a Clock, in the month of May a most clear day,
very near the Sun also did I see that his Star appear: which wondering at,
being just over (as it were) his place of Birth, White Hall, or his Fathers
head, who was come to give God praise for him at the Cross; which was also sung
by the Quire on the Leads; his Star then appearing, I my self showed it to very
many; hundreds, if not thousands witness this. So that the Heavens having now
again demonstrated Him, the Seas waiting on him, the Earth flourishing under
him; what remains, but that we get our selves into a readiness, to receive so
great a blessing, from so good a God; Whom in mercy he has appointed over us,
as I firmly believe.

The Lord of Broghill, I confess, I advised never to right, or draw sword
against this King: For the war of Ireland, I now understood it better than
formerly; and therefore did believe, that to his Lordship, who was born there,
at Lismore too (as I conceive) and resided in that Kingdom, the devices and
subtleties of the Church of Rome, in that Rebellion, or since in the carrying
on of that War, were better known, than to his late Majesty; whose goodness by
some was too too much abused; seeing it not with his own eyes, but hearing it
by others misrepresented. His Lordship, who had that great advantage, as to be
amongst them himself (which was denied his late Majesty,) did see, that his
Unholiness of Rome had only a modest design, to suppress the Protestant
Religion, and cheat the King of that Kingdom, that he might the better be soon
usurper of all the rest.

This I now firmly believe was the ground of the Lord of Broghills fighting in
that Kingdom. So never at all against the King, but for him: And I do the
rather believe this, because I never had any Commission or desire, to treat
him, other than with all respect, as a person of Honor, that had great and
good accomplishments: For I told him that day, before I went out of his
presence, that I believed, he never was against the King: Further, I never had
desire to apply my self to any man in that Kingdom but his good self. And see
now (as you shall anon) how God honors that Man, above all the swordmen in
that Kingdom; as Oliver Cromwell only of the swordmen, the most in the Kingdom
of England. And more than to these two only did I never apply my self; sent of
Heaven to these so glorious Saints, first on Earth; that they may be most
glorious ones hereafter in Heaven.

But, thou Church of Rome shall fall (as anon I shall show you:) God will down
with thee: These two Persons of Honor have, and shall the most of any two
Subjects in the world, help down with her. I had all most forgot my then last
observe to his Lordship, A material on it is, that although every man stood up,
bowed, and Worshipped God, following the Crown, and with one consent crying
out, O Lord, we praise thee for this Crown is of Heaven, come, we will follow
and obey it, yet I say this of all people, wherein no one man dissented, did
not seem for number to exceed four, or five hundred persons, which occasioned
from me then, this observe to his Lordship.

That I feared our sins and the punishment for sin would almost lay waste our
Land, we having so highly provoked the Lord, by our too much delighted in
iniquities and rebellions of all sorts, which we had just ground to bewail,
least they consumed us.

But truly since I have better hopes, nay, firmly believe I do, that if we
would turn to God with all our hearts, and do the things here God advises to,
by me his unworthy servant in much mercy sent unto you, that you might repent,
find deliverance, and so live abundantly happy, this number of men, which as I
former observed, past for the whole people in the Land, of which none
dissented, I now hope and pray will most happily prove to be that number of
men, which represent the whole people of the Land, and yet exceed not 4 or 5
hundred persons now of this Parliament, to which purpose I beseech every good
man's prayers, and every bad man's amendment of life, and for dissenting persons
in that body, believe as I do, there will not be found one, or not one to hurt
us. Who can be unhappy when all agree to fear God and honor their King,
keeping the commandments of the one, the wholesome and well constituted Laws of
the other, in which doing there cannot but be happiness here, and ever
hereafter, into which good old way of thine and ours good Lord be pleased to
set us, that we may be certainly blessed, our feet being then found in the way of
thy steps.

Thus ended all I then observed, and to my Lodging I retired to the Widow
Marricks house in Youghall.

SECT. III.
VEry few days past, but by accidental rancounter, I met and fell into
discourse with a Gentleman, who had commanded formerly a Troup of Horse in the
Parliament service; we argued, and to this we came, whether Kings were made so
originally of God, or the people: the latter he held, I the former; which I
proved to him out of the Word of God, that first the Choice, next the Anointing
of them, was of God only, and his Prophets sent by his command; as in Saul,
David, and others: so not at all in the people. It Is true, the people were all
along commanded to pray for them, and to obey them, when thus set up by God. So
we ended the discourse, and quietly parted.

Some four days after, one Sunday morning (as I best remember) having lain
most of that night in Meditation and Prayer, about day I did see, sitting at my
beds foot, behind the curtain, a Man sent of God: whilst He continued there
sitting, there fell a Shower of Fire, thick, and in drops, like Rain, all about
my beds foot: Full in my eye was the Spirit there sitting, and the fire falling
down: Awake I conceive my self to have been; for at that very time, I called to
mind the Fire that came down from Heaven, upon the heads of the Apostles, to
their inablement: Anon the Spirit called me by my name, Walter Gostellow: I
endeavored to reply, did open my mouth, tried twice, but my tongue doubled in
my mouth, and I could not bring forth my words, or speak: He called me the
second time by my name, Walte Gostellow; I endeavored the second reply, but my
tongue doubled as formerly, and I could not speak: He called me the third time
by my name, Walter Gostellow, to which I then answered, Here I am: he asked and
said unto me, Did you see the fire come down from Heaven, as a shore of Rain? I
replied, Yes, I did: he then struck by the Curtain, looked me full in the face,
so I him: He wept and said unto me, you do well interpret Scripture; clearly
referring, as I believe, to this, That the Choice of Kings, this of ours
especially is only in God, and not at all in the people.

This over, I wrote to the Lord of Broghill that nights Vision (for other I
cannot call it,) besought his Lordship, that once more he would be pleased to
admit me before him; there and then to be present also some ten, or twelve
persons, by me desired: He was pleased to afford me the favor, so also most of
the others.

By this time it pleased Almighty God to let me know, he had deputed me to go
to Oliver Cromwell, and after to his Majesty that now is, CHARLES STUART,
Charles the Second. The employ he would inform me of: and for the Commission it
self, I must believe, that from strength to strength, He would enable me,
until I came to perfect Peace in Zion. And although the things to be done were
great, mighty, strange, and wonderful; yet for his Honor, Mercy, and Names
sake, he would bring them to pass; and they should be mavelous in our eyes.
Thus began, and thus ended my Commission of the Lord.

I then bethought me of what I would say to Oliver Cromwell, and thus resolved,
that from God I would reprove him, set his sins in order before his face, and
tell him he was that great Deceiver, the scandal of the Protestant Religion,
the Dishonor of our Nation, a Whited wall he was, a great and close Hypocrite,
a Man of blood, and Son of Belial, and more than all this (for I never loved
him,) all this I resolved to say to him: but the Lord reproved me, and gave me
to remember, that my self prayed in my Dream, That God would be pleased, to let
the men of the world, who were desirous to do his will, know it from Heaven, or
in the Heavens, by a sign, which I have given thee, and they would readily
obey, applying themselves to walk in conformity thereunto.

Having thus altered me, and (as before) again reproved me; letting me know,
God judged not as man did: He commanded me to treat, and use him kindly, the
dispose of the heart being in the hand of God.

So that now from former hating of Him (for so I did; no man more) I now cannot
do other than pray for him, (for so I should, and for all others,) that God
would be pleased to enable him, for the overcoming of all his enemies, more
especially his corruptions. And firmly believe I do, that the Lord will make
Him highly instrumental for the promote and carrying on things of very high
concernment, for his glory, to his Honor, and the astonishment of the world:
For I know what apprehensions the most have of him, both at home and abroad:
but God judges not, as man does.

Before the Lord of Broghill I came the second time, and so began with him, as
you read upon Oliver Cromwell: I then told him what I firmly believed, the Lord
put into my heart and tongue, by his dictates and Visions; and how that the
Souldery, men of Valor and Honor should submit to the King; who would not
only forgive them, but give unto them all so doing, Indemnity, Honors,
Preferments, Lands, places and Hereditaments; Seal and confirm them unto them,
in the surest Tenure of this Kingdom, as at, or after that of East Greenwich.

Further; that, as the Light came on in Heavens, from the East, having in it
the richest Crown ever eyes beheld, the Bays rooted and flourishing, standing
in that Crown, as the three Plumes of Feathers in his own Arms and Coronet;
upon which Bays was store of Berries, which implies a provision for
Posterity; both waited upon by good store of Shipping: so the King should come
from beyond the Seas; Land in the East of Kent, or thereabouts; and come on
toward the West. See, thus comes the Lightning, in the 24 of Matthew, the 27
verse, out of the East, and shines even unto the West: so also shall the
coming of the Son of Man be. O my God, and my King! well: I go on: This would
fill the Men of the Kingdom, as the Heavens, with rejoicing, the people
praising God, and the Soldiery, for their good affections to Gods glory, and
the Kings interest; the Earth giving her increase. All Animosities thus taken
away we should agree, better than ever, dwell together in brotherly love, and
the most sure bond of peace, and great should be the praise of God, Honor of
the King and the Soldiery; also the true Protestant Religion receive its
Luster upon the Earth, and flourish beyond compare.

Among the Persons present, I then told the Lady Frances Boil, eldest Daughter
to the so excellent Countess of Cork, lamed in her infancy to so much debility,
that she halteth the deepest imaginable, but God Almighty has been pleased to
more than recompense that debility, by the more noble endowments of her Soul
and mind; which speak her not only in them the lively image of her most
excellent Countess Mother, but the dearly beloved of God her Father which is in
Heaven: To this Lady (I say) I applied my self, and told her what I believe God
Almighty had put into my heart and tongue: That if she were present, when the
King came into England, and so received with content in State (which would not
be long ere it was so,) she should then see, waiting on him, whom God had
deputed for her Husband; a Man unspotted of the flesh; with whom she should be
abundantly happy.

I after besought her second Daughter, the Lady Elizabeth Boil, to stand forth:
before her I kneeled, told her, if she were then present, she should see Him
the Lord had deputed for her Husband, CHARLES STUART, Charles the Second, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. Here I could not
for bear, but seeing the glory of God, and the Honor of this his Viceroy on
earth, to be so great, I fell on my face, as in the first of Corinthians the 14
and 25. And so falling down on his face, he will worship God.

I take the God of Heaven to witness, I know no other reason of it, it never
was the least in my intentions. Since I have read the Prophet did so, as in the
43 of Ezekiel, the 2 verse, and because the words, matter and manner of his
Government, there is so very full to my business, give me leave to observe them
to you; the rather because All of mine, whether of Action, or Interpretation,
are so long since past, and by me this never observed, until Thursday the
fourth of August 1654. as we account: I look upon it, as a further confirm to
me, of my so interpreting the Vision, and overruled deportment in that action
of falling upon my face, the words are these: And behold, the glory of the God
of Israel came from the way of the East, and his voice was like a voice of many
waters, and the earth shined with his glory; and it was according to the
appearance of the Vision I saw; and I fell upon my face. And so he goes on,
that the glory of the Lord filled his House.

See what his Providence has guided me to do: and all to observe to you; were
there but this in it, it migh confirm you, it is no delusion. O Lord, let the
World, as I do, stand amazed, love thee, and fear thee for ever.

This done, I told them I should go into France, or beyond the Seas, be highly
instrumental, to turn the Queen to the Protestant Religion, who with the King,
and all of our Nation, should return into this Land, and there, should be no
more Heart-burnings, divisions, or disgust amongst us; but we should all agree,
in the future, to fear God, honor the King, and live in brotherly love, one
with another; to our General good content, and admiration of the world.

I dare not here omit, to let the Reader know, I did then say, I did believe
these happy Mutations would be shortly; and that the Kings Birthday, would be
a day of great Rejoicing, in these his Kingdoms.

Nay I have expected more alterations already than yet I have seen, and said I
have to some, that I did believe this Summer past would have made the certain
things yet to come to pass much more apparent before now.

But I see where the bringing of any things to pass, depends on man's seeing to
do Evil, there is nothing but disappointment.

O Lord, if thou turn not Man to thy self, or thy self do the work, when will
it be? Those that have robbed thy house, and undone man their brother, whether
thy Ministers or others, are in no disposition as yet to part with their so
much beloved sins, because profitable: Those that on the otherside, have by
swearing, forswearing, uncleanness, and all manner of deboystness, yet
continued in giving just occasion to say, the former men, and Times, were as
bad as these; because they repent not, but continue to wallow in all manner of
their pleasing sins and corruptions; who by so doing caused the Protestant
religion, as much as the former Evil doers, to be Evil spoken of. Truly
reader, if any thing has befooled, in regard of time, the spiritual man, it is
your sins of all sorts, yet continued in. Read the 9 of Hosea and the 7 verse.
There you shall see that the iniquity of the people made that Prophet mad; and
yet you, that will not part with your lusts and Hypocrisies, and other
impieties of all sorts, must be reckoned the only sober and wise men, whilst
he whom God has spoken to, you account mad. Did I not tell you, That he which
covers his sins should not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them:
should find mercy? Gods displeasure is ready to blow over, did we but seek him
by our unfeigned repentance, and lay hold on him in faith, by our true and new
obedience. Does not the Scriptures all along give you this for reason of the
withhold of Gods mercies? There are yet reasons: Observe I beseech you, as anon
I shall let you see, I had no sooner proclaimd this, and other his loving
kindnesses toward us, A distracted and distressed people, in that Church of
Youghall, which I could not choose, neither can I do other, than apply my self
to all concerned, either by word of mouth, or by writing: But I truly say unto
you, I was there the third day clapped into prison: committed only for Teason;
when I know no man living is or can be further from the contrivance, or less
desirous of shedding any one man's blood in the world: Nay, I would from the
bottom of my heart, and so do I pray, that God would be pleased to set every
man's sins in order before his face; give him the heart, truly to repent of
them; come forth, confess, and truly forsake all his iniquities; and practice
the contrary virtues, for the time to come: So it is clearly certain, God would
be most glorified, and we most happy, that have all done amiss, one way, or
other.

It is the worst of men can kill, but who can make alive? The good Spirit of
God stirs not any man, to any private revenge: Not a Bird of prey, but a Dove,
was the shape, wherein our Savior Christ appeared. Many, O Lord, lived by
thee; never any destroyed, only the poor Fig Tree; as a real Emblem of thy
severity, to the unprofitable and fruitless. After mercy so long abused, it is
time for judgment.

So that (I say) there I was some eight weeks imprisoned: and although I often
wrote and solicited, that I might be sent over to Oliver Cromwell; to whom I
was more particularly deputed, and so most considerable, for the carrying on of
this work of the Lord. Nay, I offered, if they pleased, I would pay and bear
the whole charge of a convoy to him; and give it under my hand and faith, I
would not so much as endeavor to escape.

Further, that if I was found to be deluded, then I was content, they should
inflict upon my body what punishment they pleased: But if an Impostor, or one
that would deceive by lying, or false promises, speaking unto them, when not
sent, or what God had not deputed me for; then in that case that they burned
me, or put me to death; all these Original papers I have by me, to show any
that doubts it.

Yet these prevailed not for my enlargement; so there I was retarded in prison,
and coming over, near 3 months: and almost 2 months more after arrived in
England, before I could come to communicate, what I had to say to the General
of all the English Forces, Oliver Cromwell. Here was one impede of 5 months.
May is now gone.

Such Aversness have I met with, in all, or most of men: that (truly) had not
the Providence of Almighty God put into the minds and mouths of some men, I
have on late days heard preach, and upon such suitable Subjects also;
(certainly his Almighty goodness has guided me to my great consolation, and
them also, even to my great amazement, just as if they had been within me, and
with me in all my sufferings;) I say, had I not been thus supported, I had well
nigh sunk under the burden: For so fit encouragements have I had from wise men
preaching, that I shall never reckon it other, than the loving kindness of God
to me, for my support, and carrying on, in this his business.

Even so did the Jews thus evilly persecute, despise, traduce, imprison, and
not hearken unto the Prophets sent to them, although men of their own Religion.
Thus was I showed, what I am to expect from All, or almost all: so that now, I
thank God, I am armed for it.

For further reason, I may not do other, than present you with the passage of
Nineveh, and the Prophet Jonah, who told them, that yet 40 days, and that
great City should be destroyed. You may there see the good effect of true
repentance, and speedy turning from bad works, how it kept off their judgment
40 years: and can we (then) expect, or believe other, but that continuance in
sin (it may be augmenting them also) will have the contrary effects, to keep
off mercy?

There is yet a reason, and that is come to my cognizance and observe, in a
Book lately published by Arise Evans (a man you are unworthy of,) whom you have
persecuted too, as you have all Gods Ministers, almost all, either by
Imprisonment, Sequestration, or Death, or otherwise of undoing them. And what
to do, I pray, but to commit Idolatry; that those ye prefer, may set up
Imaginations of their own, and you (as they) worship that Calf? But you will
say, This is no Idolatry: if so, then let it go for Idiotrey; and that has but
one Letter difference: pray, let it go for both, as being guilty of both.

Those Calves you set up, after them you low and run, but continue to neglect
Gods Ministers, whom you will neither hear, nor prefer, lest you should be
converted; and so become poor. What? out of love would you have us with that
seeming righteousness, zeal, and godly party, which to be of, will certainly
prefer us. No; bewitched we are with it, and for these reasons will be of no
other judgment: It is you that talk foolishly, we profitably. And this kind
of Idolatry in all ages, has caused Gods wrath to continue even against his
own people. How long did these disobediencies keep them from entering into the
promised Land? which indeed was so near them, as we may truly say even at hand
Moses goes but up to the Mount, to converse with God, the people mutiny, and
will have him no more govern as King. And for Priest and Prophet, why not
others as well as those God only had set over them, seeing they took too much
upon them? What is the event of this madness? up goes a Calf presently, worship
it they will, they will have Governors and Teachers of their own making, as
well as a God; which shall not take so much upon them: yet ruled they will be
too, but it shall be by themselves. Tell not us (say they of Gods Mission of
your Prophets, or Ministers only; we know better; he that can do all without
book, learning, or reason, then he is sent, if so gifted, if we like him also
it is good warrant. Thus your contempt, neglect, and persecution of those men,
who undoubtedly would teach you from Heaven and better things, than you either
hear, or practice on earth, is another good reason; in all ages it has gone
for a good one: And yet one of your little ones must not be offended: but, if
he cries and bawls for the life and estate of the most considerable in the
Kingdom, to please, it must be given him, or them, Babes of Grace! for you say
the fat of the earth is for you, the seeming Saints; But you shall find, and
know too, anon, God will do something, for the thus persecuted, but penitent,
Sinners.

Turn you, turn you, you great Hypocrites, and you shall see these things come
to pass in a short time: And therefore gave I that Text to that worthy Doctor
Mollines, to let you all see, that he which covers his sins shall not prosper,
but who confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy: and there is the
reason. It is true, that good man Mr. Evans goes on to tell you one fault more,
an error it may be, I think it is, I am sure it makes way for a great one, in
giving the year its beginning from the Conception, which should take it from
the Birth of our Lord. And because you may fill the world with confusion, you
keep no day for the Commemoration of that neither: which helps to make that
ever to be observed good day no otherwise apparent, than your charity; whose
right hand never yet knew what the left did.

But you trouble me; and I long to be rid of you. Are not these reasons, if you
have any for the wise delay of Gods mercies, and restore of our so much desired
King? who, if he comes not yet years and months, of which opinion I am not, yet
I will wait and believe; for God has said it, He whom you have persecuted,
shall shortly come, and that in Honor too: and, because he sowed in tears, he
shall reap in joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

Oh! could I but persuade every man that reads me, or hears of what the Lord
is, in mercy, doing for these Kingdoms, the King, and Protestant Religion, but
to turn to him, with all his heart and Soul (for that is the taking way) in new
obedience, and to leave no sin unrepented of, and no commandment unconform'd
unto, in sincerity of heart, and true obedience; you would then All see that
suddenly come to pass, and be fulfilled in your days and eyes; which I do as
truly believe will come to pass (and I shall see it, nay I do already, and
enjoy it also,) as I do believe the Heavens to be over my head, and the Earth
under my feet. Which if it fail, I am content that you take me, and put me to
death.

These Reasons given for its Defer, I am brought from what I had of Vision, or
my own Dictates, to that, which is most certainly Prophecy, and the word of
the Lord. Which, although spoken out of my mouth, and by my tongue pronounced;
yet the matter no more my conceptions, than I now dictate, or write unto you,
the words, or thoughts of the most Remote King, or Emperor in the World: for I
never so much as had things of that nature in my mind. Hear the manner and the
matter: they are both of the Lord: To whom be given for ever Honor, Praise,
Glory, Obedience and Thanksgiving. Amen, O Lord, Amen.

And now before I proceed, give me leave to tell you, that, this Friday, the 5
of August, is come to my observe this of Jeremiah, the 23 Chap. and the 28
verse. The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; and he that has my
word, let him speak my word faithfully: what is the Chaff to the Wheat? says
the Lord.

O Lord, this being thy command, I will obey thee: So help me, God; for now I
come to thy own words.

SECT. IV.
SOme three days after, I returned the second time from the Lord of Broghills
to my Lodging, the Widow Merricks house in Youghal; upon the 3 or 4 of January
1653. lying there in bed, and having spent most part of that night in
Meditation and Prayer, rejoycings and weepings; for of that nature were my
weepings (the fullest of joy imaginable) that indeed I often conceived (not
feared) I might sooner die of an over-joy, than any grief. In that night (I
say) from lying in my bed, I was upon a sudden taken up, that is to say, made
to sit up, somewhat bowing: and when so, I did then with a loud voice, somewhat
altered from my ordinary speaking, pronounce these words, which words, I say,
are the words of the Lord of Hosts, God Almighty, and are these:

There is an end of all the Wars in the Christian World. The Jews shall come
in, also the Heathen, and shall be converted to the true Religion. The Church
of Rome shall fall. The Irish shall not be transplanted.

This said, I was laid down: and wondering with my self, that I should be thus
taken up, made to speak what I knew I uttered, yet not have any of those
thoughts, or conceptions in my mind, nor knew not before I was taken up, that
I was rising, nor one word of what I said, before pronounced; I could not but
very much admire (and so I did) both the manner and the matter: Well, I then
prayed and praised God; for awake I was, as truly as I am now; the sequel will
prove that. I then concluded it was not at all I that did it, it was the Lord,
who would have it so, and his Prophecy it was and is.

Much about half a quarter of an hour after, I was taken up again, as formerly,
and spoke these words:

Proclaim CHARLES STUART, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: Charles 2d King of the whole World. This CHARLES STUART
shall never die; the Lady Elizabeth Boil shall never die; the Queen his Mother
(wife to the late King, already blessed) shall never die; the now Queen of
France shall never die; the King of France shall never die; his Brother, the
Queens other Son shall never die; but shall all be taken up into the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, that never shall have end.

This spoken, I was laid down again: then did one M. Barret, a Merchant in
Bristol that deals in Leather and Skins, who lodged in the same Chamber with me
(but in another bed) call to me, asked me how I did, and if I was well: I
replied to him, very well: He asked me if I was asleep, I said no: he asked me
if I knew what I said: I replied, yes, very well: he asked me if I believed
what I said, I told him, he must give me leave to believe, what the Lord caused
me to speak, and would have done. There lodged also in the next room, one John
Marrick, the Widows son of that house, aged about 21. With him in bed another
Merchant, as I take it, of Bristol also, or thereabouts; to them both well
known: Those in that one bed, spoke to me also; I replied to them; many words
we had, all I remember not.

I was anon after, taken up again, as formerly, and spoke these words: OLIVER
CROMWELL shall never die; the Countess of Cork shall never die; the Earl her
husband shall never die; the Lady Frances Boil (their eldest daughter) shall
never die; the Lord of Broghill shall never die; the Lady Broghill, his now
wife, shall never die; but shall all be taken up into the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, which never shall have end.

I was laid down again, and considered with my self, What, shall Oliver
Cromwell never die? it pleased me not: But again the Lord reproved me, and
would have me know, he judges not as man judges; neither did his ways admit
of any repine or contradiction. Here again I spoke to the former parties, but
little, lay still, praying, weeping, and praising God: for now I firmly
believed, and remembered, that although these things were mighty, strange, and
wonderful; yet, by his Power, for his mercy, glory, and names sake, he had
assured me, he would bring them to pass, and they should be mavelous in our
eyes, as the Seal of my Commission was: And remember I did, he was now giving
me the matter.

Again anon after, I was raised, as formerly, and spoke these words:

Thou Walter Gostellow shall never die; thy three Sons shall never die; thy
wife Anne, and daughter Anne Gostellow shall never die: but shall all be taken
up into the kingdom of Jesus Christ; that never shall have end. Then shall the
bodies of the Saints, already dead, arise, and be taken up into heaven also;
the Sheep shall go to the right hand, and the Goats to the left: pronounce this
house, a blessed house, and this chamber shall for ever be called the chamber
of the Great Prophet.

Thus have I set here down every word, then pronounced by me: but certainly the
Dictates and good pleasure of the Lord of hosts, that they be published to the
world concerned by me Walter Gostellow, his unworthy instrument. I have not
added, or taken from, one word that I know of, nor misreported the manner.

But as old Eli asked Samuel, after called of God by his name 3 times, Samuel;
and God had spoken unto him, and given him his employ, what it was the Lord had
said unto him, as you may read in the 3 Chapter of that his first Book, and the
17 ver. and Eli there charged him, that he hid nothing from him, but tell him
all; which Samuel tells you and him in the next verse. He did so, hid nothing
from him. What follows? it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and the
Lord was with Samuel, he grew, and the Lord let none of his words fall to the
ground. So all Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, knew that Samuel was established
a Prophet of the Lord, things coming to pass as he had foretold.

When I heard the word Prophet, and knew my unworthy self to be the man, O
Lord, thou know my thoughts both then and now, they are at no time hid from
thee, I stand amazed, O Lord, and am silent, lay my hand I do upon my mouth,
and my mouth upon the ground. A Prophet! I am unworthy O Lord, yea, I am
unworthy to live, much more unworthy of this so great honor: but, O Lord, thou
have fashioned me, make me I beseech thee, always to do thy will, not mine own,
that has been and now is sinful; yea, so has it been all my days: therefore
I most humbly beseech thee, to have mercy upon me, O Lord, the greatest of
sinners, nay thou will have mercy for thy compassions fail not, and thy
mercies, as thy ways, are past finding out.

The rest of that night I spent in Meditation and Prayer; when day, I arose:
not fully dressed, took Pen and Ink, wrote all spoken; but with this addition,
I began with a Summons and Invitation to whomsoever, that they would repair the
next week, Thursday morning, about nine of the Clock, being the 12 of January,
to the Town and Church of Youghal, there to hear a Sermon, upon this Text; He
that covers his sins, shall not prosper: but he that confesses, and
forsakes them, shall find mercy.

The Text was given by a Prophet of Almighty God, now here in Youghall, his
name Walter Gostelow; which Prophet will then after Sermon, that day, tell you
all in the Church, that there is an end of all the Wars in the Christian World:
And so I went on to finish, as before Prophesied and recited.

Further, they should that day see riding out in great state, several of those
Saints, and this Prophet, out of Town; and upon the Strand of Youghall: which
to me as well as others, was given as a sign, or miracle, being yet to come,
for the strengthening of my Faith, as also for the conversion and ground of
belief, to the Sons and Daughters of Men.

I there went on, The Heathen and the Jews are now fitting by the Lord, to come
into his Doctrine, worship and service: and under his Scepter. Against which
word of God, the Holy Bible not to be altered; the Book of Common Prayer, in
some things altered and amended, as by a Council lawfully called, whom God
shall direct, shall stand and flourish all over the whole World: The Doctrine
and Faith of the Church of England, being the purest in the World: against
which word of God, and his sword, put into the hands of this King, CHARLES
STUART, no Power on Earth shall ever prevail; that of Rome is now tumbling
down, and melting away like a mighty Snow-ball.

The King and Queen of France, with that whole Nation, shall ere long be
converted to this Faith: which Kingdom of France, and all others upon the
Earth, under the Sun and Heavens, shall be obedient to this Charles the Second,
and his Rule in the Kingdom of England: The Lady Elizabeth Boil, second
Daughter to the Earl and Countess or Cork, is this Kings Wife.

The General of all the English Forces, Oliver Cromwell shall never die, so I
here wrote him, and could not otherwise, though I tried often, and varied to
give him several Titles, but could not, the Reason you shall have anon. Be
pleased to observe, in the pronounce of the Prophecy, it is only Oliver
Cromwell; all other Persons of Dignity and Honor, by their Titles as
Signiories, his only Oliver Cromwell, the Reason I promise.

I went on; The Irish Nation should not be removed, but possess their own just
Rights, converted to this true Faith they should be: And so, praying that God
would enlighten them, and all men, that we might all live in brotherly love and
Unity one with another, return again into his Courts with praises, and there
serve him in sincerity of heart, and in the beauty of holiness; (for so his
house ought to be fitted for his service,) that others might be invited by us
and with us, to glorify our Father, which is in Heaven: whose will be done on
earth by men, as it is by Saints and Angels in Heaven. Thus I concluded,
writing as fast as possibly, which done: I could not be quiet, but hasted
immediately to that so every way eminently good Countess of Cork, read the
Paper to her, and after made it my request, very often sollicitous I was by my
Letters, that she would send her Letters abroad, to invite in the Nobles,
Gentry, and Country to the Town of Youghall against that day, the 12 of
January: my self having read and communicated the whole to her Honor, was by
her and Doctor Mollines over-perswaded, to retire for a time to my Chamber,
which I did: But when there, I could not be quiet, but wrote and sent abroad to
several, inviting them to Youghall, that 12 of January, to hear, as before
recited, all to be divulged by me that day in the Church, after Sermon. I
continued soliciting that Countess, that she would do the like, until I knew I
became troublesome, yea very troublesome, even unto two days before this 12 of
January, did I thus be stir my self.

In Fine, my Kinsman, M Leonard Gostelow. Secretary to the Earl, came to me,
brought me back from her Honor, diverse of my own Letters; told me weeping,
that the Countess and his Lord, with diverse others, believed me certainly Mad,
that I would so impertinently to no purpose, trouble my self and others. He
then asked me, what I would have, I told him only the Country, Nobles,
Gentry, and All, to come in to hear the Sermon and Prophecy, that day the 12
of January: He replied to me, if it be company you would have, trouble not your
self, there will be enough here; for on that day will be several Horse-matches:
which hearing, I was very much joyed, and after that time, never troubled my
self in the least particular, in that business to move further: which I take
God Almighty to witness, until his telling me of it, it came not into my
mind; although I confess, I had formerly heard of it; but all the time until
then, it was no more remembered by me, than it was known to the most remortest
man in the World. But I shall observe to you anon, the wisdom and good
pleasure of God Almighty, in casting and bringing to pass, what fell out upon
that day; the day I was most active upon, after the divulge of all I had to
say, and did say it in the Church.

I cannot but observe to you, that when persuaded to retire to my Lodging, and
did so, the Lord of Broghill's Physician came to me, closely attended me, and
sweat I must, keep my bed, not stir, not write at any hand, not do any thing,
but as prescribed: all which I now see were clear Artifices of the Lord of
Broghill, and that otherwise-good Countess of Cork; lest I should proclaim in
the Church, what I had penned in the Paper: for to her Honor I made always my
first addresses, until it pleased God, to direct me to the Lord of Broghill,
as more considerable, for the carrying on of this work of the Lords: For it is
the Lords, and shall, and will come to pass, though I must tell thee, Reader
(whosoever thou art) I have met with very little other, then aversness and
derision, if not scorn, from almost All; and to be called Mad, has been in
many of their mouths: Yet, I praise God, though some have endeavored to make
me the sooner Mad, by very uncivil carriages and affronts, no man living can
say, nay, I challenge them to it, that they divulge it, if they ever saw, in
any of my actions, or Papers (which I have Copies of, the most considerable,
and some Letters returned me) ought of Levity: if so, let them show it to the
World, spare me not, I beg not their favor, I scorn it, it is no new thing (O
Lord) to bestow ill and false Appellations, in all ages, upon men, thy servants
sent upon the like employ, to turn others from the error of their ways that
delight in general wickednesses. To declare ought from the Lord, that suites
not with their fancies, love and over-carnal apprehensions; it must be madness
in their judgments: and to advise the Great, Rich, Covetous, Proud, and
High-minded, to deny themselves, madness it must be. Assuredly, our portion is
like that of our Saviors, from the Scribes and Pharisees, who were so: they
heard all that was said unto them, yet being proud and covetous, they derided
him.

But thou, O Lord be thy name for ever praised, and so magnified thou
assistest, thou deliverest me, thou providest for me, of thy alsufficiencie,
rich mercy, and everlasting loving kindness; which, I now most humbly beseech
thee may increase in me, not only in a firm dependence on thee, but a walking
before thee all my days, in the true practice of piety, and ways of thy
commandments: which only can, through thy mercy, deliver in all the
Inundations of evil, and practices of proud and obstinate Sinners; from whom,
good Lord deliver me. But I hasten.

Thursday the 12 of January came, in bed I would not stay, up I got, to the
Church I went, took a seat in the most convenient place, quietly demeaned my
self until Sermon was ended: Here I cannot but observe to you, that although
Doctor Mollines had his Sermon in readiness; yet by reason of a sore throat,
preached not, but the ordinary Lecturer for that day: And yet, as if he had
been, in some measure, privy to my Prophecy, and Intentions (which be could
not be) his Sermon was very much for amendment of life. And observe also he
did, that Enoch and Elias were translated into heaven, having walked with God,
and kept his commandments on earth; so that (as I after observed to him) his
Sermon seemed to me, to be a Prophecy of a Prophecy. But I have had many of
these, to my consolation, as formerly observed, from a merciful God.

Sermon ended, I then desired the people to stay, and suffer me a few words: I
told them, I had to communicate unto them, which was certainly of the Lord,
consisting of Dream, its observe and interpretation, Vision also and Prophecy,
all of the Lord. I then reached to me the Church Bible, kissed it, and did
promise upon that holy Evangelist, I would not speak other to them, than I did
believe the Lord had spoken to me, no man living ever dictating a word to me,
or disposing me thereunto, nor now to this; which as I could not do other then,
but speak, so now here, but publish by Printing unto them, and all those
concerned of the World.

Begin I did, as you have heard, declared my Dream, its Interpretation, my
Vision, and other dictates of mine own, which I penned not, yet so to them
related, as here recited; the Prophecy I read to them as I wrote it verbatim,
the morning after the Lord caused me to speak it.

When I came to proclaim the King, away goes the Governor, Colonel Saunders,
after him the Major of the Corporation. When of the Protestant Religion I
spoke, and the flourishing of that again, and how that none should ever
prevail, that rose up against the word of God, and his Discipline now to be
established, and his Sword also put into the hand of his King, CHARLES STUART,
away goes (as I conceive) the disaffected to both: for certainly, Congregations
are now adays, made up of Goats and Tares, lovers of our selves we are, more
than God; and yet be we must together, until the Harvest come: then the
Prophecy, as the most sure written word of God tells you, the Goats must to the
left, when the Sheep only go to the right hand; Chaff and Tares to their own
home.

In this Church, although a Sermon-day, but one Servant of the Earl of Corks,
not one of the Lord of Broghills, as I saw and remember: and why that one? and
who must that Servant be, but my Cousin their Secretary, one whom they knew I
loved, and would be much ruled by. Well, how governs he? I suspect, by their
order too, he comes to me almost as soon as I was entered upon what I intended,
and had to do, desires me to desist, weeps to me, I refuse him, he after pulls
me by the Cloak and Arm, uncivil more than enough hales me by both, prays and
weeps to have me out; I took faster hold, told him if they would burn me, they
might; but I would not stir from that place, nor from that employ of the Lords,
until I had done that work the Lord commanded me of his: Then crying like a
great (yet Childish) Kinsman, he went away, whilst I was over-joyed, being so
well rid of him; and so thanking God, I went quietly on, to do all I intended
to a word, without any other violence offered me: Yet my Congregation grew very
thin in the end.

It is the unhappiness of these times, that where He stands up, that is not
sent, thither the people run, to which ill advised, we may fitly use that of
the Spaniard, who, when he sees one do so, observe (says he) what haste that
man makes, to leave his wits behind him: Yet, to the comfort of those that
hold out to the last, though but a few, if in well-doing, the blessing is to
them: But its prayers must remedy this, not conceits; the loving kindness of
the Lord must do it: Which, when he shall be pleased to restore to us wiser
Teachers, we may then hope to see. In the mean time, it calls for our prayers
and tears, that we see it not.

It was a witty one of long since deceased Mr. Shuit, officiating in Lombard
street, I heard it from him, (indeed he married me; may his memory and his
works ever live in us) in a Sermon, complaining of these Times, which he
foresaw hastening upon us, (for such are the true Prophets of the Lord, and
therefore (as I conceive) called Seers;) The age is now grown so Chimical (said
he) that from a Tailers shop-board, or Weavers loom, we have those now will
extract Learning enough, to stand 3 hours in a Pulpit, before an apron'd and
giddy Auditory (with applause too;) that should a wise Man put his head in at
the Church-dore, he would judge the Famine to be very sore among us, to see an
Asses head valued at so many pieces of silver. Mais done aux ausnes le
Chardons, let Asses feed on Thistles. But I must go on.

Of a like nature was one I heard, praying in the Pulpit for a Reformation, in
those over-active times, dispairingly say, How can we hope for it to Gods
glory, when there is not one in our Universities, or Cathedrals but what are
Factors for that Whore of Babylon? Sure, he was never there, he was so
ignorant, mistake me not, I mean the University; if otherwise, give him the
Whet-stone, having thus preached for it.

Truly, I would not make these Aberrations, but for this Reason; There was
with me, all the time of my imprisonment at Youghall, and a prisoner also, a
person of great Honor, as I firmly believe, M. David Rooche, the Eldest Son of
the Viscount Lord Rooche; a Gentleman of very great integrity, and
faithfulness, where trust and devoir lies upon him.

He is a great Devotery and admirer of the Church of Rome, and has often told
me, how like I was to be deluded, because part of my Prophecy was, that the
Church of Rome should fall; which he labored to have me believe, the Gates of
Hell should never prevail against; as being what Christ promised to his Church,
That being it, and no other.

He told me, We could show no Church, neither were we any, since fallen from
them, the only Conspicuous in all ages, visibly shining, as upon an hill. That
with him was the strength of his argument, any thing that ever was in Ours,
that looked like a Church, see, because it was but like one, how God had now
annihilated that also. And for the Preachers of our Church (as we would have
the World yet misbelieve we were a Church) now amongst us, what were they, but
men unsent, who filled the world with Schisms Falsehood, Heresy, strange and
lying Opinions, few or none of them agreeing; whereas Unite was the best devote
of a true Church, and that theirs only has, and always had.

'Twas too much said, for him to prove; yet this I will say of him, (nay, I
have Prophesied it, and it will come to pass) he is too good a man, to sin
against the light of his Conscience, he would fear and serve none but God
only, nor obey any but his King; and both them with all his heart: Therefore I
told him, God had, of his Providence, then sent him my Fellow-Prisoner, to show
him, first or last, the Error of of his Judgment, and that Church: And then,
because he was so eminently good otherways in his Country so exemplarie, he
would, being converted, bring his Country to the Service of God, as well as he
had formerly done them to his Kings service; from which interest he would never
suffer himself, nor them to be stirred in the least: for in that he was a true
Rooche, which in French is a Rock; whereas now I understand the Honor was in a
French Field, but in the good Service of his then King, given to his Ancestors
Viscount Lord Rooche.

I could not for the honor of our Church, the glory of God, and discharge of
my own duty, but reply to him, and let him know, that such foolish Babblers as
those, which now so preached, were no more of our Church, the true Protestant,
than those that make merchandise of the kingdom of heaven now in the delapsed
Church of Rome, would be reckoned to be, if that Church were again restored to
her Pristine Purity: which I believe, God would in mercy do, by throwing down
and out of her, all the workers of iniquity, crept in in several ages; who,
for their own ends, defiled her with damnable Tenants and Absurdities.

The beloved Church of God, I observed to him, we were, though now thus
beclouded. The Moon, to which that Church is compared, is not always at full,
she has wanes and changes, and Eclipses also, yet still a Church, as that a
Moon.

I beseech you, is not now the Honor of the Protestant Religion at stake? and
does it not clearly appear to all that love her, what discervices these unsent,
bold and empty Babblers have done us? Those Vagabonds are like those Vagabond
Jews in the 19 of the Acts, the 13 verse. who took upon them to call over them
that had evil Spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by
Jesus, whom Paul preaches, to come forth; yet no good is done by them, out
they come not, the evil Spirits are where they were, not cast out, but replied
to them, Jesus we know, he is sent of God, Paul we know, he is sent of Jesus,
but who are you? who the Devil sent you? Well: unsent of God they find them:
What does that man possessed with the evil Spirits do? He leaps upon them,
over-comes them, prevails upon them, so that they fled out of the house naked
and wounded. This spread over the Country, and the Name of Jesus was
magnified; so shall his Name also be magnified by us, or you in Authority, if
you suppress those unsent, vagabond, giddy, bold, empty, scandalous (what shall
I call them?) Itinerates, froward and factious Presbyterians, dishonourers of
Gods true Religion, Church, and our Nation.

By sober men are not these things and times to be lamented? And are not wise
men, if now in power, obliged to help distressed Religion, thus crying out, O
Religion, Religion! thou that art the strongest of policy, which teach to
rule well, and to be so ruled? Pray, did not the fear of God, which is the
beginning of wisdom, not fear of man, make David wiser than his Teachers? And
does it not strengthen more than ten mighty men? Oh! its Excellency invites
you to side with it; though now seemingly down, it will raise it self, and all
that love it. Haste you, be ye of this blessed number. But to the matter.

All thus done at Church, I went to the Earl of Cork's house, endeavored to
enter the Parlour, where that day were sat diverse Persons of quality at
Dinner: I was refused entrance, though my unworthy self, formerly by the good
favor of that Earl and Countess, was one they were pleased to admit to their
own Table, for some months: but now denied entrance I was. Well; I watched my
opportunity, my business being of another nature, than eating; it was to do the
will of my Father which is in Heaven, which was to let that most incomparable
Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Boil (for other I may not call her, whom God Almighty
has set apart and chosen, to so much Honor and bliss, as to be his Queen, and
the beloved of God,) on my knees I told her, That, in obedience to the Commands
of God, I had that day in the Church of Youghall, Proclaimed our King, and her
good self his Queen. From my knees I rose, went out, amde no disturbance
(though the most considerable there, so soon as he saw me, I well remember,
rose up) and was for my being had out: but having done what I could not choose,
my duty so much desired, I took my self away, for I neither spoke more, nor did
more, but quietly went away. Now comes the sign given me for confirmation of my
Faith, that the things Prophesied shall come to pass, observe how it is made
good to me, both for day, persons, state, and place.

Dinner there ended, a Coach with six Horses is made ready, which in that place
I never saw before: into it gets the Countess of Cork, the Lady Broghall, the
Lady Queen Elizabeth Boil, the Lady Frances Boil, the Earl of Cork on
Hors-back, the Lord of Broghill likewise mounted, and all these well
accountred, and no otherwise attended: In good equipage they ride through and
out of this Town of Youghall, unto the Strand, where the several Hors-matches
were that day run. Well; they all gone, my self rode after; coming thither, was
looked at by all for my forenoons work, the Governor of the Town there; on the
Strand I rode, to others I told what I had in the Church, did not madly rave,
or beget any the least disturbance; stayed to the last; rode off the Strand,
sometimes betwixt the Lord of Broghill, and the Governor Colonel Saunders;
told them what God Almighty would have done and come to pass; rode next them
all through the Town; no disturbance all this while; yet the Lord of Broghill
told me several times I must forbear such expressions, otherwise he would order
me, and committed I should be. He was as good as his word; for out of my
Lodging I was fetched, and had to Prison, but by the Governors Warrant, he not
seen in it. Truly, I think I may take his word at all times, for what he
promises; hear my reason:

In France, some 17 years ago, I furnished upon Bills of exchange, one of his
Brothers with a considerable sum of money for his Brothers own use; after that
near upon one hundred pounds more, for this Lord of Broghill, who was not then
at age; his Elder Brother gave me his Bond, Parrole and Honor, to pay those
Bills of exchange, given me for repayment in England: This his Brother was
killed in the Wars of Ireland; my money not paid by him the Bills were drawn
upon, nor ever by that his elder Brother; the principle killed, and my whole
debt seemingly dead also, being very great. My self now in Ireland, I reminded
this Lord of Broghill, of what by Parrole, he was debtor to me, with its
consideration for 17 years, upon Bill of exchange, signed by his elder brother,
but never paid, his Lordship not being at age, became not bound, otherwise than
in point of Honor, by his Parrole.

Truly, the long time, and my discontinuance beyond the Seas, having made no
former Application to him, had worn both out of his memory; but upon discourse
both came to his Lordships reminde; No sooner so, but we consented to refer all
allowances and demands of Interest to the Earl his Brother, and M. Robert Boil
his youngest. This done, by consent, his Lordship a few days after told me,
Well, if my brothers, to whom we have referred this business, see no ground in
Law, possibly to proceed upon his Lordship having not given either specialty,
or promise since his being at age, to pay the moneys, so not liable in Law; If
thus they proceed (said his Lordship to me) yet come you to me, and I will
compose you in conscience.

But his Lordships brothers, whom I found conscientious also, in six words (as
I may say) composed me, and I have my money: and these grounds I have for the
taking of his Paroll, my imprisonment, and the preserve of his Paroll with
Honor; and to those that will preserve it, Honor is due, as here to his
Lordship: for the publishing of this Act I was debtor, either to the invite, or
else to the shame of others, that have more of Title, but less of good
conscience.

Good Men direct into, not lead out of the way; I am where I was, and go on to
let you know, that this day, Thursday the 12 of January, all those Persons
being thus there, and in such good equipage, upon the same place, the sign
given me for my confirmation, and others also, is fully made good to me,
considering also my not commitment, that day, together with the great concourse
of people, from parts far more remote than I intended my Summons, for the
invite in of the Gentry and Country, that day, to that place, for to let them
know this business of the Lords.

Thus the work of the Lord is carried on to the greatest advantage, and so
brought to pass, whilst we only think to do our own wills, how does he make
us to effect his? Every Creature walks blindfold, only he that dwells in light
sees whither they go. We are for Hors-races, yet see how we fall under his
decrees unawares, that we might the more adore the depth of his Providence.

For the rumore of what I had said and done that day, and the next, spread over
the Country; Post it went to Dublin; in England it was in a short time; and as
the Cloud of Elias, raised from the Sea, at first appeared but as an
hand-breadth, so this rumor, raised upon the Strand of Youghall, by the
Seaside, little then, as it was, now as that Cloud raised by that Prophet,
spread over the whole Heavens and Earth, and falls upon it also, what to do?
but even as his, To glad the people, and make fruitful the Earth. Public
meetings and great concourses of people, fittest to disperse general mercies to
the Sons of men. The Irish desire to know nothing more, nor enjoy any thing on
Earth, before their own habitations; not to be transplanted, and to have the
Kingly Government restored. Why, they are ready to die of an over-joy. Oh, the
wisdom and loving kindness of the Lord! Who can do other than obey him?

Well, the third day in Prison I am, and for Treason too, there I pass a
month, or six weeks, no offer for enlargement: On a sudden, If I will go out,
I may, but I must go presently aboard a Ship, there bound for England, ready to
depart: Many requests I made before that time, that I might be sent over
Prisoner to the General, Oliver Cromwell, to whom I was deputed; but not in any
hearkened unto. Well: Go I would, yet positively I said, that until I had once
more been with the Lord of Broghill, and given him my Prophecy in writing,
under my Hand and Seal, delivered and left with him the most material parts of
it; I would not go: that done I would go, and then his Lordship should dispose
of me as he pleased, I would afterward in all things readily obey him.

His Lordships Secretary and the Earl of Corks both with me, then making the
offer of enlargement upon the terms as before: which when I refused, except
upon my own terms, they fairly told me I should ly there three months longer,
then be proceeded against, and for Treason hanged: To which I replied, Let them
burn me also, if they could; I would not go out but upon those terms.

Appear to the people I would, had they put me in publicly, and will they take
me out privately? I would appear to the people, even to all that were there,
that I was enlarged; Mad I was not, the business was the Lords, and he would
bring it to pass, and deliver whom he had sent and commissionated, in the
fittest time. I bade them be gone, told them I would do all that, and more,
which was to leave another of my Prophesies, under my own hand, at the House I
lodged in, the Widow Merricks, written in Parchment, boxed up, and hanged over
my Beds head, in the Chamber I lodged in, which I pronounced should be called
the Chamber of the great Prophet for ever. My Prophecy I wrote, gave it to the
Widow Merricks Son in writing; a Man grown he is; he keeps it ten days, or
more, then returned it me, and told me his Mother durst not suffer it to be
hanged up, Here was obedience to Governors: I would it had always been so.

Well: the Ship is gone, in Prison I remain, my Keeper again begins (new it now
was not) to practice some of his former Tricks upon me; False Prophet he calls
me; a Child of his, some 2 or 3 years old, is also taught to call me so himself
owns the teaching of it; which when I desired him to forbear, or else tell me
upon what ground he did it, he replied to me, he had good grounds.

You are (said he) for the Superstitious keeping of Days and Times, as in
particular, that in the time of Lent we should do well to fast, pray, and
examine our selves, that so, through Gods mercies, we may, as you say, become
worthy receivers of his most blessed body and blood, for the Remission, of
sins, at the feast of his Resurrection at Easter; Nay, you are for a Passion
Sermon also, upon good Friday (as you call it,) when all days are alike: The
Commemoration also of the Nativity of our Lord, the Descending of the Holy
Ghost, and diverse other Superstitious things and times; all which the true
Prophets of the Lord have cried down, and long since declined, as most
abominable and Superstitious. Here lay his proof, when I asked him who those
Prophets were, he told me the Godly Ministers and Prophets the Parliament had
preferred, and appointed to hear preach. I replied little, only told him some
reasons, that induced me to be of that judgment; yet withal it was worth his
consideration, to remember what became of those Children that mocked the
Prophet, against whom the Lord sent Bears out of the Wood, to tear them in
pieces and devour them.

Well: reconciled we were, he told me it should no more be so, neither did his
Child any more provoke me; but on the contrary I loved it, and the Child me.
Upon a short time after he told me, If I were a Prophet, then he was a Dog: I
reminded him, such expressions did not well become; he might in that Prophecy
unhappily of himself; Dogs were without, when Prophets were in Heaven. I
observed to him, he did all without reason, told him I forgave him and his Son
formerly, and that I prayed for both, that God would be pleased to forgive
them; (It is true, I did so, and do so) that he would be pleased to have mercy
upon them. He bid me keep my prayers to my self, he nor his had no need of
them, and desired them not.

He was often girding at me, quiet I could not be for him; I saw he loathed me,
which made me sometimes think on those evil Spirits, that though they knew it
was our blessed Lord, yet raging, asked him why he was come to torment them
before their time: Good he told me I could not be, because I approved not of
one Mr. Wood, whom the Parliament power had put in Preacher at Youghall, and
settled upon him an handsome Sallery of some an hundred and twenty pounds per
annum. His name implies he may be Timber, though some suspect he is not yet
fitted for the building up the House of God. God be pleased to make all men
wise and better; Certainly the best accomplished is fittest for his service.

This being Sunday, and my keeper going then to hear this Mr. Wood, Command is
given, none must come to me; locked up I am: Things thus hightening, and his
prejudice increasing against me, my Bed the night before taken from under me,
sent for away, after he came from M. Woods Sermon, my bolster, sheets, and
whatsoever I had of his, taken away from me by himself, so great a zeal brought
he home with him, from his so good Preacher M. Wood.

Well: to this condition being reduced, my self not very well, not used to such
affronts, not such lodgeing, the season winter, truly I walked and prayed most
of that night; abandoned I now saw my self almost by all, nothing but hard
usage and aversness do I meet with in all men, to this business of the Lords,
which much troubled me: And truly, I might here observe to you, that I
besought God Almighty to direct, deliver, and enable me to get from under those
great oppressions of men, which without him I could not overcome. Observe, I
beseech you, God withdraws not our helps, but for a further advantage, however
our hopes may seem crossed. Where his name may gain, we cannot complain of
loss: 'twas so here; the work was the Lords, and he was pleased to assure me, I
should grow from strength to strength, until I arrived at perfect peace in
Zion: and how that for his Glory, Honor, Mercy and Names sake, he would bring
it all to pass, and it should be mavelous in our eyes.

Thus beseeching the Lord, I prayed, (and now do pray the Reader, that he
firmly believe, as I do, it being true) I had that night this Vision, or Call
of the Lord, Come away, bring your writings, come away, reitterated just as the
people you read before did, when they saw the Light and Crown in the Heavens,
bowed to God and it, it being of Heaven, they all said, Come we will follow it;
so here, Come away, bring your writings, come away.

I could here truly observe to you, that although my so civil Landlord, was
warm that night in a good Bed, (I cold and had none) in Bed with him such
another Saint, his Wife, educated and married from the house of the once, no
less zealous, I believe, than these two, the Lord Brook; whose Servants they
were either both, or one: Yet on a sudden she rises and runs, the strong
water is fetched, my Landlord very sick, nay, very ill, his Child had formerly
been so: This strong water was to be fetched out of the next Room where I was
pounded up; so know it I did, indeed his wife told me the reason of her haste
and coming: Well; the strong water he had, and my prayers also for his
amendment, and Gods forgiveness to him: and though he formerly bade me keep
them to my self, he nor his had no need of them, his Child I believe fared not
the worse for me, for it after loved me, when well: himself then had them, as
also the strong water; if of any validity, God Almighty have the glory, he had
the recovery then; but a Fool is not always to be answered in his folly.

This I should not have observed, but that it is in reverence to what himself
has very often told me, he was that Thomas a Diddimus, that should not believe
any thing of my Prophecy, until he saw it come to pass: the rather because it
was against those whom God approved of, and set up to his glory; and therefore
he took the liberty to call me Traitor, as to them, and false Prophet as in
reverence to their Godly Ministry; such was his zeal, but whether well guided,
or of God, that is the question. But I leave him in his Dog-kennel, for so his
then habitable house was formerly called, as himself told me one time: and
truly, me thinks upon this account and action, it may well retain the former
name, if it has been discontinued, Dog kennel.

Day being come, I penned a Letter, presenting the whole Vision, Come away,
bring your writings, come away, to the Secretary of the Lord of Broghill,
entreating him, that he forthwith impart it to his Lord, and others concerned
for the ordering of affairs in those parts, beseeching they would, after
address made to God Almighty for his guidance, forthwith dispose of me as he
should please to direct them to do: They, I humbly conceive, did so; for that
day, or the next morning I had word sent me, that I might go whither I would.
Yet observed to me it was by that Gentleman, which brought me my enlargement,
that I should not proclaim the King in the streets. Truly, I was never guilty
of any such madness, neither did it so much as once come into my thoughts. Had
I not been guided by God, in the penning of my Prophecy, to do so in the
Church, I should never have done it; but then and there wrote, I could no more
decline doing it, than I can now to pray for all men, even his and my own
Enemies. No, they are the Commands of God, which carry me on; and not to
conform to them, I neither can choose, or dare omit.

SECT. V.
THis very morning, being now the 7 day of September 1654. was I a second time
rouzed, and called early from my bed, by a great Crack, or Canon, to rise and
go to work, to bring forth this my Book to the World, in it concerned: defer it
I dare not, though I have been by some Ministers, but most of all by my other
seeming Friends, my Wife and Children crying to me also, not to publish it, all
men I have yet sent to, and all means hitherto failing me, for money to get it
out. Nay, I have lain these 20 days, the most troubled and disconsolate
imaginable, for want of money to go on with it: Tried all I know almost; would
have pawned what I had left, that I might raise money to do it; am refused by
all men hitherto I know; out I would have had it come before the Parliament
assembled, as believing it would highly dispose them to serve God, their King
and Country, so invite the Lord to send deliverance, and heal our Land. But I
see in this, as in all other of Gods proceedings, I must pray to him, depend
upon him, abide his good pleasure; his own time is the best; so is his way
also; he will do his work himself: It may be he is pleased to see what good
effect the Sermon Mr. Thomas Goodwin gave them on Monday last will operate, and
have upon those Gentlemen, as also what the Protector did after communicate
unto them. At the Sermon I was, I heard all; in particular, how he well advised
to turn from all sin, that God would be pleased to return to us, and that they
those now worthy Gentlemen, called of Gods goodness, as I believe, for the
healing of our grievances: For, as Mr. Goodwin observed, there was election of
persons for works, sometimes by the Lord, as well as to grace and glory. David
might intend to build Gods House, but Solomon shall. You see my main rise of
all this Book, and unparalleled Prophecy begins there, as that Gentleman did,
advises the rebuild of his House, the restore of his Ministers, the giving
them for maintenance what God has given, and to every man his just interest,
and then see how be establishes the Land, and the Kings Throne, which Kings
Throne I wish he had fuller pressed, he has done it in some other works of
his; where he has observed, that the House of King Solomon was established as
David's, when they thought of, and so did build up the house of God. But he is
wise, he leaves that work for the Protector; if he does not know it, I do: he
shall help to build Gods House, and bring in his King too, and that will
establish his own house also, the most Honorable of a Subject in the World, or
else put me to death, if this come not to pass.

He went on, he advised them to keep us from falling into, or returning to the
Red Sea of blood, which we, as the Israelites had passed through. Let him now
take the comfort of my Book, and this Prophecy of the Lord Almighties, as I
had of his Sermon, in many good observances. There is an end of all the Wars in
the Christian World; and I hear since that Oliver Cromwell did that day tell you
at a conference, he was ready, as a fellowworker, to carry on the work of the
Lord, and would do so.

See now to what purpose my Gun has wakened me this morning, to call you all
to your duty, us to pray for you, that you forthwith fall to it, and work as
men, whom God has highly honored, and now called to be the restorers of our
Religion, Peace, the Honor of our Nation, and our King; who, because the best
in the World, God having made him so, for our good and happiness. Bring him
presently, that our rejoicing be not deferred, nor the World kept from coming
into the then so gloriously professed Protestant Religion, and under his so
happy Government, to which all Christendom, Jews, and Heathens are to conform
also in Gods time, which I beseech him for his name and mercy sake be pleased,
O Lord, to hasten.

Now, Turks and Infidels look to your selves, our King is CHARLES STUART, the
General of all our Forces is Oliver Cromwell, both the so dearly beloved of the
Lord of Hosts; against whose sword put into their hands, as Gods Viceroy and
his Lieutenant, none drawn on Earth shall ever prevail.

O Lord, thou have wakened me, and I will do my duty, this shall now come in
that formerly was not, and my Book shall out in Print, to the World concerned,
if I go naked; for thou know (O Lord) it had been out before now, if I had
had either money to have done it, credit, or goods, to have borrowed money on.
At home I continue discontented, enjoy nothing, because it is not published,
fear I do, that it is not coming out time enough, the major part in Parliament
will be wanting to their duty, they not yet understanding what God will have
done; were my Book but once read by those Members, for whom, with Oliver
Cromwell, I first intended it, I then should fear no Votes in Parliament,
contrary to Gods glory, and the Kings just interest with a Parliament; for
divide them I can not.

In what a troubled condition I am at home I have showed you; opposed and
deserted by all, unable to effect any thing of my self. See now how God works
for me, and carries on his own work, for his own glory, as assured me he would,
that it may be marvelous in my eyes, as well as yours: For to pass it must
come, that is the seal of my Commission, the time and way is his own secret.

What does the Lord now do, my self being at loss? Upon the 12 of September, to
my unpararel comfort, Oliver Cromwell does this work of the Lords; it is
possible too, when he intends only to establish himself. The Lord often makes
us to be most highly instrumental to bring his good pleasure to pass, when
sinfully we may intend only the carrying on of our own unwarrantable, proud,
and ambitious end, I know not, but it was so here with him, and no otherwise:
but I do know, that in the end, thou Oliver Cromwell, shall delight to do the
will of thy God and thy King; in the first place also, not minding thy self,
before thy duty performed to them: in which doing thou can not fail of being
abundantly happy; otherways disquieted, and miserable beyond all compare.

The 12 of September the House door that is shut up, out go all you, or the most
of you, whose froward principal of Presbytery, or other, (call it what you
will) is not clear for the glory of God, and Honor of his King, but our
Sovereign CHARLES STUART; whose power and unquestionable right with Parliament
Oliver Cromwell takes into his own hand, suffers it not to come into yours
only, he remembers very well when you formerly forced it from the King into a
Parliament only, where God and our Laws had never placed it. How you abused
it! Though your pretentions, Oaths, and Votes, at the first, were high, deep,
and many, to the contrary; all that you might not be distrusted; his person and
his honor also you would preserve; yet see, misimployed this Militia you did,
and turned it was to the destruction of his person and honor: the last you
first wounded him in, that you might the better kill him in his body: done it
was to the perpetual shame of them that did it, profess you what you will for
Religion, Presbytery, Anabaptism, Independency, or any thing that is
unwarrantable; distinctions multiplied with your Novelties and successes.

Truly my charity leads me to believe, there were some Gentlemen refused to
settle the Militia in the hands of Oliver Cromwell, that it might the sooner
return into those hands, which their consciences are now troubled that they
ever forced it from: which unhappie Act, I am of opinion, first set us together
by the ears, most hastened, and so enabled the Contrivers of that unnatural
War; which the Lord in mercy has now put an end to. If such another Vote
engage us not afresh, from returning to which Red sea of Blood, good Lord
deliver us; as Mr. Thomas Goodwin preached, advised, and prayed.

But this Militia is now safe where it should be, in the hands and power of the
best Subject, Oliver Cromwell, for the warrantable interest of the best of
Kings, his Master Charles Stuart.

See how the ways of God are past finding out! O Lord, never any man lost by
referring all to thy good time, and best way. I do not in the least doubt thee
Oliver Cromwell; I know God has, or will fit thee for the work, who only has
thus directed, and overruled, that his name may have the glory, and thy
person the greater honor; forsaking all on earth for the command of heaven. The
interest in the Militia is a Crown-Jewel, which God will have thee ( O
Cromwell) not suffer to be divided from the Crown, but give it to the supply
and making of a better than that which bad men have by violence taken and
shared amongst the Self-deniers, as they call themselves: But thou, Oliver
Cromwell, wilt prove thy self one, they only promised to do what thou can
not but do; make him a Glorious King; for by thy means God will have it so.
Distrust him not, you Members, yet dissenting, who have a clear mind to do the
work of the Lord. Obey God, and your King, with him: Gods Word, and the known
Laws of the Land will best direct in both. Comply with Oliver Cromwell, he is
for the service of God, and his duty to his Kings just interest with a
Parliament: you understand not how highly God will make him subservient to
both. My Book is coming to you, to let you know how, much we are mistaken in
him, and how transcendently much we are for ever obliged to our merciful God,
whose work this is alone, to the amazement of the World, both for time and
manner, his goodness making it marvelous in our eyes.

I could not sleep the night of that active day the instrument for subscription
was presented; God keeping me waking to his glory, and my own content: for as
his Gun, and Call, has set me to work at other times, so here I rose and wrote
this Letter to Oliver Cromwell the very next morning; and because but short, I
here give it you, that you may see my actions are all above-bord, and that this
work on Earth comes from above in Heaven: to pass it must come, God will have
it so.

Sr. Yesterdays actings, last nights wakings, and this day God directing has
set these words upon this paper, for your Lordships observe.

Prudence it is not, to trust the Militia in those hands, who after they had
forced it from whence God Almighty had placed it, (whatsoever they pretended,)
used it to the distroying of him. Sir, you are not of these bad men beloved,
neither is there clear thoughts in all of them to do good: some are not fit to
be trusted; Pray God amend them all.

Sr. Part with nothing out of your own power; that is, or may be mis-inployed,
hurt the Church of God, or Regal rule. You are of Heaven directed, doubt it not
in the least, to be highly sub-servant to both: have courage (Sir,) fear not
the least; I know you are hated, and not understood by the most, who would
destroy you.

Sr. I had a Book ready to publish 20 days, or more before the Parliament
opened; the highest imaginable for your advantage, and effecting what God will
have done; by the turning of good men to comply with you in all things, and not
to fear any ill, because God is on your side.

Sr. All my friends have abandoned me, and money I could not get to Print it,
most men conceiving this Parliament would ruin you, so hang me, if I sided with
you. Thus deserted and opposed by all, I could not get it out; but I see God
works for me, when man opposes: so does he for you; Go on (Sir,) you are blessed
of Heaven.

Your most faithfullest W. Gostelow.
September. 13. 1654.
This Letter I sent to that hand I have sent diverse others, which I know are
delivered to his Lordship, so sure as God is in Heaven, my Commission is from
thence; and that the effect will show you all; from thence deputed I am.

And now, you Honorable Members of this Parliament, who may if you will,
readily apply your selves to be good, just, merciful, and wise, live the
Honor of our Nation, the beloved of God, of our King, and of all good men:
your selves may have the Honor to be such a Parliament, so wise, so just, so
well constituted, so for ever renowned, as those will be, if you should be
wanting to your devoirs, which is the applying of your selves to the
extirpation of all villainy, and the giving to every men his just interest, to
which ends we have chosen you, and should all pray, that God would so of his
mercy enable you, by such a Parliament our already glorified King advises in
his last words, our now so abundantly happy Sovereign his Son, ever to be ruled
by: for Parliaments so principled would readily apply themselves to give the
King his just rights, as truly as they would to every subject theirs, which
doing, King, people, and Kingdom could not be other than mutually happy and
blessed, living in rules of Justice and loving kindness, the strongest hold-fasts.

And now this thy Call, O Lord, and workings, when my self at my wits end, is
like that afforded me of bring thy Papers and come away. A deliverance it is,
like that of the Apostle Peter, when the Prison door was set open for him and
his Irons fell off; so was the effect of that Call, Come away, the doors are
opened to me the very next day.

But close up my mouth, O Lord, I may not complain, every defer of thine is as
my self suspended for a further good, I know it: thy own time and workings have
none like them: Thou will make discoveries of men, and let us see as well, who
would be good if there were no law, as who would practice wickedness by a law,
and does not God Almighty put us often into his sive, several ways also
discovering the Wheat from the Chaff, pray we must, believe we must, that all
works for the best to them that fear God, and patiently abide his good
pleasure. Return I must and go on to my former intentions, yet this believe me
in, you worthies of Parliament, this insert was not begot by either of the
Protectors two speeches to your good selves; for I take God Almighty to
witness, I had not then read either of them.

Enlarged from Prison, I gather in all my material papers, as commanded, which
were not a few, I now see them of very great concernment, for the carrying on
of this work. I believe I wrote in Prison then twice as much as this Book, and
twice over also. This Call thus directing, Come away, bring your Papers, come
away, was certainly of God.

Well; my self gotten out of Prison, and my Papers gotten into my possession, I
hasten for England, and in Easter week 1654. came to my own house, where I now
do, and have resided twenty years, being in Broadstreet, near the Church, over
against Gresham College, at which Church once (but not long enough) officiated
that so eminent and renowned Doctor Oldsworth: but thank you invisible
Parliament and such Oaks, our then wicked Governors, you sequestered,
imprisoned, and destroyed him, as you did hundreds and thousands of others God
sent unto you, of which you were unworthy: but you could not help it; the Jews
your brethren did so persecute those sent unto them; and and truly you could
not but follow the worst of examples; the best are to be conformed to by these
which are wiser men; and therefore a true Parliament. You long since, as your
actions, have been the dishonor of the Protestant Religion, and the Nation,
all the World over; and future times will never call you a sober Parliament;
but as we desire not to believe you were English men, so well constituted
Parliaments for time to come will look upon you, as upon Lots wife, a lasting
monument of her shame, for looking toward Sodom when God had set her face
toward salvation. But I go on.

SECT. VI.
HAving passed a few days in my house, I could not be in longer quiet, until
I took me a lodging near Saint James' his house, attending all opportunities
and possible means to speak with the General: whom not meeting with, I wrote
unto him several times, to give him to understand, that I had received of the
Lord the most considerable and highest things imaginable, to communicate to his
good self, being therein concerned, as much as any, and to whom from prison in
Youghall God had pleased to send me, for that very purpose, and therefore
besought him to hear me.

After much attendance, and not a few disappointments, I had first at
White Hall the opportunity only to speak to him, made my self known to him,
but he had not the convenience at that time to hear me in the things I so much
desired; yet then told me he would speak with me.

That further opportunity I had not, though continued seeking it, it, and
reminded him by Letters of his promise, until one Saturday in June, a little
before the death of the Portugal, when, and where, it pleased Almighty God to
afford me a most convenient one at Hampton Court, and his Lordship there
pleased to hear me out to the full, affording me both his patience and
attention too, as I firmly believe. There was present Sr. Gilbert Pickering,
and a Gentleman or two more, whom I knew not; for all which I returned, as in
duty Obliged, first to God, next to his Lordship, all possible prayers and
humble thanks.

And now least any thing might escape his Lordships observe, which it is
possible did my recital, he has this second review of it; but printed more
particularly for the World of men in it so highly concerned: for I cannot be
quiet, until to them I publish it also, this being a light not to be hid; the
universal splendour of the Protestant Religion must break forth, also the
obedience of men to the Lord, who I conceive and believe is now coming in
mercy, and ways of making himself known to the Christian World, Jews, and
Heathen in mercy; but in judgment to others; for the evil doer shall not abide
in this so great and wonderful a change. On earth whom is the Lord pleased to
make his Viceroy for rule? his favor and loving kindness is the highest to our
King, CHARLES the Second, CHARLES the Great, CHARLES the good, King of the whole
World: these are the words and declared pleasure of the ever living and our
most merciful God, which I dare not conceal, nor longer keep uncommunicated,
but must publish them to all concerned; to have an end of all the Wars in the
Christian World, with the rest in the Prophecy, is certainly considerable.

I confess, after I had wrote to the General, I could not but also do so to his
Majesty my King: the import of both refers only to my duty, in the discharge
of which I only can have quiet. The Original of all Letters to them I have,
being to each five, in all ten: in any of them not the least thing advised to
but, as I conceive, and so believe the minding both of them to the perform of
such their duties, as are most acceptable with God Almighty: the one how to
rule well, the other so to obey: things the most to be desired of good Kings,
and good Subjects; of which I wish the whole world were made up of. I have
therefore in the end of the book given two of those Letters to public view,
that at once my inward thoughts may appear, to the excite of walking, as best
becomes the most excellent of Kings; and the highest of Subjects, where the
meanest also have to observe, that in fearing God, and honoring their King,
they are blessed here, and ever so to be hereafter; omitting it, miserable to all
eternity.

From which sin of Rebellion, because compared with that of witchcraft, we have
good reason to pray, The Lord be pleased to deliver us; especially when
covetuousnes is joined therewith, the root of all evil sins, which some men
therefore will have the World justly condemned as a Witch, in the end to be
burnt: because it, and its lying vanities has so bewitched us, as to prefer
them before the ever living God, and our walking according to his will,
revealed in his word: which is to fear God, honor the King, not to side with
those, that are given to change; but to keep his Commandments, do the thing
that is Just, Honorable, and good, that is to all men as we would they should
do unto us. If we will take any thing by violence, let it be the Kingdom of
Heaven, which ought to be our devoir, not other men's rights, whether of birth,
or estates; which ought to be our restore. Write, O Lord, all these things in
our hearts, and incline us to keep thy Law, which is the Commandments of God,
and not of men.

I have now done referring to all of Dream, and my own Interpretation of that,
yet what God was pleased to have me observe; also finished some of my Visions,
which refer to this, as I humbly conceive, most material; and therein I have
observed what I could not but observe.

For that of Prophecy, truly I believe, I may without any delusion, or spirit
of pride, call it the words and good pleasure of the ever living God: and so
far am I from believing it to be other, or that it will not come to pass, that
I could not depart Youghall, before I had given it under my hand, sealed with
the Coat of the Right Honorable Lord of Broghill, and upon my knees delivered
it, before no less than twenty other Honorable and good witnesses, that if it
came not to pass they put me to death.

Now that I may not appear other than what I was at that time, to the praise
and honor of God, well in my senses; not mad, but true to what I have received
of the Lord; no impostor, nor yet a lying Prophet, or one that would delude by
lying vanities, and speak when and what not commissioned of the Lord: I do here
again confirm, agree unto, and consent, that if it come not to pass (the things
in the Prophecy I refer to only, which are of the most wonderful and
strangest nature, there is the most improbability by outward appearance) if
these come not to pass, I say, I consent that you first show me to the World
from place to place, afflicting my body, and after that burn my book, and by
death put an end to my days, as I conceive deservedly I ought to suffer, if I
speak as from the Lord, when never sent. For allowance of which, to me it seems
there is good warrant in that Deuteronomy, the eighteenth Chapter, from the
twentieth verse to the end, being the word of God, to which words of God and
its interpretation, I refer all I have said and Prophesied, to be tried by, as
being the most sure rule, against, and contrary to which word of God, no
Prophecy, or Prediction of man can stand, as I firmly believe: which indeed
the Lord Cromwell well observed to me, when I gave him the knowledge of my
Prophecy, by word of mouth. But if this be besides Scripture, yet not contrary
to Scripture, then I say, in my Judgment, it is a work fit for the mission of
a Prophet, or if it be for further explain of some things in Scripture, not
until now, or yet fully revealed, or well understood, then also has it
warrant: but any new, or giddy Tenets I will never force to my own destruction
out of this holy word, O Lord; which to do, I believe is the greatest
sacrilege in the whole world. But willingly I do, as I wish all men would
refer all to thy most holy word, of which, I conceive wise men, and the body of
that ministry, thou have sent into the world, to be the fittest Interpreters
to our well understanding of it: for to and with such thou have promised to be
assisting with thy holy Spirit for their enablement unto the end of the world,
and that neither Hell, nor the Devil shall ever prevail over or against them:
And those thus blessed and so sent, I believe are not the Pope nor his Cardinals,
who for their own ends make merchandise of the Kingdom of Heaven, that they may
keep up their own upon earth, so do Schismatics and others, to the
dishonouring of God, and the scandalizing of his Protestant Religion, which
shall now flourish beyond all compare. But those shall suddenly fall and melt
away, as greater and lesser snow-bals; this is certain.

And now methinks I hear some, as I read those did in the first of the Acts of
the Apostles, and the sixth, ask our Lord, Will thou at this time restore again
the Kingdom? Truly I know nothing to the contrary, but it will be so, if you
will but break off from your so much beloved, and too long lain in sins and
impieties, it may now presently be. Certainly there is no better way to hasten
its coming, yet the next verse tells you, It is not for you to know the times
and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. Read it, the case
there just as ours, The Scepter departed from Judah, the Government forced out
of the hands of the Jews, the people desire nothing more than the return of it;
Nay, the Apostles themselves are the Persons that enquire if it may not be at
this time: Yet observe our Lords answer, even to them; It is not for you to
know what the Father has put in his own power, for shame seek the Kingdom of
Heaven and its righteousness; which doing, all other things shall in due time
be given unto you. Your selves are the cause it is not already come to pass, by
your continuance in sin.

Suffer me but a few words, and I have done; there is an end you hear of all
the Wars in the Christian World; but as yet you see it not: God be thanked for
what you do see, more probability than ever. Is it not very far advanced here
on earth? Have we not that already with some Nations and People we never had
before, leagues of perpetual peace (as I have heard) and are we not with others
in treaty? Nay, very far agreed toward that purpose? Who well understand the
Scriptures know it is very frequently in them used: that very expression by the
Prophets sent of God, the present tense for the future, there is an end, that
is, it is so decreed in Heaven, and it shall be so on Earth; it being the
ordinary phrase of the Prophets, by reason of the infallible certainty of the
events, to speak of things to come, as already past; the instances are obvious
and infinite.

See here another motive to repentance, that you may forthwith reap this so
great a blessing of peace on Earth, that which makes Heaven so desirable and
lovely, having in it the blessing of peace. And yet will you be mad to go on in
sin, and make the Prophets, sent to you for amendment of life, mad also? as
your iniquities continued in will do: it did so to that good Prophet, Hosea the
9. and the 7. as before.

I hasten to an end; there are 18 persons you read of, that shall never dye,
but be taken up into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that never shall have end.
These are the very words of this the Lords Prophecy, his almighty dictatings;
of which words and their strangeness, I may say, as the prophet Zacharia did in
a vision the Lord gave him, referring to the rebuild of his Temple, restore of
his worship, and delight in his service, to which all are enjoined to be
assisting: begging and inviting them, as mine does, first to seek the Kingdom
of Heaven, his glory, worship, and service on earth.

This Prophet Zacharia, in the 5. verse of that 4. Chapter, you may there read,
having seen that Vision, was asked by the Angel of the Lord, if he knew what
the Vision showed him was, he answered, no my Lord. A second time he answered
the very same words in the 13 verse, no my Lord, read on, and you shall find
informed he was by the Angel, that Prince and Nobels, the High Priest and the
other Priests under him, are the Persons the two Olive Trees betoken; and the
Candlesticks there lighted, let us see the perfection of beauty and brightness,
the Lord will have to be in his house. Certainly where holiness is commanded,
beauty, richness, and decency were never forbidden in the house of God.

And now to do this, does not the two green Olive Trees on each side drop
golden Oil, to carry on the work?

King and House of Peers, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, see here all your
duties, Prince, Priest, and people must be assisting with purse and hand to the
rebuild of Gods house, for his public Worship and service, which when done,
nay, doing, observe how he blessed the Land, never the like before for peace
and plenty.

And here learn also not to wonder, if I yet know not in what manner to
understand those words, they shall never die. There was a time, until the
Angel gave that so emiment Prophet to understand what himself did reply to, he
understood not. A Prophecy is a wonder sent to posterity, least they complain
of want of wonders, it is a letter sealed, and sent, which to the bearer
sometimes is but Paper, but to the receiver, and opener, is full of power.

To such another non ultra was the Prophet Daniel brought, in his 12. Chapter
and the 8. verse, where he says, I heard, but I understood not what should be
the end of these things, the next verse tells that Prophet, the words were
closed up, and sealed until the end; the last verse of that Chapter assures
him he shall stand in the Lot at the end of the days.

A thousand difficulties might arise out of the particularities of so strange a
message, as all this his Prophecy is; yet observe, when things of such nature
have been dictated to the most blessed Saints in holy writ, as our ever blessed
Lady, and others, from these we hear of no more objections, no more
interrogations. The faithful heart, when it once hears, or knows the good
pleasure of God Almighty, argues no more, but sweetly rests in a quiet
expectation, Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy
word. And thus without all sciscitation, we are to go blindfold whither he
will lead us. All disputations with God (after his will known) arise from
infidelity. Great is the mystery of Godliness, and if we will give nature leave
to cavil, we cannot be Christians, as good B. Hall observes.

It Is true we read in holy Writ, that wise, valiant, and good Kings, and other
persons of Honor, have been so eminently just, holy, and communicably good to
all here on earth, as of them it is said, They shall not die. Nay, we see their
renown lives now: That is the meaning of not dying there in one place, and
though to wicked men's sense such Godly persons seem to die; as in the book of
Wisdom the 3 Chapter second verse, yet it did but seem to them: so dead they are
not, their renown shall never die.

Again, we read of Enoch and Elias, those good Prophets, so lived they with
God, though here on earth, as that he took them to himself most miraculously by
translation, never suffering them to lie buried in the earth, nor their bodies
to return to dust; whose Souls were all heavenly mindedness, and conversation
so continually above, that the took their bodies thither also, they did never
die. Be it in either of these two senses, here is as much honor and happiness,
as mortality is capeable of, agreeable to thy word (O Lord) it must be, or it
can never stand, nor as I believe, come to pass. But my hand is upon my mouth:
thy will be done, and by man for ever be thou praised, O Lord, and now seeing
the events of things are the best commentaries upon Prophesies, the best way
for these eighteen persons and all others is to walk with God, as Enoch did all
his days on earth, in a Godly sorrow for sin, weeping for his own and others;
and then taken up into Heaven also they may be, as Enoch was, who never died,
but was translated into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that never shall have end.

You have heard what the Lord is doing. The conversion of the Jews and Heathen
at hand, also the downfall of the Church of Rome; things mighty, strange, and
wonderful, which to pass he will bring for his own glory, name, and mercies
sake, making these things mavelous in our eyes. And did he not also formerly
work wonderful things, that we Gentiles might be wrought upon, to come into
the knowledge of his Law? whose fullness is now with the Jews to come in. The
Heathen, a people that have not heard of the Scriptures; the Jews not believing
in the Gospel: who, although the beloved seed of Abraham, to whom the promise
is for conversion, yet an obstinate, crooked, and wilful generation. Even to
convert Schismatics, we may also look for signs, in, or from Heaven: all whose
conversion we have little hopes to see effected otherwise than by signs and
wonders, in, or from Heaven. For this sixteen hundred years past the Gospel not
heard of by the one, not heeded by the other, who remembers not our selves cost
our Savior deer; and many wonders he did before the people would confess him
the Son of God: in Heaven signs, on earth opening the Graves, the dead bodies
showing themselves to those that knew them, himself ascending up into Heaven
also, in the presence of many witnesses need of all for conversion, I have done.

But remember, Reader, and all you that hear of what the Lord is doing, and
bringing by his Almighty power, of his good will, to pass in the World, for the
honor of his name and this professed Protestant Religion and good of such as
fear him. Take warning, go not on in your sins, break off by speedy and
unfeigned repentance, and practice you, as well as invite others, to a more
holy obedience than ever; least that when God gives deliverance to his Church
and people, you be found to be of the number of his adversaries, to whom he
renders vengeance at the same time; Remember I have warned you; and believe me
also, I could not have any quiet, until I had done so. Thus in all ages God
has sent his Prophets to forewarn, before he consume a people, or in mercy
deliver them. I have done my duty, do you yours, repent and live. The number
was but few I told you, though all that were then in being, who when they saw
this Crown in heaven, worshipped God, and said, This is of Heaven, we will
follow it. Which when done, with my self, hear we did pleasant sounds in
Heaven, and saw the earth shine with plenty, amongst men good will, all
praising God, and participating those blessings; I once more tell you they were
but a small number; make haste, be you of it.

Before judgment is gone out, repentance is seasonable; but you may cry to
late. From this City was the Kingdom fyrced, let O Lord, if it be thy good
pleasure, the inhabitants tears and thy mercy spare it from an heap of ruin: a
City that has been, and yet is the harlot, mother of Bastard conceptions, and
prodigious births; confusion she has brought forth, that has filled the world
and land, to her dishonor, with God and men. Spare us, O Lord, we beseech
thee, and have mercy upon us, even upon us also, thy most unworthy servants.

Here I have ended, but because God has, as I formerly observed to you, of his
wise delay, suspended the publishing of this book, for his own time, which
certainly is the best and fittest, as also that my Dependency on him may be the
more, as his mercies the greater when deliverance afforded us, I must yet a
little go on; and one insert more be pleased to allow me, it being for the
General good. Let me therefore present your eye, and entertain your ear, as of
Gods mercy he has done mine, for your benefit upon the day and night of the 5.
of November last, being our Lords day, on which we did commemorate Gods
deliverance afforded us from the Gunpowder Treason I dare not but do it, mark
it, it is considerable, and of the Lord himself, being the Lord of Hosts, who
has delivered us, does deliver us, and will deliver us: all good grounds to
trust him, and a set Text of Scripture it is for that day to be Treated on.

A good Act of Parliament we have, for the thankful and perpetual
commemoration of that so great a mercy, that God was pleased then and so to
deliver, Our, so good, so wise, so well-accomplished King and his posterity, to
sit upon his Throne, and to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms for ever, as we
see God has now so appointed, whose ways admit of no variation, or shadow of
turning.

Deliver he did, we see, the house of Peers, and Persons of Honor, in duty
waiting upon their King. Deliver he did the wise and learned Authors of the
Protestant Church and Religion: with them also the Judges, both together the
best interpreters of his word and his Laws. Deliver he did also those Worthies
of the house of Commons, called thither by their King, and sent thither by the
wise, obedient, and then quiet people of the land who were: and because so,
shared in that deliverance, and long enjoyed they and we the Blessings that
succeeded of peace, order, riches, beauty, in Religious worship of God
Almighty, in his Churches, to the wonder, as well as to the envy of the world.
Here was a Parliament of Gods and good men's choice and blessing, For Majesty
and Honor well met together. And this, when so, he delivers from that horrid
and unparrall'd Treason, until those times, the like not heard of. And what to
do I beseech you, but to let us see how precious in his sight we are, when met
together as those, to fear God, honor our King, love brotherly love, all
applying our selves to live and do according to his will revealed in his word
and our known Laws, the only rule we should go by, and conform unto; applying
our selves to these, not to our own willdered thoughts, for confusion,
covetuousness, rebellion, irreligion, murder of those people, whose persons,
peace, and propriety we come to preserve and maintain: not for our self ends,
to kill that we may divide the spoil. Something like him I have heard of in the
Church of Rome, who upon the words spoken in a vision to the Apostle S. Peter,
Arise, kill and eat, all things are now Common, to please the then Pope of
Rome, at difference with the Venetians, gave this gloss upon that Text, that
is, says he, your Holiness may make War with the Venetians, kill them, and
devour their estates: up and do it, arise, take, kill, and feed upon them. Thus
his unholiness and suitable Clergy force mis-interpretations of holy Writ to
their own and others destruction, Peter's successors they pretend to be, and in
the worst of things they certainly follow him, nay, exceed him: draw their
sword they do, cut not off the ear only with Peter, but the heads of Kings and
Potentates, which wicked action our Lord reproves, healing the person wounded
when but an ear, to let us see his Kingdom was not to be carried on by the
sword, and show us he does he had no need of a fighting Clergy, he made no
Apostle to offer violence, no Bishop in Buff with back-sword to help on with
Presbytery, no Priest, or Deacon to kill and supplant, that he might get his
more pious, and therefore more peaceable brothers living; because it is better
than his own, which when he has by violence gotten, he inricheth himself, but
starves, or poisons those he pretended to feed better, and do more good for
both in body and soul.

No, these are not the men fit to build God a Church, he needs no such hackers,
or hewers in Field, or Pulpit, such furious fighters, and rash zealous Clergy:
Go on to imitate Peter further, the very next apprehension of danger, they deny
their Lord and Savior, for swearing him also, if once in custody, or times of
persecution come upon them then they are Sidonians, or Samaritanes, no more
Jews, and they have a Temple not yet dedicated to any God, which you their
profitable master, so they get by you, shall call them and it what you please,
for they are resolved to side with the seeming strongest, and to get by so
doing, Cura Romana non capit ovem sine lana.

Oh! and have not we such Peter's, if but one, too many, but the more the pity,
well, I have showed you what those furious boote-feux have done, set us and the
Christian World on fire; I would to God I could show you them imitating that
blessed saint Peter repenting; which would be not only ours, the Churches, and
their own rejoicing, at the conversion of such sinners there is joy in Heaven;
and though by words and actions misunderstood, they have engaged us with, Curse
ye Meros so carried on the cause falsely, persuading they are the Lords Battles,
outward success going on that side; what will become of a Church, whose
depraved judgments, corrupt head, and rotten Members are thus ill principled?
this Prophecy tells you: They, the Church of Rome and their Factors shall
fall: and what is become of such a Parliament, or Parliaments, who have been so
principled, your selves see; gone out they are, like a snuf of the worst
lights, and left a stinck behind them: whereas the memory of the just, and
good, God imbalms, for our imitation, and is not spoken of, nor remembered
otherwise than most odoriferously, even as the sweet Oil poured on our
Savior, leaving a perpetual renown in all ages of sweetness, and goodness, to
the immortal honor of that Saint that did it, as in Matthew the 26 verse. 13.
whose memorial for good works shall never die, but still lives, and shall for
ever.

Well; that day the 5 of November, you see is properly due for thanks to Gods
delivering a Parliament made up of King, Lords, and Commons: Let no man
therefore dare to have thoughts of promoting any other, but such a one; except
it be by praying to God, and patiently waiting his good pleasure, humbly, and
fervently praying that these worthy Gentlemen and Protector, now met in Council
for the general good, who cannot but know and find themselves imperfect,
without the better parts of the body of a Parliament, whilst themselves are
less profitable Members than they might be, to Gods glory, Religions luster,
the Kingdoms strength and peace, also the peoples rejoicing; Let us not cease
to pray, (I say,) that they forthwith apply themselves to be so completed as
may best please God, and be most warrantable by the Laws of this Land, which
ought not to be broken through, nor can they be nulled, but by the powers that
quallified them to become binding: They are the very words, (I heard themselves
observe) upon the Trial of the Earl of Straford, when proceeded against for
making his paperwarrants, or messengers of force to out-value, being sent out
against any subject, the then Laws established: which had their stamp put upon
them, and only made current by the assent of the Crown, the consent of the
House of Peers, and allowance of the House of Commons all proceedings in any
other case, pretend what they will, it was Treason. Law I have not, I confess
my ignorance, those Gentlemen certainly knew this to be Law, and gave it so
there, but good conscience I am sure I have, and ought to have, there ought not
to be fast and loose when we please, that we may the better practice wickedness
by a Law of our own making: thus we strengthen our selves, and would be exempt
from punishment when we do amiss, resolving to live according to the liberty we
please to take, in the fairest pastures of other men's demeans and birthrights,
making our fences to others every way offensive, but for our self as much
security as knavery can contrive, and violence maintain. Now if they will have
us keep this 5 of November, as most commendable it is we should to Gods glory
and our thankful rememberance; let them also keep us up such a Parliament, and
warrantable Laws as God in mercy then delivered and continued us, if they will
not, then I advise to appoint another day, that all those may meet, who with
the Devil, Jesuits, and Sons of Rebellion, Sectaries, or others, call them what
you will, all who have made their wicked plots take by seeming righteousness,
only pretensions to reform Religion, amend the Laws and circumcise superfluous
things, as evil counselors, or known offenders: yet have blown up, rooted out
and for ever destroyed, as much as in them lay, Kings, Religion, Liberty, the
peace and honor of this Nation; let the lovers of those confusions meet in a
thanksgiving to their God for their successes also, and let us see who they
are, and then if God be the Lord, serve him, if Baal, serve him, for we may not
longer halt in things of God and Religion, declare your selves you wicked ones,
be no longer Hypocrites and evil doers, the Devil has helped you to do that
above ground, in the shape of an Angel of light, that he could not effect under
ground by powder, and your younger brothers, the Jesuits: I have heard of those
that have arrived at their wicked ends and purposes by more bloodshed than
you, but never of any that came to them by more Perjury and Hypocrisy, than
those that were not long since our Egyptian Tax-masters, the scandal of the
Protestant Religion, and dishonor of our Nation.

Remember, I have advised you to repent and do your first and best works, from
whence you are fallen, or else know your judgment sleeps not, a day, a night,
a moment will do it, the Sun rose and shined gloriously that very day, the
evening whereof would have showed you Sodom, Gomorrah, and her neighbor
fornicating Cities all in ashes: Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be taken
from thee, and as in the 12 of Acts, verse. 23. on a sudden in a moment the
Angel of the Lord smote Herod, and he was eaten up of Worms: who knows not that
in the twinkling of a eye we shall be changed, and our Savior comes to some,
surprising them as a thief in the dead of night and sleep of sin? I before
showed you your general condition from whence Gods Thunder only can awake, but
I would not end in a judgment, the Lord knows my heart, I pray for all your
amendments and happiness, not a Scotch prayer for all your Gueds, but that you
may repent and live. Now give me leave to present your eye with what God did
mine that last Sunday night, being Gunpowder Treason, having that day received
the most blessed Communion of the body and blood of our Lord, beseeching him
for patience, that I might bear his Cross, which indeed was cast upon me the
Saturday and Sunday night, of that very day, just as my Jailer did at Youghall,
so here called I am Seducer, false Prophet, deluded, not sent of God, foolish
babbler, and worse: See how does God comfort me, when man thus misuseth me,
just as when my Jailer so abused me, and took my bedding from under me, and
locked me up, then the Lord, that very night, afforded me deliverance and
comfort by his Vision and call; Come away, bring thy writings, come away; and I
did so; for this his Call opened the Prison doors to me; so here that very
night for my consolation, the Lord showed me very strange appearances in Heaven
for beauty and curious works, as first a vail, or covering, which, after I had
well observed, passed away, then the Heavens forthwith opened, and there did I
see one, who was just for favor as our Lord is in his general Pictures
Portraited and represented to us; which sight ravished my Soul, and brought
from me this expression: O it is the coming of the Son of Man for the
conversion of sinners; forthwith a vail came over me, that I could see no
longer into the Heavens: I then run and hasted to get from under that vail,
that I might again look up where I was, so much ravished above in the Heavens,
so pressing forward that I might get from under the vail; and so I was taken
from the ground, and so moved until I came beyond the vail, which impeded my
sight, being got from under it I looked up again into Heaven, where I saw what
I cannot utter or set out unto you.

Help me, O Lord, my soul is too narrow to express that glory and ravishment
thou shewedst me there and then: the Heavens yet opening I saw a beautiful
place much about the bigness of a quadrangle of a College, and in such a
figure also, within which sat some four and twenty persons, all in order as
being in four straight lines from side to side, so adorning the whole: they
were all arrayed in long white robes, richly Crowned they were, and he that
late in the midst the richest, on each hand of him sat also one very richly
arrayed and Crowned; all of them in order and beauty beyond any expression. I
was given to understand it was the coming of the Son of man, I can say no more,
only tell you what it was not there was in it no disagreeing, no confusion, no
striving for priority, no supplanting of one the other, all obedience, all
beauty, all holiness, every one continuing in his own station, lovely
throughout beyond all compare or expression; certainly it was to let me see
that at hand his coming is for the conversion of sinners, if they would but get
themselves in readiness to receive and meet him with prepared hearts, he would
come and dwell with them in beauty and holiness for our amendment, or else take
them to himself, unto either of which happy conditions, O Lord, fit us and we
shall be fitted: I end, believing God has now made this book fit for the press
and you: Observe to amendment of life.

Help out, O Lord, with the book, and into thy favorable loving kindness the
sons of men: this day is the first leaf of this book Printed, to finish which,
if thou help not, O Lord I cannot give it birth; I have not this day on penny
in the world, yet I doubt not by thy providence this very day to carry on thy
work, this book, nor thy power and loving kindness to effect the whole
Prophecy in it contained.

And now, O Lord, be thou pleased to help so thy most unworthy servant, and
carry on this thy great work, strange and mighty to thy own glory, and good of
all men, as I set forth the truth of all, and desire from the bottom of my
heart, that thou, O Lord, may have the glory of all, and we men the comfort:
O Lord, I may not doubt thou will do it, for thy glory, mercy, and name sake; I
see it already done, as thou have promised; though it be thus strange, yet it
is thy work and thou will do it, that it may become mavelous in our eyes.

Thus I end in the very words, which ends my own Commission: in truth also be
pleased, O Lord, to help all men of thy goodness, as thy most indeared, yet
unworthy servant

From my House the 10 of November. 1654. Walter Gostelow.

A POSTSCRIPT, Clearing the Author from Guilt of Pride, or Falsehood.
WHat! my Book conceived in sin, and before born, or come into the World, but
five sheets out, and in three of them shall I be suspected to be guilty of
pride and falsehood? Certainly I will bestir my self, the rather, because a
wise and good man tells me he fears the good intented to Gods glory, Religious
luster, and the Kings interest will all suffer in the publishing of it; and
upon these grounds he persuaded me to desist from Printing, which I can no more
refuse to do, than I can to breath and live: what shall I wound any of these in
the least? Three things as precious to me, as had I ten thousand lives they
should all not come into the scale with one of them?

Moreover, I have presented it in my intentions to the Lord Protector for his
protection and defense, and shall I not present it innocent? I know him set up
to be a terror to the evil doer and deceitful man, but to calumniated,
injuriously oppressed, honest and innocent men a Protector, and comfortable
Defender: with all reverence and humility be it spoken, thy glory, O Lord,
shall have the praise of this happy Postscript. I know it is for a farther
good to me, as well as for the worlds clearer satisfactions: by such seeming
oppositions and wise delays has thy Providence reserved it, and me in the
fittest time to become public, and for the fullest discovery of truth, it is
now made much longer than formerly intended, that all things, time and
circumstances may be fully examined, and clearly inquired into, if there may,
or can be made appear any ground for suspected delusion, or visible falsehood. I
fear neither, the charge, as Gunpowder makes a noise, but you shall quickly see
it turned into smoke and and vanish.

I am to demonstrate unto you why I should not justly be condemned of pride for
these words in the 55 page, O Lord, let the World, [as I do,] stand amazed,
love thee, and fear thee for ever, what! Arguments of innocence brought to
convince of evil? be pleased to look back but two pages, the 53. and so on you
have the reason of those words. God of his providence guiding me, at that very
time to so full a Scripture, which I there observed for my confirmation, in
that my overruled deportment of falling upon my face; Having read that
portion of Scripture, not till then known to me, 7 months after done; and my
self then penning what I there Printed, I could not but in a thankful
obedience, with all possible humility in my private Chamber fall upon the
ground, and praise the Lord for it: I beseech you let it not be laid to my
charge as pride, be pleased to read it rather, O Lord, let the whole World, [as
we all should do,] stand amazed at thy goodness, therefore praise and love thee
for ever. This will take me in, and I have what I intended there.

The next is in the 56 page, where I say, I expected more alteration already
ready than I have yet seen; and believe I did the Summer past, would have made
the certain things to come to pass, much more apparent before now than they yet
are. Here confessing my self mistaken is inferred, I clearly demonstrate that
sent of God as one of his Prophets, I cannot be; for they are always guided in
words of truth and certainty.

I could refer you to what follows, and fasten this yet non-accomplishment upon
your selves, by reason of your continuance in sins and impieties, and well
might too, but apply I will my self to satisfy reasonable men in all possible
ways and things; yet observe, before I end that very Section in the two last
pages of it, 68 and 69. you shall there read that I being brought from what I
had of Vision, dream, or my own dictates, there is the cause of those words to
that which is certainly Prophecy immediately following, and the words of God,
by which only I abide as infallably true, and will come to pass: going on you
may there see the Scripture quoted, What is the rest but as Chaff to Wheat,
whether Dream, Vision, or Dictate: by that Prophecy I will abide whilst I am
in this World, yea, O Lord, though men attempt to kill me, I will yet trust in
thee. So that all considered, I doubt not but to be cleared in sober men's
judgments.

Next in page 63 I there tell you, you are unworthy of a man sent unto you;
your eyes have seen what Arise Evans said already fulfilled, and this methinks
might free me from this cavil, together with the known hard measure, as
imprisonment and affronts late times have put upon him; whilst the good man
(other I can not call him) has for your good endured so much, and almost worn
himself out, that you might turn and live: yet him you asperse; Too many of you
miscalling him Mad, Foolish, Babbling mistaken fellow. I confess I knew him not
until my return from Ireland, many times I visited him, and he me, when I
lodged at Saint Jameses upon this employ, waiting for the Protector, I still
reserved my self in all things, of what I have here Printed.

Curious I was to know the manner of things coming so to his observe, the times
also, his Government I enquired after, looked into him as narrowly as I could,
observed the effects and fulfill of things Predicted, and what more I could
think on, still reserving my self, having understood the manner, and in
particular his always being directed to the word of God, in conformity to that
his word, advising all men to turn from sin, that God might return in mercy: I
could not but conclude him sent of God for that very employ, if this be to be
deceived, then am I also? but I suspect it not in the least; he is for the
rebuild of Gods House, the restore of his Ministers and Worship, the
invite-home of the King, a far greater rule given to him of God, than to any of
his Predecessors, also the conversion of the Jews, and the spreading of the
Protestant Religion, to which purpose and speedier invite of him home, Oliver
Cromwell shall be highly subservient: when done, the Land and people blessed.
This being his principles in all this, and more, he is in the right, and sent
of God he is, I will not cry any of you mercy, for what I have said of him it
is too little, he deserves more, he will go for a man sent of God, of whom you
are unworthy, whose good admonitions you seem to contemn, as you have done his
person: but mark the end of that man, it will be happiness, I suspect yours: me,
thinks I can right him in what you so much slight him, it is now come to my
mind, he told you the King should be restored by May last, as you say, observe
now upon the 3 January, 3 Months before that May, I tell you from God, he is,
and shall be here Crowned King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the faith, in Heaven its done, and so I proclaimed him on the 12 of
January 1653. In the Church of Youghall as commanded of God.

Now to us he is come, I see him already come, so might you also, but that you
have neither faith nor good works, in my last letter, at the opening of this
Parliament, I wrote to the King these very words. Sir, I see you already come to
your crown and dignity, only I do not sensibly touch you, but restored you
are. S^ do but stand still a little put all iniquity from your heart, believe
in God, and your self with others shall see it so suddenly, God will have it
so, you may not doubt it.

The next and last also, I hope, I am sure the greatest, to give satisfaction
to is how I dare be so proud as to style my self so often a Prophet, nay, a
great Prophet also.

Here, O Lord, in all possible humility of soul and body, I do acknowledge my
self to be the most unworthiest of the Sons of men, and well know that of merit
there is not any thing on this side Hell, but it is too good for me, beseech
thee only, O Lord, I do for thy Almighty guidance and deliverance herein; thou
can do it, and make this word good, and I know wilt of thy mercy: thy honor
being at stake, I dare not doubt thy power, nor distrust thy loving kindness,
who has assured, that I should by thy enablements grow from strength to
strength, until I arrived at perfect Peace in Sion: it is the introduction to
thy commission given me for my consolation and inablement in this thy imploys.

Yet I will give you some reasons to beget belief in you also, and true ones
too, or else may the ground open and swallow me, if I be guilty of any
conspiracy, and Hell for ever continue me, if in this, I am rebellious against
thee my God: it is the black portion of false Prophets, and may it be mine
also, and that quickly too, if I have any Commission for this but thine, or any
aim more than thy glory: the reasons of my belief I will give you truly, and as
they fell out, some of which I formerly concealed in modesty, because they
referred so much to my own honor, yet I now see when calumniated I am, and
suspected of pride, God clears me, and more than recompenses me, he will now
give Honor to me and mine, yea, such Honor, as I was never, in the least,
worthy of.

Reason 1. When I was the second time before the Lord of Broghall, in the
presence of those persons of Honor desired, declaring the vision of the fire
that fell down from Heaven upon me in my bed, and the man sent of God called me
three times by my name, Walter Gostelow, asked me if I did see the fire that
came down from Heaven, whch I replied to as you there may read, yea, I did then
I say, that second time being before his Lordship and those present, declaring
that and others of my visions and revelations, in particular one that related
to my Eldest Son Richard Gostelow, these words last of all on a sudden came
from me. His Father is a Prophet, and his Fathers Father was a Prophet:
astonished I was, my very next action amazeth me also: speaking to the Lady
Elizabeth Boil appointed of God, Wife to our King CHARLES STVART when I come to
tell that Lady so, I am thrown upon my face, thus overruled I was in these two
actions of words and demenor, any reason for these two proceedings I cannot
give neither of them having ever been in my thoughts or purpose, but when done,
to none present more strange than to my self. Now mark Gods providence, as in
the book you have it, he guides me to a Scripture, there observed to you, for
the so falling upon my face, gives me satisfaction for my so doing: for the
other of words I promise satisfaction: but first observe.

That a second time in the dictate of Gods Prophecy which I stand to and will
never alter or abate one word upon my life, there in the end of that Prophecy
these words are, pronounce this house a blessed house, and this Chamber shall
for ever be called the Chamber of the great Prophet, for that second time
Prophet spoken by me, as for all the words there, I can give no reason but
overruled providence, it was no pride, no imagination, no, it was Gods
pleasure, and his will and promise by me to be declared to all people, and it
was no more what I fancied, or would have come to pass than I wished well to
Olliver Cromwell, who is in that Prophecy and happy also a man I hated to the
utmost, till God then, as before, reproved me, do you tell me off fancy you
talk foolishly, I believe the Prophecy, and I pray for O: Cromwell the
Prophecy is Gods, the duty is mine and all yours, God has or will change O
Cromwell to his own glory, and your amazement, as well as mine, he has assured
it me, and I do you, take it for Prophecy, I do.

The third time Prophet is after dictated, as soon as light appeared, I rose,
before I dressed my self I write, that upon the 12 of January, in the Church of
Youghall, a man sent of God for that very employ, A Prophet, his name Walter
Gostelow, will that day in that Church, after Sermon tell you the things God
will bring to pass for his glory, mercy, and name sake, making them mavelous
in our eyes. For this third time Prophet, I can give you no reason, but
overruled Providence, just as in that writing I could write Oliver Cromwell by
no other dignity, or cognizance, than the General of all the English Forces, as
you may there read, so here you have to observe the word Prophet, spoken before
the Prophecy, spoken in the Prophecy, and wrote after the Prophecy, in all
overruled I knew not of it until done. Yet further observe that in the
dictate of Prophecy, the Irish are not to be transplanted, fulfilled that is
for your satisfaction; the time for their transplanting by Act was May last, I
am ashamed, I will not call it an Act of Parliament, it was so contrary to Gods
good pleasure, or brotherly compassion, to sweep all, that they might have all,
therefore transplanted they are not, May is past; transplanted they shall not
be, upon this I will put it, burn me if they be. God has altered that
unmercifull decree, scattering those that made it, given these poor Subjects
and us better Lawmakers, more merciful men in the room of them, who, having
God before their eyes, for their so doing, have learnt. Be ye also merciful,
as your Heavenly Father is merciful. Such as these shall hereafter sit at
Helm, and sway the Scepter of these three Kingdoms, just and merciful men sent
of the omnipotent and merciful God.

In the Prophecy written, the sign there given me, which I was also overruled
to write, as well as the name Prophet, is made good to me, fulfilled that is
also, honorable witnesses I have enough to prove both, for times, persons, and
place.

There is some ground for further proof, which I cannot wholly pass over, nor
decline the giving it to your consideration, just as it was given to my self,
being put upon all possible proof, one night forthwith after Mr. Barrel the
Merchant, and John Merrick came up into my Chamber, and began thus with me, Mr.
Gostelow here is happened below a thing that very much amazeth us, and some
others. I asked what is it? we are amazed we wonder at it, say they, speak,
what is it.

The little Child, say they, that came from the Irish Nurses, to which the
widow Merrick is Granmother, and Mr. Landey Merchant her Son in Law, Father,
That Child you know is very weak, and can hardly speak any thing, what it
learned at Nurse is Irish, we were speaking below to the Child, and asking it
some things in English, amongst others, what you were, the Child replied twice
what we understood not, at last plainly in English, a Prophet, this they
admiring, came up to me then in bed, and tell me: you have the men, the matter,
and their residence: if this be so, God has sent me one witness more out of
the mouth of this Babe.

Out of all which give me leave to observe to you, for I do it with all the
humility that is imaginable in the World, but do it I must, I see Gods glory is
at stake, and so also your and my well being, for turning from sin to amendment
of life, that we may repent and do the first works, so for ever live blessed
and happy; God has here sent me a Scripture this last Sunday out of the
Pulpit, and the mouth too of one of his Ministers, so full is it to give you
and me satisfaction for this word Prophet, my overruled speaking and writing
of it, that it is to me as satisfactory, and as full of Consolation, as the
other Scripture his Providence guided me to, for the proof of my overruled
deportment, in falling down upon my face; and because so very full, I will give
it you in the very words, as I had done that, and let me tell you, the Lord
Protector did observe part of this Scripture to me, when I imparted these
things to him, who then well advised me to fear God, and walk in his ways in
all humility, and for these things, which were so very strange, if to his
glory, good pleasure and his Prophecy, he would bring them to pass, not being
contrary to Scriptures, though spoken out of my mouth: as it came happily then
from him, so now also from a worthy Gentleman Preaching, God never yet left me
in my greatest straights. You have the words in the second Epistle of S. Peter,
the first Chapter and the last verse. For the Prophesies came not in old times
by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, and I am sure they wrote so also, but that this be not laid to my
charge, as the greatest pride of all, yet spoken, or asserted by me; I beseech
you pray for me to this purpose, for I am bold to tell you my heart is fixed, O
Lord, my heart is fixed uprightly and sincerely to keep thy Law, to love and
serve thee above all things in the World; but for any sanctity, merit, or
righteousness in me, O Lord, which is not thy only grace of good will, I
abominate and disown it for ever: pray for me, I beseech you, that in all the
inundations of evil I may be preserved by the loving kindness of the Lord, and
that in all the mutations of this World, whatsoever God would be pleased to
make me, and that I may be so ever found, the most humble, lowly, penitent,
just, wise, merciful, meek, patient, faithful servant of our Lord and God,
and King my Master; O Lord, I love thy House, Worship and Service, and place
were thy Honor dwells; be it in thy Temple, or in man that delights to do thy
will, which is to fear God, and honor the King. I am unworthy, O Lord, yea, O
Lord, I am unworthy and altogether unfit, but thy ways, O God, are past
finding out, who dares assume the name of a Prophet, not I, O Lord, let me
rather from my Soul choose to die than live a false one, which is to be a Son of
Belial, and accursed for ever.

But does it not manifestly appear a delation, having then also said my Sons
Fathers Father was a Prophet, to this I am yet a debtor to say what I can.

My Father Mr. Richard Gostelow, lived and died, where I was born, in
Prescot-house, a place anciently known (in my memory) it had groves and good
walks about it, some religious house I conceive it to have been, an Altar and
Chapel I have known in it, the Parrish is Croppredy in Oxford shire, situate
some three miles from Bambury. My Elder brother, bearing his name, now lives in
it, but truly I never knew my Father to have any the least repute to be a
Prophet; a very general repute he had to be an honest, just and charitable man,
so had also his three brothers, which I well knew: but seeing the glory of God
and my own reputation is to be spoken too, and my self necessitated to defend
both in all possible I can, Give me leave to present you in what things he was
like a Prophet, and this the Country well knew of him. He was a lover of Gods
house, Worship and Ministers; further he married a second Wife, with whom he
had a very considerable estate when himself in debt, her estate he employed and
put out in his own name, yet most justly gave her the procedes of it, and when
he dyed, left her near four times as much as he left to all his children, which
were then nine, yet she had no child by her former husband nor him, hardly any
kindred had she known to my Father: this he did in good conscience, I will next
show you how he was merciful and patient, remitting very high injuries and
bearing his Cross. It falls out often that the richest Wives are not the best,
I have heard him traduced, reproached, contumeliously used and more of such
dirt thrown at him, from a person, that of all others should not have done it
in wisdom or duty. Yet he has born it not provoking again, Nay, at that very
time he has taken me apart, and commanded me to pray for that very party,
always to be obedient to her in good observance of her, telling me it was the
Cross God had sent him, and his duty it was to make the best use of it, though
others curse, yet let us bless and pray: next he was eminently known to be
charitable and full of compassion, to the poor he often gave flesh, bread, and
corn, his man, I know, he sent amongst them to distribute; money several times,
me he has sent also in one hand a note to whom to give, in the other hand a
purse of money, to one a shilling, to others more, to some two as he judged
their necessity; distributing at good times as Christmas and others
bountifully. But what is all this to a Prophet, I will come a little nearer,
often it fell out that the continual dropping within doors drove him to seek
his quiet without doors, and when gotten into his private walks, he would pray
and weep; long also as well as frequently would he do thus. I but what is this
to prove him a Prophet? I will come a little nearer to you as he came nearer
his end. A mild and slow way of dying he had, in which gentle sickness he wept
much, but withal declared himself it was not that he was afraid to dye, his
tears were occasioned by the over-joy he had that he was going to so wholly a
God, to so merciful a Jesus, to such blessed company, and to so glorious a
place, all this told me and you, proves him not a Prophet, which I have
pronounced him: I am coming a little nearer to you, my self Prentise at London
when he was thus drawing toward his end, he was pleased to send me a little
money, with it a letter, having a great deal of good counsel in it, well
minding me of my condition as a servant, remembering me of the duty I owed to
God, next to my master, and charged me not to be wanting in the performance to
either, but with all faithfullness to apply my self willingly to discharge it,
this indeed speaks him a Wise and good Father, and a child of God, but not a
Prophet.

In this my last observe to you I come nearest, and may come home at last that
his letter written with his own hand directed to my self I have bearing date
1620 in the end of it he does pronounce me blessed and happy, first hear on
earth, in Heaven abundantly, so it reads something like the great blessings
that befell Joseph when ruler in Egypt under his King and Master, who is there
mentioned by him for my imitation; whilst a servant for my consolation: after
in that letter of my Fathers there is too much Honor for a Son of my demerit,
both to God and him, whose commands I have not conformed too at all as I ought,
to pass I say it may come and that will prove him to all a Prophet, but if it
do not, O Lord thou ever rallest me to say so, let not man I beseech thee lay
this to my charge, to speak me herein also further proud, it is for truth sake
and the Worlds satisfaction, if I can, that I write this in his praise, not for
vain and foolish ostentation: you see five leaves of the book was printed, and
all material things of high concernment there spoken and quite finished, my
self not minded, but forasmuch as in what I wrote my self presently after Gods
pronounced Prophecy, wherein I say I was overruled. There are also things
referring to my self and posterity I am unworthy of; I shall therefore reserve
that, as judging it fittest to show privately to my King, when time best
serves, his most excellent Majesty being upon his Throne: and now seeing God
has so overruled and brought about this published honor to my deceased
Father, which I never in the least thus intended, as here happily necessitated,
give me leave to reminde you that in the book you shall read, when I was awake,
and at the end of Broad-street, seeing the Heavens open, and my Savior upon
the Throne, I did there see my Father Richard Gostelow amongst the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, waiting upon that Throne, and this is no new invented
thing made by me now, the better to delude with (as some have traduced me) I
can produce you witnesses that I have for many years since, but in all
comfortable humility, and not otherwise, spoken it.

Truth I will give you throughout and nothing else; this book will pass far
from home, inquired into, I believe, every part of it will be; observed also
with desire from some, with sorrow of others for its fulfill, with what
concerns my self and Father, as to the name of Prophet, I have done: forget not
in the book, I beseech you, the passage of the Jailer when he so abused and
reproached me by the name of false Prophet, from whose bitter words and hard
usage, God in his own time, which is ever the best, delivered me on a sudden by
his Call, and that nights Vision, Come away, bring your Papers, come away, it
is but a little, I have more to say, and that is of Croppredy Church and
Parish, where my Father lies interred, my self was Christened; and then I have
done this long Postscript.

This Parish of Croppredy is 7 or 8 miles about, good Land all of it is, being
in a Country very populous, Churches it has in that one Parish four, and one
little Chapel of ease, the Tithes of the whole, as I believe rightly informed,
are worth 8 hundred pound per annum, there does reside and officiate in those
Churches now 4 Gentlemen, whose Milk, Pigs, Eggs, Nuts, and Apples, with other
petty Tyths altogether, are worth somewhat above 100 pound per annum, the Corn,
Hay, and Pease worth 6 or 7 hundred pound, that is stolen from the Church,
first by the Roman Impropriator, the Lord Abbot, Bishop, or what he was then
called, I know not, stolen it is, that Clergy, say they what they will, were
the great Thieves, who robbed men first by persuading our forefathers to give
to Gods glory, and after stole it from the Church to enrich their Abbeys,
Covents, or Orders: so robbed they have the Priest of his maintenance, and God
of his true worship and service, which should always have been truly
maintained with that given. Thieves you see they were, and now pray what are we
else, receive we do, buy and sell what they stole, which in other cases, less
considerable, we make death by the Law.

Fain would I see our Ministers generaly wise, good and charitable, I may never
expect to see also, their maintenance once made, what certainly it ought to be
good also. Gentlemen, if any in the World, it is to you Scholars I speak, when
wise, good, and charitable, doubt not you have a God and a King that will
remedy this villenous knavery, Theft, and Sacrilege, which has undone so
many, and made us of the Protestant Religion loose our renown, because we have
followed the Church of Rome in this way of Thieving; for we restore not, which
amongst other sins of the greatest magnitude now help to pronounce her
downfall, she shall fall, so shall Church Robbers, doubt it not: if our
Savior did but whip out those that bought and sold in his Temple, what think
you he will do to those that buy and sell his Temples, and steal the
endowments, and wonder not at it, that Oliver Cromwell will assist in this, God
has set him up for his glory, and your maintenance, and for me his most
unworthy servant, I shall have a hand, or a pen in it also, you read where and
what of his mercy brought me to this employ, seeing his Temples lay waste, his
Ministers unprovided for, and the people untaught, because the means is stolen
from the Church; if I fall short in this, let me never speak more, thou, O
Lord, have made me after dumb, speak and write this for thy glory, and I do
truly say, I love thy Temples and the place where thy honor dwells; also to
see thy Ministers well provided for, that thy name, nor the Protestant Religion
be not evil spoken of, but that we may by well doing invite others to be of it,
so communicably good to all.

One passage more of Croppredy, and I have done: here it was and about my once
Fathers house also, that our glorified King personally defeated, Sr. William
Waller, a kind defeat it was, he took no pleasure in the pursuance of his
enemies to death, he took from him there part of his Militia, the field-Guns,
destroyed not many of his men, yet a defeat it was, he recovered it not.

The Militia was that often and dangerous knife we foolish and disobedient
children cried for, which having gotten, knew not how to use, but to our own,
as others destruction, foolish and disobedient Subjects, as well as Children we
are found to be. For with it we carry on all our committed violences and
outrages, yet, for all that, men professing and practicing the Law, tell us
this is Law, certainly they speak falsely, except they mean Club-law.

Postmaster Prideaux, baiting and pursuing in the Gall of bitterness, Sr. John
Stowel upon his Trial, part of which I heard had this expression he admired any
now would oppose, or endeavor to wrong the so innocent Infant-Common-wealth,
very finely spoken Sir, your self the Father and Godfather of that so newly
named Innocent Babe; such outcries from the mouth of some blind, not yet nine
days old, P. P. or Novises in the Law, would not be much wondered at, neither
can such deceive us: we well know that sober, honest men and Counsel learned in
the Law; for such there are, go not out of the certain track and known rule of
the Laws, such run true all along, open not the mouth to spend in vain, hate to
misguide us, deceive us they will not, fearing least we, as they, should catch
what we pursue not, and so miss of truth, the only desired good and Royal Game
Magna Charta.

A Lawyer with a double heart and two tongues employed, the one to stifle
truth, the other to maintain falsehood, I would only have such tongues cut out,
when so ill employed; to such wicked ends God never gave them: for we should
praise the Lord with all our hearts and with our tongues next. For others that
cloth and enrich themselves with bribes and the wages of unrighteousness (for
certainly of both these wicked sorts we have had too many Lawyers) such I would
only have their skins flead off them, and hanged up over that place of
judicature they cause to be so evil spoken of: I have read, or heard that so
good a course was once taken for the punishment, and deter of evil Judges and
such Lawyers.

Undeniable it is, that not long since wickedness was practiced and committed
by a Law amongst us, the Lawyer, he as the witness falsely accused, the
Sequestrator, he so condemned, the Committee man he levied the Estate, or sold
it; if the Rent was low, then it was fittest for one of the Godly party to grow
rich by; most Trypartite, as a three corner Cap, all of one piece, they have
hanged together; truly, if these evil doers will not repent, and bring forth
better fruits, making their conversion to appear, as good Zacheus did, when
truly converted, who showed it by his words and actions. If I have wronged any
man, I restore to him fourfould, and for the rest of my goods I give the one
half of them to the poor, you have it in the 19 of Luke, verse 8. if they would
nor thus uprightly turn, repent, and live, truly they should uprightly and
perpendicularly hang together, as being brethren in iniquity; and this, I
believe, would be pleasing to God and man, whom they have injured, and are
indebted to: you wicked Judges, Committees, and Lawyers; repent of your
Club-Law, too long practiced upon the persons and Estates of men of worth and
honor, imprisoning the one, devouring the other; tell me, if you can, from
whence had you these presidences for Law? not from God, he is a God of mercy;
not from his word, that is a word of truth, not from our well constituted, and
better known Laws; those are for defense, not offense; Come, I will tell you
whence you are, you say you are of the seed of Abraham, but you do the works of
you Father the Devil, and if I mistake not, it was to men of your profession
and practice, our Savior said so, that could not err.

Some gave that for Law, which was not: when time was, they did help to undo a
good King; and run a way after: others of you have played the same game since;
and it is not improbable will show us such a trick also; but stay a little, and
take some of my counsel before you stir, what you gave and took for Counsel was
too dearly bought, neither worth what 'twas sold for, nor at all fit to be
followed: those you have destroyed or decoyed of your own party will shortly
tell you so; be you ruled by me for the time to come, if you go on to practice
in the Law, do in all your cases and causes as I have done in this of mine,
presented in this book: Open it aright, carry it one no other ways, present it
not falsely in any one circumstance, speak the whole truth, which done, pray to
God Almighty that he would be pleased to give you a sentence in favor, if in
truth and uprightness of heart, be assured he will: desire only that the Lord
may have the glory of it, and man, his Creature, the benefit of his just but
merciful and righteous judgments.

My employ is not to flatter any one of you, or others, I never spoke word to
Sir John in my life, the accomplishments of a judge was found upon that Trial,
as well as others to be in the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir John Stowel, in his
fixed heart was sincerity, resolution and uprightness, in his head was wisdom
and discerning, in his mouth and tongue were the words of truth, the Grand jury
were those worthies that gave hin what you Mr. Postmaster Prideaux labored to
beguile him of, the benefit of his Articles, and not you only, but the rest of
the Black Robe that quacked after you, the decoy, upon his left hand: all of
you stole, a heard of Goats you are, Hoofs and Horns you have for offense: in
the very end of my Prophecy, if you repent not you see the place you are
doomed to, as well as the condition you are found in, when others are taken up
into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that never shall have end, the Sheep, that
then stand before the Judge of all men, shall go to the right hand, but the
Goats to the left, will any of you evil doers ye go on to sin against
conscience for the accursed love of the World? do no more so; hear and take my
counsel, make not haste, haste, haste, Post-haste to be Rich, run not into
destruction, covetuousness is known to be the root of all evil.

Do you Sr. for the time to come, nay, let us all do, as new born Babes, desire
the pure milk of the Gospel, (not your Law) may we become, O Lord, as little
Children, Infants unspotted of the flesh, the World, and the Devil, thus being,
Heaven is then open to us, and that is a Kingdom: For your Infant Commonwealth,
truly it died (almost as soon as born, or named, I fear not Innocent also; how
have you lead me out of the way, I must return to Croppredy, where I was named
an Infant.

From Croppredy-Field his Majesty went into the West the same Summer, there God
gave him such another success, but greater and over a greater number: out of
their hands he took all the Militia, but their persons go free, not a man
perishes by his good will.

Who would not have expected that these mercies, God having cast his Enemies
into, and under his own dispose, and all pardoned, who would not I say have
presumed these carriages of mercy and unparalleled clemency would have won his
Subjects to a better obedience, than forthwith to fight him afresh, O my God, I
heard his majesty speak these words at Southam in Warwickshire, the very day
before Edgehill fight, he being then, and there importuned presently to hang
80 men that night taken: To persuade him to it, thus some reasoned, the Lord of
Essex is near you, the present doing it will deter your Enemy, make his men,
that love you not, run away, whose fear, if not affection, will be your great
advantages: they were so many and so powerful, that thus counseled, as indeed
my good King had but his good conscience, mercy, and a few persons of Honor on
his side, of which very small number was the Lord Henry Wilmot, and the Lord
Willowby, Son to the Earl of Linsey, whose Father was mortally wounded the
next day at Edgehill, of which he died in a few days after, nay, so bold and
so pressing were these in his presence, that they told him, Sir, if we must
take these Rebels, and you pardon them, when can you hope to see an end of this
Rebellion; they went on to importune him to hang but 70 of them, yet still to
do it presenlly, as therein being his advantage; his Majesty wisely and
mercifully replied, his design was to make a conquest of their judgments and
affections by clemency and forgiveness, and not to murder their persons, they
grew more impatient, pressed him then to hang 60. his Majesty found out wise
delays for not doing of that presently, to 50 to 40 to 30 to 20 they fell,
still his Majesty stood unmovable, at last some of them swore, as I take it,
thereby to dispose him, that passing the other day by Coventry, the Enemy had
taken and hanged four of his men: to second him, another said, they had hanged
five of his, more of them went on, three of theirs, two of another, his
Majesty to get rid of them, and it may be to enquire into the truth of it also,
(first I did so) told the^ he would presently take an order with them, now see
the order taken by him, twelve enlarged, and of them continued, not a man
suffered in his Person, yet to this good King was laid the false charge of his
being guilty of all the bloodshed in the three Kingdoms. To witness this truth
in my Kings defense, when his Majesty was upon his Trial, I being near a
hundred miles from London, heard of their quick proceedings against him, and
had the Saturday night before his death a very strange Vision concerning him; I
made haste toward London, that he might have the benefit of this my witness in
that killing and false charge: but upon the way met with the sad news of his
being Martyred, so that in this action the wickedness that was done, was
quickly done: but I will not wound afresh, or grieve a man of you that did it,
or had a hand in the bringing to pass what God would have done, that his name
might have the more glory, and you now no less happy in his Sons rule over you:
can you but repent of this, as of all your other sins, God forgives, and of the
Kings forgiveness you may not doubt, the Stuarts, as the Kings of Israel, are
very merciful Kings, King James a Beati Pacifici, King CHARLES, of ever blessed
memory, prays God to forgive all his Enemies, when inquisition is made for
blood, then, O Lord, let them be found that shed mine be sprinkled with thine,
I beseech thee: CHARLES the second, our King, will not consent that his seeming
greatest Enemy in the World, Oliver Cromwell shall privately be taken off, an
act pleasing enough to many, when the remove, but of that one man only, might
probably without more bloodshed set him upon his Fathers and his own Throne;
yet see how he Governs, he will not so much as hear of it, you have it observed
to you in the wise Admonition to Oliver Cromwell, when Wiseman and others
proposed his murder to him, no at no hand, he allows it not, he will wait upon
God in all his lawful ways, contenting himself to be Charles the good, if not
Charles the Great. And being thus principled, see, what is the happy successes
of his so doing, God gives to him the Crown for ever, and Oliver Cromwell his
ready subjection, this is counsel I have given him, but first given me of God,
his Majesty had it from me in April last, as I take it, to forgive all his
Enemies, even O: Cromwell, and to refer all to Gods own times and way; and it
may be thou O: Cromwell does owe me something for thy well being at this day, I
am sure thou do to God Almighty, give him the glory and praise of it in thy
better obedience for the times to come, and I have all I desire; I have but
done my duty, and my reward is above in Heaven, whither I most humbly beseech
God of his infinite goodness, and never to be dispaired of mercy, take my good
King, thee, me, and all men, even the greatest sinners now on earth. Whom,
though the greatest, yet how often is God pleased to make of such the most
glorious Saints, when repenting their former wickedness, then it is turn and
live for ever, you have the opportunity, lay hold on it. If any man now
distrusts his own safety and forgiveness, it is only he that keeps close his
sins, or as Hypocrites seem only to repent, he that covers his sin shall not
prosper, but he, that confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy of God
and his King.

I fear you think me too long before I give you the reasons promised: why plain
Oliver Cromwell and no more in the overruled dictate of Prophecy, when all
others by their known Titles and Signiories.

I will only show you the Crown on the other side, and there Proclaim my King,
as in Gods Prophecy commanded, that done, go on to let you read what follows
more of my observe, as also Gods disposing of Oliver Cromwell to the well
liking of all good Subjects: these worthy Gentlemen, I hope, now met in
Parliament with them also assisting, readily to the bringing in of his Majesty
CHARLES STUART, whose unquestionable the Crown is right. When given unto him,
the joy of all good men, the Protestant Religion then more gloriously
conspicuous than ever, as clearly appearing to bring forth good fruits, not
pretensions only by, which our Savior lets us know we cannot judge, and thus
in the end as well as in the beginning you have C. S. and O. C. United.

This my so long and just defense you must forgive, I know God has put me upon
it, though thus late, that his name may have the more glory, my self with you
the better esteem, and your selves the clearer satisfaction, that I am sent of
God with others to the Worlds happiness, as his Prophet for this very employ of
my God and my King, whom God preserve. Amen.

PROCLAIM I must, and do, The CROWN is given of GOD to CHARLES STUART. C. R.

CHARLES the Second, KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, KING of the whole world.

To this Charles the good, and Charles the Great, is Oliver Cromwell by God also
Honored to be General of all his Forces. Long live my King, and his Lieut. O.
C. Amen, Amen.

Yea, let all the people say, Amen.

BUt I am to give you what I promised, why Oliver Cromwell, and no more in the
dictate of the Lords Prophecy, when as all others have accompanying them their
Titles and Seignories, and further, why I could not pen him by any other Title
than the General of all the English Forces, although I did upon the then
writing of that Prophecy so much endeavor it, yea, I tried and varied it
several times but could never do it, forthwith when done, was given me this for
reason, which indeed I have already given the General himself, when I declared
the whole to him, as now to you the Reader.

The fountain of honor is Originally in God, derivative in Kings, not at all
in the people, for proof of this you have the written Word of God, his most
holy Scriptures: confirmed to me further by God, when the fire fell down from
Heaven in that Vision all about my Beds feet, and his messenger called me three
times by my name, Walter Gostelow, also spoke to me, saying, you well
understand the Scriptures, Kings are of God, especialy yours; from thence
issues true honor, not from the people, for this reason is it in the
Prophecy, Oliver Cromwell and no more, by him that ers not, the Lord.

See, it is then true honor, and worth having, only when conveyed in its
right Channel, otherwise it is just as the Calf the people set up, which
wisemen know is not of God, and therefore worship it not.

Sleep yet a little in Windsor Chapel, my most glorious and immortal King, for
dead thou art not, Garter, Spur, and Star, yet lie still in your Beds of
Honor, until your Son arise, we see already his Aurora, as plain as we did
his Day Star at his birth, so visible to us is his, and all your resurrections.
Welcome my King, welcome now for ever; thou shall set no more, the day and year
that brings thee must terminate, but the Kingdom thou shall be taken up into,
is that of Jesus Christ's that never shall have end.

Wharton where art thou? what the best Astronimer, at sometime a Prophet, and
does not thy rich sublime Transcendent wit and Pen yet appear, make us Te Deums
and Laudamus Domine, I have left thee a break in this Book more than fill it,
and the world of good hearts, with Gods, and thy Kings just praises, but thy
own duty, were not those thy verses I have so much inquired after, as well as
thy most worthy self, since returned from Ireland, thine, or Cleavelands sure,
but not yet so happy as to see either. Verses that Prophesied the King being
inbalmed at Windsor, the Garter and Spur should lie dormant, until some
Prophet sent of God should raise them from there locked up and sealed Wardrop,
raised they are, make haste, adorn them, thou have for thy enablement a Mine of
Excellencies; Cleaveland and thee have all, give God and your King the glory of
it, they have your hearts already, pen us Songs and Praises to our God, the
Quoristers and Churchmen did sing us such at St. Paul's Cross upon his
Birthday, that good example was given by the Angels, who did so at the
glorious King of Kings Birthday, who now sends our King CHARLES the Second, his
ViceRoy on earth, to rule the Sons of men, Honors he brings with him from the
Almighty fountain, to be derived and conferred upon such as fear God, Obey, and
Honor this his Viceroy our King, C. S.

Come now, come O: Cromwell, take not a share, but thy full measure, God
judges not as man does, we thought thee not at all worthy, now shall that
celestial Color, Order, Ribbon of the Garter, I had the Honor to sell it to
my King, but never thought the least to be so Honored as to repossess him of
it from God.

Come I say, let this badge of the greatest Honor now on Earth, given from the
greatest King, thine also, C. S. let it now be put on thee, I said it in
Ireland, the Honorable and good Soldiery submitting to their King, whom God
would dispose and overruled so to do, of which thou art found the most eminent;
they should have honors conferred upon them, indemnity, forgiveness, and
large rewards given unto them, of, and by the King when restored; put on this
rich Garter, which has for its inscription Honey soit qui maly pense, the other
Order Ribin worn upon the body, remembers all Subjects we should not so much as
think an evil thought of the King in our hearts.

And now complain not, but rejoice for ever, O: Cromwell thou see with whom
God has ranged thee, with the greatest and happiest of Kings, Queens, and
Princes, now thy Honor is worth having, there was something in it, that thy
good, aged, and so lately deceased Mother was as I hear a Stuart, she is gone
to the common Wardrop of the world, the grave. Be comforted, thy Father is a
Stuart too, and he lives, the Father of his Country, and the King of all good
Subjects for their Consolation, of which blessed number we may not doubt thou art
Son and Subject, since God has so declared it, and made you United Sons of the
now more visible and glorious Protestant Church than ever, in Heaven glorious
to all eternity.

This our King has now largely given to him of the fountain, and as our
blessed Savior came to his universal Dominion, not by fighting, but winning
his Subjects by dying for them: so by merit, and of purchase had the ends of
the Earth for the bounds of his Kingdom, which being but earth, the rule of it
he now gives to his Viceroy, CHARLES STUART, whom in his uncontrolable and
unsearchable wisdom and mercy he has made worthy of as much Honor, Command,
and rule on Earth, as Mortality is capable of, not of merit, but to let us see
that he, which gives himself to do the will of his Savior, which is in Heaven,
and denies him not on Earth, which thy now blessed Father our King did in
obedience to the Commands of his God, for such a witness the Almighty made of
him, and such a Martyr we have put to death, and such a glorified Saint was the
Crown of your rejoicing, my most blessed, and for ever happy Queen, when he
your Majesty's on Earth, now in Heaven glorified.

Be not troubled, Madam, they were Villains and Rebels that aspersed your
Honor, and his Majesty, you see it, as also your no otherways, virtuous and
for ever happy, Sister, now Queen of France.

See how the Lord loves your Souls, Honors your Persons, and establishes your
posterity, to you, Madam: Behold, the Lord, now gives his and your Son, but our
so much Honored and ever blessed Sovereign to be King of the whole World; and
to you, Madam, the best of France's Queens, whose two Sons; good men, saw what
God did for you, gave you them both from Heaven, it is true, to make your
patient expectancies, hopes, and faithful dependencies, on him the Almighty,
visible to the World, as they were to Heaven, he defers it in his wise delays,
which are always the best, for 23 years, until your glorified King also was
going thither, in whose last days his graces, as his blessings were at the
highest, for your comfort Madam, and the Worlds thankful, and happy
acknowledgement, had they but grace to see it, as now all may.

Was there ever two such Kings, and Mother Queens on Earth, yet see how the
Devil and his instruments would eclipse them, and has aspersed both, but God
witnesses for you, and has now declared you and yours beloved in Heaven, and
to be obeyed on Earth.

Most excellent Queen of France, you were pleased some sixteen years past, my
self being at Saint Jermains, I came thither with the now Lord Jermain, your
Majesty after honors and favors by your most excellent and good self
afforded, did interrogate me what Religion I was of, I then humbly satisfied
your Majesty I was a Catholic; your Majesty further demanded of me what
Catholic, I answered the best, said your Majesty it is then Roman Catholic,
is it not. I bowed before your Majesty as in duty, and replied it was Catholic
e Protestant, a la mode d' Angleterre, point de Rome.

Your Majesty, whom God has made to your power communicably good to all,
pitying my condition, was pleased to offer me a Letter to your Kings Confessor,
of good will desiring my conversion, I humbly acknowledge the favor, but
replied, my Religion I liked so well, as not to change it.

Madam, be pleased to see now how God more than retributes, and no otherwise
recompenseth this your good will, to Gods glory and my good, (as intended) my
unworthy self, Madam, is now sent unto you by the Lord, not only to your so
pious, and so eminently good self, but also to more than your whole Kingdom, to
bring your Majesty and them into his only true Church, that Church, which is
not that of Rome, into one of whose Chapels at Saint Jermains, your Majesty
was that day further pleased to Command me, when returned from seeing the then
Dolphin, now King of France, your Majesty's Son then in his Cradle, to wait
upon you to that Chapel, to hear the Music and Vespers.

Madam, in obedience I did so, be pleased to let me assure your Majesty, I have
heard very many Sermons, and some good ones too in the Churches of France and
Spain, tending to mortification, yet never was I of the Roman Catholic
Religion in all things. No, Madam, it is their unwarrantable Innovatious,
Traditions, Superstitions, Excesses, and Idolatries of the Priests and Factors
for Rome, and his unholiness, the Pope and that Hierarchy. That your Majesty
and all must turn now from, that is the cup of fornication she has made the
Kings and Princes of the Earth drunk with, for which wicked acts of hers, they
and all shall now hate her, God has said it in this his Prophecy, down she
shall, her fatal time is come, and her self must drink the dregs of that cup of
fornication, hers it is, and take it she shall, the Lord will have it so, she
shall fall. Yet Madam, the Lord is good to all his, though of that Church, for
he will purge her as your Majesty shall further read anon.

Be pleased so excelling Queen, I most humbly beseech your favorable
allowance, that I go on to wait upon my own King, and Gods true Church, in this
his business and my employ.

And now, O my King, rejoice fully, there is no place for sorrow (but for sin)
how like thy Savior was thy Father, who dying, prayed his Father in Heaven, to
forgive those Murderers on Earth, that so despitefully used him, it is not all
the indigne cruelties of men that can rob him of those rich mercies; thou, my
King, prayedst for them dying, wicked, and sinful people, you would be
miserable, but he will not let you; Father forgive them they know not what they
do: Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, who, because
faithful unto death, I will give him a Crown of life: as in the 11 of the
Ecclesiastes and the 17. also Revelations the 2. and 10.

I am now in Heaven in the this days discharge of my duty, I fear you Rebels,
and all evil doers, as I do the Devil, not at all. But I return to thee O.
Cromwell, the so much beloved of the Lord, which we now seeing wonder it should
be so: But God judges not as man does, when he pleases the Lion shall lie
down with the Lamb, it is so here.

Oliver Cromwell, I expect thee, nay, I believe thee no more ill biased, if
ever; no more rebellious, no more ambitious, except it be of being more just
and good in all ways of Honor and obedience, now endeavor thou, or increase
to be communicably good to all, the high end thou was born for: there now lies
thy choice and complacencie, and for thy former ways, as errors of thy
judgment, not want of zeal to God's glory, be comforted, it offends not that
our affections are moved with zeal, but that they are inordinate: thou art not
only now thy self a detestor of them, when inordinate, but a dehortor of
others from the like phrensie-practises; so that of the mercy of God changed,
or to us made known, thou here helpest to make good what our already glorified
King Prophesied to his now so Highly Honored and restored happy Son and people.

That those his Subjects, which had erred by the artifice of others, or
misguided zeal, would, when they saw the errors of their ways, and the
villenous practices of those, that had deluded and seduced them, their eyes so
opened, they would then most hate them and best obey their King, here is this
now fulfilled in our days and eyes: O you people of this Land and the world
also, judge now, was not my King and Sovereign a great Prophet, as well as the
best of Kings.

O you deceivers! who traduced him in his Honor, that you might the better
Murder his Person, and divide the inheritance; if there yet lives any of you,
(for your time is but short, except you repent) the bloodthirsty and
deceitful man shall not live out half his days. Whether can you turn to be in
quiet, or to be beloved, who hates you not, that is either wise, or good. But
God is merciful, he is the best of Paterns, his mercy is over all his works,
and his compassions fail not, I must obey him, and let you know where your
well-being lies, you bad men once gave the worst counsel and it prevailed, now
take the best, and follow it, from God and me, come forth, humble your selves,
leave no sin unrepented of: Murder and Hypocrisy are two great ones, confess
to God and to his glory, forsake all, that was of the Devil in you, contempt of
Gods house, Ministers, Worship and Service, violence to Man thy Brother,
restore to God and Man what is not your own, but stolen from both; make all
possible amends you can, for otherwise I do tell thee, whomsoever thou art,
whether yet in this Kingdom, or fled already into another, that God will give
deliverance to his Church and people, but render vengeance to his adversaries
both at once, Deuteronomy the 32. verse the 43. and this he will do, that so
wherein the wicked dealt proudly, God might show himself above them, Exodus the
18. and the 11.

My next observe is how does God Honor that Religion, which to have been of,
the World has counted madness: The Jews, the Heathen, the Roman and our
sneaking Schismatics, those that either despised Christ, or falsely told you
with them he was, and no where else, they are all now truly showed, his
delight was, and favor is, where they thought and taught him not to be, with
the faithful Professers of that so ancient true Church of God, but lately so
much despised, and by them contemned Church of England; to whom, because the
purest, God is now pleased to give so much Honor, beauty, and renown, for the
former contempt, persecution and ashes of her glorified Professers and Martyrs,
of which number it is now demonstrative our late King is the greatest: see, God
judges not as man does.

This is righteous judgment, which himself Prophesied you should have
hereafter when falsely condemned him, and had provided your selves of those at
your backs, and about your Bar of Justice, for so it was, a Bar of Justice,
where you had placed your Criers for Justice, Justice, as their fellows did
against our Lord, Crucify him, Crucify him, spit upon him you did too, as I
have heard, condemn him you did that I am sure of, no end of your malice, his
blood you thirsted for, as also the Ministers of the Lord, you had it, you have
taken them, yet see, as he prayed, you are found besprinkled with the blood of
Jesus, when inquisition is made for his and others, and thus he prayed for you,
you would never confess your selves guilty, but God sees it, and forgives it
too, with him there is mercy, if you confess and forsake your sins, making all
possible amends and for the time to come, all your days walk before him in a
holy obedience: to this end he in mercy has sent me to you, that you might
truly repent and live.

My next observe is the Church of Rome shall fall, a Church you see she is, so
I ever, believed her to be, once a pure one in whose Churches often, both in
France and Spain, many a good instructive Sermon to amendment of life I have
heard, and truly in their Churches also I have often performed, I hope,
acceptable Devotions, beseeching God that when the people came into those
Churches to pray and to learn, that they might go forth, do, and practice for
the time to come better things, to which end I believe our pious Forefathers
built them, pray and beseech we should for the people there assembled, that God
then would be pleased to hear in Heaven, also send thither to officiate such
Pastors and Teachers, as might be most agreeable to his holy Word, so more to
Gods glory and the peoples good, that the people might not longer be deluded
by those juggling villains, which make merchandise of the Kingdom of heaven, and
hold the people in sinful ignorance, turning almost all their practices, and
(miscalled) Devotions into ( finenesses) crafty frauds to enrich themselves by:
just one with our late temporizers are those Jesuits, such a stall do they both
make of the Pulpit, from thence teaching damnable Doctrines, contrary to the
word of God, calling evil good, and good evil, one of whose Tenants is the
depose of Kings; yea, and killing them too, if they rule not according to their
fancies, is it not pity the Kings of the Earth should allow either of you
residence in any of their Territories: fire brands you are, whose damnable
Tenants are so declared contrary to the King of Heavens: in this I couple you
together, Rebels both, Jesuits and Sectaries, I would I could exempt the
Presbyterian, the froward, and worst, are not guiltless: our late King was in
the right, when he advised our now Sovereign his Son not to have a prejudice
against the Protestant Religion, in regard of the ill measure dealt to him his
Father, assure your Majesty he does, it was by such done who were no true Sons
of that Church, the Church of England abhord, as the Church of God should do,
all such damnable practices and wicked Tenants. See here again, my King, was
not your glorified Father, a light of Heaven shining in a dark place, as in the
midst of a wicked and froward generation, to keep your feet and judgment in the
way of Gods Commandments? Behold now the goodness of God in letting the world
see, that the Protestant Religion taught no such corrupt Doctrine, neither were
the major part of the people of England so ill principled, I have heard, and
from a good hand also, that the reformed Churches of France did upon that Act
of cuting off the King, assembled their Doctors and Pastors, who declared and
Printed to the World, as a Gentleman of Rochel of good account assured me, that
the word of God warranted so such damnable proceedings in Subjects, and for
their Reformed Church of France, as the true Church of England, they neither
taught nor allowed any such Doctrine of Devils, or practices of wicked men.

Behold, I say, how God has freed this his Church from that asperse, and this
our Nation from that dishonor, the lesser and inconfiderable: number, never
yet included the greater and the wiser: it was well observed by Mounsiour
Causabon, a learned and Honorable Father of the Church of France, by King
James he was invited hither, and rests Honorably interred in West-minster Abbey.

That it was the violence of the Church of Rome, not our choice that has
excluded us: because we could not love her errors, she has ejected our persons.

These are those wicked ones, that had rather rend the Church, than want their
wills, who can be content to sacrifice truth, peace, millions of souls, Kings
and all, to their own ambition and covetuousness; one of which sins alone is
the root of all evil, what is it then with the rest of their rabbel, but I may
not aggravate where God has pardoned, if we repent and bring forth better
fruits: This also was prophesied, that their seditions, and madness, would at
once be the scandal of the true Church of God, and give advantages to the
false, which is the Church of Rome, know you not that I speak truth?

Well, down they must, both fellow-workers of iniquity. Sectaries and Church of
Rome; a Church you see she is called, though adulterous, and Idolatrous, we
read the Lord calls the people of Israel so guilty, yet his people, and you my
people Israel; when at the same time he sends his Prophets to let them know,
that for these very sins his punishments were hastening to come upon them, yea
to lay them waste, and cast them out of the land; as those rebellious Israelies
his people, so that of Rome a Church.

Thus we allow the greatest robber to be a true man, though a notorious Thief,
much the better, this keeps him not from the gallows, to which a true man comes
not but to look on and be premonished, by so sad a spectacle, here me thinks we
might be reconciled, take now the best of all sides, something good in all hold
it fast, put that together; and you have the only true Church, against which
you see the gates of Hell shall never prevail, and because of the strength and
yet power of that Church of Rome, we cannot take away the Hay, and stubble, and
mistempered mortar, her Babel-builders have raised her to this height with,
that her confusion, as her fall, may be the greater, the Lord himself comes to
do the work, down they must, and this Church of Rome shall fall, he has said
it.

But see the loving kindness of the Lord extended to the Sons of men, and to
that Church also, in that he tells them not only of her fall, but whither they
shall repair for safety, even under his wings, into his Church, and to the
Obedience of his King, CHARLES STUART, by the Lord now declared Defender of the
Faith.

Here Is a visibility and Church, the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against,
also a rule given and a sword put into the hands of the General of all his
Forces, Oliver Cromwell by name, against whose rule and sword never shall any
prosper that rises up or is drawn; first proved in Gods word for the defense
of his Church, now also by this his Prophecy, and immediate dictate from
Heaven.

Well what is to be done, forthwith turn to this so merciful Lord your God
withal your hearts, proclaim a fast, and keep it truly, and let us know when
you do it, that we may pray together, God would be pleased to have mercy upon
you, and now so direct all your Counsels to his glory, for the promotion of
the true Protestant Religion, the just interest of all men, beseeching God for
his guidance in all things and times for the best, doubt not then, but we shall
all live together in brotherly-love, and the Land be blessed. The King presently
invite home, when come, a general Council assemble to reform all amiss in the
Church and House of God, begin, here, and you do, what God by our late King, by
Haggai, by Zachary, by his Prophets, and by me now sent unto you, the most
unworthiest of all advise too. You see we all agree in the way, it is
undoubtedly the only course to remedy all amiss.

Thus to promote Gods glory, your Sovereigns Honor, and to preserve his
posterity has been the most of your pretensions, now let it be the best and
speediest of your practices; do this and live, the envy of the World, wicked
men, and Devils, but the joy of Saints and Angels, also the dearly beloved of
the Lord and good-men you will be, or else put me to death; I will neither run
nor hide my self to avoid it, Walter Gostelow dwelling in Broad-street assures
you of it, God having first assured him for manner and matter, as you read.

The next in order is, the poor Irish shall not be transplanted, see here is
the Bears skin you divided, before taken into power to dispose of Your cruel
Act was, that after last May it must be death for any, not qualified as you
there please to set down, if taken on this side the River Chanon: Merciful men
you are, and just too, as you would have us misbelieve, but pray what is become
of your selves? are not some of you gone thither? the Irish Nation is not, God
put it into the heart of Oliver Cromwell to turn you out, that would be turning
of others out, that you might divide the spoil, which your selves make, no,
they shall not be transplanted, to Gods glory and my comfort, this part of his
Prophecy is fulfilled already, as well as his sign given me for the
strengthening of my Faith and yours: here also you see God judges not as man
does, there are hundreds and thousands of that Nation, I firmly believe, and I
have good ground for it also, which hate that Rebellion as they did the
Contrivers of it, and the Actors of all Rebellion, the Devil and his
instruments, with this poor and oppressed Nation I have spent some time, I know
this to be true, and now to their comfort I here assure it them in Print, they
shall not be transplanted, they and the Land also may be made much better by
our good example, peaceably and loveingly co-habiting: the Land affords room
enough, and would be made good too, if wisemen sat at Helm, which I assure
them shortly will, in the mean time, and at all times I advise them to the
remedy of two things, to speak truth, and not to give themselves to idleness
and stealing, the Devil being the Father of all lies, and the other his forge
for all villainies: our own good example in this may much the sooner remedy
both: for the former, they hate many of us, and use it as a rod of our own
making for to scourge us with: for the latter, our pride and covetuousnes makes
them choose rather to steal and hang, laze and starve, than work for their
beggarly, proud, and Schismatical Lord-like usurpers. There is a great increase
of a sort of seeming strict, and conscientious living people gotten thither,
they call them Anabaptists, in Cristmas week 1653. to Youghall came one they
called Doctor Lamb, this Wolf cast many there then upon their backs into the
water, to hear, as well as see, what he did, I went; he told them that to be
sprinkled only, as used in England, made us no more Christians then those were
that lived in France, Rome, or Spain; Nay, no more than such as lived in the
remotest place of the World and had never heard of Christ; 'twas what he did
our. Savior only enjoined, and our Lord himself was not baptized until about
30 years of age, believing first also; truly at this I could not keep silence,
I observed our Savior always believed, and was baptized when he pleased, and
for the Church of England, certainly he traduced and falsely slandered them,
this Doctor further added, wicked men, having power in their hands, had for
these many years persecuted the true people of God, which they were, and
labored also to suppress his Ordinances, which was to baptize and believe, as
they did only: it is long to tell you more what I said in the defense of my
faith and Church, in fine, two of his party. Sword men in that place, stood up
and close to me also, and told me we had no Church in England; seeing what it
was like to come to force of Argument, I went out and staid with others to see
the two then to be ducked, the woman near sixty years old could hardly be
gotten down, she hanged so about this Doctor Lamb; when in the water, under
water he could not get her, the man, Young by name, dived like an old duck,
Doctor Lamb, after he had well werted them, laughed at both: all this I saw and
heard, these things I hope will be amended: when I was in prison, I wrote to
the Lord of Broghill, that I would witness those words, spoken by Lamb, to the
slander of Gods word and his Church, it is before you Gentlemen these things
require a remedy, you imagine not what a strange sort of cattle we have in
Ierland for Religion, mercifulness, civility, you may find better in America,
and upon my conscience many of them will be sooner converted to the Protestant
Religion, than too many of those Saints will cease to be villains, to the great
dishonor of the Protestant Religion, and deterring of those poor people to
come in to it; I am ashamed of it, that men, which pretend to piety, should
have so little; my Landlord the Jailer is a Saint to some of them, yet what
you have read of him is true: preachers and wise men they have amongst them, as
they call them, that will tell you, me they have, I am sure of it, that there
is no Hell, and that their consciences never yet troubled them, though they
daily swear, whore, drink drunk, besides other wickednesses, indeed what not,
for sin by links is made a chain, to this they came, their conscience ought not
to trouble them, for who ever yet resisted Gods will; for your Ministers, which
tell you this and that story out of what they call the word of God, it is but
to this end, that they may the better pick your pockets, when you are amazed
and overawed by them, and so went on, I do tell you Moses was no more a
Prophet than the rest of the Magitians, only more cunning in smiting them
first, they were all alike say these, I am afraid to tell you what I have heard
amongst the wicked rabble there of new opinionests, if you will transplant any
in Ireland transplant these and your Anabaptists, and when they have brought
these wicked ones to a true belief, let them then, as the Eunuchs, be
rebaptized: amongst the Heathen send them also, continue them not here to make
rents in Church and government, for they would conform to neither, had they
force: they told me the Lord was now coming to take the power out of wicked
Governors hands, and to put it into theirs, and truly that power I expected
would have been exercised on me, for the swordmen stepped up close to me, when
Doctor Lamb could reason no more; you are mistaken in them if you think them
meek, they are furious and not wise, I will not call them fools, although their
own words are, they desire to live and not sin against conscience, and then all
cannot but be well with them, you have heard how their consciences stands
affected.

Does not this clearly show you, that what our so late, but ever blessed and
wise King CHARLES Prophesied, is now come to pass and fulfilled in your eyes.
Your disordering and tearing up by the roots the Power and Government of the
Church, that being laid wast and contemned, would bring in all sorts of wicked
Athiesm, Villeny and such practices, speak: can any of you continue to be mad?
will you as formerly go on, what blind for ever, adding sin to sin until your
measure is made full? if you will do so, be sure you shall be removed, cease to
do evil, learn to do well, about it presently, that this scandal may not stick
upon the Professors of the Protestant Religion, least they say of us, as they
do of the Spaniard in America, that it cannot be Heaven where such bad men are,
so come not to their Religion: but my belief is, that blessed America, and those
people, will shortly have a better Religion before their eyes than that of
Rome; and a better people also to cohabite with than the Spaniard: I know what
God is doing, he is fitting the Jews and Heathen to come into the Protestant
Religion, and I believe many of them there in America, the Church of Rome shall
fall.

To the rest of the Prophecy, the two Letters promised, they are now made
three, the first to our King, the second to Oliver Cromwell, the third
occasioned by a Book, not until this was almost ready for the Press, then
through Gods blessing come to my hand and view, written by Manasseth
Ben-Israel, the Book entitled the Hope of Israel; to that Author is my third,
in those next ensuing Letters, is the rest of the Prophecy in some things
spoken to.

I would not swell this to a Volume, which I intended for every man's pocket and
heart, I would gladly leave the Reader with good appetite, that he might not do
other than be in love with the precepts and mercies of the Lord, and his
Prophets also, which never were compared to the flat, dull, and tiresom, empty
babblings of the Priests of Baal, or the Idiots of these times, both unsent of
God.

My second Letter to our Sovereign, C. REX.
Most worthy Doctor,
SIR, Mine of the tenth present, I hope is received by you, it was directed to
Mounsieur Renier Bazine Merchant, residing in Rue de Mavise Parroles PARIS: my
charge to him that forthwith he carry it to you, Sir, or my Sovereign, and
deliver it to none else: which since I understand is done.

Sir, This is to describe to you the two Ladies, Frances the Elder, and
Elizabeth Boil, the 2d. daughter to the Earl and Countess of Cork, chosen, by
the Almighty, Wife for our Sovereign Lord the King: the the Elder, Sir, is
lamed by a fall taken at Nurse, so that she goes not but with the deepest
halting that is imaginable, hardly without leading; she is very virtuous, and
some 18 years of age.

For the Lady Elizabeth, Sir, she has the most loveliest face ever eyes
beheld, the most of Majesty in it, nothing but loveliness in every part of it,
Excellency throughout: her hair is brown, her eyes black, her mouth little, her
teeth the best, her complexion, as that of the Canticles, brown, but most
lovely, and comely as ever eyes beheld: her body the perfection of
workman-ship, none did I ever see so made as to resemble it: she is aged about
thirteen, she dances well, she speaks very good French, she delights in
reading, serving of her God, and obeying her Parents; the Chaplain in that
house is Doctor Mollines, Son to him of the Church of France, a wise and good
man, and of the Church of England a true Son also.

Sir, You may not doubt the indowments of her Soul and mind, whom God has set
apart to be so blessed, as to be our Sovereigns Queen, and his delight; for she
cannot be other, all that see her admire her outward perfections and
deportments; and for charity and humility, two good adorns, she is already
eminent, as a Queen Elizabeth.

Sir, Let me be believed in a word, she is a Queen of Queens, and an Angel on
Earth: and this is my rejoicing, that the Lord has in mercy given such a Lady
to my King, that will go hand in hand with him in all paths of virtue and
godliness; that she is as well a Nursing Mother to the House of God, as his
most blessed Majesty by God appointed, and so commanded to be a Nursing Father
to us, and all his now happy people.

Sir, I spoke truth to you, and all of the Lords doing for our King, whom as
his Queen God Almighty ever bless, and let their rejoycings in his good will
and commands be not deferred, to the joy of our hearts admiration and obedience
of the World: Let us pray, God save my King, CHARLES the Second, and his most
delightful Queen Elizabeth, both the Servants of the ever living God.

O my King, fail not, I beseech you of the most sincere performance of your
Devotions, by fasting and prayer every Friday, and let there be no looking
back, nor return to any sins whatsoever: let not any of a bad life, that will
not be reformed, eat one bit of your bread, or receive a favor from you, more
than prayers for his, or their amendment and punishment, where it is not
conformed unto, be you Sir, I beseech you, frequent in Devotion and receiving
of the most blessed Communion of the body and blood of our Lord, to which you
are to come always well prepared, that you eat not to condemnation.

O my King do you truly forgive, and so pray for the very worst of your
Fathers, Mothers, and your own Enemies, God will do you right, who ever lost by
referring all to his Almighty power, times, and goodness? Thus shall your
Fathers Counsel be followed, his ever blessed memory and unparaleld good
example live in you, to the joy of Angels and good men. Sir, God is turning for
you, and to his own glory the hearts of all, or most of all to love true
Religion, your just interest, brotherly love, in which only we can be happy,
in that good way and best example, I beseech God be you the first and most
eminent; I may not doubt of it, for whom God Almighty has reserved, nay,
declared such everlasting loving kindnesses.

Sir, I do truly tell you, I could with the most ardent desire and greatest
hazard endeavored to have hanged, or murdered all your Enemies, but God has
reproved me, I can now do nothing with more delight than to pray for them, yet
let us not trust them, that is a folly I beseech God to deliver us from: the
wisdom of the Serpent is not denied, though the innocence of the Dove be
enjoined, both most excellent for imitation.

Sir, I have no intelligence more than with the common, it is believed that
some days since from Holland came expresses of the confirmation of peace, I
believe after this summer, within a short time, there will be an end of all the
Wars in the Christian world: Sir, I have seen letters reporting your affairs at
Ratisbon to be well advanced, and in good condition; humane wisdom, the
strength of allies, and confederates for the probable carrying on or promoting
of your just interest may not be neglected, or refused: but Sir, I do hope;
Nay, believe, that the Almighty will do this great work for the good of all
without bloodshed, if we give over to abuse his mercy, and provoke not his
wrathful indignation, then for his mercy, honor and name sake he has
promised to bring all these things to pass for you, this Land, and Protestant
Religion; and although mighty, strange, and wonderful these things are, yet he
will do it for the reasons above, and it shall be marvelous in our eyes; as in
my first Papers you have it at full, consisting of ten sheets, numbered in the
margent, as they should be read, Sir, the time is now at hand, in May you shall
see the fulfilling of another part of that Prophecy, which the Lord was
pleased to have spoken by me, his most unworthy Servant and Prophet, the not
transplanting of the Irish Nation: I beseech you, Sir, let Doctor Earls first
read my Letters, for I spell ill, write ill, and point not well, he is a good
man, let him also choose your Clergy, and be you, Sir, advised by him; God
Almighty be pleased to preserve you, give you abundantly of his grace, mercy,
and wisdom, and with it all things that good is.

Sir, So prays the humblest and unworthiest of the servants of the Lord my
God, and you my King. April 21. 1654 Walter Gostelo.

My second Letter to the PROTECTOR, O. C.
Most excellent Sir,
MY belief, as my hopes is, that what your Lordship was pleased to say unto me,
I shall in the best and fittest time reap the speaking with you: I did return
to my Lodging at Saint James the Tuesday, I promised your good self, but there
I met with this affront, as to have it disposed of in my absence, contrary to
my order and expectations, affronts in other places also: Indeed, Sir, I meet
with little else but aversness to good in men, I have since expected your
Lordships Command, or the happiness of seeing you, neither yet come to hand, or
eye, did not the goodness of God, from the mouth of such as his Providence
guided me to hear Preach, let me see what I am to expect from man, though of my
own Religion, my Spirits would fail me: the Jews so ill treated the Prophets
sent to them in their times, and we, no better, follow their bad examples.

My Lord, be not backward to hear and consider the great good, the Lord is
pleased to do and bring to pass for the honor of the Protestant Religion, the
general good of all men, amongst whom more particularly our Sovereign CHARLES
STUART and your good self, so sure as the Heaven is over my head, and the Earth
under my feet: I do believe his Majesty and some others, of which number you
are, to be blessed with long life, honor, as much as mortality is capable of
here, and everlasting happiness hereafter: My Lord, as these things are the
decree of heaven, so are they to all assured the strongest Obligations of the
strictest obedience upon Earth: I have already wrote to my King, I could not do
otherwise. First to let him know what God is pleased to assure shall be done
for him, next to mind him of his daily duty, how that without holiness no man
shall ever see the face of God to his comfort: Further, that he forgive all his
Fathers, Mothers, and his own Enemies, for no man yet ever lost by referring
all to God; in this he will best imitate his glorified Father, certainly in
Heaven, who prayed dying for forgiveness to those that put him to death. For
the remitting of the highest injuries we have the best of patterns our Lord
himself.

My Lord, if I have any other end than the glory of God, the honor of the
Protestant Religion, the discharge of my duty, to the command of my God in my
desire to speak with you, then do thou, O Lord, whom I believe has deputed me
to these very ends, never suffer me to see your face: Therefore, good my Lord,
be not backward to let me speak with you, which done, as God shall direct, I
shall afterward haste, as concerned into other Kingdoms, to those in Ireland;
and this, when communicated to your good self, I have done my duty, and shall I
presume then have quiet, and after see the fulfill of all to Gods glory, who
for his name and mercy sake has assured me he will bring it to pass, and it
shall be marvelous in our eyes.

My Lord, I ever shall continue to pray that God would bless, and preserve you
to the overcoming of all your Enemies; but more especialy your corruptions. So
prays the unworthiest of the Lords servants, and yours, Sr,

Walter Gostelow
At my house in Broadstreet, May 25. 1654.
A POST-SRIPT.
MY Lord be pleased to allow this Postscript, I dare not omit it, your
Lordship has heard me, and now read my Prophecy, I believe diverse others
also, that of Elenor Channel, who was sometimes taken dumb, a Prophecy very
highly considerable, failing out in a time much about mine, the matter one with
mine, sent upon that employ of the Lords to your good self, as most
considerable in this Kingdom; disquieted, as I was, until she had
communicated, or made known the whole, to you only addressed: Now because it
is so very full, and falls in such a conjuncture of time with mine, and but
short, I have printed it at the end of this.

My Lord, I well remember you were pleased, after the good Admonition given me
to serve God, and to walk according to his will revealed in his word, to let me
understand your self formerly had, and now lately also, some things presented
unto you, which were since come to pass also; but to rely on Visions, or
Revelation we should not, having the more sure word of God, the Scriptures to
rest on, good counsel it was, I agree all, and the best to avoid delusion; the
Prophecy being the Lords, I cannot have a dis-esteem of one word of that.

My Lord; is not all I have said unto you agreeable to the word of God? Is it
not your duty to fear God, Honor, and obey your King, to assist the rebuild of
Gods House, the restore of his Ministers and their maintenance, not to side
with those that are given to change? to be in love with all men, also with
justice, mercy, and forgiveness; to seek first the Kingdom of Heaven and its
righteousness, and then all other things less considerable unpursued shall be
given unto you? My Lord, do this and live for ever happy.

Now because its possible this has not been done by you, certainly not by the
Nation, see, God sends his Prophets unto both, and that you may know they are
his, they bring nothing contrary to Scripture; it is true they come to you in a
unwonted and seeming strange way, the reason of that is this: To persons of
Honor, or a people the Lord intends mercy too, it has been his accustomary
manner of proceeding, to such he sends his Prophets, that they may repent and
live, and shall Gods mercy, your own happiness, and the Kingdoms welfare become
our contempt, your destructions, if not harkned unto? No, God forbid, do you as
all others what I have advised too, and be happy, Nay, you shall do it.

There is a Gentleman of known worth and Honor, his name I will not Print, his
Paper I have, with this Gentleman God has sent me acquainted very lately; my
Lord, this person of good accomplishments tells me of a Vision he had some time
since, and in it how he saw the King and your Lordship on one side of the
water, Moderators on the other, debating upon the 39 Articles of the Church of
England, from Article to Article: the word Protestant Religion was much
insisted, upon, and discussed it was, whether in so large a sense you intended
it, as to take in the Sectaries and disturbers of the peace of that Church, and
this Kingdom, so to comprise all; my Lord, in fine there was so much said to
his Majesty, and such clear satisfaction given to your Lordship by such as sat
as Moderators, that it brought your Lordship to a most humble and thankful
submission, and so bowing before his Majesty, you came both into one Boat,
where the King kindly and with good affection embraced you, and so went away
both together in good understanding. That done, this Gentleman heard the Bells
generaly ring, saw the bone-fires, and great was the acclamations, as well as
the rejoycings of the people in the Land.

My Lord, make all this good, do you Proclaim, as well as pray, God save the
King; and then the people will pray and say, God save the best of Subjects, and
the honourablest of Soldiers, O. Cromwell. Amen say I, God preserve both.

The PROPHECY and Message of ELNOR CHANNEL, sent to the Lord Protector, Oliver
Cromwell, April 19. 1654.
1. PEace be to this House, and Peace be to the whole Kingdom, and the peace of
God be with us for ever.

2. The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has opened the
mouth of the Dumb to speak for peace, the Sword must be stayed, the World
draws toward an end, and the knots of peace and love must be made in all the
Christian Lands.

3. Sir, You have taken upon you to be a Protector of your Lords Vineyard, but
he requires that you should make the Hedges and the Walls of it, which is
peace and love, and the true Gospel, and that you Protect the Stuart, to plant
his Vineyard.

4. If a man fall into the hands of a Creditor, if his Creditor be one of
Christ's servants, he will not take body and goods, if his Body pays the Debt,
his Heir shall have the Inheritance.

REader observe, this ELNOR CHANNEL, Arise Evans, and my self with others, I
have heard of, all agreeing and sent unto Oliver Cromwell Protector upon this
very employ, the rebuild of Gods House, the return of his Ministers, the
restore of the King, the Promote, and declare of a General Peace through the
Christian World, the Conversion of the Jews, the Protestant Religion more
Glorious than ever, with its fruits of peace and love amongst all men: we, I
say, whom God has sent to promote and declare these things of his mercy for
you coming to pass, are all of the Protestant Religion, the true Church of
England, no Papists, no Schismatics, no abettors to any faction whatsoever,
yet as in duty bound, we continue to pray for the Conversion of all them, and
more to the true Religion, which Gods Word shows you, as well, as our
Prophesies now tells you is the Protestant, and shall be now more conspicuously
glorious than ever. The Defenders of which Faith is CHARLES STUART, and Oliver
Cromwell United.

AN ADMONITION to Covetuous, and therefore miserable men.
WHat! Compassion left the Christian World, and fled into America? Certainly
the Gospel follows; he has said it, that is the word of Truth (whose
Compassions fails not) through the world that shall be preached, happy America,
most happy Exchange has thou made for thy Clay and Dirt, the surface of that
Earth is not so Barren, Thorny, and Stony as our hearts, which stick to thy
Ore, as to our All, Thou wisely sents it from thee, as a Servant to do thy
will, it is unhappily become our Master, whilst we neglect and contemn the
only Jewel, to purchase which we should sell all: this Gospel Teaches better
things than you formerly have either heard, or we practiced, covetuous and
miserable comforters are you all, more than thirty of you in six Months
solicitation not lend so much money as to Print this Book, which I told you was
so highly to Gods glory, the Kings interest, and the Worlds general good, with
the honor of the Protestant Religion, to all which you pretend good affection,
but to promote any of them, this ready answer, no money; would you borrow to
set up Gods Kingdom, he can do that without you, our money is to set up our own,
let him look to his, we and you to our own callings, I can value your Estates
worth at least 150 thousand pounds, your persons I cannot value at more than so
many 0000000000, miserable men, bring forth better fruits for the time to come,
and know that mercy neglected, leaves room for judgment: follow me Reader, and
I will in the next place show thee better Jews than these were, and therefore
God sends them his Gospel to guide their feet in the ways of his Commandments,
which are Compassion and loving kindness: it is the merciful that shall find
mercy, Misers you are, going out of the world also, you shall shortly find,
if your treasure be laid up in Heaven, (for there it perishes not) but I may
not flatter you, you have counted gain godliness, not godliness great gain; you
will reap what you have sowed, amend your lives if you would be happy, the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, to your comfort, or destruction. Rich men hardly
enter into Heaven, covetuous and unmercifull men, not at all.

I beg of God for your amendments, although you have necessitated me to beg of
the World money to Print this Book, which I will repay God willing. Yet I
believe some that commoded me, rather thought it given than lent, so visibly
poor has violent men, and these ill times made me, I have lost by hundreds and
thousands, despoiled of all, but what makes a continual feast: it is not for
faithful servants and good subjects to lie down in Beds of Roses, when their
Savior stands Crowned with Thorns, and their King falls shorter by the Head,
we must suffer with them, before we can Reign with them, happiness is for him
that overcomes, and the Crown of Glory is given to such as fear God, and
Honor the King. Of which blessed number, though I cannot presume you are, yet I
hope this Rabby and good Jews, I next direct too, will shortly be.

For Mannasseth BEN-ISRAEL, at AMSTERDAM.
Most Learned Rabby,
SIR, your Book entitled the Hope of Israel, Dedicated to the Supreme Court of
England, a Parliament, came not to my hand until this was near ready for the
Press.

Certainly Sir, you have been of Gods goodness guided aright to make your
addresses to this Church and Nation, you observe well, we have continued to
pray for your conversion, duty binds us to it, to treat your persons otherwise
than well, we should not; to assist what possible we can, a people so anciently
the beloved Sons of God, and most honorable offspring of Faithful and
blessed Abraham is, and ought to be all our devoirs. Sir, I read your so
excellent and profitable resolution to carry on the Famous and Learned History
of Josephus. And also further observe your desire, that if any thing offer to
men in the Christian world fit for your purpose, your request is they would be
pleased to acquaint you with it.

Sir, In this Book you will find things very highly considerable, God having
been pleased to communicate it to the World in his own way by Prophecy, your
Brethren expect a deliverance and restoration, not far off, because all the
Prophesies amongst your own are fulfilled.

Sir, It is my firm belief, that in our Kings Reign, CHARLES STUART, Charles the
Second, and under his government you will have deliverance, Peace, and
Protection, the ground for my so believing this book will inform you, I have
therefore given you it, with all its circumstancies at full, that thereby you
may have the clearer satisfaction, that it is not delusion.

About the 18th. year of my age I was in several of your Synagogues, my eldest
Brother a Studient and fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, there with
me, to observe, and accomplish himself for the good of others. He, Sir, having
conversed with diverse of your Rabbis, did after tell me what they so believed,
as not to be moved from.

That for a people so beloved of God, and to whom the promises of the Almighty
were so peculiarly good, so many, so frequently afforded and made known, as to
the Jews they were, your Rabbis could not be persuaded, that Shilo, or the
Messiah could be come into the World, and they not know of it, to whom, say
they, he was promised as a King to deliver, restore, and govern them in this
World; take heed, Sir, the love of this world, deceives a world, thus to bound
the Almighty, and herein to place your happiness, demonstrates your
misapprehend of him, and what was Prophesied by your own of him, David tells
you, as well as others, his Kingdom was not of this World, he came to his own,
which were your selves, but ye refused him, he after turned to us the Gentiles,
who indeed enjoy him, that you yet hope for. I wonder, Sir, you see not this
clearly fulfilled and proved to you in your own Prophets, as also in that so
excellent piece of History, you are carrying on, Josephus, was not Jerusalem
destroyed and made a heap of stones? all which our Savior long foretold it
should be so, and that Generation should not pass until all were fulfilled, as
in the 22 of Luke, and the 32 verse, referring to the destruction of Jerusalem,
that it was fulfilled, Josephus his story confirms, and the continuance of
that verdict is yet evident.

The other Prophecy, which evidently argues Christ's Divinity, by its success
also, is what your self, and your own Rabbis cannot but see and hear
fulfilled, concerning the Woman that spent the Ointment on our Savior, for
which he told that it should never be forgotten, but with the Gospel be
Preached to all ages, as in Matthew the 26. and the 13. your self, Sir, living
in the Christian World cannot but see, read, and hear this fulfilled, the
Fathers of our Church and Protestant Religion have published to the World the
fulfill of your allowed Prophesies, and showed it you clear as the Sun. Sir,
have you ever lain so long under Gods displeasure, as since you have shut your
eyes against so great and clear a truth?

That God will in mercy gather you from the corners, and parts of the World is
my belief, as well as yours, that many of you are in America I may not doubt,
neither do I allow for other than true the relation given to your self and
others at Amsterdam, in the year 1644. by Antony Montezinus.

I now only advise, and especialy commend to your reading the New Testament,
you have it with you in languages: very many of you now sufficiently
understand, God has put us of this Church and Nation to give it you in more
languages, hasting to you Sir, that will acquaint you with truer and better
things to Salvation, than the story of the Saba^ic^l River, whose great stones
you say rest upon your Sabbath only, but all other days continue to be
carried about in motion. Sir, to the frequent reading of that New Testament,
the best Book in the whole World, be pleased to join your often prayers,
beseeching the Almighties guidance in all things for the better understanding
of it, thus continuing in well doing, reading, and praying, you are sure to be
taught of God, and know you will, that what the Prophet Isaiah Prophesies in
his 28 Chapter, and 16 verse. Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a
tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believes
shall not make haste. Now, Sir, would you, and all yours, as new born Babes,
desire the sincere Milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, you would
suddenly know, that this corner stone, and sure foundation, is Christ our Lord
already come, To whom coming as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men,
but chosen of God, and precious, would you I say, but come thus fitly prepared,
ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house; an holy Priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, and he that
thus believes on him, shall not be confounded; this stone which the builders
disallowed (you Jews,) the same stone is made the head of the corner. Converted
to him you shall be, therefore look about you, your time is at hand, ye are a
chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, that
ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of darkness
into his marvelous light: So that with the fullness of Gentiles now coming in,
you make perfect that building which himself the living corner stone holds
together.

This observe you have in the 1 of Peter, the 2 Chapter, from the 4 to the 10
verse, in that Testament is the fulfill of all your Prophesies of him that was
to come, Shilo already come, look, I say, on that his word, and know him, look
not for Him as a Temporal King. Next, Sir, for your further good, make your
applications to CHARLES STUART Charles the Second, Gods Vice Roy on Earth, who
sitting in Parliament makes then the Supreme Court of England, before not: so
rightly called, thus Charles is your and our King, blessed and happy for ever, by
God and him you may not doubt to be freed ere long from the many unsupportable
pressures and sufferings (your Antony Montezinus truly tells you, and us) are
imposed upon you in America, and yet endured by your brethren the Jews, from
the cruel hands, swords, and tongues of those proud, idolatrous, high minded,
and puffed up Nation the Spaniards, constraining the Roman Religion, which Church
of Rome shall fall, God has said it, and that Nation shall not long Tyrannize
over you nor those poor Indians there: if this come not to pass, put me to
death your deliverance is not far off.

Sir, we have an Earthly King for your comfort, that will show you in his
professed Protestant Religion the ways of truth, which you and all are
commanded to walk in, that you may at the last, to your comfort also, know and
see him the King of glory, Jesus Christ our Lord, that is above in Heaven,
which Heavens must contain him until his second coming, whose appearance, or
making of himself known to you, for your conversion, I hope, (nay, I believe)
is at hand: I beseech God open your eyes, that you may see him, though you have
stopped your ears, as being not willing to hear his Gospel, charm he never so
sweetly: Sir, you are sure of my readiness to serve you in all I can, to God
first praying for you, next in my true endeavors for you and your Nation, to
this my King CHARLES STUART, Gods Viceroy on Earth, that whilst you live in
this World, you may be favored, and defended of his goodness and power, by his
so victorious, happy, and prosperous Lieutenant General of all his Forces,
Oliver Cromwell. Lastly, Sir, when your bodies shall go the way of all flesh, my
prayers have been, are, and shall be, that your Souls may go the way of all
Saints, and so all of you sit down and keep a perpetual Sabbath of rest with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; to which Kingdom, God of
his infinite mercy bring all of you and us. Sir, I doubt not to prevail with
that worthy Gentleman which translated your book, Mr. Moses Wall, to translate
this my Letter into a language fitter for your observe, your accomplishments
speak you skilled in Arts and Tongues, my self bread to Trade and Negotiation,
Sir, I beseech Almighty God to improve all your studies to his glory, and your
brethrens good Such is the most affectionate and hearty prayers of your
undoubted friends, and servants of this Nation, as also more particularly

Sir, Your for ever to command W. GOSTELO.

To the worthy Persons of Honor, now being, or to be, in PARLIAMENT with the
PROTECTOR.
GEntlemen, this Book has told you what God will certainly do for this Church,
King, and people, yea, he will do it.

I have told you in some measure what you ought to do, Gods word, a good
conscience, and the known Laws of the Land will best guide you: If not all
observed to you, return you into those ways, from which late Parliaments,
pretenders to Reformation, have deviated.

When the Prophet, which God sent upon his employ to wicked Jeroboam, who
indeed, as all wicked Governors, when named, is remembered to posterity, he
that made Israel to sin, when this Prophet went out of his way back again with
that false one that had seduced him to eat and make provision for the flesh, as
you may read in the first of the Kings, and 3 Chapter, what does the Lord do to
that disobedient man sent to them for reformation? he commands a Lion to meet
him and kill him, the Lion does so, after stands by him, justifies the doing of
it, being commissioned of God, so obeyes God in all things, ^he preyes not upon
the body, he devours him not, though a disobedient Prophet.

Gentlemen, you have now to deal with great offenders, and presumptuous
wickednesses, I believe you are sent of God, be not you afraid of any. Vice
seasonably checked, pulls in the head, and seeks rather a hideing place than a
Fort, he fears every thing, that fears not God, he that fears God, fears not
man at all, when disobedient to his Lord, King, and Maker.

Worthies, be you bold, as this Lion sent of God, you have a Lion for your
leader, sent of God also, Oliver Cromwell, for the punishment of evil doers,
follow him, do you as he advises, God has commissioned him, he must act
boldly, justly, and yet mercifully, Gods will in all things must be done,
Rebellion, Schism, and and Villeny must be extirpated, and left dead, not stir
again: I know you are too good to fall upon any man in unjust ways for his
Estates sakes; this Lion did not so, he eat him not, declare you your selves
that none disobedient shall escape, or go unpunished; be an enemy to all vice,
no man's person, the evil doer will vomit our his surfeits, rather than die.
Those boasts, if you closely pursue them will do as that I have heard of, but
now remember not his name, bie of his precious stones, rather than loose
himself. This will make the best amends to injured men, and give offenders the
opportunity of amending also; having taken from them their money, which is the
root of all evil, give to every man his just interest, whether in Church, or
State, take heed of foolish pity, it marrs a City.

I have heard that the yet Bishop of London and Wells B. B. now (great and
rich) complaining of the active School-boyes for throwing stones, and breaking
the windows of one, or both those Cathedral Churches, an innocent and bold boy
readily replied, Sir, had your care been as great to remove the small stones,
as it was to dispose of, and remove the great ones, with other things also from
those Cathedrals, we could not have offended you: thus he laid the fault upon
the B. it may be those innocent boys intended only a civility, to keep open
the way, which too many come in by, the window: foreseeing that the door is
like shortly to be shut against them, who have shut and bard it too, against
others, especialy, if the Living were great and profitable. Persons of Honor,
have no man's person in esteem, that v^lueth not his actions: that is the duty,
and therein will be your honor, for fears and scruples they are to be
suggested by the wicked only, who indeed fly when no man pursues them, but the
just and good are bold as this Lion, sent of the Lord, have you, nothing before
your eyes but Gods glory, religions luster, and the peoples good, in your
hearts his fear only, do thus and you will have no need of guards, Militia, or
what else, bad men think to secure themselves by; A good conscience, and
wisdom, fortifies more than ten mighty men, God is then on your side, so is all
good men, fear God, your King, and to sin, and you cannot fear wicked men, let
me hear of no looking back to sins, or cowardice, God has showed you
salvation: if your hearts be in Sodom, (for the wickedness of that City,
Gomorra, and all the five Cities has been practiced in this one) I say, if
your hearts delight in sin, your judgment sleeps not.

The Protestant Religion, the Kings Honor, Oliver Cromwell also, the peoples
just Right and Interest must flourish, live, and be enjoyed to all good men's
comfort; whilst destruction must be suffered by those only which continue
Rebellious, and will not be reformed; whose remove will be our rejoicing, as
well as Gods good pleasure, for deliverance shall come from Heaven to this Land
and people, the evil doer shall be rooted out, and sent to his own home with a
vengeance.

But for thee, Oliver Cromwell, with Soldiers of Honor, and such, as are of
good Counsel with thee, who advise the speedy remedying of all that is amiss,
for such I continue to pray.

That you, forthwith apply your selves to do his will, and that is to be more
than Conquerors. A King and rulers on Earth, whose right it is not, shall
stinck on Earth, (as he that made Israel to sin) and howl in Hell too very
shortly, but as the memory of the just, good, and merciful shall begin to live
for ever on Earth, and that shortly too, so shall thine, Oliver Cromwell, and
others, declared in this Gods Prophecy, be taken up with thy King into the
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that never shall have end; then
also shall good people, and such subjects go, as the sheep in this, Prophecy,
to the right hand, wicked and Rebellious ones, as the Goats, to the left hand,
unto the former happiness God of his mercy, I beseech him, bring us all, from
the later, God deliver us all, he only can do it that has said and spoken now
by me, the Church of Rome shall fall; But our Church for ever flourish. God
save the KING. Amen, yea, let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.
THere are two Books, which have Traveled far with me, if well understood, and
no otherwise practiced, the two sorts of people they are more particularly
directed unto, cannot miss of the best end of all our Travels, Heaven. The one
is a Priest to the Temple, or the Country Parsons Character, and rule of holy
life. The Author, Mr. George Herbert: the other as the former commends a holy
life here, and tells you, That the habitual observing of the Law of Christ, is
indispensibly necessary to Salvation, the Author, Mr. Richard Stanix, B. D. one
that I believe lives as he writes, and would have all do so. He that in Travel
carries in each pocket one, and in his heart both to practice, needs not doubt
but one day his face shall shine with glory, having so conversed with God, be
he Priest, or people, for whom I pray, that God be pleased to make all, good,
and happy.

Walter Gostelow.


