VVater-Dipping NO Firm Footing for Church Communion: OR CONSIDERATIONS Proving
it not simply lawful, but necessary also (in point of Duty) for persons
baptized after the new mode of Dipping, to continue Communion with those
Churches, or imbodied Societies of Saints, of which they were Members before
the said Dipping; And that to betray their Trust or Faith given unto Jesus
Christ to serve him in the relation and capacity, whether of Officers, or other
Members, in these Churches (respectively) by deserting these Churches, is a sin
highly provoking in the sight of God. Together with a Postscript touching the
pretended Answer to the Forty Queries about Church Communion, Infant and after
Baptism. By John Goodwin, a Servant of God in the Gospel of his dear Son.

Ye did run well; who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the Truth? Gal.
5. 7. Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. Jer. 15. 19. If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, Fulfill ye my joy; be ye like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done
through strife or vain glory, etc. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. London, Printed by J. M.
for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1653.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
HOw thou will interpret, or accept of, the Considerations here presented unto
thee, I know not. The ground of my doubt is, because they are but as so many
candles lighted up to show unto men the Sun. Never did my pen labor in a cause
more expedite and facil: yet this (I confess) is fully balanced with the
unreasonableness and difficulty of conviction in those persons, with whom I
have chiefly to do. And since all proof ought to be made by somewhat more
manifest and better known, then the conclusion in question; he whose task it is
to prove that twice two make four, must needs have an hard Province to manage.
My engagement in these Papers is (upon the matter) only to prove, That Jesus
Christ does not require of his Followers to be promise-breakers for his sake
(much less for a Ceremonies sake) when the matter of these promises is just,
and holy, and good; least of all when these promises have been solemnly made,
and as in his own presence, and unto persons relating in Faith and Holiness
unto himself. It is a polique Maxim maintained by the Consistory of Rome, that
Promises are not to be kept with Heretics: but that Fides cum Haeretic^s non
est servanda.
promises should not be kept with Saints and true Believers, and so
acknowledged, certainly is the apprehension and conceit of a troubled and
maimed fancy. And I confess that the cure of a misused and distempered fancy is
(...), little better then an hopeless undertaking; seldom achieved by art, or
skill; sometimes by chance, or Providence out of course. However, my small
pains in teaching these Papers to speak as they do, shall be largely rewarded,
if God shall only please to use them as a Shield, wherewith to defend those,
which are yet whole and sound, from like impressions of distemper.

Thine, to serve thee in the things, both of thy present, and eternal Peace, J.
G.

CONSIDERATIONS, Proving it not simply lawful, but necessary also in point of
Duty, for persons Baptized after the new mode of Diping, to continue in
Communion with those Churches, or imbodied Societies of Saints, of which they
were Members before the said Dipping or Baptizing; and that to betray their
Trust, or Faith given unto Jesus Christ to serve him in the relation and
capacity, whether of Officers, or other Members in these Churches respectively,
by deserting these Churches, is a sin highly provoking in the sight of God.
CONSIDERATION I.
IT is evident from many notable passages of Scripture, that God himself has
given a kind of Superintendency or power of Regulation unto the Law of Nature,
the dictates and duties thereof, over Institutions, and Ceremonial Commands,
and the observations of these, (even as he has given a like power unto some
Institutions over others, Mat. 12. 5.) so that when and whilst the observation
of an Institution or Ceremony cannot take place, or be practiced, without
trespassing upon some branch or other of the said Law of Nature, then and so
long, the said observation is to give place: nor is the Law of God requiring
it, in such a case, broken, or disparaged in the least. Have ye not read (says
our Savior to the Phaerssees) what David did when he was an hungered, and they
that were with him, How he entered into the House of God, and did eat the
shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat [viz. in ordinary cases,]
neither for them which were with him, but for the Priests only, Mat. 12. 3, 4.
And soon after: But if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless: For the Son of man By
Son of man here, is not meant Christ (personally considered,) but any person of
mankind. See Hugo Grotius upon the place, who gives a sufficient account of
this Exposition.
is Lord even of the Sabbath day. Again, a few verses after: What man shall
there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the
Sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out? How much then is a
man better then a sheep? Elsewhere: If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
there rememberest that thy Brother has ought against thee, Leave there thy
gift before the Altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then offer thy gift, Mat. 5. 23, 24. [Our Brethren, in stead of reconciling
themselves to their Brethren, fall out with them, and then go and offer their
gift of Dipping.] From the same lips in another place this dew of Heaven
falls: The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath, Mark 2. 27.
Circumcision was a great Institution of God, and obedience unto it most
strictly and solemnly commanded: Yet they to whom it was particularly
commanded, omitted the observation and practice of it for forty years together;
and this without any other warrant, dispensation, relaxation, or permission
from God, but only that which by the Light and Law of Nature he granted unto
them, and yet are blameless. And yet it may be worthy consideration, that the
inconvenience in Nature, I mean the degree of smart, pain, trouble, or danger
in any kind, the prevention and avoiding whereof they judged (and truly) a
sufficient dispensation from God for a forbearance of Circumcision during their
travel, was not so great or threatening, but that in probability they might
have endured it, without the loss of any of their lives. The Jews of later
times, though rigid enough in their Doctrine concerning the observation of
their Sabbath, yet have this maxim, Periculum vitae pellit Sabbatum, Peril of
life drives away the Sabbath. But on the contrary it is no where to be found in
Scripture, that God gives any superintendency unto Institutions or Ceremonial
Observations over the Moral Law, or Authority to overruled the dictates or any
the principles of the Law of Nature, or to exempt any man from the performance
of any duty required hereby. How much less will he justify any man, in
pleading the necessity of submitting to such a Ceremony, which, or at least the
necessity whereof, more probably is of humane, then divine Institution, by way
of bar to the performance of such duties, which the Moral Law, yea the Law of
Nature it self, requires? Therefore inexcuseable altogether are such persons,
both in the sight of God, and men, who pretend themselves disobliged from the
performance of such promises, which they have solemnly made unto their
Brethren, by a necessary of subjecting to an external Rite or Ceremony: how
much more, when the observation of this Rite or Ceremony, is, and always has
been, by all the judicious, learned and faithful servants of God in the
Christian world (a very few, and these upon no account, very considerable,
excepted) adjudged no ways necessary by virtue of any Precept, or Command of
God? God (doubtless) by the Law of Nature, and of love to their Brethren,
requires of such men a forbearance of their Ceremony (though supposed of
Divine Institution) for the peace, comfort, spiritual accommodation and
edification of their Brethren, rather then the practice of it to their offense,
trouble, and distraction, yea to the danger of the precious Souls of many weak
ones, who are emboldened by their example, having no sufficient ground in
themselves for such a practice, to condemn themselves in allowing and
practicing the same Ceremony. For, as our Savior of the Sabbath, so say I of
Baptism: Baptism was made for man, and not man for Baptism. Baptism was made,
or ordained, for man, [i. e. for man's benefit, comfort, and accommodation; and
consequently, is only to be used and administered in order hereunto, and so not
to his disturbance, danger, or distraction,] not man for Baptism, [i. e. man
was not made or created by God for any such end as this, that Baptism by his
trouble, sorrow, molestation or danger should be magnified or exalted in the
world.] And why it should not savor of as much Christianity, and be of equal
acceptance with God, for the peace of the Churches and servants of God in these
days, to lay asleep a living Ordinance for a time, as it did in the Apostle
Paul to awaken a dead Ordinance (I mean Circumcision) upon the same account in
his days, I understand not.

CONSIDERATION II.
The Churches and Societies of the Saints, which are not actually and
externally baptized with that figure or kind of Baptism so much contended for,
yet, supposing this very Baptism to be the only Baptismal Ordinance of Christ,
and that it is his Will that they should be baptized with it, they are,
according to the rule and standard of divine Estimate and Acceptance, baptized
therewith, as well as those persons themselves, who so impotently please
themselves in their subjection to the letter of it. The Standard, or standing
Rule of Divine Estimate, is this: If there be first a willing mind, a man is
accepted according to that he has, (so it were better rendered, though the
difference be not material,) and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 1.
12. By a like rule God likewise estimateth the sinfulness and wickedness of
men. Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has COMMITTED ADULTERY
with her already in his heart, Mat. 5. 28. So then if the Members of unbaptized
Churches (so called) have a willing mind, are prepared and large-hearted to
submit unto all and every the Ordinances of Christ, and consequently, unto
New-Baptism it self, (supposing this to be one of that retinue,) but only want
the opportunity of light and conviction so to judge and conceive of it, they are
accepted with God, and esteemed by him, (and ought they not then to be so with
men?) as persons baptized with that very Baptism. Yea the truth is, that if the
unbaptized Churches sin, or be blameworthy, for not being actually baptized
after the manner of the Brethren of New-Baptism, these persons themselves are
in a great degree accessory unto such their sin, partly by administering unto
them only weak and insufficient grounds for their conviction, partly also (and
more especially) by causing, through their pride, frowardness, insolency and
disdainfulness of spirit, together with many other strains of most unchristian
behavior toward them, that sacrifice of the Lord (if such it be) to be
abhorred. Besides, I am all thoughts made, that the far greater part of those,
who have been prevailed with to accept of a dip for Baptism, neither have, nor
ever had, either that love unto, nor sacred and reverent esteem of, all the
Ordinances of Christ, which thousands of those have, whom God has not yet so
persuaded. So then they who refuse Communion with such Saints, who have not
been actually baptized with their Baptism, upon this pretense only, that they
have not been thus baptized, reject the communion of those, whom God reputeth
to have been baptized with that very Baptism, for the want of which such men
reject them, (always supposed, as has been said, that the Dipping-Baptism is
the sole Baptism. Ordinance of Christ.)

CONSIDERATION III.
The Scripture very frequently and expressly teaches, that by Faith men become
and are made the children of Abraham, and Sons of God. But as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe
on his Name, Joh. 1. 12. But ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ
Jesus, Joh. 3. 26. See also Romans 4. 11, 12, 16. If then true Believers be the
Sons of God, then must all they needs be Bastards, and no Sons of God, but
children of Satan, who are not their Brethren. And if they who are the Sons of
God, and consequently their Brethren, be ashamed of them, and shall refuse to
own them in their Church Fellowship, are they not ashamed of those, of whom the
Lord Christ professes before Heaven and Earth that he is not ashamed; no, not
ashamed to own them in the relation of Brethren? For both he that sanctifies,
and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for which cause HE IS NOT ASHAMED
TO CALL THEM BRETHREN, Hebr. 2. 11. Must not then Jesus Christ needs look upon
those men, as greater in their own conceit, either in Holiness, or in Dignity,
or in both, then himself, who are ashamed of such persons, of whom he is not
ashamed; yea indeed in whom he glories, as being (with their fellows) his
Fullness; and in whom he shall come to be glorified and admired in the great
day? a These. 1. 10. Or is not the great jealousy of Christ like to be
provoked, when men shall presume to make, or call, that common, which he has
sanctified with his own blood, and made express declaration from Heaven
accordingly? Or can either a thing, or person, be made, or called common, in a
more disgraceful, or reproachful way, then when men shall separate from them as
unclean, or defective in Holiness?

CONSIDERATION IV.
Such persons, whom God judges meet for communion and fellowship with himself,
and his Son Jesus Christ, the reasons and grounds of this his judgment being
visible in these persons, especially being acknowledged also by men, ought not
to be judged unmeet for any holy communion with the Holiest of men, especially
not by those, who do acknowledge those things in these persons, which are the
grounds of their acceptance into the said communion with God. The Apostle
instructing the strong in Faith, in their duty toward the weak [i. e. toward
those who were at present ignorant of many things which the other knew] says
thus: Him that is weak in the Faith, receive you: And again; Let not him that
eats [i. e. the strong in Faith, who understands his liberty] despise him
that eats not, [i. e. the weak,] Romans 14 1, 3. The reason, why God would have
no despising of weak Christians on the one hand, nor judging of those that were
strong on the other, is delivered by the Apostle in these words, [vers. 3.] For
God has accepted him; i. e. as well the weak, as the strong; and again, the
strong as well as the weak, (the reason equally relating to both the preceding
clauses in the verse;) clearly avouching Gods accepting of persons, when
discovered, or acknowledged by men, for an obliging ground upon these, not to
despise them, or [which is by the Apostle interpreted as the same] to reject
them from their communion. Now the grounds of Gods acceptance of men and women
as meet for communion with him, and his Son Jesus Christ, are from place to
place in the Scriptures declared such, which are owned and acknowledged by
persons themselves baptized according to the new and late edition of this
Ordinance (so much corrected, enlarged, and amended) in those Churches, and
their members, who at present make use of the former edition only. In every
Nation (says Peter, speaking of God) he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is ACCEPTED with him, Acts 10. 35. The Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: for he
that in these things serves Christ, is ACCEPTABLE UNTO GOD, etc. Romans 14. 17,
18. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have FELLOWSHIP one
with another, etc. (to omit other places of like import, which are many.) Now
the Brethren of the New baptized Churches themselves, at least such of them
whose Judgments and Consciences have not been drowned by the dipping of their
bodies, do acknowledge all the said qualifications, as the fear of God, the
working righteousness, etc. to be as visible in the members of bodies by them
called, unbaptized, as in their own. Yea some of them as yet retain so much
Christian ingenuity, as to confess, that in our unbaptized Churches (to please
Jews, we speak in the Jewish language) we have persons of as great, or greater
worth, for holiness, righteousness, the fear and love of God, with all other
Christian accomplishments, as themselves have in the best of their
Congregations, notwithstanding the unimaginable advantage of their Baptism. I
wish in my Soul for their sakes, that God would mercifully please to put it
into their hearts seriously to consider, of what insufferable height and
insolency of spirit it strongly savoreth, for men to judge those unworthy their
communion, whom the most Holy God, the great and high Possessor of Heaven and
Earth, accepts into his.

CONSIDERATION V.
The main Pillar upon which the house of our new Dippers of Men, and Dividers
of Churches, is built, is the signification of the verb baptizo, (...),
translated to baptize: as for others, they are much more crazy, although
neither is this of any great strength. But how few are there amongst those, who
with so much violence and height of confidence build troubles, sorrows,
distractions and confusions of Christian Churches, upon this Pillar, that
understand little or much what the said word (...) means, or what it
signifies. For ought they know (upon their own account) (...) may signify,
either to tide, or to run, or to build, as well as to dip; So that all the
Faith they have, of the proper signification of the said word, is built upon
the authority and tradition of men. And the truth is, that men of greatest
judgment and knowledge in the Greek tongue are not agreed about the adequate or
exact signification of it. Certain it is, that the word which properly,
primitively, and originally signifies to dip, is (...), nor (...) being only a
frequentative (as Grammarians speak) and of a diminutive form, from the
original (...), as (...) is from the verb (...), and (...) from (...), (with
many others of like consideration in the Greek tongue.) And very considerable
it is, that the Scripture of the New Testament, where ever it has occasion to
express the act of dipping, constantly uses the word, (...), never (...), [See
Luke 16. 24. Joh. 13. 26. Revel. 19. 13.] as on the contrary, where ever it
has occasion to mention or express the sacred action of Baptism, it never
uses the word (...), but always, (...). Yea it is granted by the Dipping
Grandees themselves, that the word (...), is often found in the New Testament
it self, where it signifies nothing less (or rather somewhat less) then
dipping. Yea that when it is used in the Sacramental signification, that it
does not signify or import, dipping, unless it be said to signify undipping,
or lifting out of the water also, is to me evident from most, if not all the
places, where the sacred action known by the name of baptizing, is expressed by
it. I shall argue only that one (at present) Mat. 28. 19. The Apostles
commission there, as to the matter of baptizing, is expressed by the said word;
(...), etc. Now if the word (...) here signifies to dip, and not to undip, or
heave out of the water, then had the Apostles no authority at all, or
commission from Christ, to perform the one half of the baptismal transaction,
(we speak now according to the Dipping principles) viz. that which consists in
the lifting or taking up out of the water, those whom they were to dip into or
under the water: but in case they did raise or help them out of the water, they
did it upon their own heads, and without commission; and consequently it could
be no part of the baptismal transaction. How unreasonable a thing then is it,
and unworthy Christians, to swell against their peaceable Brethren, (their
Brethren partakers of like precious Faith with themselves) to separate
themselves from their Holy Assemblies, as if they were the Synagogues of Satan,
to pronounce them unclean for Christian Communion, etc. upon the account only,
or chiefly, of humane tradition, and of such things whereof themselves can have
no certain knowledge, no, nor yet men of far greater learning and knowledge, then
they?

CONSIDERATION VI.
No Authority can discharge, or disoblige, but that which is either greater
then, or at least, equal unto that which binds. The Authority of such a
Command of God, which is manifestly and undisputeably such, and is so
acknowledged by the consciences of all men, is greater, then of any such
Command, whereof it is matter of doubtful disputation whether he be the Author,
or no. It is (I presume) no man's doubt or question, but that, 1. It is the
Command of God. That they who have promised things lawful, and meet to be done,
and in their power to do, should perform their promise accordingly; how much
more when such promises have been made in a sacred and solemn manner, in the
presence of Christ, and of a great number of his Saints round about him, yea
and (in some sort) unto Christ himself? Nor, 2. Can it be any Christian man's
question, but that Christian offices of love, as the edifying, comforting,
admonishing, counselling, watching over Brethren, supporting those that are
weak, refreshing the bowels of those that stand in need, with other services
belonging either to Elders, or Members of Christian Congregations, are things
very lawful to be done, yea and more then lawful, especially when they have
been promised. Therefore unless men, who have promised such things as these,
can show as fair, as full, as express a discharge from God, from the
performance of them, as that Command of his is, which he has laid upon them
for their performance, they are to be looked upon as promise-breakers (and this
of one of the worst and most horrid kinds) if they shall refuse, or neglect, to
perform them. Now I appeal to the Consciences of those persons themselves, who
upon any pretense whatsoever (especially upon the pretense of a false Baptism,
so called only by themselves) shall, after their Covenant struck, and promise
made, with and to any Christian Church, or Society of Saints, to perform all
the particulars specified, turn their backs upon this Church, thus treading and
trampling under foot their holy Covenant and Promise, whether they can produce
any thing from God, or from the Word of God, so particular and express for
their discharge and disobligement in this kind, as that Command of his is, by
which both they and all others stand charged to keep promise. I fear the sin of
Churchbreaking, yea and Church-deserting without the leave or consent of the
Church deserted, will not be understood or duly considered by men, until the
punishment of it come to be suffered, and then it will be too late. A pretended
Defect in, or of, Baptism, will not excuse any man's waxing wanton, or kicking
with the heel, against Christ in any of his Churches, or Assemblies of his
Saints; no nor yet any such Defect as this in truth of being.

CONSIDERATION VII.
In that very Text of Scripture, Hebr. 6. 2. wherein our New Baptists place a
great part of their trust for the support of their Cause, there is evidently
imported a plurality of Baptisms; the Doctrine or Explication of which is here
numbered amongst the foundations of Christ, i. e. such heads of Doctrine,
wherein persons were wont to be instructed (as it were) in the infancy of their
Christian profession, in order to their further increase in knowledge. Now
whether the Holy Ghost by mentioning, Baptisms (in the plural number) did not
intend to insinuate, that however in one sense and consideration there be only
one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. [viz. in respect of the signification and end of
Baptizing,] yet in respect of variety of subjects, and of different forms of
administration, wherein it might be, or was to be, administered, it might not be
many, is (I suppose) not so easy upon grounds satisfactory to a considering
man, to determine: Yet I judge it much more difficult for any man upon such an
account to prove the contrary. Therefore such persons who call Christian
Churches and Societies of men, accursed, or unclean, for want of such or such a
determinate form of Baptizing, are not able to give any reasonable or Christian
account of such their hard sayings; nor yet to prove, that a plurality of
Baptisms, as well in respect of different kinds of subjects, as of external
modes of administration, was not intended, or allowed by Christ, nor
(consequently) that the Baptism practiced in the Churches of their reproach, is
not a Baptism approved by him.

CONSIDERATION VIII.
Every Kingdom (says Christ) divided against it self, is brought to
desolation: and every City or house divided against it self, shall not stand,
Mat. 12. 25. meaning, that in all Communities and Societies of men, greater or
l^sser, divisions of one part against another, threaten dissolution of the
whole. In consideration whereof some of the ancient Fathers judged a
schismatical rending and dividing of the Church, to proceed only from a
diabolical spirit, and to be a sin of very near affinity with that which is
unpardonable Eos quoque asserit Diabolico ut^ spiritu, qui separant Ecclesiam
Dei: ut omnium temporum haereticos and schismaticos comprehenderet, quibus
indulgentiam negat, quod omne peccatum [aliud] est circa singulus, hoc in
universos. Soli enim sunt qui volunt solvire Christi gratiam, qui Eccleslae
membra discerpunt, propter quam passus est Dominus, spiritusque, sanctus datus
est nobis. Ambr. de Poenitentia. lib. 2. c. 4.
. Now although I judge this somewhat too hard and heavy a censure of
schismatical practices, and in this respect like to the censures wherewith
Schismatiques themselves always burden those Christian Societies, from which
they rend themselves, for wanting one thing or other that should make them cize
with the standard of their imaginations, yet due consideration had of all those
high appearances of the Holy Ghost in Scripture against schisms, divisions,
strifes and contentions amongst imbodied Saints, the sin of Schism must needs
be adjudged a sin of a deep demerit, and high provocation, in the sight of God,
and of Christ. And the more precipitate, violent and heady any Schism shall be,
and with how much the more contempt, and neglect of those, in respect either of
giving, or receiving satisfaction about the pretended ground of schismatizing,
against whom the sin shall be committed, and again, the less considerable, all
circumstances duly weighed, the matter pretended for the schism-making shall
be, so much the more heinous must the sin needs be, and punishable with the
sorer Judgment by God. Now whether the Schism made by the Rebaptizing party of
Professors amongst us, from those Churches, of which they were lately Members,
upon the only pretense of a defect of Baptism, be not fearfully aggravated by
all the said circumstances, I leave to their own Consciences, when God shall
have awakened them, to consider.

CONSIDERATION IX.
That determinate kind of Baptism, which is the firebrand of contention
amongst the Saints, and which has put the Christian world about us into a
flame, is by one of the gravest Authors, and and greatest Apostles of the
Anti-paedo baptistical Faith, called (and that with evidence enough of truth) a
carnal Ceremony Treatise entitled, Of Baptism, (p. 22.) generally presumed
written by Mr Lawrence.
, i. e. an external Rite of some sacred signification, or import. Now to make
new partition walls of carnal Ceremonies, and this not only between Abraham's
spiritual seed, and the profane Gentile part of the world, but between one
part of this blessed seed it self, and another, so that the one, because of
this Ceremony rising up in their way, may not come at, to enjoy any spiritual
communion, with the other, is it not the founding of a new kind of Judaism in
the world; and the making work for Christ to be crucified a second time for the
dissolution of it?

CONSIDERATION X.
Ignorance in some things appertaining to the knowledge of God, and the mystery
of Christ, whether found in a Church, or in particular persons, rendereth
neither the one nor the other unclean upon any such terms, but that both may
lawfully, and without the least tincture of guilt, be conversed with in a
Church Way. Otherwise there will neither Church, nor Member, be found upon
Earth, but whose communion will defile us; in as much as the Apostle, speaking
as well of himself and his fellow Apostles, as of the entire successive body of
Christians in all ages, says; We know in part, and we prophecy in part, 1 Cor.
13. 9. Again, where Churches, or persons, know but in part, it cannot be
expected they should practice in whole, or in full. He is a good Christian, who
practices and walks up to his light, though he does not walk above it, yea
although his light be somewhat low, and mixed with much darkness. And though an
erring or mistaking Conscience, will not simply or totally justify a
concurring practice, yet will it justify it comparatively; it being better to
follow the dictate or light of a mis-guided or mis-taught Conscience, then to
rebel against it. Otherwise sad were the case of those sacrilegious
Church-breakers, who out of Conscience (I judge no worse of many of them)
practice this enormity. Now then they who give sentence against a Church, or
people, as unclean for communion, only because they do not practice Baptismal
Dipping, must ground the equity of such a sentence, either, 1. Upon their
non-conviction of the necessity of such a practice; or, 2. Upon the
non-practise it self, which they must suppose, either to be concurrent with, or
repugnant unto, the light of their Judgments and Consciences. If the former of
these, the ignorance or non-conviction of a Church, or people, of the necessity
of Dipping, be pretended for a ground of the sentence we speak of, to justify
this pretense, it must be proved, that every mistake or dissatisfaction in
Judgment, in any controversal Point whatsoever of like difficulty or
disputeableness with that about the necessity of Dipping, rendereth a Church or
people unclean for Communion. But I look to see Jesus Christ as he is, long
before this be proved. 2. If the ground of the said sentence be the latter, the
non-practise of dipping, then, in case it be supposed that this non-practise be
a matter of conscience in the Church or people we speak of, and confirm to
their judgments, they are adjudged unclean for not defiling, or not sinning
against, their conscience. But far be it from us to suspect our Brethren in the
Faith, of such a judgment as this. If it be supposed to be contrary to their
judgment, and that in refusing to practice Baptismal dipping, they go against
their consciences, then are the Supposers judgers of evil thoughts, supposing
that which they cannot prove, indeed have no ground or reason at all to
suspect, but ground in abundance to conclude the contrary. So that they can
upon no Christian or reasonable ground pronounce any such hard sentence against
their non dipping Brethren, as of uncleanness for Church Communion. And if they
would but please plainly and clearly to declare, wherein they place the high
demerit, the unpardonable crime of non-dipping, whilst men remain
dissatisfied, either touching the lawfulness, or necessity of the practice, I
verily believe they would soon be ashamed of their notion, and out of hand pull
down all they have built upon it.

CONSIDERATION XI.
When the Apostle writes to the Churches in his days, in sundry See Romans ^. 7.
1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Col. ^. 2.
the inscriptions of his Epistles unto them, wherein he describes them, he
insereth the mention of their sanctification, their calling to be Saints, their
being beloved of God, their Saintship, their faithfulness in Christ, etc. but
never so much as hinteth their having been baptized. Which is a strong
presumption at least (if not a demonstration) that in case it be supposed that
all these Churches were baptized, yet the Apostle did not look upon their
Baptism as any part of their Church-ship, or of the visibility thereof, much
less as any essential part or point of either. For if such a thing shall be
supposed, what reason can be imagined, why their Baptism should not once, or
twice at least, have been mentioned in their description, as well as their
Faith, Sanctification, calling etc. so frequently, and (well-nigh) constantly
(I mean, one, or other of them.) So then it is a plain case that the Apostle
does not estimate the truth of Churches by the observation or practice of
Baptism (much less by the practice of such or such a determinate kind of
baptizing) but by the Faith and Holiness of the persons inchurched. Baptism is
never mentioned so much as by way of commendation, either of Church or person,
(at least not more then the observance of other ordinances) no not when several
other matters of praise are insisted on in reference unto either: (See 1 Cor.
11, 2. Romans 1. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Ephesians. 1. 5. Luke 1. 6. Acts. 11. 24. to pass
over other texts of like import) and yet many things may be commendable in
either, which are not essentially requisite to their being. And (doubtless) if
men were not under some strong enchantment, and the rational powers of their
Souls strangely held, in reference (at least) to the subject we now speak o^,
such an imagination as this would never have been found amongst all their
thoughts, That Baptism according to one mode, or other, should be a
constituting principle of a true Church.

CONSIDERATION XII.
When the Apostle Paul instructs Christian Churches with their respective
members, who and what manner of persons they are, who are unmeet for their
Christian Communion, he mentions Fornicators, Covetous, Idolaters, Railers,
Drunkards, Extortioners, Disorderly walkers, etc. but never persons 1. Cor. 5.
11. 2 These. 3 6.
of an holy and blamless conversation, whether baptized, or unbaptized. If our
Brethren reply, that there was no occasion why he should mention persons
unbaptized, in as much as there was none such in these days, who lived holily,
or had the names of Brethren amongst Christians; We answer,

1. That our Brethren are still wont to use slime in stead of mortar to build
their Babel; I mean, to make use of light conjectures, loose suppositions,
presumptions, self-imaginations, etc. in stead of solid and clear
demonstrations, either from the Scriptures, or sound principles in reason, for
the defense and support of their Cause. To say that in the times we speak of,
there were no Saints reputed Brethren in any Christian Church, who were
unbaptized, is somewhat lighter then a mere conjecture, and not of any more
weight then such a supposition, which has much reason and strength of
probability against it (as has been showed elsewhere.)

2. In case we should relieve the poor, and grant our Brethren their said
supposition without proof, yet how do they know that in case there had been any
unbaptized persons reputed Brethren amongst the Churches (especially such, the
truth and validity of whose Baptism had been the only question, for this is the
case between us and our Brethren) that the Apostle would have ranked them
amongst Fornicators, Drunkards, Idolaters, etc. and prohibited the Churches of
Christ communion as well with the one, as with the other? But

3. When our Brethren pronounce the Saints and servants of God unclean for
Church communion, upon a pretense only (or be it a true plea) of their not
being baptized, do they not intrude themselves into the prerogative Office of
Christ, making new Orders, Laws, and constitutions of themselves for Church
communion, which were never made by him? Or if they desire to be judged
Innocent of this Great Offense, let them produce from the Gospel some Order or
Law of this tenor, or import, That he that has only been washed in the Name of
Christ, and not dipped over head and ears, shall be unclean for Christian
communion, although the Image of God in righteousness and true holiness be
never so resplendent and lovely in him.

CONSIDERATION XIII.
A submission unto the Ordinance of Baptism upon those terms on which it is
obtruded by our Brethren upon all sorts of Believers, is, as themselves also
acknowledge, yea and boast of (though to the shame both of their opinion, and
practice in the way) very offensive, burdensome, and grievous to the flesh.
And the truth is, that when men or women, especially being any thing weak or
tender of constitution, shall in winter or cold seasons be persuaded unto it,
they had need purify themselves, as men at Sea use to do (God himself
observing and reporting it, Job. 41. 23.) by reason of the breakings of
Leviathan, i. e. when they expect nothing but death by being wrackt by this
unruly and formidable creature. Yea for many to go into Rivers, or Ponds to be
dowsed over head and ears, in such seasons, is as express a tempting God, as a
passing through the fire would be. One of those poor women lately persuaded
into the watery Paradise about Newington, had much ado to recover the air with
her life, saying when she came from the water to her self, words, either these,
or to a like effect; that she was almost gone, and that well might the business
of baptizing be resembled to Christ's death, for she was nigh unto death by it.
The rest, who had somewhat a better return of their venture, yet sustained
loss. There was not very long before a maidservant living within a door or two
of me, in the City, who being led (by what Spirit let understanding Christians
judge) to meet with Jesus Christ under water, was so far from being healed of
the infirmity, which she carried thither, that she brought with her out of the
water the extreme torture of several days together. What became of her after
this, I know not. And how severely the healths, yea and lives of men and women
are almost continually threatened, and sometimes severely handled, by the
waters of Baptismal dipping, are matters better known to many others, then my
self. And if they be thus terribly austere to the flesh in the Southern parts
of England, what may we judge them to be in the Northen parts of Scotland, and
in climates of far less communion with the warmth and heat of the Sun, then it?
Yea Mr Fisher himself imputes Paul's being so tardy and backward to the duty of
dipping, as to need such a sharp Exuscitation hereunto, as he conceits the
words of Ananias, And now why tarriest thou, etc. do import; he imputes (I say)
this supposed backwardness in Paul to the said supposed duty, to a sensibleness
in him of some tediousness in the service Mr Fisher. Baby-baptism, P. 370.
. A little before he has these words: I know no man's flesh forward to it,
further then by Faith it is over-powerd. So that by consent of both parties,
Baptism by Dipping, upon such terms, and under such circumstances as our new
Baptists urge the necessity of it, is a burden exceeding grievous, and next to
that which is intolerable, to the flesh: yea neither party needs be tender,
upon such terms to vote it a yoke more heavy then circumcision under the Law,
which yet Peter plainly tells the Jews, was such a yoke, which neither they nor
their. Fathers were able to bear; yea and upon this account, calls the
putting of it upon the necks of the Disciples, a tempting of God. Now therefore
why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, which, etc *.
Concerning the other Sacramental service of the Lords supper, it is Act. 15. ^0.
sufficiently known that it is in no degree burdensome, or troublesome to the
flesh, but rather of a cherishing, nourishing, and welcome import to it. Nor is
it (I suppose) the sense of our dissenting Brethren, but that Gospel Baptism
was by Christ calculated and intended for babes in Christ, for believers of the
first peep (as it were) out of the shell, and greatest weakness, in the Faith;
as on the other hand, the Sacramental Sevice of the Supper was in like manner
prepared and ordained by him for Believers of grown stature and strength.

Now then I cannot but greatly wonder, that our Brethren should esteem it a
matter of such high impiety in us, and deserving no less censure or punishment,
then excommunication it self, to judge it contrary both to the wisdom and
tenderness of bowels in Christ toward his Saints, to provide the strongest
meat for his weakest babes, and milk for his strong men; to put his newborn
babes to bear the heat and burden of the day of Christianity, whilst his old
Soldiers, men of strength and courage, are feasting with bread and wine at his
table. Considering what a stream and torrent of Scriptures there are that run a
head against such a notion as this, we know not how to handle our judgments or
consciences to make them of this opinion, that Evangelical Baptism consists
in any thing so like the piercings of a sword to the flesh, or which requires
such an overpowring of Faith to subject men unto it, as our Brethren themselves
represent their dipping to be, and to require. Nor can we with all the might of
our own understandings, nor with all the additional help of the light hitherto
afforded us by our Brethren, tell how to believe or conceive, that all the Land
of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, with all the region round about Jordan, were
all overpowered by any such high hand of Faith, who yet came thick and
threefold, troops upon troops, and companies after companies, to be baptized of
John, and were baptized accordingly.

CONSIDERATION XIV.
For those who are babes in Christ and weak in the Faith; yea for those, who
know but in part (and higher then thus, neither does their knowledge it self
rise, who think they know more then all the world besides) to mistake, where
(in a manner) all the judicious, learned, and grave, all the zealous, faithful,
and best conscienced Christians, and Servants of God throughout the world,
Fathers, Martyrs, Reformers, and others, for sixteen generations together, even
from the days of the Apostles, until now, have mistaken, and not been able to
discover the truth, or mind of God, is (doubtless) the most venial and
pardonable mistake, that can well be imagined; yea although it should be
supposed that the subject matter, wherein, or about which, this mistake has
been, be of very great weight and consequence. Such as this, and no whit worse
or more culpable then this, is the mistake (if yet a mistake it be) of those
Churches and Saints, who judge it no ways necessary, nor agreeable to the mind
of Christ, for them to desire a baptismal dipping, having been regularly (as
they conceive) and sufficiently baptized in their Infancy. Now the common and
best-known principles of reason and equity, (and of Christianity most of all)
upon mistakes of the most-venial nature, and which are incident to the best,
the most watchful and faithful of men, teach men to inflict the lightest
punishment, whether by censure, or otherwise (if any at all) that well may be.
If then to judge and condemn a Church, or people of God, as a spurious and
unclean Congregation, with whom no man can join in Church Communion, without
polluting himself in the sight of God, be an high and heavy censure (which I
presume no man questions) then must they, who inflict this censure only upon
the account of the demerit of the aforesaid mistake, needs be extremely
irregular, unrighteous, and unreasonable in so doing. And yet they who in the
open view of the world, inflict it by an actual, hasty, and (as it were) a
frightful rending and tearing off themselves from such Churches, inflict it
upon the hardest and most unchristian terms that can be imagined. And give me
leave here only to add this; that I know no more pregnant a symptom of a
strong enchantment, delusion, or distemper, then when a petty handful of men
are rank of confidence and conceit, that all the world are out of their wits,
but themselves; and that they are as so many stars of the first magnitude, and
all other men but as the snuffs of so many Candles.

CONSIDERATION XV.
That Baptism, how duly soever administered, is no Churchmaker, but at the
highest, a Church-adorner (and this possibly in some cases only too) is evident
from hence; that the Lord Christ, whilst he was yet unbaptized, was as much the
head, and as legitimate an head, of the Church, as after his The Doctrine of
Baptism is numbered as among the Foundations of Christ (i.e. such principles or
Doctrines, as were usually first taught and learned by young scholars in
Christianity, as being easy of perception) but this proves not the actual
reception of the Rite of any Baptism, one or other, is essential to the making
a man a true member of Christ, nor yet of a Church of Christ, any whit mo^e (if
so much) then a cordial belief of that far greater Foundation (of the two) the
resurrection of the dead.
baptism. And as Christ obtained not the Head-ship of the Church, nor right
unto it, by being baptized, so neither do believers obtain their right to
membership in a Church, by their being baptized. Yea it is but conjectural and
traditional Divinity, to affirm or hold, that all the members of all the
Churches in the Apostles days were baptized. Certain I am that Baptism cannot
rationally pretend to so much Interest to constitute, ^^ legitimate, members of
Christian Churches under the Gospel, as circumcision might to constitute the
members of the Jewish Church under the Law. Yet this Church was altogether as
true a Church, and all Abraham's children by Isaak as true members of this
church, when and whilst they had no practice of circumcision amongst them (as
viz. during their Forty years journeying through the Wilderness) as when it
was in the most regular and standing use among them. Yea (doubtless) Abraham
and his family were as much the Church of God, before the Ordinance it self of
circumcision was delivered unto him, as afterward. And why the Jewish children
before the eight day, should not be judged members of that church, as well as
after, I understand not. Therefore without all controversy Baptism is no
builder of Churches, although, as some men now set it on work, it is a puller
of them down. Nor does it at all savor of Gospel dispensation, that God should
build his spiritual Temple upon Foundations made of a carnal ceremony, or that
he should deny that poor and mean privilege (comparatively) of
Church Membership, unto that Grace (I mean, Faith) unto which he has
vouchsafed that High and Heavenly prerogative, the making of men to become the
Sons of God. Besides, that which is no where mentioned as commending any man,
either unto God, or men, more then, or so much as, many other duties or
qualifications, cannot reasonably be judged more necessary to any man's regular
admission into Church Fellowship, then those other things. Now Baptism is no
where represented in the Scriptures as commending any man, either unto God, or
men, nor as any considerable testimony of any man's Faith, vast multitudes of
people having been baptized by John, yea and by Christ himself or his
Disciples, whereas there were very few true believers amongst them (Mat. 3. 5.
Mar. 1. 5. Luke 7, 21. Compared with John. 1. 11. Ioh. 3. 32, Acts. 1. 15.)
whereas other qualifications, as Faith, Love, Righteousness, Holiness,
Humility, the new Creature, the hearing of the Word, the searching of the
Scriptures, (with many others of like character) are frequently insisted upon,
as matters of worthy testimony unto those, in whom they were found, yea and
some of them of signal acceptance with God. Therefore certainly it is a most
groundless and importune conceit, to estimate the truth of a Church of Christ
by the Baptism of the members; or to deny unto such congregations or bodies of
Saints, the legitimacy of Church-ship, upon a pretense and conceit of their not
being baptized, which are in all things, which commend a Church, either unto
God, or men, the Glory of Churches, yea and (in the Apostles sense, 2 Cor. 8.
23.) the Glory of Christ himself.

CONSIDERATION XVI.
The main, if not the only, ground and reason why our newbaptizing and baptized
Brethren, reject the Baptism, so esteemed and practiced among us, is, because
they suppose it to be a mere nullity, and to have nothing in it of the Baptism
appointed by Christ. Upon this their supposition they proceed with the utmost
severity against us, they excommunicate us, and deliver us up to Satan, that we
may learn rightly to baptize. But if the Lord Christ's rule be true, a corrupt
tree cannot bring forth good fruit (Mat. 7. 18.) And again; that every tree is
known by his own fruit (Luke 6. 44.) then is our Baptism no corrupt Baptism,
but the Baptism commended by Christ; or however, far from being a nullity. For
it is a true rule: Nonentis, nulli sunt affectus, nulla opperatio: Nullities,
or non-entities, have neither affections, nor effects, or operations: produce
nothing which is proper to be produced by a real and truly excistent cause. But
that Baptism amongst us, which our Brethren very inconsiderately and invita
veritate, vote to be a nullity, is as efficacious, as operative, in respect of
all the main ends of Baptism (the Baptism I mean intended by Christ) as theirs
is, or can be; yea in respect of some of these ends, if not all, it has the
preheminency. For

1. It does as solemnly, with as much authority and power, with as express a
signification to the understandings and apprehensions of the world about us,
testify and declare us the profesed Disciples and followers of Jesus Christ,
as that Baptism practiced by them can do. Nay in this (which is one of the most
considerable ends of Baptism) it is of the two more efficacious then theirs.
For their Baptism is (comparatively) a kind of Barbarian to the world: nor do
the generality of men interpret or look upon it, as any thing more
significative, or assertive, of their owning the Name and Faith of Jesus
Christ; then our Baptism; which was also theirs, until they renounced it, by
substituting another in the place of it. Yea the sense of the world, and of the
generality of persons, amongst whom they live, is so far from being either,
that by their Infant Baptism they stood insufficiently declared the professed
Disciples of Christ, or that by their new Baptism they make any material
addition unto that their Declaration, that it inclines rather to this, viz.
That they betake themselves to a Re-baptism, more to disobliege themselves from
what their Infant Baptism engaged them unto, then to strengthen or make valid
that engagement; which, at least as they apprehend, cannot receive any addition
of strength or validity by any further Baptism, but they are jealous that it
may be disinabled, or at least disadvantaged, by such an after-Baptism. Of
which apprehension I wish they had not, and yet much more, that they may not in
time have, too just a ground. But however, nothing can be more evident, then
that that Baptism is most serviceable and efficacious to testify or
demonstrate a person, man or woman, to be a professor of, and to own, the Name
and Faith of Jesus Christ in the sight of the world, whose signification and
import in this behalf is best known unto the world. If so, then is our Baptism,
as valid, as efficacious, in respect of this great end of Baptism, as our
Brethrens new Baptism can be; and consequently, is far from being a nullity.

2. Our Baptism is altogether as operative, as bearing, as engaging upon our
judgments and Consciences, to become the real, loyal, and true Disciples of
Jesus Christ, as theirs can be upon theirs, or could be upon ours, should we
come under it. For out of the sense and conscience we have that we have been
Baptized, and still own and stand by that our Baptism, we expect no other but
the severest judgment and condemnation, which belong to Covenant-breakers with
their God, from his hand, if we shall be found unfaithful under this our
Baptismall engagement. And certain I am, that our Brethrens new-Baptism can
have no richer, no fuller, no more vigorous or potent an influence upon their
judgments and conscience in this kind, then so. I wish that theirs may hold
weight with ours in this balance. If our Baptism, whilst it was theirs also,
had not the same weight of engagement upon their consciences, which it has
upon ours, have they reason to judge us for it, and not rather themselves?
Therefore in respect of this great end also of Baptism, ours is no whit more a
nullitie, then theirs.

3. (And lastly) nor can we, or they (reasonably, and upon ground) judge that
our Baptism (as we call Baptism) is less edifying, strengthening, comforting,
to the inner man, then theirs. Our souls, through the grace and goodness of our
good God unto us, have prospered as much under that Baptism which we own, and
by means of it (as far as we are able to compute) as we can, upon consultation
had with all Oracles that are like to inform us in the point, expect they would,
or should have done, under that Baptism, whose threshold our Brethren place so
near the threshold of Christ himself. I believe there are thousands yet abiding
under our Baptism, who would not willingly exchange spiritual estates with the
best of those, who to better their estates in this kind, have sought security
under the wing and shelter of a new Baptism: yea I make very little question,
but that if our Brethren of this new Baptism (at least many of them) would deal
ingeniously and freely (and what is this but Christianly?) with us in the
point, they would acknowledge and confess, that they carried far the greater
part of that spiritual treasure, of which they are at present possessed, from
under that Baptism which they forsook, unto that which they have taken in
exchange for it. Yea I heartily wish for the sake of some of them, whom I know,
that their New Baptism does not help to diminish their Old grace. Therefore in
respect of this great end also and benefit of Baptism, the building up of the
inner man in Grace and peace, our Baptism is no whit behind theirs; but, if
experience will be allowed to umpire, much before it. I know no other end of
Baptism but what is easily reduceable to one of these three. Set them then to
judge (as the Apostle speaks in another case) who are least esteemed in the
Church, whether that Baptism be like to be a nullity, which acts and performs,
and this with authority and power, all the ends, services, purposes and intents
of Baptism; yea and in most of them, if not in all, quits it self at a more
worthy rate of efficacy and success, then that which pretends to the honor of
being the sole reality and truth.

CONSIDERATION XVII.
It is no where to be found in Scripture, that any Church of Christ, or
imbodied society of Believers, was commanded by God, or Christ, or his
Apostles, to be Dipped; nor yet threatened, or reproved by any of them, for the
non-practise of Dipping. If this be denied, let the Scriptures, one, or more be
produced (for as yet none have been) for the justification of such a Denial. Is
it not then presumption in the Highest, and an assuming of an Anti christian
power, to impose Laws upon Christian Societies, which the Lord Christ never
imposed; yea and to censure and scandalize them with the odious and reproachful
terms of Antichristian, and unclean, only for the transgressions of their own
Laws? Nor will it serve the turn, to pretend, that it is to be found in
Scripture, that particular members of Churches or imbodied societies of Saints,
are commanded to be dipped, and by consequence, that Churches, or whole
Churches, ought to be so likewise. For (besides that this is contrary to the
avouched principles of those, who are like thus to pretend, who affirm, that
the Scripture no where reports, or makes, any person a member of a Church, but
only such who were dipped, before they entered that relation, and consequently
could have no such command imposed on them, being now members) it follows
not, that because some particular members of a body were required to be dipped,
therefore the whole body was commanded to be dipped likewise; especially not
upon such terms, that unless it would be thus wholly, universally, and in all
its members dipped, it should be unclean in the sight of God and men, and all
communion with it sinful. Therefore they who impose such a Law as this upon
Christian Churches, or Societies, and make them heinous transgressors for the
breach of it, punishing and censuring them accordingly, are usurpers of the
high Prerogative of God, and of Christ, claiming and exercising a Lordship over
the Faith and consciences of men.

CONSIDERATION XVIII.
Yea I believe it is more then the greatest Oracle of Baptismal Dipping under
Heaven, will ever be able to prove to the satisfaction of a conscience
Christianly considerate, that there is any precept or command of Christ in the
Scriptures, whereby it is made sinful for any person whatsoever, not only not
to be diped, but to be not so much as baptized in one form, or other. For
first, certain it is, that it is no sin unto any person whatsoever to be
un-dipt, whilst there is no person to be found sufficiently authorized by
Christ to administer dipping unto him. And however the camel be swallowed
whole, either by the largness of the consciences, or by the scantness of the
understandings, of our Metropolitan Dippers, yet is it not so easy for them to
justify the authentiqueness or validity of that commission, by which they act
(without fear or trembling) the parts of dippers. But of this elsewhere.
Secondly, that precept of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. which (as far as I understand)
they make their chief treasure to support them in their wars against their
Brethren, does at no hand make those transgressors, who are not dip-wise
baptized, no nor yet those who are not baptized, either so, or otherwise. For
first, here is no precept, charge, or command given unto any person, one or
more, but unto the Apostles only. Go ye therefore [i. e. ye Apostles] and teach
all Nations, baptizing them, etc. Now as a Law imposed upon a Magistrate for
the discharge of his office, does not make a subject guilty by his
nonperformance of it, nay he [the subject] should be more guilty, in case he
should observe it: so neither does a charge laid by Christ upon his Apostles in
reference to their special office and ministry, oblige any other sort of men to
the observation of it This commission cannot be thought to obliege, or empower,
ordinary Pastors or Teachers; because they were not to go and teach all
Nations; but to watch over those particular flocks, over which the Holy Ghost
makes them Overseers, Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Secondly, in these words, baptizing them, it cannot reasonably be conceived
that they were enjoined to baptize any person, or persons. against their wills,
or whether they would, or no. No, nor is it a matter of easy resolution, what
is the Antecedent or Substantive to this Relative pronoun, them; or whom, or
what persons they are, whom our Savior here authorizeth his Apostles to
baptize. Therefore, Thirdly, Here being no command laid upon any person to be
baptized, or to desire Baptism of the Apostles, it clearly follows, that the
Apostles are here enjoined only to baptize such persons, who shall freely and
voluntarily require the same at their hand. Nor, Fourthly, Can it be proved
from these words, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded them, that the Apostles did teach Saints, believers, or others, to
require Baptism of them, unless it were first proved, that this was one
particular of those things, which Christ commanded his Apostles to teach the
Nations to observe. But I believe there is no day in the year auspicious for
our new Baptists to undertake the proof of this. Nor, Fifthly, do we find, that
the Apostles in the course of their ministry, did ever teach either Church or
person, to demand, or seek Baptism at their hand; much less threaten them, or
charge them with disobedience unto Christ for not seeking it. Sixthly, in case
it should be granted, that the Apostles by the tenor and virtue of their
commission, might, and did, teach Believers to observe the Law of requiring
Baptism at their hands, yet it follows not from hence, that by virtue of this
commission they had power also given them to make it a standing Law for all
Pastors and teachers to the worlds end, who were to succeed them in the
preaching the Gospel, to impose the observation of the same Law upon all
Believers; considering 1. That Water Baptism, as appears partly by the express
intentions of God about it in the first setting it on foot in the world, Ioh.
1. 31. partly also, in that there is never mention made of any administration
of Baptism in any place, but only upon the first coming or preaching of the
Gospel therein, although there were never so many converted to the Faith in the
same place afterward (I mean, upon a second publication of the Gospel in this
place) Acts. 2. 41. compared with Acts. 4. 4, and 5. 14, and 9. 42, and 19. 3.
with verse. 18. by these two considerations (I say) it fully appears that
Water Baptism was never intended by God, but either only or chiefly, for an
Introductory or planting Ordinance i. e. to attend the Gospel for a time at its
first coming unto, and reception by a People, City, or Nation, until it should
get some considerable rooting, and Interest amongst them, not for a staple or
standing ordinance in one and the same place (whereof good reason might be
given, but that we are now upon a pin of brevity.) Secondly, That wheresoever,
either the work and office of Pastors and Teachers, or their qualifications are
described, or the Intentions of God in, and about the erections of them in the
Church declared, there is not the least mention made either of any charge given
them to baptize, nor of any qualifications requisite in those, who should
baptize, nor of any intent of God, or of Christ, that they should baptize. See
and compare 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 4, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Tit. 1. 7, 8. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 13, 14. Thirdly, When the Apostle Paul directs Timothy to commit unto
Faithful men, the things which he had heard of him among many witnesses, the
end why he thus directs him, is signified in these words, who be able to
teach others also (2 Timothy 2. 2.) plainly intimating, that what is deriveable
from the Apostles unto standing Pastors and Teachers, respects chiefly, if not
only, their abilities to teach, or preach the Gospel. Seventhly, Concerning
these words, And lo I am with you to the end of the World; neither do these
necessarily prove, that a ministerial or actually Baptizing should continue to
the end of the world, at least not in all parts or places in the world, where
the ministry of the Gospel should be continued. For 1. Jerome conceives that
the Apostles themselves are here said to live, and so to teach and baptize, to
the end of the world, viz. in and by, their writings and other labors in the
ministry: and that the presence of Christ with them to the end of the world
here promised, imports, 1 his directing, strengthening, and encouraging
presence, whilst they continued in the body; and 2 his assisting presence with
them in their writings and other labors faithfully performed in the work of
the Gospel, whereby these should prosper and bring forth fruit to the end of
the world. This is no hard or far fetched interpretation. Those words Dan. 12.
13. But go thou thy way til the end be, for thou shall rest and stand up in thy
lot at the end of the days, are commonly understood in a sense of much affinity
hereunto.
Yet 2. be it granted, that Christ here promises his presence, not unto the
Apostles alone, but to all their successors in teaching and baptizing, (though
a substantial proof of this requires more, I fear, then all the abilities of
our Brethren of the Dip are able to perform) yet neither will it follow from
hence, that they who should succeed them in both, should baptize upon any other
terms then the Apostles themselves did, yea or are recorded in the Scriptures
to have done. Now (as we lately observed) it is no where reported of them, or
any of them, that they ever Baptized in any place, but only at, and upon,
their first bringing of the Name of Christ, and the Gospel thereunto, in case
it found any competent entertainment and settlement there. But, Eighthly, (and
lastly) Grant we all that can either reasonably or unreasonably be demanded
from the words in hand, on the behalf of those, who were, and are, to succeed
the Apostles in the work of the Gospel, viz. Ministers and Teachers, and that
Christ promises his presence with them, as well in Baptizing, as in teaching;
yet what presence of his is here promised to private Christians, in their
Administrations of Baptism? Surely when they Baptize, Christ is not with them
in the work; how much less when persons of this character shall put forth their
hand to touch the Ark of Baptism, who are not so much as Baptized themselves?
And yet a Baptism administered upon such polluted terms as these, is the mother
and Foundress of all those Baptizmall Administrations, for which our Brethren
so importunately magnify themselves against us. To plead, that a person
unbaptized, may administer Baptism in a case of necessity, is a sufficient plea
indeed thus understood; viz. 1. When God himself adjudgeth and determines the
case of necessity; and 2. authorizeth from heaven any person, one or more, for
the work, as he did John Baptist. Otherwise Vzzah had as good, or better reason
to judge that a case of necessity, in which he put forth his hand to stay the
Ark, then our first unhallowed and undipt dipper in this Nation, had to call
that a case of necessity, wherein, to the sad disturbance of the affairs of the
Gospel, yea and of the civil peace also, he set up the Dipping trade.

We do not intend that any thing hitherto argued in the consideration in hand,
should be taken as meant for a positive or demonstrative proof, that the
Ordinance of Baptism is now extinct, or not administrable without sin in the
world; but rather as a demonstration partly of the many Labyrinths and
difficulties, which they ought to overcom and clear, who are so confidently
positive and assertive of the contrary; partly of the most unreasonable and
importune practice of those, who pronounce all men unworthy of Christian
communion, who are not as positive and assertive in matters of so doubtful
disputation, as themselves.

CONSIDERATION XIX.
(...), i. e. Variances, Emulations, Animosities, Contentions, Divisions [or
Seditions] Sects *, are by the Holy Ghost himself adjudged works of The word,
(...), is commonly rendered, Sect. See Act. 5. 17. Act. 15. 5. Act. 24. 15. 5.
Act. 26. 5. Act. 28. 22.
the flesh, and such which are manifest; Yea and are ranged in the middle
between, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, on the one hand, and, Envyings murders, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like, on the other hand. Concerning all which, jointly and severally the
Apostle denounces this heavy Sentence: Of which I tell you before, as I have
also told you in times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5, 19, 20. 21. [meaning, without repentance] Now how
can men and women in any other way, or upon any other account, more manifestly,
or more directly incur the guilt of the said sins of Variances, Emulations,
animosities, Seditions, Sects, (at least of some, if not of the most of them,
and consequently the dreadful doom of being excluded from the Kingdom of God)
then by laboring in the very fire to trouble, disturb, rend, tear, dismember,
break into sects and factions, such Churches or bodies of Saints, who until now
were walking Holily, and humbly with their God in unity, love, and peace,
edyfiing one another in their most holy faith, with all good conscience
observing all Ordinances of God made known unto them for such, and ready and
willing further to abserve all other, that should in like manner be made known
unto them? Or can any pretense or plea whatsoever render the children of such
high misdemeanors excusable before the Judgment Seat of Christ? I draw out my
whole heart and Soul in requests unto my God, that he will graciously awaken
the consciences of such persons, who whilst they pull down, what Christ has
built up, and scatter, what he has gathered together, think they do him
service. Certainly never were the sins of variance, emulation, wrath, strife,
Church-seaition, schism, committed in the world by men, nor can it be imagined
how they should be committed, if they who quarrel, trouble, rend and tear off
themselves, labor in the very fire to rend and tear off others, from Christian
Churches and Congregations, only for dissenting from them in their private
conceits about the ceremony of Baptism, be not guilty of them. The contentions,
rents and schisms in the Catholic Church, so deeply complained of, bewailed,
and opposed by the Fathers of old, were, according to a true estimate, but as
shadows of these sins, and of light demerit, in comparison.

CONSIDERATION XX.
When some of the Brethren of the Church at Jerusalem were unsatisfied about
that which Peter did, in going to the Gentiles at Cornelius his house in
Cesarea, and having communion with them, Peter, in order to their satisfaction,
and his own justification in holding communion with them, does not insist upon,
nor so much as mention, or hint, their being baptized, but only the gift of the
Holy Ghost given unto them by God in Testimony of their Faith. For as much then
(says he) as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on
the Lord Jesus Christ, who, or what, was I that I could withstand God? Acts 11.
17. Where (by the way) it is observable, that Peter judged that a withstanding
of God which our Brethren call a serving, or an obeying of God; I mean, a
refusing of communion with those, concerning whose faith in Jesus Christ he had
received satisfaction. Upon the said account given by Peter, it follows (verse.
18.) When they heard these things, they held their peace and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. From
whence it is evident, that neither did Peter himself, nor yet the Brethren of
this Church at Jerusalem, look upon Baptism, as essential to Christian
communion, or as absolutely necessary to be found in those, with whom this
communion may lawfully be held. For if so, why did not Peter rather insist upon
their Baptism, then the testimony of their believing, for his vindication in
holding communion with them? Yea and why did not those who contended with him
about his said act of communion, make some such objection as this against his
plea (instead of being satisfied with it) Why do thou tell us of the falling
of the Holy Ghost upon these Gentiles, or of their believing? What is this to
justify thee in going in unto them? Tell us were they baptized, or no?
Certainly both Peter's silence of Baptism in his plea, and their silence in not
inquiring after it for their satisfaction, divisim and conjunctim prove, that
Baptism in these days was looked upon as no foundation essentially requisite to
build Church communion upon. For that that communion with the Gentiles, about
which Peter was now questioned at Jerusalem, was constructively at least such a
communion, is evident; 1. Because Peter for his justification therein, pleads
the falling of the Holy Ghost upon them as a testimony from God of their
believing in Christ, which is no proper or necessary plea for the justification
of the lawfulness of any other communion. 2. That communion which consisted in
any kind of eating with men, was by the Jews, who were the men that now
contended with Peter about his communion with the Gentiles, interpreted as an
acknowledging and owning of them in relation unto God, and as persons in
Covenant with him. In which respect they judged it unlawful for a Jew to sit at
table, and eat meat with an unproselyted Gentile, as appears from Luke 5. 30.
and sundry other places. Yea our Savior himself looked upon a regular
forbearance of communion in this case, as a matter of Religion, and of like
nature with the offering of sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. compared with ver. 10. 11.

To pretend that that communion, which Peter had with these Gentiles, was
after, not before, their baptizing, is little to the purpose. For that their
baptizing was merely accidental and irrelative to his communion with them,
appears clearly 1. Because he builds his justification in it upon quite another
foundation (as we have heard) viz. the gift of the Holy Ghost unto them in
testimony of their believing (which notwithstanding our Brethren judge
insufficient to justify them in a like communion, unless it be eeked out with
a baptizing.) 2. Because, they who demanded, and expected (if were to be had) a
plenary satisfaction of that act of Peter in communicating with them, were
fully satisfied with the account mentioned, making no question for conscience
sake about their baptizing. In like manner this very Church at Jerusalem, a
while before, had admitted Paul into their communion, only upon Barnabas his
declaring unto them that he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had
spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus,
(Acts. 9. 27.) without having heard the least inkling of his baptizing. Yea it
may be a question whether Barnabas himself knew that he had been baptized: but
however if he did know it, it is scarce a question, but that being now to
prepare him a way into communion with this Church, he would have represented
his Baptism, if he had judged the knowledge hereof necessary for this Church,
before they could lawfully receive him into their communion. Yea a little
before this, Ananias at Damascus had given him the right hand of Christian
fellowship in calling him, Brother, before he was baptized. Therefore our
Brethrens conceit of such an absolute necessity of Baptism in order to
Church Fellowship, as they dream of, is but an Apocryphal dream, without
footing or foundation in the Scriptures. How much more is the emphasis of this
their conceit Apocryphal, which bears, not that Baptism simply, but Baptism
according to their model of circumstances in every circumstantial punctillo
administered, is of this Sovereign and Sacred necessity to qualify and
capacitate for Church Communion? Do they affect to be either more wise or more
Holy then God?

CONSIDERATION XXI.
When Christ ascended up on high, it is said that he led Captivity captive, and
gave Gifts unto men; Some, Apostles; and some, Prophets: and some Evangelists:
and some Pastors, and Teachers, For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. Ephesians. 4. 8,
11, 12. From hence it appears by as clear a light as any the Sun shines at
noon day* that Christ's gift of Pastors, and Teachers, was intended by him, not
with limitation to Saints baptized, or for the perfecting of them, but to
Saints simply and in general, whether baptized, or unbaptized, or (which is the
same) to all Saints without exception of any, in as much as the Body of Christ
consists of all these, according to that 2 These. 1. 10. When he shall come to
be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in ALL THEM THAT BELIEVE. Now if
Pastors and Teachers were given by Christ that all Saints, one or other,
baptized or unbaptized, should be perfected by them, and the whole Body of
Christ edifyed, then certainly they have all right to Church Fellowship, in as
much as Pastors and Teachers have their callings only by, and residence in
Churches. Neither are they in any capacity, or probable way of perfecting them,
but only when, and whilst, they are incorporated with them in their Churches
(respectively.) If men will not allow the privilege of Church Membership unto
the Saints deemed by them unbaptized, do they not herein rise up against the
Council and gracious Intendments of Jesus Christ toward them for their
perfecting? Fighting against Christ is a sin most dreadsully terrible, where
forgiveness cannot be pleaded in prayer for the siners upon this account, For
they know not what they do. But I trust, Ignorance is the mother of that sad
Devotion of our Brethren, whereby they reject, yea oppose, the Council of
Christ concerning his Saints.

CONSIDERATION XXII.
Besides the many reasons and arguments in our way (many of them of great
pregnancy and strength, as they seem in our eye) which separate between our
judgments, and the necessity, yea or expediency, of a Baptismal Dipping (which
reasons may be published in due time) we have some discou^agements and
disswasiv^s upon us otherwise from that way.

First, We understand by books and writings of such authority and credit, that
we have no ground at all ^o question their truth, that that generat^on of men,
whose judgments have gone wondering after Dipping, and Rebaptizing, have from
the very first original and spring of them since the late Reformation, been
very troublesome and turbulent in all places where they have increased to any
numbers considerable; and wiser men then I are not a little jealous over the
peace of this Nation, lest it should suffer, as other places formerly have
done, from the tumultuous and domine^ring spirit of this sort of men so
numerously prevailing as they do. There is a strong tide of Report both from
Ireland and Scotland, that as far as the Interest and power, so far the
insolency also and importune haughtiness of that generation we speak of,
extends in both these Nations, and that all persons, of what Integrity or
worth soever otherwise, who are not enlightened with their darkness about their
dipping, are trodden under foot like unsavory salt, and judged unmeet for any
place of trust or power with them, being allowed only the preferements of
drawing water, and hewing wood. One of this faction or party in England (and he
no small beggar neither) speaking of a Person, who, though not of his judgment
about the necessity of dipping, yet otherwise a man (to my knowledge) that had
very well deserved of that way in several respects, as well public, as
private, yet speaking (I say) of this person, he said in the prefence of
several persons of quality, that He deserved to be hanged; an aphorism
consonant to the later saying of a preacher of that way about the City, who in
discourse with a person (walking in communion with me) about his judgment, and
being (as it seems) worsted in the skirmish, at last recovered all the ground
he had lost with this or the like, Epiphonema; that she might find her Church
at Tyburn, and the Gallows. These words I regard but as muck, notwithstanding
it may concern others to look after the fire. But surely these men, when they
come into their Kingdom of Authority and power, will execute judgment and
justice without partiality. If so, then, He that deserves to be hanged, must
expect no better quarter then that of the halter: and if justice be administered
without partiality, all that are in the same condemnation of Anti-dipping with
him, may bear him company in the same expection. Let no man think that because
I write these things, I do not walk charitably toward the persons of the men,
of whom I speak, or that I bear in my spirit the least touch or tincture of any
Sinister affection against the worst of them. My principles (I confess) are too
lofty and stiff to honor any man's unworthiness whatsoever, so far, as for the
sake thereof to become his enemy. Jesus Christ with the hand of his grace has
taken my gall out of my bowels, and divided it between sin and Satan. My
Conscience bears me witness in the Holy Ghost, that as I have been cordially
and christianly respectful and friendly unto these men, as far as I have had
opportunity to serve them, so am I still ready to bow down and lick the dust at
the feet even of the meanest of them, and of him amongst them, who ever he be,
that is my greatest enemy, for their spiritual, yea or temporal accommodation.
Nor do I deny, or doubt, but that as amongst the Pharisees, though a generation
of Vipers Mat. 3. 7. and 23. 33.
, there were some who believed in Christ Luke 3. 1. and 7. 50 Act. 15. 5
; so among those, who have been baptized in their own water, some there are
baptized into the Spirit of Christ, and upright in the sight of God. But the
Israelites being mingled amongst the Heathen, in time learned their works Psalm.
105. 36.
and the Nightingale (some say) by conversing among Sparrows, will forget her
native notes, and learn to chirp. Moreover, those things were not in Hazael's
heart, whilst he was yet a Subject, which were afterward ingendered there,
when he came to be King over Syria 2 Kin. 8. 12, 13
.

Secondly, There is scarce any of those worthy Instruments, Luther, Calvin,
Beza, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Bullinger, with others of like name and
worth (almost) without number, whose piety, zeal and faithfulness in
conjunction with their singular gifts, and abilities of learning, God was
pleased to honor and use in the glorious Work of the Reformation, and in the
deseace and propagation of the reformed Religion unto this day, but in their
Writings, Commentaries upon the Scriptures, and others, very frequently and
upon all occasion take up most sad complaints against this generation of men,
as enemies to the progress of the Gospel, and by their unchristian and unworthy
carriages, causing the good Word of God and the Reformed Religion to be evil
spoken of, and reproached by the Adversaries thereof in the world.

Thirdly, We understand by the Records of former times, and our own experience
time after time informs us in part, that many of the best, and most
considerate persons, who have been for some time engaged in that way, after
full trial of it, have forsaken it, as not finding God, or Christ, in it.

Fourthly, We understand by frequent and very credible informations, and some
of us are able to testify as much upon our own knowledge and experience, that
in some of their religious Assemblies and Conventions there is no considerable
presence of God with them; that there is little taught amongst them with any
evidence or demonstration of the Spirit, with any Authority and Power; that the
Scriptures are very defectively and lamely opened and applied, ever and anon
wrested to the countenancing and magnifying of their own private conceit and
notion about Baptism; and that the greatest part of the time, during these
Meetings, is spent in fruitless altercations, and vain janglings. Nor know we
any ground to believe that it is much better in those other Congregations of
these men, which we know not, then it is in those which we know.

Fifthly, Another thing of little less discouragement unto us then the former,
is, that there have been, and still are extant, three or four several Editions,
or man-devised modes, of Dipping, every latter pretending to correct the
insufficiency, irregularity, or inconvenience, of the former. In regard
whereof, some (we understand) instead of being once baptized, have been dipped
three or four times over, thus committing that sin in Baptism, which Christ
prohibits in prayer, the sin, I mean, of vain repetitions. So that in case our
Consciences did lead us to a baptismal Dipping, yet should we be at a loss
concerning the particular mode or form, which is agreeable to the mind of
Christ, there being so many Competitors for this honor. And for the Mode of
the latest and newest Invention, and which (as we understand) is of greatest
esteem, it is, as far as we are able to conceive by the representation of it
made unto some of us, so contrived, and so to be managed, that the Baptist, who
dippeth according to it, had need be a man of stout limbs, and of a very able
and active body: otherwise the person to be baptized, especially if in any
degree corpulent or unwieldy, runs a great hazard of meeting with Christ's
latter Baptism Luke 12, ^0, Mat, 20. 22 23
instead of his former. And if this manner of Baptizing were in use in the
Apostles days, it is no great marvel that Paul, being a man little and low of
stature (as History reports him, and himself overtures, 2 Cor, 10, 1, 10.)
cared so little and seldom to adventure upon the work. And yet should we
hesitate in our Consciences much more, where to find a competent person amongst
them authorized by God to administer such a kind of Baptism unto us. For we are
not yet baptized into the belief of either of these Doctrines; either, 1. That
a person unbaptized, may, without a special call or warrant from God, like unto
that of John Baptist, Luke 3. ^. undertake the Administration; Or, 2. That that
was a case of necessity, wherein either Nicholas Stork (with his three
Comrades) in Germany about the year 1521, or whoever he was that first, himself
being in his own Judgment and Conscience un-baptized, presumed to baptize
others after that exotique mode in this Nation. Nor are we convinced or clear
in our Judgments, that any of those, who have been dipped amongst us, have been
rightly baptized, if it be supposed that true Baptism consists in a total
immersion, or submersion, by him that baptizeth; because the baptized
themselves are wont to submerge the greater part of their bodies, before the
Baptist comes at them; and so are rather se-baptized, then baptized according
to what the Scripture seems to speak concerning Baptism. Besides, we do not
read in the Scriptures of any Baptismal Boots, or Baptismal Breeches, or of
shifting garments to avoid the danger of being baptized, or of encircling women
with women after their coming from the water to salve their modesty, with some
other devices now, or of late in frequent use amongst our new Baptists in the
way of their practice. All these things narrowly considered, minister a ground
of vehement suspicion unto us, left the whole story of Baptismal Diping should
prove Apocryphal.

Sixthly, Another thing much discouraging and dissuading unto us from the way
mentioned, is, that they who have passed over the bridge of Anabaptism, can find
(as it seems) no firm ground to stand on on the other side, but are ever and
anon shifting their Judgments and their practices, running out into strange and
uncouth opinious, heaping up observation upon observation: yea their own
Churches and Congregations, notwithstanding their high Purification by Baptism,
are sometimes unclean to them; in so much that they divide, and subdivide, yea
and are ready to divide again their divisions.

Seventhly, Whereas Antichrist himself is not more Antichristian, then in
claiming and exercising such a dominion over the Faith of his Proselytes and
Disciples, by virtue whereof he commands them to depend only upon Ministers
and Teachers of his own Faith and wicked persuasion in matters of Religion,
severely prohibiting unto them the hearing of Protestant Preachers; we
understand that the same high-imposing spirit domineers more generally in the
Churches and Congregations which have been dipped; and that they also solemnly
conjure all their Proselytes and Converts not to hear Jesus Christ himself
speaking by any other mouth, then theirs; thus bearing them in hand, as if a
voice from Heaven like unto that, which was heard by the people at Christ's
Baptism concerning him, had come unto them also in reference to themselves and
their Teachers, in this or the like tenor of words: We are the only true
Churches and Ministers of Christ: HEAR US. Yea there was of late a very great
Schism made in one of these Churches, and the greater part aposynagoguized by
the lesser, because of the high misdemeanor of some of the Members in hearing
the words of eternal life from the mouths of such Ministers, who follow not
them in their way. Such principles and practices as these we judge to be most
notoriously and emphatically Antichristian, and such wherein (as was said in a
like case) the very horns and hoofs of the beast may be felt and handled. Yea
we cannot but judge them to be of most pernicious consequence to the precious
Souls of men, as depriving them of the best means and opportunities which God
most graciously affords unto them for their recovery out of all such snares,
wherein at any time their foot may be taken. This is another grand
discouragement unto us from that way.

Eighthly, We observe, That (more generally) when men or women have suffered
themselves to be entangled with a conceit of that way; especially when they
have bowed down their Judgments and Consciences unto it, they are presently
found in that sad condition and distemper, wherein the Apostle perc^ived the
Galatians, upon their subjection to the yoke of Circumcision, when he demanded
of them, Who has bewitched you Gal. 3 1.
? For as these were so strangely besotted and dissensed with their notion of
Circumcision and legal Observations, that the Apostle himself feared Gal. 4. 11.
that he should not be able to deliver them, no not by the clearest arguments
and demonstrations of the vanity and danger of their new notion, and practice:
so are the Reasons, Judgments and Understandings of the persons we speak of, so
stupefied, distraught and confounded with the admiration of their Water-work,
and their airy conceits about it, that all Reason opposing it, is a Barbarian
unto them; common sense is a mystery inaccessible to their understandings, the
light of the noonday offering to discover any nakedness in their way, is as
dark as the darkness of midnight it self: Men of sound and serious
intellectuals are as men that speak unto them in a strange tongue, if they
speak any thing against their way. They know not valleys from hills, nor hills
from valleys, rivers from trees, nor trees from rivers, halfs from wholes, nor
wholes from halfs, precepts from promises, nor promises from precepts, ceremony
from substance, nor substance from ceremony; every distinction that attempts to
show them the error of their way, ipso facto becomes a Chaos and confusion. On
the other hand, for the maintenance and defense of their way, the shadows of
mountains seem valiant and armed men; stubble and rotten wood, are turned into
weapons of steel and iron before them; letter becomes spirit, face becomes
heart, promise becomes precept, ceremony becomes substance, Apostles become
ordinary men and women, disputeables become demonstrations, and peradventures
become all Yeas and Amens. In respect of these mavelous and sad distempers in
their fancies and understandings, to reason with them about their way, or to
endeavor their conviction, seldom turns to any better account then a beating of
the air, or then Diogenes his begging applications to the Statues of men.

But Ninethly (and lastly) The first born of all Discouragements unto us in
this kind, is, that which our eyes daily see, and our ears often hear, and
wherewith our hearts are continually made sad within us, viz. that the
generality or far greater part of those, who turn aside into this way, do, some
more suddenly, others by degrees, impair and decline in their Graces, lose that
sweetness, meekness, love, and Christian humility of spirit, wherewith they
were formerly adorned, as if they were baptized in Marah Exodus 15 23.
, or in the waters of the Red Sea. Never did we know any that by being dipped
added thereby so much as an hairs breadth to his spiritual stature, or that
became in any degree either more meek, or more humble, or more patient, or more
merciful, or more mortifyed, self-denying, or the like; but very many have we
known and heard of, who upon such an engagement have made shipwreck of much
spiritual treasure, wherewith God had blessed them under their first Baptism.
Many have we known, who went into the water, Lambs, and came out of it Wolves
and Tigers: many who went in, Doves, and came out, Serpents; as if they had met
with the spirit that rules in the air under the water, in stead of the sweet
Spirit of Christ. Yea we have known some, who soon after their dipping have
perpetrated and done things so unworthy and unsuitable to their former genius,
which if any man had challenged them before their dipping, that they would do
after, we have reason to judge they would have replied to the challenge, as
Hazael did to Elisha in somewhat a like case; But what is thy servant a dog
that he should do this great thing? 2 King. 8. 13. So many sad spectacles and
stories, wherewith our eyes and ears are filled from time to time, especially
not being balanced or counterpoysed with any thing desirable, or of moment,
put us into some fears, lest as God, in his just, though secret judgment, gives
Satan a permission to haunt some houses, and to misuse and terrify those that
shall lodge in them; so he should, for causes best known to himself (though
somewhat might with good probability be conjectured in this kind) have granted
unto this enemy of mankind somewhat a like power, over the opinion and practice
of Rebaptizing, and to tempt those, who suffer themselves to be entangled with
them, more dangerously and prevailingly, then those, who in simplicity of heart
walk before him in the contrary way. We are not definitive in this; but only
crave leave (without offense) to make known our fears. And however, God having
multiplied grace, mercy and peace unto us in that way of his worship, wherein
at present we walk, we judge it no Christian prudence to tempt him in another.
But whether our Brethren have any just cause to cast us out of their communion,
for not forsaking a way of experienced peace and safety, to walk in a way of so
much danger, as that they seek to conjure us into, we leave to their own
consciences, and to all considering men, to judge and determine.

CONSIDERATION XXIII.
The Consideration that seals unto me the conclu^ency and force of all the
former, against the practice of Church-rending upon the p^etence of undipt
members, is, the invalidity of any First Argument against lawfullness of
communion with undipt Churches, Answered.
thing that has been yet brought to light (and I presume of all that ever
will, or can be) in justification of it.

1. It is not true, (is has been sufficiently proved) that circumcision was
constitutive of the Jewish Church, or gave being of membership to all the
leg^^imate members of it. Or if this could be made good, yet would it not
follow from hence, that therefore Baptism must needs constitute the Christian
Church. For what though it be supposed that Baptism succeeds in the place of
circumcision (a supposition, which though true and demonstrable enough, yet
neither lives, nor dies, to me) yet it follows not, that it should succeed it
in all its circumstantial ends and relations. Solomon succeeded David in his
Kingdom, yet he did not succeed him in his wives or concubines, or any his
relations of affinity.

2. Nor do the contents of Act. 2. 41. prove, so much as in f^ce, Second
Argument Answered.
or appearance, that Baptism is of the essence of a Churchmember. For, 1.
Those who are said to have been baptized (in the former part of the verse) are
not said (in the latter) to have been added to the Church, but simply, (...),
they were added, or added to. If the question be, to what, or to whom they were
added, if not to the Church; the Holy Ghost himself may inform you, expressing
himself more plainly in a like case, Act. 11. 24. And much people was ADDED TO
THE LORD. And, 2. It is said, Act. 2, 47. And the Lord added unto the Church,
who? Such as were baptized? no: but, Such as should be saved, or, (...), i. e.
those who are, or were, saved, or delivered, viz. from the general impiety of
the Jewish Nation, which was, not by being baptized, but by believing. 3. (and
lastly for this) In case their baptizing having been mentioned in the former
part of the verse, it should been said (in the latter) that they were added
unto the Church, yet (...) would not have proved (...); the recording of their
addition to the Church after their being baptized, will not prove this addition
to have been made by virtue, or by means of their baptizing. In the former part
of the verse, Ioh. 6. 49. Christ tells the Jews that their Fathers did eat
Manna in the Wilderness: he subjoyneth in the latter, and are dead. Will any
man reason from hence; because this eating Manna is reported in the former part
of the verse, and their death, or being dead, in the latter; therefore their
death was caused by their eating of manna.

3. Nor does that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 13. make any The third Argument
Ans^ered.
whit more (if not rather less) for Church-constitution by Baptism, then the
former. For, 1. When the Apostle says, by one Spirit we are all baptized into
one body, it is not necessary we should understand him to speak of
water-Baptisw; because, 1. Here is another element expressly named, wherein this
Baptism might be administered, viz. the Spirit, whereas there is no mention of
water at all. 2. The phrase of being baptized with the Spirit, or with the Holy
Ghost (as (...), might have been translated here, as it is in all other places
of like construction, as viz. Mat. 3. 11. Mar. 1. 8. Luke 3. 16. Ioh. 1, 33.
Acts 1. 5, Acts 11, 16.) is most usual and frequent in the Scriptures (as the
several texts now cited sufficiently declare;) whereas, to be with, or through,
the spirit, baptized with water, is an uncouth and hard expression, no where
found in the Scriptures, nor carrying any regular Sense in it. 3. If the unity
or oneness of the body here spoken of, did, or does depend upon their baptizing
with water, and was caused by this, it had been impertinent for the Apostle to
mention the unity of the Spirit, For we by one Spirit are all, etc. he should
rather have insisted upon the oneness, or same-ness of water Baptism (as he
does, Ephesians. 4. 5.) 4. The unity or oneness of the body, of which the Apostle
speaks, is not so much, or so proper, an effect of Water Baptism, no nor of the
oneness of this Baptism (if it be any effect of either at all) is of the
Spirit, by which this body is inspired, animated, acted, and moved, and the
members of it knit together, and kept from dissolution. 5. Whether all the
members of the body were baptized with water, or no, is uncertain. The Apostle
expressly professes that he baptized [viz. with water] very few of them; and
who else should baptize them all, no where appears; whereas that they were all
with, or by, the Spirit baptized into the same body [i. e. persuaded and
overruled in their judgments and consciences to imbody themselves in a
profession of the Faith of Jesus Christ, and of the Gospel] is unquestionable.
6, The Spirit is no where said to baptize men with water by or through the
Spirit. 7. Though there be no express mention in the verse either of God, or of
Christ, who elsewhere (the one, or the other) are said to baptize with the
Spirit, those who are thus baptived, yet verse. 6. God is named, and this under
the consideration of his unity, or sameness, as working all in all: But it is
the same God that works all in all. And in the next verse it is said; But the
manifestation of the Spirit is given unto every man, etc. [meaning, by God,
mentioned in the verse preceding.] Besides, There is nothing more familiat in
the Scriptures, then to express such actions, which are proper unto God, or
Christ, indefinitely, and without the mention of either. All Power is given
unto me [saith Christ, meaning by God his Father] in Heaven and in Earth,
Matthew. 28. 18. Instances of this construction, see Matthew. 12. 37. and 25. 29.
Philip. 4. 12. (besides many others.) Yea actions appropriate, whether to
Angels, or men, are sometimes thus expressed. 8. The resemblance which the
Apostle borrowed (in the Verse next preceding that in hand) from the natural
body, shows that the unity or oneness of that Church body of which he here
speaks, is not such an oneness which accrueth unto it by Water Baptism, or
any external Rite or Ceremony, but by the oneness and sameness of that Spirit,
by which it is (as it were) informed inwardly, and supported in life, and
spiritual Being. For as the body (says he) is one, and has many members, and
all the members of that one body, being many, are one body: so is Christ;
intimating, that as the natural body, notwithstanding the plurality and
diversity of its members, yet is, is made, or becomes, one entire body, not by
any external or accidental thing befalling, or done unto, every of these
members respectively, but by that spirit of life which diffuseth it self into
all and every of these members proportionably, and so by means of the oneness
or sameness of it, causes a joint coalition and natural consent in all these
members to constitute and make one and the same entire body; so is the mystical
or spiritual Body of Christ made, and does become, one and the same Body in its
kind, notwithstanding the great number and difference of the persons, who are
the members of it, by means of that Spirit, and his unity and sameness, which
communicates himself inwardly unto them all, raising and begetting in them an
holy consent to love and serve, and accommodate one another, much after the
same manner, as the natural members in that other body do. 9. Nor is it any
ways probable, that in that clause, (...), translated, and have been made to
drink into one Spirit, the Apostle speaks of the sacramental drinking in the
Supper; 1. Because drinking, or the sup, in this Sacrament, is never found
mentioned apart, or without mention of the bread in the same contexture of
Scripture with it. 2. To say that they, who have before this their drinking,
received the same Spirit, are made to drink [at the Lords Table] for, into, or
unto, the same Spirit, is very improper, and not without very much ado, so much
as truth. 3. Neither are Believers any where said, to be made to drink, or to
have drink given them, at the Lords Table, in order to their obtaining the same
Spirit, 4. Learned Expositors give notice of several different readings of this
clause, found in Manuscripts, and other Copies. In a Manuscript (says Grotius
upon the place) this clause is thus read: (...), i. e. and we all are one Body.
Oecumenius (it seems) did read it thus: (...), i. e. and we all drank, or were
caused to drink, one potion, or one drinking, for, or unto, one Spirit. Some of
the Fathers read the clause in their language, Et omnes unum Spiritum
potavimus, i. e. and we all have drank one Spirit; with which the Syriac also
accords. 5. The meaning of the clause (if the reading we have be judged
authentic) construed with the former, seems to be this: We have by the same
Spirit, not only, or simply, been baptized into one and the same Body, [i. e.
received such a proportion, or measure of the Spirit given us, which is
sufficient to make us one Body,] but we have also been made to drink unto one
Spirit, [i. e. have received of this Spirit of God so liberally, so
plentifully, that we may very well become one Spirit hereby amongst our selves,
and walk together without either divisions in judgme^ts, or distances in our
affections.] This construction of the preposition, (...), might be exemplified
from the Scriptures: and however, there is no hardness or unpleasantness in it.
And this Exposition of the clause, receives countenance from all those passages
in both Epistles, wherein the Apostle signifies the more then ordinary pourings
out of the Spirit in variety of gifts and graces upon these Corinthians. But,
10. (and lastly) Suppose it should be granted, 1. That the Apostle in this
Verse speaks of Water Baptism, 2. That his meaning is, that by this Baptism,
they had been all baptized into one Body; Yet, 1. It does not follow, that this
must needs be understood constitutively, but declaratively only; and that all
employed hereby should be, that by their Baptism they did declare, or signo
tenus pretend, unto the world, that they were one Body, not that they were
constituted, or really and actually made one Body, by their Baptism. 2. Both
the said particulars admitted, yea and this also, that they were (in a sense)
by Water Baptism baptized [constitutively] into one Body, yet will it not
follow from all these put together, either, 1. But that they might have been,
yea and now were, the same Body, which they were, by another Constitution, and
Constitutor (one, or more) besides that of Water Baptism; Or, 2. That no other
kind of Water Baptism, but only that by Dipping, would have been every whit as
effectual, as that by diping, to constitute or make them one Body. As to the
former; Men may be truly said to be justified [i. e. constituted or made
righteous] by Faith; and yet as truly be said also to be justified by Christ,
yea and by God himself, and this with the self same Justification. Yea Children
without Faith are justified with the same Justification by God and Christ,
wherewith men Believers are justified through Faith. In like manner a company
of Believers, may be said to be constituted a Church by Baptism, and yet be
said to be constituted and made this very Church by the Spirit of Christ, or by
Faith also; yea though Baptism be wanting, yet may these persons be a Church of
a like, as sound, as worthy a constitution by means of the other two, the
Spirit of Christ, and Faith. To the latter; Suppose baptizing by sprinkling, or
pouring water on the face, or head, were only the Ordinance of men, and not of
Christ; yet by common agreement and consent about the signification and purport
of this Ordinance, a general submission unto it by men, might as well and as
much, constitute them one and the same Body, as baptizing by dipping would do.
It is true, upon such a supposition as this, the unity of the Body, so far as
the ceremony of sprinkling has to do in it, is not raised, or effected,
according to the mind or precept of Christ; but yet those other Constitutors of
the same unity (I mean, the Spirit of God, and Faith) are not defeated in their
operations or effects hereby. So that the Body, or Church, we speak of, is a
true Body or Church of Christ, although the external Contributor toward the
unity of it, be not such as it ought to be. But in this latter part of our
Answer, we put our selves to more trouble then we need, by arguing against such
things, which neither can be proved, nor are (indeed) in themselves probable.
However our Brethren may please to take notice here from how ready and desirous
we are to give them satisfaction in the largest measure they can desire it.

4. (And lastly) Whereas an unlawfulness of communicating with Churches or
persons unbaptized (as some call unbaptized) Fourth (and last) Argument against
the lawfulness of communion with Churches undipt, answered.
is argued from hence; that the Gospel no where records, or approves of, any
such communicating by Saints baptized, in the Apostles days; we answer,

1. That it is not recorded that the spring, or water, wherein the Eunuch was
baptized, was so deep as to reach, or come up to his ankles, when he went (as
is supposed) into it: yet our Brethren build very high, and with confidence
(more then enough) upon a far greater depth then so in it. Nor is it recorded
that any of the seven Churches of Asia, or the greater part of the Members of
any of them, were baptized: yet our Brethren would think it unreasonable in us
to deny it. But by what Law should our Brethren judge it unreasonable in us to
deny, upon the account of a non-being recorded, what they suppose to be true;
when as they judge it very commendable in themselves to deny that only upon the
same account of not being recorded, which we judge to be true? But if we deny
them the principle, or privilege of unreasonableness, their fabric falls to
the ground.

2. Where the Scripture, not only allows, but enjoyneth, the believing
yoke fellow in marriage, cohabitation with the unbeleeving, there it does ex
super abundanti both approve and require Church-cohabitation and communion of
the baptized with the un-baptized; at least where both parties are really
sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, and the Baptized have most solemnly, and
in the presence of God, and before many witnesses of his Saints, engaged
themselves by promise unto the other, to walk with them in all the Ordinances
of God and of Christ, as they should be at any time revealed and made known
unto them. I shall not (I suppose) need to traverse the comparison. The
Argument a minore ad majus, from the less probability to the greater, lies
large above ground. If Infidelity, which is ten times worse then the want of an
external Ceremony, yet has no power to absolve the believing wife for her
matrimonial engagement to her Husband; much less has a defect of, or in, an
outward Ceremony, in one or more members of a Christian Society, any Commission
or Authority from God to discharge those, who call themselves baptized, from
those sacred promises or engagements, wherein they have openly and avowingly
affianced themselves to this Society.

3. Where the Lord Christ says, What God has joined together, let no man put
asunder, (Mat. 19. 6.) he does more then justify that Communion, which is the
subject matter of our present Debate. For if it was God, that joined together
the persons who now look upon themselves, as Baptized, with those who are
challenged for unbaptized, in that holy Communion wherein they sometimes walked
together, then it is a plain case, that no man (indeed no creature) whatsoever
has any authority or right of power, whatsoever his pretense may be, to
dissolve the band of this Communion between them, except it be given unto him
by God. And then this gift or grant from God must be made to appear to men,
before they ought to own or countenance any man in his act of parting, or
putting asunder what God has joined together. And the truth is, that that man,
or creature, that shall claim a right of power to abrogate or disanul any act
of God, otherwise then from God himself, makes himself not only equal, but
superior in power, unto God. So that all the Question is, whether God may
lawfully and with truth be entitled to those transactions, by which the
respective members of a Society or fellowship of Saints, do at any time imbody
themselves, or become a Church or spiritual Corporation. For if it be either
granted, or proved, that God is the Author of these councels or motions in the
hearts of his Saints, as well undipt, as dipped, by which they incorporate or
imbody themselves, it will roundly follow, that men have no power, but that
which is usurped, and sinfully used, to dissolve, either in whole, or in part,
these imbodied Societies, or Incorporations. For if God, upon this supposition,
should authorize or license men to make any such dissolution, he should be
divided against, and inconsistent with, himself; giving men leave, what he
builds up in one day, to pull down the next. For certain it is, that they who
separate and rend themselves off from any Society of Saints after one, two, or
three years walking with them, had the same right or power of separating
themselves the very next day or hour after their first uniting, unless it be
supposed that this Society in the mean time has enormously corrupted it self,
or apostatized from that Faith, which it professed when the said persons first
joined themselves unto it. Now whether God be the Author of those counsels and
motions in the hearts of his Saints, whether dipped, or undipt, by the ducture
whereof they are led to imbody themselves (as has been said,) can be no man's
question, who does but know and consider the most gracious and blessed
tendencies, yea and real effects of such Incorporations, when the persons
incorporated do but in any considerable degree walk according to their light,
and perform the terms of their engagements, dipping, or not dipping, making no
difference in this kind. Notwithstanding if a thing so clear and evident as
this should be any man's doubt, demonstrations and proofs are near at hand; but
till they be called for, the Reader (happily) for his ease, had rather hear of
them, then have them. But,

4. (And lastly) To justify the practice of persons dipped in separating and
tearing off themselves from the Societies of Saints undipt, it is not (so much
as in color or show) sufficient to plead, that they find no Example in the
Scripture of any such Communion; but it is absolutely necessary hereunto, that
they find and show some Example (and this attested by the Spirit of God) of
such a Separation, as they practice. They find no Example in Scripture of any
Believer dipped after they had been dedicated in their Infancy unto the Service
of Christ by sprinkling, or washing; yet they judge themselves bound to the
practice. Why may they not as well judge themselves bound to remain in communion
with Societies undipt, although they find no Example in Scripture of a like
practice? If they practice in one case without Example, why do they not the
like in the other? As for matter of Precept, whereon to build either the one
practice, or the other; certainly there is as much (or rather much more) for
holding communion with Saints, though undipt, as for dipping, after sprinkling,
or washing. And as sprinkling, or washing in Infancy, is no where expressly or
litera tenus made an exception against after Dipping; so neither is this
dipping made any exception or bar against holding communion with Saints or
Believers, though undipt. Yea whereas that Communion* we speak of is an act or
service of love and of mercy, and consequently one of the great things of the
Law, Dipping being only a Ceremony, and so answering the tything of Mint,
Anise, and Cummin, certainly if men think themselves bound in Conscience not to
leave the latter undone, they are much bound to observe and do the former.
Therefore they who dip after sprinkling, in this very practice condemn
themselves for breaking Communion after Dipping.

Postscript, To the Reader.
Good Reader,
UPon occasion of the foregoing Considerations, and the Argument traversed in
them, I judged it not amiss to subjoyn in the cloze of them one Consideration
more* which though it does not so particularly relate unto the Argument of the
former, yet may it through the blessing of God comfort, strengthen, and relieve
thee against such impressions of sadness, wherewith, as well that troublesome
and disorderly behavior of men there counter-argued, as many other parts of no
better, if not of a much worse import, like to be shortly acted upon the stage
of the world yet standing, are like to fill thy Soul. The Consideration I mean,
is, That the Great Troubler of the World, the Devil, knowing that he has now
but a very short time, is like to arm himself with greater wrath then ever,
against the poor generation of the children of men, the objects of his deadly
fury and most inveterate indignation. They who have yet their turns of
mortality to take, either in whole, or in part, are like to learn and know more
within the space of one year what a DEVIL means, then those who have lived
before them have done in seven. Satan has but dallied with the world in
mischief and blood hitherto (in comparison.) The scope of time before him
wherein to act, was a kind of temptation upon him to remissness in his work.
Now finding and feeling himself close begirt, and penned up in straits of time
for action, it cannot be expected but that he should daily break out upon the
world like thunder and lightening out of the blackest cloud. Acerrima virtus
est, quam ultima necessitas extundit. He never rent Seneca.
and tare the poor child (Luke 9.) so cruelly, as when he knew that the date of
his possession was now expired. And however his game by, as well the present
troubles, perplexities, and confusions of the world, as the eternal ruin and
perdition of the precious Souls of men, (for his motto may be, Tam mart, quam
Mercurio,) yet when he can pursue and follow both in one and the same chase, he
is in the highest ecstasy of his delight. His great and deeply beloved design
is to dissolve his works in the world, who he knows came into the world to
dissolve his. And as he knows that Christ's method for the destruction of his
Kingdom was by kindling a fire of division in the midst of it, by means
whereof, where five should be in an house, three should be divided against two,
and two against three, The father divided against the son, and the son against
the father, the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the
mother Luke 12 49, 51, 52, 53.
, etc. in like manner his method, by way of revenge, and, if it were possible,
to destroy the Kingdom of Christ, is, by casting fire too, a fire of division,
into that also, whereby the Saints in their families likewise should be
divided, the husband against the wife, and the wife against the husband; the
father against his sons, and the sons against their father; the master against
his servants, and the servants against their master, etc. And though it be
true, that the Devil has in former ages cast sundry fires of separation and
division into that great body or bulk of the Professors of Christ in the world
(commonly called, the Catholic Church) causing hereby great troubles and
confusions in this Church, and possibly might separate and divide some true
Saints and Servants of God, from others, partakers of like precious Faith with
them, yet did he never (at least since the Apostles days) attempt the Kingdom
of Christ so compact in it self, and so well fortified for its own defense and
preservation, as of late it was amongst us in the Congregational Churches of
the Nation, by any fire of division whatsoever like unto that, which is best
known in the world by the name of, Anabaptism. By other fires, for the most
part he either separated the vile from the precious, or the use amongst
themselves, and from the vile; in both which cases the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ was rather a gainer, then a loser. But by this fire of Anabaptism (at
least as the greatest part of the Engineers, who work with it, do employ it) he
separates only the precious from the precious, Saints from Saints, Believers
from Believers; and makes the one to become as Publicans and Heathens unto the
other. By means whereof many spiritual temples and habitations of the living
God, fair and large, and wherein his Soul delighted to dwell, are in imminent
danger of being made waste and desolate. Alas! the fires of Swenkfieldianism,
Famdism, Antinomianism, Lutheranism, Calvinism, Super-Ordinancism, with the
sparks of Quaking and Ranting, were, and are, but as ignes lambentes, fires
running up and down and licking only the outside of the house, without kindling
upon, or burning any the principals, or main timber; whereas the fire of
Anabaptism, is like the fire kindled by God himself heretofore in Zion; the
fierceness whereof was so sore, that (as Jeremiah lamenteth the case) it
devoured the Foundations thereof, Lam. 4. 11.

And if we diligently consider the nature of that design, the accomplishing
whereof Satan projecteth by this fire, we cannot reasonably conceive but that
it should be very subtle and penetrating (in its kind) I mean very apt and
proper to insinuate and convey it self into the judgments and consciences of
good men, either less knowing, or less considerate; and yet withal so
propertied also, that persons who are diligent in the use of the touchstone,
and of through judgments, may not feel the least warmth or heat of truth in it.
That fire which is to separate between Silver and Silver, between Gold and
Gold, had need have somewhat more then ordinary fire, in it. And when Satan's
device and work is to sever and divide Saints from Saints, true believers from
true believers, imbodied as close and fast together as the scales of Leviathan,
the fire whereof he must make use in the operation, must be some notion,
opinion, or apprehension, one or more, so calculated and conditioned, that in
face it may look like a truth of God, and yet in heart be far otherwise. For by
means of such a composition or constitution as this, it is apt to take good
people of lighter and weaker judgments, and less considerate, and to leave
those of stronger, and more inquiring: and thus the operation is finished, and
the separation wrought. For there is scarce any Church or congregation of
Believers, but is compounded of these two sorts of persons; some who are more
credulous, and more easy to be taken with appearances; others, who are more
jealous of faces, and who must see, a sound bottom, before they approve, or
commend tops. Now the Doctrine or opinion (with the concurrent practice)
embraced by those, who are best known from others by the Name of Anabaptists (I
intend no reflection in the term, nor any avouchment of the propriety of it, in
reference to those meant by it, but merely designation) is of that calculation
we speak of: it has a face or show, both of truth, and Godliness; but it has
an heart of error, and profaneness. By means of the former it captivateth one
sort of men: by means of the latter, it alienateth the judgments and affections
of others from it.

I know not (good Reader) whether thou have taken any notice either of the
Forty Queries about Church Communion and Baptism (some while since published)
or of the Answer (so called) to them, published more lately. I judge it not
worth, either mine, or any other man's pains, to make an Anti-answer, or just
reply. Heaving at a feather is too childish a posture for a man. Something may
be said in commendation of a fair face, although the heart relating to it be
never so foul and bad. My Antiquerist is a man of parts and worth, in his
sphere: but what the word of God, and evidence of truth make crooked, what
parts or abilities of man are able to make straight? I shall, upon occasion of
the subject discoursed in the precedure of these papers, here only say this
(giving in withal a small first fruits of an account for such my belief) that I
verily believe that there is nothing answered to any one of the said Forty
Queries, but what is defective, either in point of pertinency, or of truth, or
at least of proof. The grounds of my Faith in this kind, are partly the nature
and import of the questions; partly the tenor and substance of such of the
Answers, which I have had time to weigh and consider.

For the former; If I should propose such a question, the tenor whereof should
import, that I verily believe the Sun to be up at noon day, or, that the body
ought not to be sacrificed upon the service of the shadow, or the raiment
belonging to it, or the like; could I expect, or think, that he who should
undertake in Answer to such my Questions, to overthrow my belief imported in
either, could alledg or insist upon any thing, but which of necessity must be,
either impertinent, or untrue (if not both) or if neither, yet uncertain; which
in close disputations, especially if the degree of uncertainty be any thing
considerable, amounts to little more, then to that which is untrue.

For the latter; because I would not be thought to seek out my Antigonist,
where possibly he may be more obnoxious, or weak, I shall give a brief account
of his weakness in the best of his strength; for I presume that if he be
stronger then himself any where, it is in the front of his battle, and in his
foremost Answers. Therefore let us (in a word) see whether the foundations both
of his first and second Answers, be not less either in pertinency (as has been
said) or in Truth (if not in both,) or least in proof.

1. In his Answer to the first Query, he lays for one ground hereof, that
which is the matter of question between him, and his Querist, viz. that
Constituting of Churches without Baptism is a corrupt practice; 2. That
Infant-sprinkling is a corrupt practice also. Now what an impertinency is it in
arguing, to assert that without proof, which is denied by the adverse party
(and that in the Question it self under debate,) and withal to build the
process of the dispute upon it?

2. He lays this for another ground of his Answer; that there was no such
practice, as either constituting of Churches without Baptism, or sprinkling of
Infants, on foot in the world, till after all the Books of the Holy Scriptures
were finished. This likewise he affirms without all proof, notwithstanding he
well knows that the sense of his Querist stands to the contrary. This is of the
same house and lineage of impertinency with the former.

3. He builds another strein of his Answer upon this ground; that the Querist
has disclaimed communion with the Church of Rome, and the Parochial Churches
in England; and this upon this ground, because there is no example in Scripture
for such Church-Constitution, as that of Rome and England is. Here are more
untruths then one, un ess a very improper construction of the phrase, disclaim
communion, contracts the number. For I never disclaimed communion with the
Church of Rome, more then I have done with the Church of Mahomet: nor had I
ever occasion to do the one, more then the other. But the Grand untruth here
is, that I should have disclaimed communion with these Churches, because there
is no example in Scripture of such Church-Constitutions etc. my Anti querist is
very much mistaken in this: for I disclaim no action whatsoever upon this
account, because there is no example of this action in the Scripture; as
neither do I perform any action, simply because there is an example of such an
action here. But the adequate ground of my disclaiming any action (and so of
communion with any Church whatsoever) is, that I find no sufficient ground in
the Scriptures for my doing it. But I may (and do) find sufficient grounds in
the Scripture for my doing of many things, of which I find here no examples.
However, upon this mistaken ground of my disclaiming communion with these two
Churches, he goes on his way merrily, and builds as securely, as he that
mistakes the sand for a rock.

4. He advances supposing yet further, that I hold communion with Churches
built upon Infant Baptism. Surely here is a pair of mistakes: one, about his
own; another, about my practice. For, 1. Himself disclaims communion with those
Societies of Saints, which here he calls, Churches, merely upon this account,
because they are no Churches. 2. Whereas he charge me with holding cammunion
with Churches built upon Infant Baptism, the truth is, that I hold no communion
with such Churches; nor do I know any Church, one or other, built upon any
Baptism, whether Infant Baptism, or Beleever-Baptism. The Churches with which I
hold communion, are BVILT upon the Foundations of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

5. Neither is it at all pertinent to the business before him, to inform his
Querist, or others, that there is example in abundance in Scripture of Churches
of a better Constitution, [he means, then of Churches built upon
Infant Baptism, such as he supposes I hold communion with,] and that this is,
of Saints baptized after they had believed. We do not believe that Baptism,
whenever, or howsoever administered, is any part of, or ingredient into, a
Churches constitution, more then the Gospel it self, or the preaching hereof,
or the service of the Lords Table. A Church may be of a very ill constitution,
though all the members of it have been regularly baptized; and on the contrary
of a good and sound constitution, though there have been some defect or
irregularity in their Baptism. Baptism is extrinsecal to Church-constitution,
as the washing of a man's face or hands is to the constitution or complexion of
his natural body.

6. Another mistaken ground, upon which he builds very high, is, that the
Querist, and others of his Judgment, plead the Precept os circumcising Infants
under the Law, as virtually requiring the baptizing of Infants under the
Gospel. I confess if we should plead thus, we should plead much after the rate
of those, who plead the unlawfulness of Church communion with the Saints,
because they jump not in conceit with them in every circumstance about
Baptizing. We are far from either saying or thinking, that the precept of
circumcising Infants under the Law, virtually requires the baptizing of them
under the Gospel. We hold, that had there not been a precept given, in, or
under the Gospel for baptizing, the precept of circumcising Infants under the
Law, could not have justified us in our baptizing them under the Gospel. We do
not go about to prove the lawfulness (much less the necessity) of baptizing,
from the precept of circumcising: this is a Grand mistake in the Antiquerist
about the sense of his Adversaries: but we receiving a precept, from God under
the Gospel for baptizing, without any determination of, or limitation unto, any
certain age of the persons, to be by virtue of this precept baptized, and
finding the Council of God to have pitched upon Infancy, as the most meet age
for the reception of a former Ordinance of like spiritual signification and
import with Baptism, judge our selves bound in conscience rather to be directed
to the proper subject of Baptism by the Council of God in a case of like
nature, then to consult the wisdoms (or wills rather) of men in the business.
This considered,

7. How, not impertinent only, but importune and unsavery, is that insultation,
If it be not good reasoning from circumcision to Baptism, let the Pedobaptists
bid adieu to their cause of Infant Baptism, which is built and bottomed
thereupon. Alas, good man! the cause of Pedo-baptism is not at all built or
bottomed upon any reasoning from circumcision to Baptism, but upon the good
Word of God it self. Neither have we any reason, or need, to bid adieu to this
cause, although (to please our friend the Antiquerist) we should take our
leaves of our reasoning from the subject of circumcision to the more
appropriate subject of Baptism. Yea this our good friend himself being so well
acquainted with us, cannot be ignorant, but that we have many other pillars
hewn out of the Rock of the Scriptures, whereon we build our cause of
Pedo-baptism, besides what we argue from the subject of circumcision. Yea
himself has of late been hewing and hacking at some of them (whereof notice
may be taken in due time) but his attempts against them have rather proved them
to be strong, then any ways weak.

8. How impertinently weak is that insulting demand also (in the process of
this answer) And now which of the horns of this Dolemma will the Pedobaptists
suffer themselves to be gored by? Here the Anti-querist (it seems) turns
Querist himself. But if he has not an happier stroke in Anti-querism, then in
Querism, he had better harken unto the Proverb, Manum de tabula, and leave his
paper as white as he found it. The Pedobaptists need not fear goaring by either
of the horns of his Dilemma: they stand so staringly wide, that there is roomth
enough and enough for seven men to pass abrest between them. For first, the
man's Dilemma takes it for granted, that uncircumcised persons were excluded
[surely he means, always, not sometimes, or in some cases only; for this would
sink the saying too far beneath his cause) from acts of Church Communion,
whilst circumcision was in force. Will he say that women were circumcised? or
that they were excluded form acts of Church Communion, because they were
uncircumcised? or that all those, who were not circumcised in the Wilderness,
were excluded from all acts of Church communion for Forty Years together? 2.
The said Dilemma very weakly supposes, that the Author of it, may from the
exclusion of uncircumcised ones under the Law from acts of Church Communion
then, as well argue to the exclusion of unbaptized, or unduly baptized ones
under the Gospel, from Church Communion now, as we reason from the subject of
circumcision, to the subject of Baptism. I wonder upon what principle or ground
in reason such a supposition or conceit as this stands. For what the
Antiquerist offers upon this account, is no better then gibbrich or nonsense
unto me. For (says he) the same things have the same consequences; and two
things alike, belong to the like reason and judgment. He that either can
understand these topiques, or fit them to his case, must plough with a stronger
and nimbler heyfer, then mine. That which I suppose the man would have, is this
(but his demand is most unreasonable and importune) that if Baptism succeeds
circumcision in one thing, it must succeed it in another; yea in all things.
How empty such a conceit as this is both of reason, and of truth, has been
showed in the last of our foregoing Considerations. And however some of us upon
occasion sometimes say, that Baptism succeeds circumcision (which is a truth
evident enough, and acknowledged such, in some respects, by one of the Great
Apostles of the Anti-querists Faith in the matter of Baptism,) yet have we no
need of such a saying to support our cause of Infant Baptism. For the analogy
or proportion of reason, from whence we argue, that infants may be as well the
subjects of Baptism, as of circumcision, may equally stand, whether Baptism be
looked upon as Successor unto circumcision, or no.

But if our good Friends intellectuals be not too far spent with the strength
of the Enchantment upon him, but that he yet remains in some competent capacity
to receive instruction, I shall here (once for all) give him an account, why,
though it were to be granted (which yet it is not, but only with limitation, as
was lately showed) that want of circumcision did exclude from Church-ship under
the Law, yet this at no hand proves, that therefore a defect of, or in,
Baptism, should do the like under the Gospel.

1. The Church of God being in the Infancy or nonage of it under the Law, the
state and condition of it was more servile, then now under the Gospel. Now I
say that the heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant,
though he be Lord of all; But is under Tutors and Governors, until the time
appointed of the Father. Even so we when we were children, were in bondage
under the Elements of the world. But whtn the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, To redeem them that
were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons Gal. 4. 1. 2. 3,
etc.
. In respect of this different State of the Church under the Law, and under the
Gospel, the Churh is not to be looked upon as under a like rigor of subjection
to any carnal Ordinance or Ceremony whatsoever, as it was under the Law. Nor
are the external Ceremonies of the Gospel pressed upon like terms of
peremptoriness and severity, upon the Saints, as those of the Law were imposed
upon the carnal Church of the Jews. If they were, the two so different States
of the Church mentioned, should be confounded. But somewhat to this purpose we
speak in our Considerations; where we declared, that in the Gospel, no man is
threatened for not being Baptized, Baptism being here enjoined or recommended
unto men by way of indulgence, and for their spiritual benefit and
accommodation, not with any intention on Gods part to render the bare omission
of it an article of condemnation against any man, much after the manner of the
Law of the free will offering under the Law. And whereas it was said unto
Abraham concerning circumcision, He that is born in thy house, and he that is
bought with thy money must needs be circumcised, It is no where said unto any
person in the New Testament, ye must needs be baptized; Yea unto the Eunuch
requiring Baptism, Philip answered, If thou beleevest with thy whole heart,
thou MAY, not, thou MUST [be baptized.] There is an eye of this Evangelical
liberty concerning external observations in the Institution it self of the
other Ordinance also, as the Apostle Paul records it, 1 Cor. 11. 25. 26. This
do ye as often as ye do it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Here is no
Injunction of the Quoties, but a plain intimation of a liberty touching this;
only the manner of the Toties is strictly prescribed: which is the direct
calculation, or manner of sanction of the Institution concerning the free will
offering under the Law. This kind of offering was imposed upon no man, as of
necessity: only the terms of the oblation of it, when offered, are strictly
prescribed. See Levit. 1. 2, 3, etc. and again, Levit. 22. 18. 19. 20, etc. But,

2. Concerning Circumcision, there never was any question among the Jews, nor
indeed any place or occasion for a question, either whether it was commanded by
God, or no, or whether the practice of it was to continue till the coming of
the Messiah, or no; no nor yet concerning the due mode or manner of its
administration. So that whosoever refused to submit to circumcision, during the
reign of it, did ipso facto and without dispute, openly manifest, yea profess
disobedience to God in an express command. Whereas the Anti-querist well
knows, that amongst the Saints and servants of God themselves, and persons as
tender conscienced, of as rich an obediential frame of heart toward God, as
himself, or the best of his late-born persuasion, there are many scruples,
questions, and cases of conscience about Baptism; some being unsatisfied
whether there be any command of God, or of Christ, in the Gospel, requiring
subjection of any person in these days, unto such a thing; others, ohether the
mind and pleasure of God be, that the ordinary and standing administration of
it should be made to Infants, or persons of mature years; others again, whether
the administration of it may not with as good, or better acceptance with God,
be made by sprinkling, or pouring water on the baptized, as by dowzing or
dipping (besides several others of like nature.) And such questions and
dissatisfactions amongst holy, humble, grave and sober Christians, as these,
undeniably show and prove, that the mind and will of God t^uching these
particulars, is very sparingly, obscurely, and with much scantness of
discovery, delivered in the Scriptures.

The premises considered, the case must needs become plain, why, though it
should be granted that circumcision was made by God a necessary condition of
Church-ship under the Law, yet this no ways proves, that he has made Baptism,
especially in any particular mode of its administration, a like condition of
Church Membership under the Gospel. If God should have intended Baptism (as
some men count Baptism) for a necessary requisite, or ingredient into
Churchship under the Gospel, he should have made a Law for the inchurching of
his Saints, which would have excluded the far greatest (yea and best) part of
them from all part and fellowship in that gracious accommodation; and which
would have brought in an Heterogeneal generation of vain and loose persons, in
their stead; as now the groundless conceit of such a Law does amongst us. Nor
can any man tolerably imagine, had the precept of God concerning circumcision
under the Law, been like to have occasioned as many doubtful disputations
amongst the best of the Jewish Nation, as he knew the signification of his mind
concerning Baptism in the Gospel, would occasion and raise amongst the best of
his Saints, that he would ever have regulated Church Fellowship amongst them by
circumcision. Yea,

3. (And lastly) the Regulation of Church Communion under the Levitical Law by
circumcision (upon the terms, and with the limitations formerly specified) is
so far from being so much as a probable argument, that Church Communion should
be intended by God to be regulated by Baptism under the Gospel, that it rather
evinceth the quite contrary. For as the communion of the Church under the Law,
whilst it [the Church] was yet carnal, and servile, in the Infancy or nonage of
it, was regulated by a Rule or Law suitable to the state and condition of it,
i. e. by a Law of a carnal Ordinance; so is it reasonable to conceive, that the
Church under the Gospel being spiritual (1 Pet. 2. 5.) and of mature growth,
the Communion thereof should be regulated by a Law or Rule agreeable to the
condition and state hereof, and which requires, and consiseth in, somewhat
that is more spiritual, and not by Baptism, which is a carnal Ceremony (so
acknowledged by the Greatest Masters themselves of the way called Anabaptism)
as well as Circumcision.

Thus they who have eyes to see, and hearts to understand, may clearly enough
perceive, that however the subject of Baptism under the Gospel may be
rationally calculated by the subject of Circumcision under the Law; yet the
Regulation of Church Communion by Circumcision under the Law, can be no ground
of estimating Church fellowship by Baptism under the Gospel. We have assigned
Reason upon Reason of the difference. And thus having felt and handled the two
insulting horns of the late-threatening Dilemma; we find them to be made of
brown paper. But (to proceed yet a little further with the Answerer in his
Answer to the first Query)

9. Another ground whereon he builds, is, that the Scripture is every whit as
express; for Baptism, to precede the enjoyment of Church privileges, as it is
for a voluntary consenting to Church Order and Government, to precede the same
enjoyment. But how impertinently to his Cause, and with how little proof, is
this affirmed? First, If by, Church Priviledges, he means, all
Church Priviledges, how can the Scripture be express for Baptism to precede the
enjoyment of them, when as it self is one of these privileges; and (doubtless
according to his sense) one of the greatest of them? Is the Scripture express
for any thing to precede the enjoyment of it self? If by, Church Priviledges,
he means, some of these privileges, when he has specified which he means, we
shall consider further of his assertion. But,

2. The Scripture may be express enough for Baptism to precede the enjoyment he
speaks of, [i. e. that Baptism did sometimes precede this enjoyment, and may
precede it still, yea and happily that in some cases it ought to precede it,] and
yet be neither express, nor virtual or implicit, for the absolute or universal
necessity of such a precedure, which is the point wherewith the Query before
him pincheth him.

3. (And lastly) The Scripture may be as express for what he says it is, as
for a voluntary consenting to Church Order, etc. and yet be neither express,
nor yet virtual or consequential, for it. For the Truth is, that the Scripture
is not express for the said consenting: only some of us judge it meet to desire
such a consent of those, whom we judge otherwise meet to admit into Communion
with us in Church Priviledges, to prevent some grand inconveniences, which it
is not pertinent here to specify; although the sense of others of us is
otherwise in the case. And,

10. How impertinent to his Cause is this reasoning: If one person may be
admitted upon such terms, [he means, to Church Priviledges without Baptism,]
then why not two? if twe, why not ten, and so an hundred, or a thousand? and
consequently such Gospel Order laid totally aside? If an hundred, or a
thousand, or ten thousands, should be admitted to Church Priviledges upon a
manifestation of their Faith (which may be otherways, and to far better
satisfaction, done, then by a being Baptized) with an exclusion of all others,
who are able to give no such account of a work of Faith in them, would this be
a total laying aside of Gospel Order? Good Reader, consider and judge.

11. He affirms, that those Precepts, Exhortations, or Doctrines by which men
stand enjoined to observe Gospel Order, do virtually prohibit men Baptized
communion with unbaptized in Church Fellowship, as that which is contrary
thereunto. But at what a distance do his Proofs stand from his Position, as if
they were mere strangers to it. For,

1. His first Proof is built upon a clear mistake of the word, Teach, Go and
teach All Nations, Mat. 28. 19. (and indeed upon a misunderstanding of the
whole Verse.) For (...), to teach, does not signify to teach men so, as to
make them willing to obey the Gospel, [which sense notwithstanding bears the
whole burden of his first Proof of the said Position:] this sense of the word
was (I believe) never heard of from any Author that has written in the Greek
Tongue; and however, cannot be the sense of it here (as will appear presently:)
but the word (...), properly signifies to instruct or teach; or (which is the
same) to do that, which is apt and proper to make a Disciple, one or more,
whether any person be actually, or by way of event or success, made a Disciple,
or no. And that this was the proper and only sense of the word intended by the
Lord Christ here, is evident; because otherwise, 1. He must be conceived to
give a Commission or Charge to men to do that, which was not in their power to
do, as viz. actually to regenerate, or convert men to the Faith, etc. 2. It
would follow, that although the Apostles should have taught and preached the
Gospel with never so much faithfulness, yet they had falsified the Trust
reposed in them by Christ, and acted short of their Commission, if they did not
at all times when they preached, make those, to whom they preached, actual
Believers. This considered, how impertinent and insulse is that conceit, that
an Injunction to baptize is therefore put by a participle of the present tense,
Teach all Nations, baptizing them etc. to imply, that they were presently to
baptize men upon their being taught. If this were so, all persons whatsoever,
to whom the Gospel was at any time preached by the Apostles, were, upon their
bare hearing of it, and whether they believed, or blasphemed, to have been
baptized by them. And if there be any sense at all in these words, as all
examples of that nature in the Acts of the Apostles do declare, how loud an
untruth is it. There is not so much as any one example throughout the Acts of
the Apostles, of a person baptized barely or merely upon his hearing of the
Gospel preached unto him. But how impertinently this piece of Scripture is
alleged, either to prove who, or what kind of person, is the proper and
adequate subject of Baptism; or a necessity that all believers to the Worlds
end, should be baptized, or otherwise be guilty of Sin, has been argued in the
preceding Considerations.

2. How little truth, or pertinency there is in his second Proof of the
aforesaid Position, sufficiently appears by the examination of the first. For
though the Apostles did put the said Commission of Christ into execution
according to his Command, i. e. did both teach and baptize, yet it does not
follow from hence, either, 1. That they baptized all that they taught, (the
contrary hereunto is evident from the Story, Act. 2. 41, 43. and 5. 33. and
other places) Therefore the Teaching mentioned in their Commission, was not the
Rule of their Baptizing. Nor, 2. Does it follow, that because upon their first
preaching of the Gospel in Jerusalem, they baptized those who gladly received
their Word, and believed, therefore they baptized in like manner all those, or
any of those, who were converted to the Faith by their after-preaching in the
same place. We read of no such thing as this in any place of the Acts, or
elsewhere (as we formerly observed.) Nor did the tenor of their Commission
impose this upon them. For he that is simply and only commanded to Teach, and
to Baptize, as he is not hereby commanded to teach continually, so neither is
he commanded to baptize always when he teaches. But whereas he demands; What
is more plain then that the Commission of Christ to them, was to teach and
baptize first, and to admit into Church Fellowship thereupon, as is visible in
that prime example of theirs, Acts 2. 41, 42. I answer, This is much more
plain, viz. that they were not commissioned in that Commission we speak of, to
admit into Church Fellowship, either upon terms of Baptism, or any other, there
being not so much as the least mention or hint here about admission into
Church Fellowship. Nor is it said, Acts 2. 41, 42. either that the Apostles
admitted any into Church Fellowship; or 3. That any were admitted into
Church Fellowship, much less that they were admitted into this fellowship,
because they had been baptized; But all that is here said (as to the point now
in hand) is: Then they that gladly received his Word, were baptized, and the
same day (...), i. e. there were added, or added to [not, to them, as our
Antagonist emphaseth, or, to the Church, but rather, to the Lord, as it is,
Acts 15. 24] about three thousand Souls. Neither is the addition here spoken
of, ascribed to the Apostles: it is not said, that they, or any of them, added
so much as one Soul. But if we will entitle him unto the addition here spoken
of, to whom the Holy Ghost ascribes it, verse. 47. we must say, that it was
made by the Lord; And the Lord added unto the Church daily such as should be
saved. Here, where there is express mention made of adding to the Church, there
is no mention made of Baptism.

3. His third and last Proof is as irrelative to his purpose, as both the
former. For Christians are not said (Romans 65.) to be planted together in [it is
not, into, as our Anti-querist takes a most unworthy liberty, both here, and
elsewhere more then once or twice, to mis-cite his Scriptures] the likeness of
Christ's death, by reason, or means, of their Water Baptism; for then it would
follow (from the latter clause of the Verse, (...)) that all who are thus
baptized, should be everlastingly Partakers of his Resurrection; but we are
said to be (...), complanted with Christ, in, through, or by means of, a
likeness of his death, when we are truly and really mortified, and become dead
unto sin, and to the world: Which is a kind of death holding some analogy with,
and carrying in it some resemblance of, that death which Christ suffered upon
the Cross. And the Apostle informs us, that by such a death as this, we become
planted together with Christ, i. e. interested with him in that most stable,
fixed, and unchangeable Council and Purpose of God, wherein he has decreed the
immortal Glory and Blessedness of all those that shall obey him. This sense of
the place considered, how frivolous and impertinent is this supercilious
Interrogatory, which he builds upon it? And may you not therefore as well
suppose trees to grow together, before they are planted together, as to suppose
Christians to grow together before they are planted together? Yes surely, as
well the latter, as the former: but the mischief of the impertinency is; that
Christians may be planted together in Christ by a work of mortification, and so
grow together, whether they be baptized, or no: and they may be baptized
together, and so be planted together as far as water can plant them, and yet
not grow together; but some wither and dye, whilst others grow and prosper. Or
however, such a plantation which is by Baptism only, is no way, or means, of
growth unto any man. And yet of the two, it is a broader impertinency, to make
this demand, in stead of a Proof that a Church cannot stand but upon Baptism,
And what house stands without its principles, or is built without a foundation,
only upon occasion of this admonition of the Apostle to the Hebrews; Leaving
the Word of the beginning of Christ, let us advance toward perfection; and his
making, not the practice, but the Doctrine, not of any one Baptism
determinately, but of Baptisms (plurally) a part of the foundation; i. e. of
the body or systeme of that Doctrine, which young beginners in the School of
Christ were wont to learn in the first place, as in building a foundation is
first to be laid in order to a superstruction. But what is there in this
passage, to prove that one Baptism, or one kind of Baptism, is the foundation
of a Church, more then another? or that any kind of Baptism, more then
imposition of hands? or that either imposition of hands, or Baptism in one kind
or other, more then repentance from dead works, or Faith toward God;
especially considering that these two are named in the first place, as the
principal parts of the Foundation he speaks of, and first to be laid? Yea
supposing that the Hebrews, to whom he writes, were a constituted Church, and
that he had taught them the Doctrine of Baptisms under this Constitution, it
evidently follows, either that they were a Church before they were baptized, or
that they had been baptized before they had been instructed in the Doctrine of
Baptism. I believe it is much harder for the Anti-querist to escape goaring (as
he calls it) by one or other of the horns of this Dilemma, then we found it to
make an escape from both the horns of that Dilemma, which was prepared by him
to do the mischief.

12. Concerning the Text, 1 Cor. 12. 13. where the Apostle says, not as our
Anti-querist cites the words shorter by the head, that they were all baptized
into one Body; but, BY ONE SPIRIT they were all baptized, etc. this Scripture
(I say) we argued somewhat at large in the last of our Considerations; and
found war in the heart of it against Church-constitution by Water Baptism. And
running is no posture for repetitions. Only whereas my Friend the Anti-querist
challenges me that some while since I interpreted this Scripture comportingly
with his notion; the truth is, that I do not find such a line in any fragment
of the history of my life extant at present in my memory; yet because I daily
find so little stedfastness in my memory, as I do, I had rather in the business
trust my Friend and his memory, then mine own. But this I well remember, that
long since I learned this Christian Principle from an Heathen Philosopher,
(...), A man must be content to sacrifice even his own sayings, and opinions,
upon the service of the Truth. This kind of sacrifice I have often offered: and
if my Antagonist, and some others, could be persuaded to consecrate themselves
Priests of this Order, with me, the water of Baptism would be no longer a fire
to divide between Friends and Friends. But they rather choose to be Priests of
that Order, whose Hierourgy or Priestly Function mainly stands in sacrificing
the body upon the service of the raiment, or the substance, upon the service of
the shadow.

13. Whereas he demands, Ought not that, which was a reason to them [he means,
the Apostles in the primitive times] not to admit Church Members into Church
fellowship [we pardon the impropriety] without Baptism, to be a reason unto us
likewise to steer the same course, etc. does he not very impertinently and
groundlesly suppose, that they had a reason not to admit the admission he
speaks of? He has not hitherto so much as intimated unto us any reason at all
of such a non-admission in the Apostles, as that now mentioned. If that should
be granted him, which he will never be able to prove, viz. that the Apostles
did not admit into Church Fellowship without Baptism, yet it will not follow
from hence, that therefore they had a reason to admit none without it;
especially if the case were so, as the Anti querist seems to suppose it, viz.
that no unbaptized person ever desired such admission of them. And suppose (for
argument sake) that they had de facto admited into Church Communion only
unbaptized persons, it would not follow from hence, that therefore they had
reason to exclude all others, as all that were baptized, in case they had
desired it. If all who desired Church Fellowship, and consequently all who were
admitted unto it, were baptized; is this any argument or proof, that therefore
in case others had desired it, they must needs have been rejected? If a man
should go a fishing upon the Seas, and should catch only of one sort of Fish,
as suppose Whiteings, would it follow that therefore he had reason to catch no
other?

14. How importune and impertinent are these words also! If so, then farewell
all Gospel obligations. For if we may take liberty to cast away one Law of
Gospel Order, and Worship, then why not two, and so three, and in the end, all?
etc. For does he not here suppose, that separating from Churches, or persons,
unbaptized (though esteemed in the world, and by all but himself, and his,
baptized) is or was, a Law of Gospel Order, binding Christians of the first
age? Surely this Law is written on the backside of some of Paul's Epistles,
where no man did ever read it. And they that take liberty to cast away this
Law, are more like to bid all Gospel obligations, welcome, then to bid them
farewell. Secondly he supposes that those rules, by which the Apostles ordered
themselves in their times, were binding to Christians of that age; which is
broadly importune and truthless. For the truth is, that no rule whatsoever, by
which the Apostles ordered themselves, as Apostles (and certainly they ordered
themselves by many such rules as these) was binding unto any other Christian of
that age, but unto themselves only. Thirdly (and lastly) he supposes it a
grand absurdity, and tending to a dissolution of all Gospel Order, to imagine,
that there were any Gospel rules binding only to Christians of the first age of
the Gospel. Does he think, that when Christians of the age he speaks of, sold
their possessions, lands, and houses, and brought the prices of them, and laid
them down at the Apostles feet, they did this irregularly, or without rule? or
without a rule binding unto them? If this latter, then it follows, that either
Christ himself, or his Apostles, prescribed some rules, which were not binding,
no not unto Christians of this first age? Or does he think that that rule, by
which those Christians acted in the case specified, is binding unto us now? Yet
that Rule respected charity, and self-denial; and so in reason should be more
binding unto us now, then rules respecting only an outward rite or ceremony.
Again it was a rule binding unto those Christians he speaks of, that their
women praying or prophesying, should have their head covered, and that men on
the contrary should have their heads uncovered. Does he judge this rule binding
unto us now? Or do all men sin who Prophesy [i. e. join with him that
preahcheth the Word, in the act of hearing] with their heads covered? I believe
there are many who should sin much more, if they should Prophecy with their
heads uncovered; viz. all those who by reason of weakness or tenderness are
like to suffer in their healths, if they should sit uncovered for an hour or
two together, in a cold place and cold season. There is the same confideration
of a frosty-dipping to persons that are valetudinary, of a crazy and infirm
constitution, though it were supposed that there was a rule binding Christians
of that age, and of those warm Countries, to dip at all times immediately upon
their believing. Instance might be given in several other Gospel rules, which
were binding unto Christians of the first age, at least unto those particular
Christians to whom they were prescribed, and yet are not so unto us now. The
rule which prescribed the Holy kiss, which prescribed the speaking in an
unknown tongue by two, or at the most by three, (1 Cor. 14. 27.) which
prescribed the holding of the peace to him that was speaking in the Church, in
case any thing were revealed unto another, (1 Cor. 14. 30.) which prescribed
abstaining from meat offered to Idols, and from blood, etc. were binding unto
those Christians of the first age, to whom they were given; but are they all
binding unto us now? Or in case they were all now binding, but one or more of
them not so apprehended by Christians now, and upon this account not observed
by them; does it follow from hence, that they must needs bid farewell to all
Gospel Obligations? If my Anti-querist not seeing, or minding a Friend of his
passing by him in the street, should omit the salutations accustomed between
Friends, does this tend to the abolishing or casting away all friendly commerce
or expressions between them otherwise? Or in case a man gathering his Apples,
overlooks one that is more covered with leaves or boughs, then the rest, and so
leaves it ungathered, does he hereby either dispose, tempt, or encourage,
either himself, or others, never to gather Apple more? What frivolous and empty
reasonings are these? Let me here observe this one thing more. The Apostles
were not so uniform in imposing Ordinances upon Churches in their days, but
that what upon occasion they imposed upon one, sometimes they relaxed unto
another. They imposed abstinence from meats offered to Idols, and so from
blood, upon the Church at Antioch, simply and indefinitely, Act. 15. 29.
whereas the Apostle Paul enjoyneth the former abstinence unto the Church of
Corinth only in the case of scandal unto weak Brethren, and of encouragement to
Idolaters, 1 Cor. 8 7, 9, 10. compared with Chap. 10. 23, 27, 28, etc. and
concerning the latter, he seems to relax it unto the generality of Christians
(those happily excepted, to whom it had been enjoined, together with others lying
under the like circumstantial obligations thereunto) in that passage to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. where he says, that every creature of God is
good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; yea and
(which is more considerable) makes it a character of men giving heed to
seducing spirits, and speaking lies in hypocrisy, to command to abstain from
meats, which God created to be received with thanksgiving, etc.

15. Whereas he says, that it is said in effect in 1 Cor. 12. 13, and the like
Scriptures lately quoted by him, that all of all sorts, ranks, and degrees,
that were of the Body, were baptized into the Body, etc. it is indeed said (as
we heard) that they were all by one Spirit baptized into one Body. But how
impertinent, yea and void of truth is it to ascribe that unto Water Baptism,
which is so expressly attributed by the Apostle to a baptizing in, or with, the
Spirit? But this Scripture has been argued more at large.

16. (And lastly, for this Answer) He says, that the same ground which did
satisfy Believers then [in the Apostles days] in not joining in Church
fellowship with persons unbaptized, though they did believe -- will serve to
satisfy baptized Believers now touching the lawfulness of the same practice,
which is the will and appointment of Jesus Christ that so it should be, etc.
But to how little purpose is this said? For, 1. He has not yet proved (nor I
believe ever will) that baptized Believers in the Apostles days did not join in
Church Fellowship with persons un-baptized, though Believers. And how
impertinent is it in arguing, to suppose that without proof, which a man
knows is denied by his adversary? 2. In case he had proved, or could prove,
such a thing, (I mean, that baptized Believers did not join in
Church Fellowship with unbaptized Believers,) yet would it not follow from
hence, that therefore they did not thus join with such upon any such ground as
this, viz. because it was the will and appointment of Jesus Christ that so it
should be. Christians in these times (as in all other) did, and especially did
not, many things, upon other grounds, then this, as viz because they have no
occasion, opportunity, or necessity to do them. They did not join themselves in
a Team with Horses, or after the manner of Horses, to draw Carts, or Wains;
they did not, at least many of them did not, join with Merchants where they
lived, in their Adventures by Sea. Did they omit the doing of these things (and
twenty more like unto them) upon this ground, or motive, because it was the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ that so it should be? How uncouth,
sapless, and without savor, are such conceits and reasonments as these? The
baptized Believers he speaks of might possibly not join in Church Fellowship
with unbaptized Believers, only upon this ground; viz. because no such desired
this fellowship with them. But will this ground serve to satisfy baptized
Believers now touching the lawfulness of such a practice, when as there are
Believers, whom they call unbaptized, who desire this fellowship with them? But
it is no great marvel that the Carver, though a good Artist, can make no better
a Mercury; the wood he has to work upon, is not for it. 3. (And lastly) The
nonjoyning of baptized Believers in Church Fellowship with Believers
unbaptized, could it be proved, would serve to satisfy baptized Believers now
touching the lawfulness of the same practice. But not to join, and to break off
or separate after joining, are two very different practices. That ground which
would satisfy a believing man or woman for their not joining in marriagewith
an Infidel or Unbeleever; will not serve to satisfy them touching the
lawfulness of the practice of separation from him, or her, after marriage.
Therefore my Anti-querist does not argue pertinently at this turn neither. He
pleads another Cause in stead of his own.

For a cloze to what at present I reply to his Answer given unto my first
Query, it is very observable, that he does not at all, his long Answer
throughout, so much as touch upon one thing, which the said Query asks after
with as great a desire of satisfaction, as after any thing besides. The Query
thus saluteth him: Whether is there any Precept, or Example, in the Gospel, of
any person, how duly soever baptized, who disclaimed Christian Communion,
either in Church Fellowship, or in any the Ordinances of the Gospel, with
those, whom he judged true Believers, upon an account only of their not having
been baptized, ESPECIALLY AFTER SUCH A MANNER, AS HE JUDGED IT NECESSARY FOR
THEM TO HAVE BEEN? These last words, especially after such a manner, etc. which
are as emphatical as any other in all the Query, and with which he found his
Cause harder pinched then with any thing besides, he prudently dissembles in
his Answer, as if they were not. To give a just and competent Answer to the
Query, he should not only have attempted to prove, that there are examples in
theGospel of baptized persons, who disclaimed Church communion with Believers
upon the only account of their not having been baptized (which indeed he has
attempted, though successlesly,) but also that they disclaimed this Communion
with them upon the account only of their not having been baptized after such or
such a particular mode, as they judged necessary. But speaking neither little
nor much to this point, in stead of an Answer in full to the Query before him,
he gives us an Answer that is empty; and which speaks short to other things,
but to that which is most material, nothing at all.

Concerning his Answer to the second Query, it is of a like raw The Answer to
the second Query, examined.
spinning with the former, and in neither respect, either of pertinency, or of
truth, any whit more considerable then it. For,

1. (To take notice in the beginning of this Answer, of the same
Tergiversation, which we respited to the cloze of the former) He does his good
will to say somewhat to what he conceived more repliable in the Query; but that
which he apprehended (as he had reason to do) more intractable, he answers
with silence, and a prudential slip. Yea whereas by transcribing so much of the
Query, as he does, he induces his Reader to conceive that he presents him
with the whole; the truth is, that he wholly suppresseth and keeps out of
sight, that entire clause, wherein the Query bears hardest upon him. For
these words are not extant in his Edition; Especially in case they had been
baptized and solemnly consecrated by washing with water unto the service of
Jesus Christ before. And as his prudence taught him not to acquaint his Reader
that there were any such words in the Query, as these, so the same Guide
directed him to undertake somewhat else, in stead of answering any thing to the
matter contained in them. For had his Answer kept way with the demand intended
in these words, it must have proved not simply, or only, that the Apostles, or
Christians in their days, denied Church Communion unto Believers not baptized,
after their believing, but unto such Believers also, who had been solemnly
consecrated by washing with water unto the service of Jesus Christ before their
believing. This he wisely considered was impossible for him to do: Therefore he
abandoneth it from amongst his undertakings. In the mean time we are like to
have but a lame Answer to the Query.

2. How little savor, either of reason, or of truth, is there in the very first
words of this Answer! For are they not these? It does not only appear, that the
Apostles and other Christians would have declined Church Communion with
Believers, because not baptized, but it appears that they did do it. For it
sufficiently appears that men and women did believe, before they were baptized.
By the way let this be minded; that here also he evades and slips quire besides
that, which that part of the Query, to which here he pretends an Answer,
principally demanded. For it is here demanded, not only whether it can be
proved, that the Apostles, or other Christians, would have declined
Church Communion with, but further, whether they would have denied this
communion unto, such persons, whom they judged true Believers, because not
baptized. Now the difference between, declining communion with, and, denying
communion unto, is very broad. A man may decline, i. e. not do, many things,
[viz. in case he be not requested, or desired to do them] which yet being
requested, he would not deny to do. The Apostles might very possibly decline,
i. e. non-admit unbaptized Believers into Church Communion, upon a supposition
that they desired it not. And yet as possibly, nay much more probably, not deny
this communion unto them, in case they had desired it. But in as much as the
Anti-querist had not so much as in color what to answer to this strein, or
touch of the Querie, his prudentials befriended him with this stratagem; to
leave out those words of the Querie in the transcription, wherein this unruly
demand was contained. But passing by this, how impertinently does he argue that
little which he undertakes, in the words mentioned? For,

First, Suppose it should be granted him that the Apostles and Christians did
decline communion with Believers unbaptized, does it presently follow, that
therefore they declined it, because they were unbaptized? A man declines such
and such meats, which are tender and easy of digestion: but this proves not,
that their tenderness, or easiness of digestion is the reason why he declines
them. Every quality or property in a subject, is not the reason or ground of
every thing that is done unto it, nor yet of the forbearance of every act, that
is not acted upon, or about it.

If my Antiquerist demands; But what can reasonably be supposed to be the
reason or cause, why the Apostles or others, should decline communion with
un-baptized Believers, but only their not being baptized; I answer;

1. That a simple non-admiting to Communion, can in no tolerable construction
be called, a declining of communion, or, of admiting to communion. There be an
hundred godly persons about theCity, whom I do not admit intoChurch communion
with me, whose communion notwithstanding I cannot with truth be charged to
decline. Therefore whilst my Anti-querist only shows or proves, that the
Apostles, or others, did not admit into Church Communion, Believers unbaptized,
he does not at all hereby satisfy or answer theQuestion propounded: This
speaks of declining Communion: he answers of not admiting to communion, Here is
only a stone given, when bread was demanded. Yet,

2. To the question now propounded, I answer; The reason why the Apostles did
not admit Believers unbaptized into Church Communion (if this either should be
granted, or could be proved) is most probably this; viz. because such Believers
desired it not of them. The Apostles were not wont to admit into
Church Communion (in that sense we now speak of admission) any person against
his will, or without his desire signified on such a behalf. If my friendly
Antogonist here replies; but if the primitive Believers did not desire
admittance into Church Communion, until they were baptized, why is not this
primitive pattern followed now? I answer; 1. it is not affirmed, or granted,
that they made no such desire, but only upon supposition, and for argument
sake. Yet,

2. The pattern mentioned, is, as far as I understand, generally followed in
these days; no person that I know, desiring Church Communion, but such only,
who judge themselves baptized, as the primitive Christians did in their days.

How untruly he says, that it appears that the Apostles and other Christians
did decline Church Communion with Believers unbaptized, because unbaptized,
needs no further evidence then the late premises. The reason which he subjoyns,
is most importunely impertinent. For what though it never so sufficiently
appears that men and women did believe before they were baptized? What is there
in this to prove, that therefore the Apostles and Christians did decline
Church Communion with Believers unbaptized, because unbaptized. He that can
make hand and glove of this reason, and that which was to be proved by it, how
gladly, were it possible, would I exchange understandings with him!

Whereas he demands; What is a not admiting, less, then a refusing to admit,
them to such communion? I answer; that though I cannot tell what [i. e.
precisely how much] less it is, yet this I am certain of (and so may any other
person readily be) that very much less it is. A non-acting dothnot necessarily
suppose an unwillingness to act, but possibly a want of an opportunity only for
acting, and sometimes a want of power. But a refusing to act, always imports a
want of will to act.

3. Whereas he turns Querist, and demands: Will it follow, that because these
external rites, Baptism and the like, do not avail unto men's justification,
when they are observed, that therefore they are not necessary unto
Church Communion.

I answer affirmatively, yes, it will follow, For if men may be justified
without Baptism; it follows that they may believe and be sanctified also,
andconsequently brought into the number of Saints, without it. Now that the
will and pleasure of the Lord Christ is, that all Saints without exception,
whether Baptized or unbaptized, whether convinced of the necessity of Baptism,
orunconvinced, should be perfected [i. e. built up to the greatest meetness for
their Inheritance in light, that may be] and consequently admitted into
Church Communion, where the best means of such an edification are to be found,
has been sufficiently (I trust) proved in the preceding Considerations.
Concerning the rite of Circumcision, how, and with what limitations it was
necessary to Church Communion amongst the Jews; as likewise how different the
Consideration of circumcision, and Baptism, is, about the Regulation of
Church Communion, has been argued at large already.

And whereas he demands; How then can the Querist estimate the usefulnes and
disusefulness of Baptism as to Church Communion, by circumcision, as he does,
etc. the Querist answers, That he is so far from doing that, which he is here
charged to do, that (as he even now intimated) his since is, that there is
altogether a different consideration between Circumcision and Baptism, in their
respective relations to Church Communion. Only herein he confesses an
agreement between them, that as that is not circumcision, which is outward in
the flesh (Romans 2. 28. meaning, not the circumcision which much commends any
man unto God) so neither is that Baptism which is externally administered and
received, the Baptism that much interesseth any person in his favor.

4. Whereas he yet demands, How the Apostles or others Christians in these
times would have known, or have been able upon good ground to have concluded,
that such persons had truly believed in Christ unto Justification, and had been
meet to be admitted to communion with them, who should (if any such had been)
have refused to obey Christ in submitting to Baptism, etc. I answer;

Whosoever refuses [i. e. professedly denyeth] to obey Christ, not only in
submitting unto Baptism, but in any other of his commands, [being made known to
be his unto him] cannot (I suppose) by any argument or testimony whatsoever be
concluded to believe in Christ unto justification. But this nothing hinders,
but that in case any person be in the general course of his life conscientious,
and observant of the Laws of Christ as far as the knowledge hereof shall come to
him, he may be upon this account concluded a Believer unto justification,
although being ignorant of, or dissatisfied about, any particular Law of
Christ, as suppose his Law concerning Baptism, he should not exhibit obedience
unto it. Nor is a refusal to submit unto Baptism, in these days, of a like
interpretation with such a refusal in the days of the Apostles: Because then
there could be no place for any question or doubt, whether a submitting unto
Baptism, at least being required by the Apostles, were an act of obedience unto
Christ, or no; whereas now it is the sense of some worthy Christians (I do not
say it is mine) that a submission unto Baptism is rather an act of
will worship, then of obedience unto Christ, and others are dissatisfied about
the necessity of it. Therefore although a refusing to be baptized then, did
argue a rejection of the Council of God, in the refusers; yet supposing that
God has now laid Baptism aside (which is the judgment of those lately
mentioned) a refusing to submit unto it rather argues an accepting, then a
rejecting, of the Council of God. As the Jews who refused to submit, unto
circumcision after the Gospel had been preached unto them, did not herein
reject the Council of God concerning circumcision, but embrace and accept it;
however such a refusal before would have been a rejection of it.

5. Neither does the Querist estimate the Apostles judgment of Gospel Rites by
what he speaks of circumcision, but by what he opposes both to circumcision,
and to uncircumcision, and speaks concerning them. For whereas the Apostle
expresses himself, thus: In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but FAITH WHICH WORKS BY LOVE: And again,
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but THE KEEPING OF THE
COMMANDMENTS OF GOD; He plainly declares and avoucheth, that that which is
opposite to such things which are nothing, a vail nothing, (and consequently,
which is somewhat, and which highly avails) is not Baptism, nor any other
external rite or ceremony, but such a thing, which is as contra-distinguishable
against these, as against circumcision, or uncircumcision themselves, viz.
Faith which works by love; and, The keeping of the Commandments of God. Nor
does an opposition made between Faith, and Gospel Ordinances, any whit more set
them together by the ears, then the Evangelist John sets Moses and Christ (who
were and are, as good Friends, as Faith and Gospel Rites) together by the ears,
in making this opposition between them: For the Law was given by MOSES: but
Grace and Truth came by Jesus CHRIST. Joh. 1. 17. Or then John Baptist set his
Baptism, and the Baptism of Christ, together by the ears, by opposing them
thus: I indeed have baptized you with water: But He shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with fire. Mar. 1. 9. He that says, Luther was of an active
resolute, and tearing spirit, Melancthon of a gentle and soft, does not set
these good Friends together by the ears, but only shows wherein,
notwithstanding their agreement as dear Consorts and Friends, they yet differed
the one from the other. There are no two things in the world, but differ in
something the one from the other: and consequently may in respect hereof, be
opposed the one unto the other. Yea though Baptism (I mean a submitting unto
Baptism) be the keeping of a commandment of God; yet may it regularly enough be
opposed to the keeping of the Commandments of God, as one man may be opposed
unto many, or the setting of a man's foot out of his door, to the performance of
a long journey. But these things are (I suppose) a little out of my
Anti-querist his Element.

6. Whereas he demands; Why does the Querist make circumcision a Gospel rite,
which is indeed a rite abolished by the Gospel? I may much more honestly
demand, why does the Anti-querist lay to the Querist charge a thing which he
knows not, no nor yet the words of his Querie? For though he should say
(which yet he does not, the Anti-querist making too bold here, as too
frequently elsewhere, to mis-recite his words, as the Reader may readily
observe by comparing the Original all along with the transcript) that under the
Gospel Circumcision by a Synechdoche speciei is put for all external rites and
ceremonies, yet does not such a saying as this necessarily suppose, or imply,
circumcision to be a Gospel rite. For rites, or ceremonies, being of two kinds,
some of Divine, others of humane institution, the Apostle may by the said
figure Synechdoche, mention only circumcision, in stead of all other Divine
rites, without supposing it to be a Gospel rite, inasmuch as there were far
more rites of Divine institution under the Law, then there are under the
Gospel. His following words, And if for all kind, then certainly for Gospel
rites and ceremonies; for they are some of all, have neither goodness of sense
in them, nor pertinency to his business in hand. For what though circumcision
be put for all kinds of rites [of Divine institution] and consequently, for
Gospel rites also, yet does it follow from hence, that it self must needs be a
Gospel rite? By what principle in reason is this consequence formed? Supposing
there are two sorts of men in the world, rich, and poor, and I, having occasion
to speak of men in general, should, to give some light to my discourse,
instance in John, Thomas, or James, I should not by my instancing John (for
example) in this case, suppose him to be determinately either a rich man, or a
poor. But these things (I confess) are scarce worth the examining, excepting
only that me thinks I perceive my Anti-querist in a little ecstasy of
contentment, by virtue of a conceit he has that I have so ill behaved my self
in the passage in hand, that he can make large earnings by descanting upon it.
And I would wilingly awaken him out of his ecstasy. For certain I am, that
there is nothing in the Query, rightly understood, but is exception-proof. And
the truth is, that all things in his Answer to this Query from first to last,
duly considered, together with that his contentment mentioned, there seems to
be a mixture of a kind of discontent against the Apostle for opposing Faith,
the new Creature, keeping the Commandments of God, unto circumcision, and not
Baptism rather. For if it had been written thus; In Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Baptism which is by
dipping, or plunging into water, I believe he would have been as hard or heavy
to be born, as an hand maid that is heir to her Mistress: Prove. 30. 23. And I
understand that a Great Doctor of that way, taking occasion not long since to
open the said passage of the Apostle to his people, made special treasure of
this observation from it, that although the Apostle says, That in Christ Jesus
circumcision avails nothing, yet he does not say that Baptism avails
nothing. If he had understood the Apostle (a trouble of mind not much incident
to th^^ generation) he must needs have known, that however the Apostle did not
in so many words say, That Baptism avails nothing, yet constructively and in
pregnancie and neer-handedness of consequence, he said every whit as much, yea
and somewhat more too. For by shuting out Circumcision instance-wise, together
with uncircumcision, and letting in only Faith, the New creature, the keeping
the Commands of God, it is a plain case that together with circumcision he
excluded Baptism also, yea and all other ceremonial practications whatsoever.
But such an observation as that now specified, is a competent instance, or
example, whereby to estimate how unworthily the Scriptures are commonly handled
in those Congregations. But,

6. My Anti-querist greatneth the pile of his former impertinencies by heaping
all these words upon it: Neither surely would any man (much less the Querist)
be so impertinent, as to assert no external rite availeable under the Gospel,
because circumcision is not, unless he held circumcision to be as much a Gospel
rite, as any other; since it is against common sense to say, That which is
greater is not available to such or such an end, because that which is less is
not; and yet more irrational would it be to assert the non-availeableness of
that which is, from the non-availeableness of that which is not: which yet
would be the trip of the Querist, if he should not think that circumcision had
some manner of institutive being, yea as eminent a being under the Gospel, as
any other rite of the Gospel has. Hereunto add we this vainglorious vapor
in the following Paragraph: Truly I cannot but think that cause hard bested,
that is fain to beg its bread out of such desolate places as is that of
Circumcision for one, whose foundation was long since rased by the hand of the
Gospel to the very ground. The long thread of all this discourse is spun of tow
that has touched the fire. The basis and ground work of the whole Fabric has
been already, rased to the very ground. For my friend al along supposes, 1.
That I make the best and most conscientious observation of Gospel rites, of no
acceptance at all with God. 2. That I argue that comparative non-availableness
of Gospel rites, which I assert and hold, from the non-availableness of
Circumcision simply considered. Against both these I have sufficiently
explained my self already, and likewise vindicated the words of the Queree from
any intimation or supposition of either. Touching the former, I shall add
nothing to the premises relating thereunto. For the latter, I have likewise
showed in as plain English as I know how to write, that neither do I, nor the
Queree, argue the comparative non-availableness of Baptism, which the Queree
only asserteth (as the Anti-querist himself yeildeth, as we formerly heard)
from the non-availableness of Circumcision simply considered (this we have
formerly showed to be a palpable mistake) but from Circumcision considered in
that opposition, which the Apostle makes (in the Scripture before us) between
it, and Faith; and again, between it, and the New Creature. From this
opposition it evidently appears, that the Apostle by excluding Circumcision
(with uncircumcision) from that availableness with God, which he solely
ascribes unto Faith, the new creature and the keeping the Commandments of God,
intended together with circumcision, to exclude all ceremonial observances, as
well those of the Gospel, as those of the Law. This considered, it had been
more honor for the Anti-querist to have kept himself as free from the charge,
as the Querist is from the crime or trip, of reasoning at any such rate of
nonsense, at this: because that which is less, is not available to such, or
such as end; therefore neither is that which is greater available hereunto: Or
again, because that which is not, is not available; therefore neither is that
which is. How can I but think that my Friend dreamt waking, when such
reasonings as these, presented themselves to his imagination, as the arguing of
his Friend the Querist? Either he complements profoundly in his private address
by Letter unto him, wherein he pretends to give him the right hand of himself
in abilities to manage a discourse; or else he renders himself weak indeed in
such affairs, by making himself an underling in abilities to a man, the tenor
and strain of whose reasonings is so far beneath the line of the most
irrational of men.

By this time we suppose that the vapor also mentioned is wholly vanished into
the air. The cause he speaks of, cannot well, at least needs not, beg the
bread of it is support out of desolate places; there being very few places,
especially in the new Testament, but which yield this bread plentifully. A
taste hereof is given in the premised Considerations. But concerning the place,
which he calls desolate, it has been proved over and over, that there grows
a strong staff of bread for the support of the cause depending, in the very
midst of it.

7. And lastly, whereas he demands; But why also does the Querist oppose the
rites and ceremonies of the Gospel, or under the Gospel, to the keeping the
commands of God, etc. he should rather have demanded a reason why the Apostle
does it. But whether it be the Apostle, or the Querist, or both, who makes this
opposition, a plain reason has been given of it, and the sense declared
wherein this opposition is to be understood. Yea I suppose the Anti-querist
himself can hardly be so enormously extravagant in his opinion or notion about
Baptism, as not to judge but that an habitual and constant course of obedience
to the rest of the Commandments of God, does much more highly commend a person
unto God, then one single act of an external submission unto Baptism. If so,
then is there a manifest ground for an opposition between Baptism, and a
keeping of the Commandments of God, yea though a subjection unto Baptism be
supposed to be an act of keeping one of these Commandments, yea and available
also, to a degree, for a commending of men unto God. For as little may very
regularly be opposed unto much, and so, less, unto more; so may that which is
less acceptable unto God, be very properly, and according to the strictest
rules of opposition, be opposed unto that which is more. Neither is there so
much as a face, or the lightest appearance of a contra-diction, between denying
the observation of the Ceremonies of the Gospel to be available (comparatively)
to any man's acceptance with God, and an affirming that a keeping the Commands
of God is highly available to such a purpose. But enough of this with a
surplussage, formerly.

Thus we see plainly, and without a Parable, that no Answer has as yet been
given by the Anti-querist to the two first Queries, unless by Answer we
understand any thing which he that makes it is pleased so to call. Nor is it any
disparagement to any man's abilities or worth, that he isnot able to make an egg
stand end-ways upon a smooth table, without cracking it, though such an
undertaking may (I confess) somewhat reflect upon him. My Friend (my
Anti-querist) has sustained no loss at all in my esteem of his parts and
abilities, by drawing up so insufficient an answer to the Queries, as he has
don. For I well know and consider how far a mistaken province will oppress,
abuse, and belie any man's learning, knowledge, parts, and abilities whatsoever.

I suppose there is no need of any further engagement of mine against the said
Answer; the first fruits being polluted, the whole Lump is hereby sufficiently
proved to be unclean. Only I shall take notice from his Answer to the fourth
Query, how impertinently he cites (and upon no better account, vindicateth)
this of the Apostle. (1 Timothy 6. 1.) Let As MANY servants as are under the yoke,
count their own Masters worthy of all honor, to overthrow this assertion of
his Querist, that this particle, as many as, in such constructions as those
Romans 6. 3. and Gal. 3 27. is always partitive. When the Apostle (says he)
says, Let as many servants, as are under the yoke, count, etc. does he thereby
suppose, or imply, that there were some servants that were not under the yoke,
or who were not to count their Masters worthy all honor? Yes (my good friend)
the Apostle does here suppose that there were some servants not under such a
yoke as that, whereof he here speaks; as is most evident from the opposition
which he makes in the very nex words, verse. 2. speaking of servants of another
kind; But those who have Believing Masters, (...), let them not despise them,
etc. And the best expositors generally acknowledge and give notice of a
distribution or partition of servants into two kinds, in this context of
Scripture; yet not into two such kinds neither, as my Antiquerist notioneth in
his objection, which he so favorably frames against himself, that he may
plaufibly (at least) answer it. Servants are not here distributed into
believing, and unbeleeving; but into such who are under the yoke, [viz. of
unbeleeving Masters] and such, who are free from this yoke, as being servants
to Masters, who believe. Both the one and the other kind of servants are
plainly enough supposed by the Apostle to be believers. Nor was it his manner
in any of his Epistles, to give directions about the carriage or behavior of
Infidels, or to prescribe matters of duty unto them. How impertinent then is
that which he pretends in the answer, which he draws up to his own objection,
viz. that these expressions, as many as, used. Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 27.
intentionally only respect those at Rome (and so in Galatia) who did believe,
and were baptized, and therefore are partitive in respect of others the
inhabitants of those places, dividing those of these Churches from others
dwelling in the same places, etc. For what can be more evident then that the
Apostle by the particle, (...), as manyas, in the Scriptures before us, did not
intend to divide the believing members of the Churches of Rome and Galatia,
from the unbeleeving party of men in these places, but only believers
themselves amongst themselves, the baptized, from the un-baptized; considering
that in the former of the said places, he expresses himself thus; Know ye not
that so many of Us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, etc. and in the latter,
thus: For as many of YOU as have been baptized, etc? Is it worthy any man's
belief, that Paul writing thus to the believing members of the Church at Rome,
Know ye not that so many of us that were baptized, etc. should either in the
pronoun, Us include Nero, with all the rabble of pagan Idolater in Rome, as if
he wrote to these, as well as to the Saints or that he intended to signify unto
them, that himself was one of those, who dwelt in Rome? Or is not his meaning
in saying so many of us as, etc. clearly this, that as many of us Saints, or of
us believers, who have been baptized? For in what other consideration,
rel^^ion, or respect, he should make himself one of them, is not easy to
imagine. Evident it is from Chap. 1. 13. 15. that he was no dweller in Rome, at
the time of writing this Epistle, nor had been any time before. So likewise
when he writes to the Churches, and members of the Churches of Galatia, thus;
For as many of YOU as have been baptized, etc. can his meaning be, as many of
you who dwell in Galatia, as have been baptized? Or does not such a sense as
this plainly imply, that he wrote his Epistle as well to the Infidels in the
Countries of Galatia, as to the members of the Christian Churches there?
Therefore (questionless) the Apostles meaning in the words before us, is
plainly and directly this: As many of you, who being members of the Churches of
Galatia, have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: and consequently
the particle (...), as many as, is not partitive of the believers in the places
mentioned, from the rest of unbeleeving Inhabitants there, but of believers
amongst themselves, those that had been baptized, from those who were at
present unbaptized, in either place respectively. This to be the express sense
of the two passages mentioned might be further evidenced by the light of sundry
considerations, but that we judge the premises already levied sufficient to
establish that conclusion. It being then so clear a case, that there were some
members of Churches in the Apostles days, who were unbaptized, at least for a
time, it undenyably follows, that Baptism is no Constitutor of Churches; as the
beloved notion of my Anti-querist bears.

Concerning that Copweb-piece, styled by the Author, Some Baptismal abuses
briefly discovered, wherewith some silly flies (as I understand) have been
entangled and catched, there is a besome preparing for the brushing away of
that also from the Temple of God, so far as it is catching, and has not been
dismantled by the contents of these papers. For the tail of it, wherein the
sting, and the worst of the poison lies, has been cut off and swept away
hereby.

THE ANATOMY OF Ana-Baptism.
ANa-Baptism, is, by the Modern Architects of it, built upon Foundations, or
Grounds of three sorts. Some 1. True, but not pertinent. 2. Falls, and therefore
not pertinent. 3. Conjecturall only, and therefore very little pertinent.


1. Of the first sort are 1. All those Texts of Scripture, on which they
mis-ground, first their Opinion, and then their Practictise. As, Mat. 19. 28.
Mar. 16. 16. Act. 2. 38, 41. Act. 8. 37. Romans 6. 3, 4. Coloss. 2. 12. Heb. 6.
2. (possibly with some others) These are true Grounds of Doctrines, and
practices corresponding; but are irrelative to the Doctrine and Practice of
Ana-Baptism. 2. Of this sort also, are these, and some other like Tenants upon
which they build their said Fabric. 1. That in the Scripture there is no
particular or express, either Precept, or Example, for Infant Baptism. 2. That
no Ordinance of Christ, can be neglected, or omitted, without sin. This rightly
understood, and with due limitation, is a truth also: but thus understood, it
reaches not their practice.



2. Of the second sort are these, 1. That in case Infants were not Baptized in
the days of John the Baptist, nor of Christ, nor of his Apostles, then ought
not Baptism to be administered unto Infants now. 2. That Circumcision was
neither sign nor seal of the Righteousness of Faith, or of the Covenant of
Grace, but unto the person of Abraham only. 3. That Baptism it self is no Seal
of the Covenant of Grace unto any person whatsoever, but a sign only. 4. That
an Administration of Baptism made to professing Believers, does more conduce
unto, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that which is made to
Infants. 5. That Infant Baptism is disagreeable to the Ministration of the New
Testament. 6. That none ought to be Baptized but such who [in their own person]
appear voluntarily willing to be Baptized in obedience unto God. 7. That
Infant Baptism is a nullitie. 8. That Infant-Church-member-ship was a
Leviticall Ceremony, and abolished (with the rest of the Legal Ceremonies) by
Christ in the Gospel. 9. That a profession of Faith, whether real, or
feigned, is a more warrantable ground, whereon to administer Baptism, then an
estate in Grace, though attested by God himself. 10. That any Person
un-baptized, may, without special Commission from God, and without proof-making
of such a Commission, administer Baptism; and that such a man's Administration
(together with all the administrations lineally descending from it) is the
Institution of Christ. 11. That any person whatsoever pretending to believe,
and to have been baptized, whether invested into any Office, or not, may as
lawfully administer Baptism, as he that is an Officer in a Church. 12. That not
simply Baptism, but the administration of Baptism to believers only, is an
Ordinance of Christ properly so called. 13. That there can be no warrantable
ground for the administration of an Ordinance to such or such a subject, or
after such or such a manner, but either a particular and express precept for,
or example of, the one, and the other. 14. That there ought to be a
resemblance, or similitude, between the sign, and the thing signified [as there
is between the bush, and the wine in the Vintners celler; and was between the
straight pole on which the brazen Serpent was lift up, and the cross timber, on
which the Lord Christ was Crucified; and again between the Rainbow, and the
safty of the Earth from drowning, between Circumcision, and the Covenant which
God made with Abraham, and his seed.] 15. That the Baptizing of Infants is
unlawful, because it is not a Ordinance of Christ. 16. That obedience to
external Rites, Ordinances and Institutions, is to be preferred before
obedience to the Law of nature, or to the precepts of the Moral Law. 17. That
no circumstance mentioned in the Tenor of an Institution, or observed in the
first Administration thereof, can without sin either be omitted, or varied, in
after Administrations, upon any occasion or consideration whatsoever. 18. That
persons baptized after the new mode of dipping, though void of saving Grace,
and strangers unto Holiness, are notwithstanding, by virtue of such their
Baptism, rendered visible Saints; whereas others not so baptized, are
invisible, notwithstanding the greatest Exemplariness of Saint-ship in the
whole course of their lives, and conversations otherwise. 19. That children
under the Gospel are more unworthy, more unmeet, less capable, subjects of
Baptism, then they were of circumcision under the Law. 20. That it was better,
and more edifying unto men to receive the initiating or first Sacramental pledge
of Gods Fatherly love and care, in the time of their Infancy, under the Law;
and that now under the Gospel, it is worse, and less edifying unto them to
receive it at the same time, and better and more edifying to receive it
afterward, viz. when they come to years of discretion. 21. That the Jews, who
believed in Christ, and so came under the Gospel Administration, were, in
respect of their children, in a worse condition, then they had been in under
the Law: And that such of the Gentiles, who were by Faith engrafted into their
Olive, did, in their children, partake less of the root and fatness thereof,
then the Jews themselves, before the coming of Christ in the Flesh, had done:
and consequently, that God was much more indulgent unto children, yea and unto
Parents in reference to their children, under the Law, then he is under the
Gospel. 22. That Parents may dis-interess their children of Church privileges,
by their Apostasy or unbelief; but cannot restore them hereunto by their
repentance, or believing. 23 That such Jews, who, together with there children,
were Church Members, before their coming in by Faith unto Christ, by this
coming in to Christ, bereaved their children of this privilege without any
recompense.


Of the Third (and last) sort are these. 1. That there was no child in any of
those Families or Households, which are recorded in the New Testament to have
been baptized. 2. That no Infant or child was Baptized in the days of John the
Baptist, or of Christ, or of the Apostles. 3. That all, and every the
respective members of all and every the respective Churches in the Apostles
days, were baptized. 4. That the Eunuch baptized by Philip. Act. 8. and those
Gentiles commanded by Peter to be baptized, Act. 10. were baptized by a Total
Immersion of their bodies under water by those, who baptized them. 5. That
persons, who from their Infancy, or first capacity of making any profession of
Religion at all, have publicly and constantly professed the Name and Faith of
Christ in the world, ought to be baptized into this profession after Ten,
Twenty, Forty years spent and passed in this profession. 6. That Infant Baptism
was first brought into the Christian Church after the days of the Apostles. 7.
That Baptism ought as well to be Administered, yea and urged and imposed, in a
Place, City or Country, where the Gospel has flourished for an hundred years
together, or more, as at, or about the time, when (through the Providence of
God) it first came in the Ministry of it, unto this place.


Of these three kinds of arguments or grounds (as they have been now
represented) that the first are impertinent (as to the justification of
Ana-baptism) the Second, erroneous; the Third and last, conjectural only, I am
all thoughts made; and shall, God sparing me health and life, and more material
occasions not intervening, give an account of my Faith herein in due time.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 24. l. 36. read, operatio. Page 30. l. 27. r. actual. Page 36. l. 25. r.
separate. Page 37. l. 24. for muck r. smoke. Page 44. l. 26. r. should have.
Page 45. l. 1. r. Baptism. Page 46. l. 37. r. or the cup. Page 51. l. 35. r.
much more. Page 56. l. 4. r. or at least. Page 59. l. 29. for, two r. to. Page
61. l. ult, r. whether. Page 69. l. 13. r. admitted. Page 77. l. 34. r. other.

