The Remedy of Unreasonableness OR THE Substance of a Speech Intended at a
Conference or Dispute, In Al-hallows the Great, London. Feb. 11. 1649.
Exhibiting the brief HEADS of Mr John Goodwin's Judgment, Concerning the
Freeness Fullness Effectualness of the Grace of GOD. As also concerning the
Bondage or Servility of the Will of Man. Occasioned by an undue aspersion cast
upon him; as (viz.) That he held Free Will in opposition to Free Grace.

And not rather, as we are slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we
say, Let us do evil that good may come; whose damnation is just. Romans 3. 8.
Nonnulli Intelligentes citius volunt exagitare, quod non intelligunt, quam
quaerere ut intelligant: and non fiunt humiles inquisitores, sed superbi
calumniatores, Aug. LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Lodowick Lloyd, and
Henry Cripps, and are to be sold at their shop in Popes head Alley. 1650.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
I Had not troubled thee with these Papers out of the Press, had not the
unreasonableness of those, who ministered the occasion, or necessity rather, of
the contents of them, uncivilly denied the liberty of an orall prolation of
them, when time, and place; and a good conscience, required it at my hand. At
the former of the two late Conferences or Disputes held in All-hallows the
Great, London, between Mr J: Simson, and my self, he was pleased, upon no
occasion at all given by me, to traduce me before the whole Congregation there
assembled, consisting of some thousands of people, as a man holding Free Will
in opposition to Free Grace. At the latter of the said Conferences, perceiving
him not altogether so knowing what my sense or opinion was in the said points,
and upon this ground, fearing the like of his Friends and Followers, who made
up a great part of the present Auditory, as well to relieve their ignorance
herein, and free them from the guilt of an unchristian surmise against their
Christian Brother, who never injured them, nor any one of them, in the least,
as also to wipe off the blot from my self, which I had contracted by opposing
uncivil men in the way of their error, I was desirous to have given an account
of my Faith touching the said particulars, together with the Question agreed
upon for present debate, in the presence of those that were there met to hear.
But he that had the face to charge unduly, had not the heart either to stand by
so unworthy an action, or to acknowledge the unworthiness of it. For when I
desired leave over and over, and that with much earnestness, to have given some
brief account to the people of my judgment, touching the things unjustly
charged upon me by my Antagonist, he peremptorily denied it: and as often as I
made offer to speak upon this account, he, in a very unseemly manner, and with
clamor, interrupted me, and suffered me not to speak. Nor do I think that
there can be an instance of a like unmanlike carriage produced out of al
Histories or Records whatsoever; I mean, that a person wrongfully accused,
should not be permitted by his Accuser, to speak what he has to say in order
to his purgation. Another cake of the same dough was this. When I reasoned thus
against his most absurd (and indeed blasphemous) opinion of Gods reprobating
men from eternity.

If God reprobated men from eternity, then he reprobated himself, [there being,
neither thing, nor person from eternity, to reprobate, unless men will say,
that he should reprobate himself.]

But God did not reprobate himself. Ergo. He, with his train of Disciples,
(whether out of weakness, or a worse principle, I will not judge) expressed
themselves with a kind of zealous indignation, as if I had spoken blasphemy,
and affirmed, that God reprobated himself; whereas expressly, and in so many
words, I affirmed the quite contrary (as the minor in the recited Syllogism
plainly imports) charging that blasphemy, as a direct and unavoydable
consequence of his Opinion; from which, neither he, nor his co-adjutors, were
then able to vindicate the said opinion, nor will be able to the days of
eternity.

Ne vero, ne me ad tales impellite pugnas.
No more, good Friends, no more (I pray you)
Of such Disputes, and Disputants, as these.
But as Jehojakim got nothing by cutting the Prophet Jeremiah's first Roll in
pieces, but only the writing of another by the same Prophet, with an addition
of more words like unto those written in the former Ier. 36. 32.
: So neither has my Antagonist gained any thing by stopping my mouth at the
Dispute, in not suffering me there to make straight, what he had made crooked,
but only the publishing of the same things there intended to have been spoken,
to the cognizance of far greater numbers of men, and this with some enlargement
(though not much) in words of like consideration with them Toward the latter
end of the said latter Dispute, with much ado I forced an opportunity to speak
somewhat, though very little, of that which is presented unto thee, in these
Papers.
. Farewell:

Thine, in the Lord Christ, and his Truth, JOHN GOODWIN.

The Substance of a Speech intended at a Conference or Dispute, in All-hallows
the Great, London, Febr. 11. 1649.
THe Question to be taken into consideration and debated at present, is,
Whether the Gentiles, who wanted the Ministry of the Gospel by men, had not
sufficient means notwithstanding to be saved. I am here (God assisting) to make
proof of the affirmative; viz. That such Heathen had sufficient means for
Salvation, such a want notwithstanding. But first I must crave leave to open
the state of the question, and to declare in what sense I hold and maintain,
That the Heathen, under the want of the Ministry of the Gospel by men, have yet
sufficient means vouchsafed unto them by God whereby to be saved. I have so
much the greater necessity lying upon me to give you a clear and distinct
account of what my sense and judgment is in the present Question, because by
some words which fell from the Opponent at our last Dispute in this place, I
clearly perceived that he altogether mistakes my opinion in the present
Controversies. For he was pleased to say, that I maintain Free Will in
opposition to Free Grace, (or words to this effect) and pleaded this as a
ground, why he could not give the right hand of Christian fellowship unto me.
Now, to satisfy both him, and all you that are present, I here declare this
day in the presence of God and all his holy Angels, before you, and to all the
world, I hold no freedom of Will, nor any thing else, not any opinion
whatsoever, in any the least opposition to Free Grace. Yea whenever his
opinion and mine, touching the freedom of the will in man, and of the Grace of
God in Jesus Christ toward men, shall come into a clear light, and be duly
compared together. I know with the knowledge of a full assurance, that his
opinion will (of the two) be found to be the far greater Exaltress of free will
in men, and the greater abaser of the Grace of God. There are many hundreds
present, that have heard me from time to time deliver my judgment in public,
and many in private, touching the present Controversies: I appeal to them all,
conjunctim and divisim, whether ever they heard me utter so much as the least
word tending to exalt the freedom of the will of man unto that which is good.
My present opinion is, and my constant Doctrine has been, That the will of man
destitute of the Grace of God, and his cooperating assistance with it, is, or
would be, most desperately wicked, and servile unto sin. Yea and further, that
notwithstanding the co-operative Grace of God with it, yet it is exceeding apt
and prone to be led captive unto sin by the Devil. Whereas the opinion of my
Antagonist (being truly and fairly interpreted) if it be contrary unto mine,
is, That the will of man, by means of the cooperating Grace of God with it,
becomes free after the manner of the freedom of the Will of God himself, i. e.
so free unto that which is good, that it is unpossible for it not to move or to
be carried out unto it.

Concerning the Grace of God, there are three things, wherein the glory of it
consists: the freeness of it: the fullness or extent of it: the force or
efficacy of it.

Concerning the first of these, I clearly hold, and have upon all occasions
constantly taught, 1. That the whole plot or counsel of God concerning the
Salvation of the World, is of free Grace, of mere Grace, and goodness of Will,
or pleasure in God. 2. That his purpose of Election, or Predestination of men
unto life and glory, is an act of free Grace also; and that there was no
obligation or necessity upon him to predestinate any man, or any sort of men,
as now he has done. 3. That the gift of Jesus Christ unto the World, is a gift
of free Grace, and that God was no ways obliged hereunto. 4. That, to give or
confer Justification, Adoption, and Salvation it self, upon believing in Jesus
Christ, are acts of the pure and free Grace of God. 5. That to give strength,
power, and means of believing unto men, is an act of mere and free Grace
likewise. 6. That it is of the free Grace of God, and by the help, and
assistance thereof, that any man does ever actually believe.

2. Concerning the fullness, or extent of this Grace; my sense is, and my
Doctrine has been, 1. In respect of persons, that it is not imprisoned or
confined, within the narrow Compass of an handful of men, in comparison; or
that it extends it self, either in the intentions of Salvation, or in the
provisions which it makes, or affords unto men for Salvation, only unto those
few, who come in time actually to believe, and to be saved, but that like the
Sun in the firmament of Heaven, it compasses the whole Earth from the one end
of it unto the other, and stretches it self unto all men. 2. In respect of the
Good, which it intends unto men, my opinion is, That it is exceeding full and
comprehensive, i. e. That the good, or blessedness which God graciously intends
unto men, in, and by the Gospel, is a full, absolute, and complete Blessedness,
containing every good and desirable thing in it. 3. (And lastly, for this)
That in respect of the means, which it vouchsafes and exhibiteth unto men, for
the bringing them to the full enjoyment, of this blessedness, it is full and
complete also: so that the means, which God graciously exhibiteth unto men to
make them blessed, are everyways sufficient for such a purpose, or end.

3. Concerning the power or effectualness of this Grace, I hold, and teach
(upon all occasions) 1. That in the gift of a power, or a sufficiency of means
unto men, whereby to believe, or to be saved, it is simply irresistible, and
that men cannot frustrate or hinder this operation of it. 2. That what good
thing soever any man does, he does it through the assistance of the free Grace
of God, and is in no capacity or meetness so much as to conceive or think a
good thought without it: 3. And lastly, That when any man actually believes,
or is truly converted unto God, that he is mightily strengthened and assisted by
the supernatural, or special Grace of God thereunto: So that the act of
Conversion, or believing, is to be ascribed unto God, not only as the sole
Author and giver of that power, by which men do believe, but as the sole
supernatural Actor also of this power in the Act it self of believing; and that
man, when he does believe, is so far from having any cause, or ground of
boasting in himself, because of this his believing, that he has all the reason
in the world to confess and say (in our Saviors prescript of words) That he is
an unprofitable Servant, and has only done that which was his duty, and that
in abundance, to do. Only I conceive that men are not necessitated by this
Grace of God, or any working thereof, to believe, whether they will or no: nor
yet made willing upon any such terms, but that there is a possibility left unto
them of nilling, or of remaining unwilling, to any moment or point of time,
until the act it self of believing be produced.

So that my opinion concerning the Grace of God, being truly compared with the
opinion of those that dissent from me, appears to have much more in it for the
exaltation of the Grace of God, then theirs: and theirs much more in it for the
exaltation of the will of man, then mine. For 1. My opinion makes the Grace of
God so free, as to enrich the whole world, and all that is called man in it;
and that without the least engagement upon God from men thereunto: Whereas
their opinion imprisons it within a narrow compass of men (in comparison) and
so bridles or stiffles the freeness of it (in that consideration.) 2. As in one
branch of their opinion, they stiffle and destroy the glory of the freeness of
it, so in another, they quite destroy the very nature or essence of it, and
make it to be no Grace at all. For that opinion, which makes the Grace of God,
the fountain or cause of no other actions in men, then such, as God cannot,
according to the Law and constant method of his remunerative justice, or
bounty, reward, destroys the very nature of Grace. And that the opinion,
maintained by our Opposers, does this, is evident from hence; viz. because
that, making men to act necessarily and unavoydably, by means of the grace
which is given them, makes them to act physically, or as mere natural Agents,
and so reduces all that they do by virtue of the Grace of God, to the Law and
Condition of mere natural actions, which, by the standing Law of Gods
remunerative bounty, are not capable of reward by God.

Again, That their Opinion, tends many thousand degrees, more then mine, to
magnify the wills of men, is evident thus: I affirm the will of man even under
the strongest and most effectual motions of the Grace of God, whereof it is
capable (the nature and essential liberty of it only preserved) to be in a
capacity of sinning, and doing that which is evil (which is the greatest
abasement of the will, that can well be imagined;) whereas the other opinion,
makes the wills of men, under the effectual motions of the Grace of God unto
that which is good like unto the will of God himself; I mean, necessarily and
unchangeably good, and free from all possibility of s^^^ing, which is the
highest exaltation of the will, that can well be conceived. And besides, that
opinion, making men unable to do righteously, for want of the Grace of God,
when they sin and do wickedly, takes off the shame, and demerit of sinning from
the wills of men, and either casts them upon God for denying his Grace unto
them, or else resolves them into nothing. Whereas the opinion asserted by me,
affirming, That men, when they sin and do wickedly, have sufficient means from
God to refrain sin, and to do righteously, resolves the shame and whole demerit
of sinning into men themselves, and their wills, and so renders them
inexcuseable. Thus you see how unjustly, and with manifest untruth, I have been
charged to hold Free Will against Free Grace: and how that my Accusers are the
guilty persons themselves.

Concerning my opinion about the death of Christ, which is, That he dyed for
the Salvation of all men, without exception of any, and consequently for the
Heathen, as well those who do enjoy the oral Ministry of the Gospel, as those
that want it; I herein hold nothing, but what was generally taught, and
received, in the primitive Churches of Christ, for three hundred years
together, and more, next after the times of the Apostles (which are by all our
modern Protestant Divines, and by Calvin in special manner, acknowledged for
times, wherein Christian Religion reigned in her greatest purity, and soundness
of Doctrine) as I am able to make substantial proof by express testamonies, and
these not a few, from the best Records and Writers of these times; as from,
Ignatius, Hegesipp^^, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Athanasius,
Hilarious, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, Nazianzen, Gregorius
Nyffenus, Arnobius, Lactantius, Ambrosius, Didymus, Chrysostom, Jerome,
Angustine, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Theodoret, (with many others,) as from
several Councels also. And that Gods predestination of men, or purpose of
Election, depends upon his prescience or foresight of their Faith, (an opinion
clearly confederate with that of Universal Redemption by Christ) is both by
Culvin, and Beza themselves acknowledged to have been the judgment of many of
the ancient Fathers Sic interposito praescientiae vtlo electionem, nomoa^
obs^u^ant, sed origin^m aliund^ habere singunt. Neque viro haec vulgo recepta
p^^^o solius vulgi est. Habuit enim saeculis omnibus magnos Authors.
: and is proved by many particular instances, and express testimonies, by
Gerard Vossius in his Historia Pelagiana, lib. 6. These. 8. Concerning some few
sayings, found in some of these Authors, which seem to be of a contrary import,
and are cited by some upon that account, the truth is, that they are but
seemingly so: and they speak, not of the purchase, or procurement, but of the
application and enjoyment, of the Redemption by Christ. Therefore (by the way)
they that inform or tell you, That Christ's dying for all men, a sufficiency of
power given to all men to believe, an election of species or kinds of men, not
of persons, personally considered, etc. were held by Pelagius, and condemned
for Errors by the Orthodox Fathers of those times, Quod ingenue fatere, nequis
causae nostrae magnopere obsuturum con^^^^^, st^orum nomina contra opponantur.
Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. S. 1.
sin both against their own, and your Souls, and shall render an account unto
him who judges righteously, for dealing so unfaithfully and unchristianly, by
his people and Truth. They cannot prove, that Pelagius ever held any one of the
opinions mentioned (unless happily after that Recantation of his Errors,
whereunto the Arguments and Authority of the Orthodox men in his times, brought
him) but that he held Mr Simsons opinion, which denies that Christ dyed for
all men, Est etiam hic locus diligenter observandus, adversus (...), qui fidei,
vel operum p^aevi^^^^em saciunt electionis ecusam. in quem (...) sane
turp^ssimum, Origenes vet^^es plaeolque, tum Gracos, tum Latinos adegit; donec
tand^m Dominus Augusitinum per Pelagia^os, ad (...) agnoscendum and Co^^igen^um
errorem, excitaret. Beza in. 9 ad Romans
before, if not after the said Retractation, may be evidently proved from
Augustines Epist. 106. and from other testimonies, that the same opinion was
held by his followers. But of all these particulars we intend a further
account, when God shall give opportunity.

Besides, they that are competently acquainted with books, cannot lightly but
know, that the Reformed Churches of the Lutherans, with their Ministers and
Teachers, who have as great a zeal of God, and for parts of knowledge and
learning, yea, and for numbers also, are not much inferior to those who follow
Calvin, if not superior to them, in all, do (in a manner) generally hold,
universal Atonement by Christ, together with the other Opinions
consequentially accompanying it: and Doctor Prideaux (a man sufficiently
engaged and declared against those ancient Tenants of the Christian Church,
which now unjustly suffer under the name of Arminian) in his printed Lectures
about these points, still brings upon the stage the Lutherans and Arminians, or
Remonstrants, hand in hand, as his joint adversaries See his Lecture de
Absolut^ Decreto, de Gratia universali, de Perseverantia Sanctorum.
.

Yea, these Theological truths, That Christ dyed for all men, That God
vouchsafes sufficient means of Salvation unto a men, etc. are so extremely
necessary in the managing of the affairs of Christ, and of the Gospel, that as
the Roman Orator said of Justice, That it was so necessary for the preservation
of Civil Communities, that Thieves themselves, who are enemies to it, and live
by injustice toward others, yet cannot want it amongst themselves; So neither
can those men, who profess enmity and opposition to the said Opinions, hardly
preach, hardly write, any thing to purpose, concerning the Gospel, but they are
necessitated to make use of them, and to assert them, either in expressness of
terms and words, or in their clear and manifest principles. The writings of
Calvin himself, and so of Bucer, Musculus, Vrsine, Bullinger, with several
other Reformed Divines, who are generally taken for men of a contrary Judgment,
yet do their writings (I say) frequently teach and avouch them, and that in as
plain and ample terms, as any Remonstrant can lightly express his sense about
them. Yea, these truths were too hard for the Synod of Dort it self, and now
and then gained testimony from them, notwithstanding their solemn and sacred
engagement to devote themselves and the best of their Synodical Endevors, to
oppose and suppress them. What I have now only affirmed, and this in the
general, I shall, God willing, and sparing me in life and health for the
service, in due time make to appear in particulars. In the mean time, if you,
that are present, shall please narrowly to observe, and consider, the Sermons
which you ordinarily hear from your Ministers, or mind their printed books
upon some subjects, you shall ever and anon very apparently find such things
asserted and delivered by them, which cannot stand, nor make any tolerable
sense, much less Divinity, but by the credit and countenance of the Opinions I
speak of, and which they notwithstanding so zealously pretend to abominate. I
could weary you with instances in this kind: but if you will afford me your
Christian patience in harkening (at present) unto two only, I shall excuse you
for the rest, till some better convenience of time. The former of the two
consists of several passages in a Sermon lately preached before the Lord Major
of your City (and more lately printed) by Mr Powel, an Arch-stickler about
these late Disputes, and a zealous Defender of that Faith, which teaches him
to doubt whether Christ dyed for him, or no, yea or for any one of all those,
to whom he preaches the Gospel, and makes a tender of Christ, at any time, yea
or for any one of his Nation. Thus then Mr Powel, giving a large testimony to
that Truth, which himself decryeth for an Error, page 39, and 40. of the said
Sermon.

Object. Oh Sir! this stands in my way: Though I (...) Christ has finished the
work of men's Redemption, and of men's Salvation, yet I do not know whether he
has finished it for me?

Answ. Harken my beloved; what ground have you to make a plea against your
selves? He has done it for Rom 5. 8. 1 Timothy 1 15.
sinners, for the Rom 5. 6.
ungodly, for Psalm 68. 18.
rebels, for the John 6. 51.
world; you are a sinner, you are one of the ungodly, one of the world, what
plea can you make against this? why object you such an Objection against your
selves? If a Pardon be sent from a Prince to a company of Prisoners, and the
Messenger says unto them in general, Here is a Pardon for you, from my Prince,
for what you have done against him, come, accept of it, and you shall be free.
Now if one should ask, is the Pardon for me? and another question. Is the
Pardon for me? He would answer, It is for you that are Prisoners, without
exception, if you accept of it. A Pardon is now sent unto you, that are sinful
men and women, who are Prisoners under the power of Satan, and sin; I say to
you all, the Lord Jesus has sent forth his Pardon, which runs thus; I the Lord
Jesus, the Son of God, and the Savior of sinners, out of my free grace and
mercy, rich love and pity, am willing to pardon, and forgive, the sins and
transgressions of you all; and that I will do really, if you will come in, and
lay hold of this Pardon, and of my Righteousness. Will a sinner now say, Does
Jesus Christ mean me, seeing he says, Whosoever comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast him out; And whosoever believes on me, he shall be pardoned, and
saved? This word whosoever comprehends all, and excludes none; therefore object
not against your selves, neither refuse your own Salvation.

Object. Oh! but though Christ's invites all, and makes promises to all that do
come, yet he intends not that all should be made partakes thereof?

Ans. My beloved, Think you that Christ's Intentions, and his expressions, are
not one as real as another? I tell you (and you may believe it) that he intends
to pardon all, and to save all, as he expresses it: He says not the words
only, but his heart is so also. But mark it well (and mistake me not) I do not
mean that he says absolutely, I Will pardon all, and save all, and no more; Oh,
no: but he speaks conditionally, I Will pardon you all, and save you all, if you
believe on me, and accept of my Pardon.

Certainly, Arminius himself could not have Arminianiz'd in the point of
Universal Redemption by Christ, more plainly, more pregnantly, then he that
speaks such things, as these.

The latter instance has for the Authors of it a full Comfort of 52. grave
Ministers, in or about the City, page 32. of a little Treatise subscribed by
them (or by some of them, with the Names, though without the consent, of the
rest) and published about two or three years since, under the Title of, A
Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, etc. where bewailing the prevailing of
Errors and Heresies (so by them supposed) they bemoan the case of those, whom
yet other-while they judge the happiest men in the world, thus: Thousands, and
ten thousands of poor Souls, which Christ has ransomed with his blood, shall
hereby be betrayed, seduced, and endangered to be undone to all eternity. Here
we have the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, fully, and with open face,
asserted; in as much, as they who are ransomed by the blood of Christ, are said
to be endangered to be undone to all eternity. He that is in danger of an evil,
or misery, may very possibly fall into it. Danger does not only imply a
possibility, but even a probability, or likelihood of suffering. So then, if
thousands ransomed by the blood of Christ, may be brought into danger of being
undone for all eternity; they very possibly may suffer such an undoing, and so
perish for all eternity. If the ransomed by Christ may perish for all eternity,
then Christ ransomed not the Elect only, of whose perishing there is not the
least possibility, but the Rebrobate also, or those who perish; and
consequently, all men.

For any men to pretend or plead, that though there be an impossibility, in
respect of the Purpose and Decree of God, that those, whom Christ has ransomed
with his blood, should be undone to all eternity, yet they may be said to be in
danger of being thus undone, in respect of such means, which have a direct
tendency toward the undoing of Souls in such a way, as the spreading of Errors
and Heresies is, etc. such a pretense (I say) and plea, as this, is no salve at
all for the sore. For there is not the least danger of suffering inconvenience
by any such means, or causes, how likely or threatening soever, in themselves
simply considered, to bring the inconvenience upon us, which we certainly know
to be thoroughly mated and over-ballanced by means and causes of a contrary
tendency and import. Upon this account the Scripture it self frequently makes
such demands, as these: If God be for us, who can be against us? Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, etc. Which
kind of arguing clearly implies, that where, and in what case soever, we have
God for our security, we are in no danger at all of suffering. And it is a
Maxim in the Civil Law; That Omnia invalida pro nihilo sunt habenda: i. e. All
means that are insufficient, are to be reputed as none. Souls that are secured
by any Decree of God, are in no more danger of being undone to all eternity, by
Errors and Heresies, then by reading the Roman or Turkish Histories, or by any
other means, how irrelative soever to such an effect: in as much as Errors and
Heresies, bear no more proportion in their destroying, or undoing properties,
to the saving or preserving power of God, then the reading of the said
Histories, or any other means, how inconsiderable soever in their relation to
the same effect.

Nor is the instance from Act. 27. wherein those, whose lives God had promised
to save, are said notwithstanding to have been in danger of drowning, of any
better accommodation, to deliver the said passage from the Orthodox error of a
clear comport with the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, then the former
arguing. For evident it is, from those words, ver. 31. Except these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be saved, that that expression of the Angel unto Paul,
verse. 24. And lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee, did not
import any absolute purpose of God to save the lives of all those in the ship
with him, but only a conditional; it being a thing very frequent in the
Scripture, to express both such purposes, and such promises, of God, in an
absolute and un-conditioned form of words, the execution and performance
whereof, in respect of the things purposed, or promised, are never the less
suspended upon conditions. Instances hereof we shall (God willing) produce many
upon a more material occasion. Therefore the safety of the lives of those men,
to whom Paul says, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved, was not
under any absolute Decree or promise of God, as the souls of those that are
ransomed by the blood of Christ (according to the constant Assertion of the 52
subscribers of the passage mentioned) are; God never subjecting any thing
positively and absolutely decreed by him, unto any condition whatsoever
performable by man. So that the subscribers are most palpable
selfinconsistents; nor does the instance now argued, take the least pity or
compassion on them in covering that their shame.

I have only this one word to add, touching the sense, wherein I hold a
sufficiency of means to believe, or to be saved, vouchsafed unto the Heathen,
who wanted the Ministry of the Gospel by men. By a sufficiency of means to
believe, I do not understand an immediate sufficiency, but a mediate or remote
sufficiency. By an immediate sufficiency of means to do a thing, I mean such
a sufficiency, whereby a man is enabled to do the thing, without having any
more means in order hereunto, then what he has at present. Thus a man that
understands a language, and has his sense of hearing perfect, has an
immediate sufficiency of means to understand the mind of him that speaks
audibly unto him in that language. He stands in need of nothing more for such a
purpose. By a mediate or remote sufficiency of means to do a thing, I mean
such a sufficiency by which, though a man is not enabled without further
provision of means, to do the thing, yet he is enabled to make such a farther
provision in this kind, that having made it, he becomes immediately qualified,
or able to do it. A man endued with reason, memory, and understanding, and
having the opportunity of an able teacher, to instruct him in the knowledge of
a strange language, and which at present he understands not, has a remote
sufficiency of means to understand this language, and by a due improvement of
these means, though remote, is very capable of obtaining such a sufficiency of
means hereunto, which is immediate. With this latter kind of sufficiency, I
affirm, the Gentiles, who wanted the Ministry of the Gospel, had
notwithstanding a sufficiency of means to believe to the saving of the soul.
The Heathen were sufficiently qualified or furnished by God for the doing of
those things, by which they might, and should, if they had done them, have been
brought to an immediate capacity of believing.

By believing unto Salvation, I mean such a Faith in God, or such a dependence
or reliance upon him, which is proper and sufficient to have led them into such
ways, wherein God would have saved them, had they walked in them, according to
that of the Apostle; If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not 2 Cor. 8. 12.
.

FINIS.

