THE AUTHOR AND Case of Transplanting THE IRISH into Connaught VINDICATED, from
the unjust Aspersions of Col. RICHARD LAVRENCE.

By Vincent Gookin Esquire.



LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Simon Miller at the Sign of the Star in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY the Lord Deputy General of IRELAND.
MY LORD,
IT is not any high opinion that I have of my self, or these following Papers,
that makes them ambitious of a Dedication, much less so high an one: but that
which I have of your Lordship: Your great humility not to disdain the meanest
present, patience to attend the most impertinent address, and Justice to right
the lowest person injured, all which virtues I seem at present to need, and
your Lordship does more then seem always really to have. Besides, my Lord, I
carry a constant reason for it within me, so great and particular an honor for
your Lordship, that if I could do any thing worthy a handsome account, I must
profess a resolution to expiate this fault by greater presumptions; not to
give credit to what worth the world takes ^^tice to be in you by my testimony,
but rather to gain credit to my testimony from your worth; My Lord, There are
more conside^^^^ that have created in me this confidence; The thing mane^^^^
this Controversy has fallen under your Lordships action, the ^^^te it self
therefore craves your consideration; You are the person imagined, given cut by
some to be chiefliest reflected on by me in the Case of Transplantation: At
your feet therefore I particularly cast my self with this tender of
Satisfaction. All come to you for Justice, I among the rest, whom you have
often sent away with favor: My heart tells me I am innocent, and ever was in
this kind, yet though I am innocent, I am not clear till absolved by your
mouth; My Lord, I was happy once (and rejoiced in being so) for some little
reputation which your own goodness had given me with you, for I had nothing in
my self to deserve it: But if I have nothing in my self to forfeit it neither,
I beseech your Lordship that I may preserve it still, that it may preserve me
still; Your goodness has seldom denied me in my intercessions for others, I
hope I shall not be only unhappy when I plead for my self; I doubt not but
diverse have taken the advantage of my absence as well as of my actions, to
lessen your esteem of me: and it is not only that one thing of the Case of
Transplantation, I hear they have misrepresented me in; I dare say it is
misrepresentation, if any thing therein has displeased your Lordship, who can
be no more offended with any thing that is just, then they can be pleased with
any thing then what is otherwise: My Lord, it is your favor I crave, not
theirs; before you to appear blameless, not them, which I shall never do
whilst I oppose their interest and desires of Arbitrary Power, which I esteem
my self bound in duty to do, whilst I have either power or interest, so far as
it shall seem to me to oppose the Commonwealths good. My Lord, There are some
things in this Treatise less fit for your Excellencies view, but they are fit
for Coll. Laurence, who has sometimes drawn expressions from me I am not used
to, by having always fastened characters upon me which were wont heretofore as
little to be used to me: They are so frequent, and so gross, that they might
have gained some little credit with strangers who think bashfulnesse proceeds
still from guilt, If I had not sometimes refuted them in as loud a style as he
writ them; I likewise confess, my Lord, his accusation of my reflecting on
you, so much reflected on me, that the anger of it lent my arm strength
sometimes to strike hard; for he loudly calls me out to be his enemy that shall
but whisper that I am not,

MY LORD, Your Excellencies most faithful, and most obedient Servant VINCENT
GOOKIN.

A Just VINDICATION of the AUTHOR and CASE of TRANSPLANTATION, from the unjust
Aspersions and Censures of RICHARD LAVRENCE.
WHilst any thing of Reputation might have been the effect of writing the Case
of Transplantation, I was content to take the labor to my self, and leave the
good to others: This was the reason of silencing my Name at first; and indeed
the thing it self had never invaded the Press, if a diffidence of my own
Judgment had not made me willing to expose it to better, and the request of
some of the members of the Parliament that it might be thoroughly perused by
them all. But now what I intended for good, is come to be thought so ill, I
must leave that resolution, and assert my own act to try if I can assert my
innocence: yet I could have wished that he who undertook to confute me had used
more of Reason and less of Passion; it being unlikely that should make me see,
which it self had first blinded him.

But though I did not think fit then to put my Name in Print, yet did not that
Trifle steal out in so clandestine a way, as that the Parent was hid from all:
but being laid at my door, I owned it (when challenged) and the rumor spread
like a train, so that I believe even Col. Laurence had a jealousy, if not
certainty who Writ it; which I am the more confirmd in by p. 17. line 10. of
his book. The more I wonder, how not having (that I know) any personal spleen
against me, or (I hope) not being lead by such things, if he has, he should
fall into such foul defamations of me, as to go about to persuade others such
things to be true of me, as he himself must believe most of them to be false:
As that I am an abettor of the Irish Rebels, a Malignant, an incendiary, an
opposer of the Authority, etc. to which I shall say little now, because they
were fixed on a chimera before (my Name being concealed.) But hereafter, if he
shall think fit to continue that wrong, the way will be more open to do my self
right: Surely from the former actings of my life he could not have charged me
with all this guilt; and if in this last I happened to tread awry (because I
was not so sharp sighted as he) my ignorance ought rather to have been pitied,
then my maliciousness censured; I am not the first that has done ill (once) if
I had done so, and first faults do not use to be so rigidly treated, especially
by friends. I am not offended with Col. Laurence because he is not of my mind,
why should he be that I was not of his? The unhappiness is great enough that I
was not so, he might have spared the attending severities.

I believe there is no person but would think it easy for me to make him lose
that pleasure in ill hearing, that he has taken in ill speaking: But I am both
a Christian to pardon, and a man not to scold; my aim is at truth, not victory;
to have the best, not the last word; and this resolution will shrink what of
his Book is fit afterward to be answered, into a very little room, the carcass
being but small, when the guts and garbadge are thrown away: My civility
obliges me to wait upon him in the way, but not to tumble with him into the
kennell.

The first piece of justice that I owe to my self, is to wipe off an aspersion
cast on me by the Prologue, that ushered Col. Laurence Book on the Stage; which
though I shall not at random make him the Author of, I may prove my self not to
have deserved. And this is no ill place for it now I am at the Bar, to answer
(if I can) altogether.

Letters in the Diurnall come from Ireland, which tell us, That there are
certain sums of Money raising for Irish Agents in England, among whom the
Author of the Case of Transplantation is believed to have a considerable sum,
a reward propor^ionable unto the greatness of his deserts from them.

First, The Author presents his most deserved thanks to the kind Gentleman (if
he be one) for his grateful intelligence, which he professes else he had been
a stranger still unto (notwithstanding so nearly concerning him) unless his
civility had thus informed him.

Secondly, He is bold upon the account of his former unprovoked goodness to a
stranger, to request a new favor for one whom he now knows; namely, that he
would be pleased to enquire more fully after that report (doubting it may be
too good news to be true) and if he be so happy to find it out, and please but
to give the Author of the Case of Transplantation an assurance of the truth of
it from himself, and please but to take off his vizard and show who himself is,
the Author of the Case does hereby engage himself to call that Gentleman to an
account for the slander, if he will not him for the bribery; and this he hopes
may provoke him either to make good his impeachment, or by his silence to
ascertain others of his malice: but it is to be doubted that person has got
more by [Lying] there, then I ever have or shall by staying here. And I do here
not only challenge him, but all persons in the world to prove that since ever I
served the State, I was corrupted by the value of a penny, but have for their
service expended many pounds of my own.

I return now to Col. Laurence, whose resolution I cannot but admire in the
beginning of his Book, or rather his irresolution, in receding from the Title
to his Book; there he promises an Answer to that scandalous, seditious Pamphlet
(as he is pleased modestly to call the Case of Transplantation penned by me.)
And indeed I must confess, if it were a scandalous, seditious Pamphlet, he has
answered it in some sense, that is, as the image in the glass answers the face
out of it; or the Echo the voice, by composing a rhapsody, as like a
scandalous, seditious Pamphlet, as possibly may be; nay I will grant him more,
he has really made most of my Book appear false; that is, he has represented
very many things not truly: But if he be serious, then he did well in his Title
to say he intended it as an Answer; but ill to change his intentions before he
had disengaged his word pawnd: for here he tells you on the contrary, p. 1, and
2. that he will not give an orderly Answer to the discussors Arguments and
Objections as they stand (and it seems for him are like to do so still) in his
Book; but for brevities sake pass them by as impertinencies: And that he may
not take notice of the aspersions and reflections cast by me on Authority.

1. I desire the Reader to reflect on the heads of my Arguments, what they
were, before he do on his censure of their impertinency: They are
Considerations drawn, 1. From Religion, p. 1. 2 From public profit, p. 15. 3.
From public safety, p. 20. Is Religion publicly disclaimed as an
impertinency by Col. Laurence? Is the Interest of the State, Adventurer,
Soldier, Planter, Inhabitant, a trifle fit to be hushed up (by him) who
pretends to be their Champion against me? Must the security of all be laid by
too, to swell his ^ardle of impertinencies? Strange! What a wilderness will he
make of Ireland, which has been all this while his Land of promise, and waded
to, through a red sea of blood? A Land where neither Religion shall be regarded
by them as Christians, nor advantage thought on as men, nor security respected
as creatures: This is a new model of a Church and State beyond either Plato or
Sr Thomas Moors conceptions; Sure the world in the Moon have this Government
among them, which is the cause of her so frequent changes: But I believe the
godly that intend for Ireland, will look on Religion with another eye; and the
estated man will think profit a very pertinent argument to promote his journey;
and safety, I suppose, when they come there will not be looked on as so loose a
thing by any. In the mean time it is but a sad consideration that follows Col.
Laurence's Ho yes for Ireland, that he is of such a judgment that invites them
thither, that he regards neither Arguments drawn from Religion, Interest, or
Safety, by what Arguments shall they move him when he has them there?

2. Surely this was a good brief way indeed, a short method of answering all
the books in the world in a moment, to wave their Arguments as impertinencies
for brevity sake: But it is only orderly answering that he avoids: This sure is
a stratagem from war, the stoutest soldiers love always to charge scattered
troops; But (Sir) you should have first routed my Arguments; why what needs
that? he has disordered them without that: O that the weakest Armies could be
but used as the strongest reasons; then Colonel Laurences sword might be as
famous as his pen, what victories should we have, which now we must rest our
selves content to want? Surely I expected, where so much was promised, some
performances; the Reader will not be converted without better demonstrations
from you; and if you carry the Transplantation, he will think 'twas by reason of
your force, not by the force of your reason; but you do it to be courteous to
me, to pass by my reflections on Authority, etc. Surely, if your kindness,
have observed so many of my defects in this kind (for every leaf almost is
dapled with malicious, scandalous, slanderous, weak, malignant, impudent
incendiary, etc.) 'twas well for me your cruelty was asleep; you have hidden
this fault, as a Lady does a little pimple, by placing over it a great spot,
which makes her more remark't, how ill or deservedly that will hereafter appear.

Leaving Reason therefore he descends to write a History, 1. Of the Authority
by which this was done. 2. The Reasons of it. 3. The Manner in it. 4. My
Mistakes; and then with a single Argument he pickeers on the States behalf, and
attempts the answering some Objections.

And surely the first three of these (to so mean an understanding as mine)
might have been put into the rank of impertinencies, and not insisted on by
him; for I think no body questions but there was Authority for this result, and
I never thought, nor any save their enemies, but that they did it upon grounds
and motives, and with good intentions: and what has been in pursuance thereof
hitherto acted in Ireland, was not examined by the case of Transplantation, nor
censured; but only what might happen if transplanting should be concluded on
(generally) in probability pointed at, according to my judgment. I reasoned
concerning the good or bad effects of Transplantation, and produced Arguments
to prove the latter; To answer all which, he tells us great wonders, 'Twas
resolved on by Authority, and that for some reasons too, and has been pursued
in Ireland, things which all men know, but how they need to be inserted here, I
know not.

Object. But that is my ignorance, for this was caused by my self; who blame the
Authority in Ireland for its Obedience to the Authority in England, and accuse
both for cruelty and weakness, page 2. and 3. of his Book, and many ways in
mine reflect on both: To which I answer.

1. Unless I will be so ingenuous to confess all those crimes, Mr Laurence is
so indulgent, as not to press me with the proof of any of them; His Assertions
therefore I shall confront with my Actions, and leave the Reader to judge the
truth of the first, and the honesty of the second. Having had the honor to be
chosen a Member of the last Parliament, among many other things, the great
Affair of transplanting the Irish, came to be the matter of some discourse:
Being employed thither (for Ireland) I did not foresee, I confess, that it
would be a sin of so deep a die, as it seems it is, nay be a complication of
so many gross enormities, if I did happen to speak my mind in that affair;
and not dictate Magisterially, but summon the best reason that I had to back
it; This I did, and at the request of some Members, that it might pass the
Test of the rest, cast it into that Paper wherein it was published, with as
honest an intention (I dare say) as Colonel Laurence prints the defiance to
it, though (it may be) not with so good success: They that have so much time
to waste, in reading my folly and his wisdom in our papers, will without being
bribed by either of us, quickly pass sentence who abounds most in abuse. Was
there such an Hidra of mischiefs (as he cha^ges on me) in venturing to debate a
resolution not yet commenc't into Action? This was the Parliaments fault with
me. Why did not the Parliament understand the horridness of this fact? and if
wise to understand it, why not just to punish it? It was their Authority
enacted it (according to Colonel Laurence) and so (if any) theirs was opposed,
censured, etc. and not that in Ireland; Now what the Parliaments thoughts were
of this, the Gentleman that ushered in Colonel Laurence's book with his
letter, tell us, That the Irish had great hopes in that Parliament, but God be
thanked they were blasted by their happy dissolution; Thus Parliaments are made
by some men to go with screws to be set higher or lower, as may please their
fancies or serve their humors.

But is this the reverence this Respondent has for the Parliament likewise
(whom he pretends in some places so much for) thus to abuse the Members of it,
as he has me? Besides, by the Respondents law, nothing (though never so ill
done) should be reverst, though on grounds never so well spoken, when even
things but in motion may not be ventilated? How long has Authority been such a
tender eye with this person, that it might not be touched? Sure it is but since
he has got to be in a little himself; and all others but so far regarded, as
they may exalt his, else Mr Laurence (probably) may find Arguments of another
nature; they are but men like others, The servants of the people, God respects
not persons, nor must we make an Idol of man, Not many mighty, but God has
chosen the foolish to confound the wise; Christ must rule, etc. I desire to
know of the Respondent, if he has never interposed his Reasons in public
State affairs of Ireland, to which he was not called, as the Discussor was to
the Parliament?

You see what the Authority is that he does so revere (himself and his
contrivances and interests) and the opposing this, is to be an Incendiary,
Malignant, etc. and you must take this for a general Rule in the Affairs of
Ireland; that if in the least thing you happen not point-vice to close with
Colonel Laurence, but O if you should have the unhappiness and the impudence
both to oppose what comes from this Tripos! If you displease but a Landprizado
that is in his Livery, that very day you commence an enemy to the State, and
the sad influence will sit closer to you then if you were born under a
three-peny planet; You are blasted for ever, and your infamy fires in a train;
he that never-saw you shall rail at you for a Malignant upon Public Faith; and
you are slain with the white powder of secret whispers, you cannot tell by
whom* But now on the contrary, how all things are lawful for some men, nay are
virtues, nay a duty, and the more exorbitant you are, the more excellent (as
not fearing the persons of men) so far is it from contemning Authority?

Can you hardly read English, and so not likely to understand the language of
the Law in French or Latin? Or are you a fool, and do not understand the
reason of the Law? Or have you a mind to rule arbitrarily your self? why then
you may rail and petition against the Law according to the judgment of some to
have it pulled down: Yet this is not malignity, though so long (and by so much
Authority) settled, though it be an Ax to cut off the neck of all Authority at
one blow? Have the Dominions of England and Ireland a mind to reward the
services of their principal Commander* with the honor of Protector; why you
may, nay you are bound, say some, to bear their Testimony against it, and yet I
never heard that Colonel Laurence was so offended as to vindicate Authority
against these in print; if the least crum go but awry with him, he may have
Petitions framed, remonstrate, consult, complain, and yet be no Incendiary; O
that Achilles mother had dipped us all, that so we might have become
invulnerable! But alas we are of Adams image, sinful and naked like him.
Indeed if Colonel Laurence has suffered for his Obedience, by the Author of
the Case of Transplantation, he may glory in it, as being the first Martyr of
his Judgment upon the fyle for such a Cause.

2. Though (Colonel Laurence, having accused me only in general terms, without
showing in particular wherein this great Malignancy lies, or what my
reflections on Authority are) I might content my self with this general Answer,
yet because, though it is the safest way, for a slanderer to make his charge
general as he has done; yet it is not so for him that can fully manifest his
innocence, and answers: I shall take leave (not to answer him, but others whom
he may have infected with this opinion of me, because it may be they are
strangers to me, and that Authority that is in Ireland, both Civil and Martial,
whom he intimates to have resented such a dealing from me) to annex these
ensuing lines in order to their Satisfaction, and my own fuller vindication.

1. That I have not the least sinister opinion of the Civil Government of
Ireland, or the Army, but on the contrary did, and do justly honor the wisdom
and justice of the Lord Deputy and Council, and the godliness, courage and
patience of the Officers and Soldiers in general; and therefore had no secret
embers in my breast from whence any flames against them might break forth, and
no contrivements or designs against them, but rather their profit and highest
reputation in my eye, and to set it up and advance it in my place, and
according to my mean abilities, knowing those persons to have been the
instruments of many glorious things for the time past in Ireland, and my
desires are they may be so in their posterities there for many generations to
come. The greater have their slanders been, who taking the advantage of my
being in England, have made it their business to stir up animosities in the
Army of Ireland against me, as if in my being here, I had negotiated diverse
things prejudicial to their Interest, and in particular that by my means relief
was obstructed from being sent unto them; My innocence in which, as I must here
plead to them, and to all moderate persons, not already engaged as my enemies;
so I do here publicly disavow all acts of the like kind against them, as
horrible calumnies spread abroad to my danger and defamation by malicious
persons privately, who dare not offer themselves to justify the least part of
their Libels in public. But on the contrary, I do hereby promise to make it
appear before any persons of piety and honor, either of the Army or out of it,
that all that ever I propounded in England did exceedingly tend to advance the
interest of the Army in Ireland, of which had I been the most eminent member, I
could not have told for my life how to have studied the good of it more; The
truth of which I do not doubt but a little time will manifest.

Yet I shall not deny but when I was in a civil imploiment for the State in
Ireland, I had some sharp conflicts with some particular Officers for dealing
unjustly with the Country, which I did and can make appear, and I thought I
was bound not to fear a man with a Sword, but defend the oppressed, according
to the trust reposed in me; I confess I did not flatter such men, nor never
shall vail to any dishonest course, but yet what I did I did openly, and
maintained legally, and am so far from repenting, that on the like occasions I
should repeat the like actions; This gained me those enemies, who never having
any thing that they durst defend against me openly, have labored to taint my
reputation with private whispers. I desire such secret murderers of my fame may
find no credit, whose very private way of slandering, will among judicious
persons beget a greater jealousy of themselves then me: If they speak truth,
why do they not justify it publicly? If a lie, why do they attempt to sneak
it into men's thoughts privately? Why do they not oppose my plainness with
plainness, and urge me publicly, as I have done them? These are the persons,
and these the ways whereby I am endeavored to be made an enemy to the State
and Army; The English of which is, Because they hate me, but cannot hurt me,
they will entitle the State to the cause when it is their own private,
believing then, men will condemn me, who else would condemn them; Supposing
them to defend the States innocence, when indeed they only vent their own
malice; for Colonel Laurence, though no juster, yet he has been a nobler
enemy, he has spoken loudly; I would he had plainly (nay sometimes) truly; he
says, I reflect much on Authority! But, 1. Reflect is a hard word, and of a
wide significancy, who can write thing but so good a wit as his joined with
some disgust against the person may draw it to reflect on any thing? 2.
Reflecting is the obscurest way of injuring; and if Colonel Laurence had not
been too nice a Critic on the behalf of Authority, plain men, who only see
down right abuses* it may be might not have seen those reflections. And lastly,
If they be but reflections, they are the immutest injuries that may be; but I
am sure he has not (reflected) but fallen down right outragiously on me for
that which himself confesses is but a reflection, without proof that it is, or
naming what it is; and I believe upon examination will be found not to be my
reflection, but his misinterpretation; He would have helped me mightily, if he
had named any particulars, but his negligence has awakened my diligence both to
reperuse that trifle of the Case of Transplantation, and to enquire diligently
after what others might think or have heard these reflections were; for I can
avow my heart to have been so clear from intending any thing of this nature,
that I am assured it must be either mistaking my meaning, or my own unhappy
expressing of it, or my enemies wilful perverting of it, that can engage my
words to a sense (not only so different from, but) abhorred by my very thoughts.

2. All therefore that I have heard from others, or can imagine my self in the
least degree to be in those papers mistaken or perverted to a reflection on
Authority, I shall set down here faithfully, with the meaning I intended them,
that so (which is of highest consequence) Authority may be cleared by me, and
(which is as much my desires as hopes, that) I may not be esteemed guilty by
Authority.

1. Page 3. Of the Case of Transplantation (in the Answers to the Objection
there) some things I am enform'd want an explanation to keep them from
reflecting on Authority: As

Object. 1. The grinding of the Irish (spoken of there) with heavy pressures,
to the destruction of more Families among them, under our Protection, then out
of it. To which I answer.

That this was a Narration of what has happened to them, not a complaint that
it has befallen them, nor an accusation of those instruments by whom it has
befallen, but brought in here to show they are hardened in their Superstition by
it, whatever cause it sprung from: Here is nothing spoken, that the cause of
this arose not from themselves, or not from necessity and justice in us, but
the contraay is often expressed in that Book, in these vindicating phrases, the
States wants, the Armies necessities, page 23. Now it is not the doing of a
thing, but the grounds on which it is done, that makes most actions
unwarrantable, which grounds are so far from being condemned on the part of
Authority in Ireland, that they are not questioned, but supposed as clear to
all; for it is obvious to common understandings, that the war against those
Rebels was just, and therefore justly to be prosecuted; and this could not be
done without money; and for England to defray the whole charge of a numerous
Army so long to attend that war, could not be expected, especially its own
war with Holland, and many other great additional expenses intervening: who
then should suffer, the English Army, or the Irish inhabitant? The last sure,
suppose him in the capacity of a Rebel it was lawful to destroy him; and
suppose him in the condition of a Subject, it was just for him to preserve us;
The English were large contributers there, why should not the Irish? The Irish
begun the Rebellion, they were the fittest to help to end it; Now that this
went so close with them, as to undo them, arose from our necessity, not will;
and from their precedent poverty in maintaining the Irish Army against England.
That more Families were undone among us then them, arose hence, That single men
became Soldiers among them, and fought against us, generally those that had
Families came in, and so fell among these pressures; and therefore, I said,
more Families of the Irish were undone under our Protection then out of it. Now
that I did not set down all these things punctually in that Treatise, was not
because they were not true, but because they were not pertinent; My business
was not there to write a Panegyric for the State, and accumulate all their
Praiseworthy actions, nor to write any thing in their Defense, whom I saw no
honest man accuse, but to give a short account of the matter of
Transplantation, and an historical report of fact where it was necessary in
order thereto, without putting in my censures or approbations of every single
act, or rendering the reasons of each particular, which would have swelled it to
a Volume; I was not aware, I confess, of a malicious Interpreter, who would
take my words absolutely, and not consider the account they were brought in
upon, for thus we may make what we will of any thing, Loyalty may be Treason,
and Orthodox Divinity Heresy.

Object. 2. In p. 3. I speak of great Divisions among the Protestants, and
bitterness of those so divided in matters of Religion against each other.

Answ. Surely, if my not speaking of those things (which I so much bewail)
would have contributed to their not being, my tongue should first cleave to the
roof of my mouth, ere I would publish the divisions of Reuben; nay, if it would
but smother it from being spoken of in Gath, or published in Ascalon; But who
does not speak of it? We to upbraid one another, and the Papist to scorn us
all; I wish the coining new names to be the liveries of divided parties did not
more loudly proclaim our rents, then my words, as of old Protestants, etc. And
I believe Colonel Laurence possibly may give some account of the mintage of
this, or who continue still to make it current to foment divisions still; I
have heard himself complain of these sad differences; I think all pious,
moderate Christians do the like; Religion (like infects) running out thus into
joints and bendings, has lost much of its blood and vigor; These things then
(though it is deplorable with tears of blood) being so, and known by our enemies
to be so, it is to no purpose to go about to hide the Sun with a man's palm,
or to keep them from them (and among our selves) at one time. But rather it
seems to be a duty called for at the hands of all sober Christians (who desire
not like Salamanders to live in fire) to take notice of these things themselves
for proof that they disown them, and that these are not general but particular
affections, not inherent in our Religion, but adherent to some persons that
profess it.

Object. 3. I seem (at the foot of the same Page,) to tax the neglect of
sending Ministers to convert the Irish, as if our business were to set up our
Interests, not Christ's.

Answ. This is no other thing then what has been publicly spoken and preached
in England and Ireland before his Highness, yet without any ill resentment
till now, that I have heard of; nor was it an accusation but an incentive, to
quicken the Parliament here to supply those necessities there; and if
intrenching on the neglect of any, it was theirs certainly, who had power to
have sent over Ministers, and could not touch the Governors of Ireland, who
had no Ministers to send.

II. Page 4. Of the Case of Transplantation, I accuse the ignorance and
heresies of diverse, who were allowed Maintenance under the notion of Preachers.

Answ. Here is indeed a crime taxed, but it is only in those persons that are
ignorant, heretical, none in Authority; they intended piously to maintain good
preaching: Those impiously to maintain bad doctrine, whom they could not know
till they should discover themselves; besides having no great choice of
Ministers in Ireland, they were constrained to accept whom they could, not
choose whom they would; to hope well till they found ill; They may be wise men
to conjecture prudently from externals, but God only searches the heart; None
can deceive him, many may us, who indeed deceive our selves; It could not then
be a fault in the Authority to admit such, but to continue them whom they knew
to be such, which was as far from being asserted by me, as my thoughts were
of injuring them; For the Governors did clear themselves in rejecting diverse
of these after upon complaint, yet might the Irish be scandalized that they
were admitted before.

III. Page 5. line 6. Some may be offended, that I seem to glance upon gifted
men, and to speak slightly of their Mission.

Answ. I did (and shall I hope) always highly value and love the gifts and
graces of God, wherever I found them, so far am I from contemning even the
meanest of Christ's little ones; It will be plain to him that views the place
without prejudice, that I spoke not of all gifted men, but those only under the
character I there give of them, viz. who are ignorant, scandalous, heretical,
not builders up, but pullers down; Nor of gifted men in all places, but only in
Ireland, where we have too many that make the forementioned things their work;
I spoke not against godly, sober, approved Christians sent forth by
Congregations, but rash, fanatic persons, who run of their own heads; who
are not gifted truly, but (swollen up with wind, and the applause of others as
ignorant as themselves) only pretend to be so; Those that rail against
Ministers, Ordinances, Scripture, are the men I described there; and he that
would extend this any further then I intended it, may suppose me guilty of one
injury, but is himself certainly of two; One against me, in corrupting my
meaning; and another against those that are gifted, in traducing their manners.

IV. Page 13. lin. 26. The Irish are described to be under a miserable
condition, and tied to impossible Laws, and reserved only for slaughter, and
(Page 14.) those frowned upon that dispense any equity to them; Does not this
accuse the State of injustice and rigor?

Answ. It may do so, but it must be only with those that are resolved
pertinaciously to cleave to mistakes after they have read what I write,
whatever they did before; For this consider,

What is it that I am proving there? It Is, that after Justice is done on a
Community, Mercy may take place; which Mercy that the Irish may taste of, I
show Justice is done on them; To make which appear, I instance all these
particulars. Is not this to show the State has done justly, and what they have
suffered, they have suffered justly? Where Is the accusation against our
Governors and Government? Is it that they have done justly? Do I not there
prove, that Justice must necessarily precede Mercy; and then prove, that it
has done so? And is the proving of Justice done, the proving a thing done
unjustly? If any be condemned there it is the Irish; be absolved, it is
Authority; Who uses to suffer Justice? the guilty: to do it? the innocent; And
yet (by this mistake) to say, the State has done Justice, is to make them
guilty, and the Irish has suffered it, to make them innocent: This is to make
the Judge the Thief, and the Thief the Judge; Pray put but the word Justice to
every part of the Irish suffering there mentioned, and then see what you can
charge me for charging the State with; The frowns there mentioned are
restrained (by the word some) to particular persons, and such, I say, still
there are, though they frown more on me. Nor have their disgusts herein
terminated in me, but moderate, equitable persons even of eminency in the Army
it self, have born their part with me, in particular the Governor of Cork for
his (in tenderness of the States honor) defending from injury such poor
Irish, as put themselves under their shelter, has suffered many unjust
defamations, because he labored to preserve others from injustice.

V. Page 24. line 6 I write of the incredible oppression of the Soldiers, and
seem to intimate the like of the Officers, by saying, The people have just
causes to fear to complain.

Answ. I do believe that the Army in Ireland is the best disciplined Army in
the world, except that in England, whereof it is a part: Yet I believe
likewise, that there never was an Army (except of Angels, where the Lord of
Hosts was Captain) that had not some that swerved from the integrity of the
rest. I said no more (but some) and I believe themselves will say no less, I
do not accuse all, neither will they excuse all; and for these things going
unpunished for their just fear to complain, it touches not the most
subordinate, much less the Supreme Officer: for the Officers not knowing it,
keeps him just; and yet the private Soldiers power over the peasant, may make
his fear just too; for though it lie in the Irish man's power to complain of a
first injury, yet it lies in the poorest Soldiers power to do him another,
that shall put him (it may be)* past complaining, or put such a specious color
on it, as may give it the face of Justice, and then who will not believe an
English Soldier, rather then an Irish Teige, if the matter should come to
dispute; So then, though the cause be unjust in the Soldier, yet it may be
just in the labourer, who may fear justly to complain of injury, least he be
injured more by complaining.

These were all the things subject to scruple in that Treatise (which I could
either conjecture or learn from others) save what is referrible to the same
heads, and so being the same Objections, the same Answers will assoyl them; If
I could have met any others, I should as easily have untied them, as these, but
not able to divine what they are, must leave them to the Readers wisdom and
charity, who from what I have answered already may reason to what I might to
the rest, and will perceive how unjust those multiplications were of my
traducing Authority, which are scattered every where in Colonel Laurence his
Book, and his unworthy censures on me, supposing me so to have done. I
reverence Authority as highly, as I prize Col. Laurence slightly, who has
discovered but his own weakness or malice, whilst he attempted to blast my
innocence; And surely he is more beholding to his Buckler then Sword; The
States cause (which he pretends to maintain) then his own, which he is not
able; for had he not interwoven his so many abuses of me with the colorable
pretext of righting them, so that it is a hard matter to touch him but he will
cry they are wounded, I should not have spared the unripping of a multitude
more of his observable indiscretions then I have done in this Book; which were
stuffed in by him without any reason, and are overpast by me for this reason.

Thus I hope I have evidenc't that I have not injured Authority in general;
This may satisfy them; but I cannot my self, unless I do right eminently unto
one eminent particular person in it, who has no less merited from me, then he
deserves to do from all others; I mean his Excellency the Lord Deputy that now
is of Ireland, who as he had the chiefest power in managing this business of
Transplantation, (as of all other things transacted in that Land) so if any
thing were said by me that intrencht on Authority, it might seem more directly
to reflect on him; and therefore I hold my self obliged particularly to give
some account of my self in this thing, as of his integrity in that; Not so much
that he needs my doing him right, as to show how much I abhor the doing him
wrong; And all men must see this now to arise from necessity not flattery. He
is certainly a fountain of much good to Ireland, and stands in the gap between
that poor people, and much ill; A person made rich with those excellent
endowments that enable men to command, and prepare others to obey; One of whom
I should say more, but for fear to injure his modesty, and of whom I could say
no less to defend my own innocence.

I must as a perclose to this, keep the Reader from being mislead by some
Errata's in this his History, which are not reserved (as in other Books for the
latter end) but enter at the beginning, and disperse themselves throughout.

1. He here begins with a solemn tale of the Authority by which this was
enacted, a Parliament. 2. Nay several Parliaments. 3. On mature deliberation,
and on this ground loads me with calumnies, that I should despise so great
power, so much wisdom. But the Reader must know, that this is all otherwise, to
speak modestly of it; for, Transplantation was given out in Orders by the
Council of State. 2. Ratified only by the little Parliament. 3. Not long by
them debated, for it was never so much as once read. 4. But it was not yet put
in execution. 5. That it might not, the address was to the Parliament by a
Member called lawfully to speak his mind, only his reasons given for his
apprehensions; where is the Malignancy, singularity, slander (in all this) that
he every where belcheth out against me?

But I perceive by what he writes at the bottom of p. 3. That it is not my
writing so much as my self, that he quarrels with; for before, laying to my
charge, that I asperst Authority, he is here offended with me for acquitting
Authority, and is resolved neither to be pleased with my doing one or the
other; I must lament my hard fate, and admire his dexterity, that can manage a
cause both for and against the Commonwealth, and yet be still Champion for
Authority; and on the contrary, whether I argue against, or for it, I must
still continue an enemy to Authority.

He is so eager on Transplantation, that he transplants my very Book, the
latter end here to the beginning, and my beginning (or Arguments) to the latter
end, page 3. of his, where his intention is to take away the force of those
reasons, which I produce in the behalf of Authority, to justify their enacting
the Law of Transplantation, though I apprehended inconveniences in the
executing of it, and this is the first essay of his Defense of Authority, the
endeavoring to disprove my justification of them, and the proof he gives them
of my malignancy: but to view it more particularly.

1. He is offended Page 4. (who pleaded for Authority all this while) that I
did not lay the ill consequents of Transplantation on them directly and solely,
but force in others to take off the envy from them, he hugely magnifies the
Parliaments wisdom above being so hoodwinkt by others, and mislead by
strangers (as I seem to say) whom floutingly (he continues) they needed not
send for into Ireland to consult with, having had enough in England to advise
with that were strangers to that Land.

Answ. 1. He takes it for granted, that the Parliament gave life to the Order
for Transplantation, which is a mistake, for 'twas the Council of State, as was
shown before. But

2. It was approved by the Parliament, nay several: that is another mistake,
for we have had but one since, and they approved it not.

3. Not rashly, but upon a twelve months deliberation, he says, which is a
third mistake: for how long they would have sa^e, I know not, but all England
knows the little Parliament did not sit a year, and when they did sit, did they
deliberate on nothing but the Irish Transplantation.

4. This Gentleman's memory or intelligence has much failed him, for the
Instructions for Transplantation never were read in Parliament, but only
confirmed in another Act by the small Parliament.

5. He tells you (I say) there were some sent for out of Ireland to advise with,
before Orders were given for the Transplantation; but I say not any such thing;
and this in so little (but fertile ground you see) is his fifth (but I believe
will not be the last mistake.) And now I conceive you may guess the reason,
why in the entrance of his History (Page 2.) he invokes memory and
understanding (as the Poets do their Muse) it is surely that whenever his
mistakes were detected, he might escape through these back-doors, though with
the disreputation of loss of understanding and memory both.

6. In Page 4. of his Book, he threatens me with some thing no less dire, and
as obscure as the influence of a Comet, if the Irish happen to rebel by my
means, who yet shall be quel'd by his, and have their rebellious blood let out.
But I shall neither be disturbed at his railing (Page 5.) nor terrified with
his threatening (Page 4.) of letting blood, though I know him to have been one
of the engines of death; In the mean time, Let others be cautioned by my
misery, how they prognosticate any effect, though never so clear in the cause,
left they be made the cause themselves: as here he would feign me to instigate
a people to rebel (Page 4.) because I say such a course is likely to provoke
them to it. Indeed I should entreat Colonel Laurence out of his great charity,
to help the people of England, to have Justice done (who did suffer much this
winter from inundations) upon the Almanack-makers, for they foretold there
would be great rain, and thereof certainly must be as much the Authors, as I,
if the Irish rebel, of their insurrection; But I pray God in such evil
likelihoods, that I may ever be mistaken. I desire not to have a Country
ruined, to have Prophecies verified.

Secondly, At Page 5. he is offended, that I say, the face of things, is much
differed in Ireland (it may be I said differed, but is differed is nonsense,
and his own term) but tell him not whether to the better or the worse: yet he
tells you my meaning, I must mean to the worse.

And surely, 1. Then he has showed himself a charitable man, (a thing hanging
doubtful between two constructions) to interpret it to the worse part: But a
horse-flie will only settle on a gall.

2. Had I been thus impertinent, so much as to debate, whether Ireland could be
in other then a better estate, then before, after an Army had quite subjected
it, in which so warlike and busy an Officer as Colonel Laurence was, I might
deservedly have incurred so terrible a thing as his displeasure; but what my
meaning was, might in likelihood be best collected from the end for which that
sentence was produced, and that was, as he tells you, that the Transplantation
need not be urged, because the face of things in Ireland was much altered; Now
was it a rational collection (or rather like one of his) to say, The Irish are
as much, or more rebellious then ever, as high, as numerous, as powerful,
Therefore have pity on them, do not transplant them: Or rather thus, Their
courage is exhausted, their numbers decayed, their Soldiers (most of them)
sent beyond sea, their Priests banished, the remainder lie at your feet,
therefore do not transplant them (though heretofore you thought on that course)
since now there is not the same necessity which made it then fit, but many
expedients which make it now unfit; this discourse he might have found more at
large page 13. Of the case of Transplantation, which would sufficiently have
acquainted him with my meaning. But it is a hard matter to make one that stops
his ears hear, or him that shuts his eyes see. He ends this Paragraph like the
Month of March, which comes in like a Lamb, and goes out like a Lion: he roars
against Incendiaries and their impudence in the conclusion, till he become all
on fire himself, nay and an Incendiary too, laboring to kindle the fire of
discord in the pacifick hearts of those in England. But (though I do, yet) I
hope the Commonwealth shall not suffer by any flames of my kindling; for if I
carry fire Colonel Laurence can bring water. But I would entreat him to make
use of it to allay the heat himself is in, and I will undertake to satisfy for
whatsoever detriment the Commonwealth sustains by those papers.

But his opposition to that which he calls my third Argument, in the behalf of
Authority (for it seems I am become Defendant, and he is Plaintiff in their
suit) presses in for room to be heard, Page 5. of his, wherein mark his
Rhetoric now, By a fiction of the person, he introduces me speaking thus, That
because Authority did not in their goodness execute, what in their wisdoms
they ordered, therefore they have studied to make the people miserable, that
they might have an opportunity of showing them mercy; And this is the Sum of
my defense so far as he can make it (hang) together. Me thinks my Arguments
reprieved from the amazement unto which it may be his threatening of hanging
them together puts them, speaks more recollectedly then that distracted sense
which he takes as their confession from the gallows; To show him this in the
mysteries of his own Science; When he that is now Colonel Laurence was a
Marshal, had he never a condemned person under his jurisdiction, whom gracious
Authority rescued from execution by a merciful reprieve, hoping afterward they
might have cause to increase it to pardon? O, but this says he, is to bring
the man into misery to have an opportunity to show mercy? No, Sir, but it is to
intend mercy to a man that brought himself into misery; The Irish case seemed
to me thus, They by an imparalell'd crime, merit an unparalled punishment,
and are for a long time so high in their obstinacy, that nothing but extremes
can work on them. This I said might put Authority on those Resolutions which
was just in them to do (indeed) and for the other to suffer; but yet they loved
mercy to, and will show it if they may (without cruelty to themselves) even to
the Irish; nay, when not only the good of the Irish, but of the English, their
peace, plenty and safety is combined with it, as was endeavored to be shown in
the case of Transplantation; but as impertinencies these Arguments were not
vouchsafed an Answer by this Gentleman; they respite therefore the execution of
this, to see if any other way will bring about their ends, to show, that
nothing but necessity puts them on so rigid a one as this; To say then
Authority is clement and deliberative, is to expose them to laughter, as he
thinks, with whom these are ridiculous things; as Religion, Interest and
Security before were impertinencies; But if that person that writ the Case of
Transplantation (after so much cause of pensiveness, as he has from the
tyranny Colonel Laurence wit has exercised over him, and the fear his power
will execute his threatenings) if he could be still so sanguine as to recreate
himself with a sportive humor, he professes he should quit Authority, and
labor to make the Colonel ridiculous rather, as being the safer, and by far
the easier task; but he needs not, he can make himself so.

This is the Sum of Page 3, 4, 5. From the 6. to the 9 he goes on in telling
a story what was acted in Ireland, in order to Transplantation; which being a
tale, and not reason; a matter of fact related, but no Argument produced for
the necessity or expediency of Transplantation, is to be put upon the syle of
things without this Question, which is not What was done, or not done; But upon
a supposition of the Transplantation to be done, What is likely to follow? From
which consideration, he argues very remotely, who tells you, what is past, when
I speak of what is to come. The Gentleman is much mistaken, I had nothing to say
against what was done in Ireland, but I had something to say against what was
concluded in England at that time when I might speak, and before them to whom
it was proper to speak: My design was to prevent what might be done, not
censure what was done: which things, if this person had not confounded but kept
separate in his understanding, he had not fallen so often desperately upon me,
and foully in his own undertaking. But it seems he must politiquely make the
Commonwealth an enemy, to show himself a friend; and feign some body to accuse
Authority, that he might write an Apology in their Defense.

And now how faithful has Colonel Laurence been to his first engagement (to
wave impertinencies) when we have hitherto had nothing at all else from him?
which that it may appear evidently, I shall join his premises as far as we
have gone, and his conclusion together, and see how strong influence the one
has upon the other.

All the Inconveniences urged by the Author against general Transplantation
(says he) are vain terrors and panick fears, that is the conclusion: And why?
For it was not the Authority of Ireland, but in England that projected it (Page
1.) and doubtless they intended it for the Englishs good (Page 3.) and the
Authority in Ireland has proceeded slowly in it (Page 7, 8.) These are his
Premises, the Connection is excellent.

Well, but this is but the forlorn hope of his Book, the main body is reserved
for page 9 where he intends to make strange Discoveries of nothing but mistakes
in the Author of the Case of Transplantation; To which I have only thus much to
say in general.

1. That it seems he has only showed his own mistakes all this while.

2. Granting mine himself but mistakes, he should rather have pitied a poor
man's weakness, then have laid so much malice and mischief to his charge as he
does. But suppose

3. The mistakes should rest on his part still. What a gulf of error has he
plunged himself into? Let us see where to fix them right.

My first mistake is (says he, Page 16.) the supposing a general
Transplantation, when but a particular was intended, and is to be practiced.

1. If this be so, I wonder how the Colonel came so to fall out with me; he
intends only a particular Transplantation, and I write only against a general
one; and yet he writes against me, and rails at me sufficiently for writing for
it; and now we are friends again; and he tells me, he intends to put in practice
what I desire; O Aedipus unfold this mystery: Tell where the difference lies;
This is like a drunken quarrel, which none can trace to the occasion; Or like
the feud between Martin Luthers Scholars, because one was the Disciple of
Martin, and the other of Luther; and yet you see how zealously he maintains the
scuffle; Surely people will take us for a couple of dissembling Atturneys, who
squabble at the Bar in the Court, and are agreed at the Bar in the Tavern;
or conclude, That if there was one mistake, there were two mistakes: if I was
mistaken in the Question, then he must be mistaken in the quarrel.

But secondly, The perfect way for his evidencing my mistake in this; had been
to have cited the Acts and Orders for Transplantation, in which the Reader
might have seen either his mistake or mine, by the general or particular
current of them; but since you may refuse to believe him, if you will not take
it on his credit, I shall desire your assent no further then my witness
compels; Thus then runs the Order of the Council of State, in their
Instructions, entitled, Further Instructions, etc. That all Persons who have
right to Articles or Mercy, held forth by any qualifications in the Act of
Parliament, transplant themselves, etc. except only such as did not adhere to
the Rebels at any time before September 1643. and have ever since professed the
Protestant Religion; and women who married English Protestants since the second
of December 1650. and themselves become Protestants. I would now desire
Colonel Laurence to speak ingenuously and roundly, how many Irish he believes
in the whole Land falls within the compass of the exception from
Transplantation, and whether upon serious consideration, he will defend (that)
for a measured truth (which it may be come unweighed from him, page 17. lin.
19. of his Book) that the twentieth man was not by Order to be transplanted,
besides Soldiers, of which many are gone beyond Seas? I appeal to those who
knew the condition of Ireland in those times, whether those Instructions
adhered to, would not transplant almost every man? How is it possible to be
otherwise, when the English were hemmed in to their very gates, and the whole
Land became a wild rode for the Rebels, if it were possible for any
considerable number to be innocent, it must be those who inhabited with the
English in their Towns? And yet (to take the Irish Inhabitants of Kinsale for
example) these were judged so clearly transplantable, that in order thereto
their whole Estates had been disposed of, had not the timely clemency of his
Excellency the Lord Deputy stepped in for their relief.

3. The Authority there makes but two distinctions of men, 1. Those that are to
die. 2. Those to be transplanted; From whence is it not rational to say, all
those are to be transplanted that are to live; and do they not name expressly
plowmen, laborers, etc. when they say they shall not die? There is no Medium
in that Article between dying and transplanting.

But fourthly, I shall make him, who has been my accuser all this while my
Judge now (And if you judge of what is to come by what is past, you may think he
will not be partial on my side;) if you please to look into page 11. of his
Book, there you shall see in a different Character these words, That all
persons who have right to Articles, or any favor or mercy held forth, etc. All
and every the persons aforesaid, shall before the 1 of May, 1654. transplant
themselves into Connaught, etc. I wonder what restriction or limitation is here
to deny a general Transplantation; All pardoned for life and estate are to go;
What can be more general, unless he will suppose those that lost their lives
might go too by a more then Pythagorick transmigration? Nay, what he here
denies, and makes the root of all my Error, what will you say if himself
grant, and say the self-same thing elsewhere? View Page 7. of his Book, lin. 10.
For though the Parliament in their (Instructions) included all persons within
any the qualifications in the Act of Settlement, etc. Is not this to grant what
I say, to conclude the Parliament included all? They are their words, as he
quotes them himself.

Object. But it may be said, This is foul play to dismember a sentence; Hear
what he says after (Yet in their Declarations thereon, they confine it to
Propriators of Land or Persons, who had been in actual Rebellion, etc.) this
turns the current against me again.

Answ. I believe he intended it should do so, but yet it does not; You may see
by his gloss he had a good mind to have corrupted the Text, for these last
are his words, not Authorities, as you may see by his next words (or to use
their own words) i. e. the Parliaments; Now what are the Parliaments words
(according as he was feign to cite them?) Read on there, and they say thus,
That all Persons that had contrived, advised, promoted, acted, or voluntarily
aided, assisted or abetted the Rebellion, etc. Or have been in actual Arms;
Good Colonel Laurence are none but Propriators of Lands or Persons in actual
Rebellion intended here to transplant? Pray first of all tell us, What you mean
by actual Rebellion, for I perceive you intend this fig* leaf to hide your
nakedness withal; you seem to mean those that were actually in Arms? But then
if Propriators of Land and Soldiers were only intended, what is the meaning of
these additions (advised, promoted, assisted, or abetted) do they signify
something, or are they the Tautologies of Authority? They may be insignificant
now they are urged against you; but I warrant them recover their vigor, when
you come to lay the Law to the Irish; or do you mean a third sort, beside the
Propriator and Soldier (by being in actual Rebellion?) Indeed this is the true
sense of the word; there is no middle between Loyalty and Rebellion; to advise,
promote, assist, abet, etc.) is Rebellion (if it be intentionally only, it
comes not under man's cognizance) and if actual, it is actual Rebellion? The
Colonels meaning then is this, That though the Instructions of Authority
include all, yet in their Declarations they confine it (To all) this is a
strange opposition, a pretty universal restriction: It Is strange Authority
would let their Instructions and Declarations run so at odds, and interfere so
mightily: Sure I am he must mean one of these two senses, unless perhaps to
evade me he will say he means non sense: if the first; then he becomes an
Advocate for the Irish, and excuses them all from actual Rebellion, except
Landedmen and Soldiers; if the second, then (which he dreads more) he pleads
for me, and against himself, excusing none from Transplantation; if the first,
he abuses Authority, if the second, his Reader; into these difficulties has he
engaged himself, to engage me; Sir, How much reason have we here to invoke your
truth and modesty, as in the beginning you did your memory and understanding; I
beseech you hereafter learn to speak less confidently, or resolve to speak
more truly; Though your passion may prompt you to contradict me, yet let your
reason curb you from (thus grossly) contradicting your self.

5. Observe, That though you may perceive Colonel Laurence to be a very
learned man by the many Books he quotes in his Tract (as the Act of Settlement,
Further Instructions, Orders, etc.) Yet he has been very unhappy in his
apprehension of them (as many times great Readers have small judgments) for
the truth is, Authority in that Act of Settlement in the part cited by him,
speaks not of transplanting those that were in Rebellion, or had advised,
assisted, abetted, etc. into Connaught, but somewhat further even out of the
world; as you may see the words in the close of the Act of Settlement, Artic.
1. All those before, nay those who have contributed Money or Victuals (which
they cannot make appear to have been taken away from them by mere force) shall
be excepted from pardon of life and estate; How shall we salve this cruel
capital mistake for Colonel Laurence (truly I know no way but this) That
though this be not an account of Colonel Laurence's reason, it is of his
faith; that he is no Sadducee, he holds there are Spirits, and that they can
walk, and may be transplanted, and possess Estates: Yet I believe, because
they are Spirits, they need not such bodily provisions as we do, and therefore
are to be sent into Connaught.

6. There has been lately a Petition by some in several Counties in Ireland,
preferred to the Authority there, that the Irish might be generally
transplanted, because the Orders of the Council of State did so require. It
seems I am not single in the construction of those Orders.

I have the longer insisted on this, for that it is the hinge of the whole
controversy between the Respondent and me, who falls vehemently upon me, that I
should abuse Authority with an Act they never intended; enforcing this every
where into his Book, and imposing it upon the Reader with such ardour and
frequency, that he is almost afraid not to think it to be true; yet upon
examination of Records it appears false, his own testimonies make him give up
the Bucklers; and upon those proofs I crave the sentence of all unprejudicated
persons, Whether I had not reason (being a Member of the Parliament, and for
Ireland) to represent my sense to them of such an Order (as Colonel Laurence
will not abuse them with once intending to act in?) Or whether he had just
provocation so to abuse me, and himself too? This then which he calls my mistake
proves to be his; and he calls it my first (which acknowledgement from an
opponent is worthy of thanks) but he must excuse me from making him the like
civil return, for it is not his first by a great many.

There is one Objection against me from Page 9. and 10. of his Book, that
supposing the Orders to be general; however there is no such thing in
preparation or practice in Ireland, but rather that they have admitted
conscientious and prudent debates concerning it; To which I answer,

1. Then it seems they condemned general transplanting, and I desired (and
endeavored) only against that. I hope then Authority there, will not own Col.
Laurence's clamours against me, who moved in their own sphere; nor censure my
subserviency to themselves.

2. Colonel Laurence told you, they had Orders out of England for doing this,
and I do not understand what place is left for the consultation of Inferiors,
after the determination of Superiors, especially who cry up their own
obedience so much as he. Let him answer this Objection, I cannot for him.

3. But now he speaks more broadly, and says, They are resolved on a
particular Transplantation, and you saw England resolved on a general; which is
to say, he resolves not to obey; some men may say any thing, but I tremblingly
now repeat it after him.

4. If this be the resolution, I know not, that I deserved such rude thanks for
endeavoring to obtain an Order for it; But however I shall be glad of the
event (being possessed of my poor design in it) and leave it to some more
turbulent humor, to dispute whether it be by Order or not.

5. It Is his Resolution, and it is not his Resolution: It is his Resolution for
the present; but it may be not for the time to come; The Transplantation may be
but particular now, but it may be general hereafter; Hear his intimation of it,
page 10. of his Book. When (says he) there shall as much reason appear for
transplanting the whole as a part, then the Discusser may offer his Arguments,
and the Actors their Answers, but (for the present) no such preparation. He
tells you only then what is resolved at the present, not what may be acted for
the future, when any man starts new reasons, but p. 17. he speaks more plainly;
whether all shall go at one time or not (says he) is disputable.

6. Consider if this be likely (whatever may be done at present) from these two
Propositions put together; He tells you, Page 17. lin. 19. the Irish to be
transplanted are not the 20th part of the Nation, nay so inconsiderable they
cannot be mist, but as one friend may miss another; and yet almost all
Connaught is laid out for them.

Let us proceed to what he calls my second Mistake, which is (as he says) my
Arguments against a promiscuous Transplantation without respect to merit or
behavior, and that (says he) is not so. In answer to which consider

First, I think it had been a Mistake to have written for a Transplantation
without respect to merit, etc. But I conceive none to oppose it.

Secondly, If it was a mistake in me to write for it, it will be a greater in
him to act for it, which yet he professes to do; and I am glad he complies with
me in his deeds, though he seems to be at variance by his words.

Thirdly, If the Orders ran for a general Transplantation, then for a
promiscuous one doubtless, for non-promiscuous makes a difference, and general
supposes none; but the first was proved before, and therefore the second needs
no proof now.

Fourthly, As the Resolution is pious in the Authority there to make a
distinction, so I wish the Obedience may* be cheerful in the Executioners to
perform it; the merit is so small on the Irish part, that their rewards will be
more just then costly; But unless this Rule be better kept (generally) for the
time to come, then it has been in some particulars (that I could name) for the
time past (but I am confident) without the fault, or so much as knowledge of
Authority, we shall have no cause to boast of our signal recompenses, nor the
possessors to rejoice in them: But I have better hopes for the time to come; to
resolve well is to begin to do well; and this the Gentleman professes, and I
shall in charity believe him till his actions disingage me.

Fifthly, Then it appears that this is no poisoned Arrow shot by me at
Authority, as he says (Page 10. of his Book) but rather that his censure is a
bolt of his, too soon let fly at me.

My third Mistake (he tells you) is, that I think Transplantation was
principally proposed as a punishment for murder, and thereupon grounds a large
Discourse, etc.

Answ. 1. I was not so foolish to think my self so wise, as to pretend to know
the reason of Transplantation, which (though I have since heard the Respondent
speak, it is my dullness) I do not even now conceive; but then, though I believe
the State has reason for it above my apprehension, or if they had not, I should
yet in duty submit, looking upon it as a work (to my poor capacity) of very
threatening consequence, I thought (if it were done) it must be on very
constringent motives; and I thought there were none more binding then Religion,
Profit and Safety; the first of which I prosecuted from Page 1. to the 15.
under which head comes the passage that he assaults here.

2. Colonel Laurence will be but an ill Soldier if he cannot discern his
friends from his enemies; What confusion may he bring upon an Army? 1. It
cannot be my ground (for he confesses) I reason against it: 2. But it is one
that I have heard from those of his judgment often inculcated, and I believe
he that denies this to be the reason, will not suddenly be prepared to assign a
better.

3. He is again mistaken, for this, that Transplantation was done on the
account of punishment, was not a position, but a supposition, not an assertion
fastened on Authority, or any one else, but an indefinite Objection which might
have been used by any body, and (it may be) was by some body, or if not, yet
might have been, or may be, and it shows only his care that writ the Case of
Transplantation, not to pretermit any thing that might possibly be said against
him, so far was he from his Antagonists humor, to slide by all the Arguments
against him as impertinencies; which different proceeding (it may be) was that
which most offended this Gentleman, looking on it as his own reproach.

4. He says, This was not the Reason of Transplantation; then it seems there
is one reason less for it then I thought there had been.

5. If it was not, it might have been; It may be the Respondent did not
perceive its force, and so (not knowing how it could serve his turn) disbanded
it; for certainly he has either not much reason to spare in this controversy,
or it lies in ambush for us; and indeed I should be much surpised to see it.

6. I have only his bare word, That punishment was not a principle of
Transplantation; and so first I am left to my good nature, whether I will
believe him or no. 2. I have no temptation to believe him, for then I must
believe my self a malignant, incendiary, etc. having the same Author for both.
3. I have reason not to believe him; for, 1. He was in Irelan (and this Order
came from England, and therefore) was not at the debates, and so could not know
the motives further then it should express them it self, which it does not;
And yet in the confidence of this Negative Argument, he is ready to cry
victoria, page 11. where having cited the words of the Act of Settlement, he
triumphs thus, Is there in all this one word of tending to
ground-transplantation upon principles of punishment? Just as if I should
argue, Is there in all this one word of reason given for Transplantation (as
indeed there is not) therefore Authority had not one reason for their action?
Or as if I should say, there is scarcely a line of sense in Col. Laurences
Book, from whence another should collect, there is scarce any sense in Col.
Laurence? What a desperate Conclusion would this be? But, 2. Though it was not
expressed that it was their reason, yet he could not tell that it was not; for as
they do not affirm it, so they do not deny it; they might disclose some of
their reasons, and conceal others. 3. I would know if the Irish had not thus
trespassed, whether they should have been transplanted? If he say, No (as he
must and does, Page 11.) then their Transplantation was the effect of their
Rebellion; and what is punishment but the effect of sin? But he says, it was
to preserve the English; and might it not be for to punish the Irish too? May
not one cause have many effects? Were not the English preserved by the
slaughter of the Irish Armies, and yet they punished for their Rebellion too? O
wonderful acuteness of judgment, that can thus divide a hair, that can
oppose things subordinate, nay inseparable! For could the English be safe
without the punishment of the Irish? Why then was not so much blood and
treasure saved? Am I now mistaken? Or am I not rather taken amiss?

7. After all this bustling, which was only to show his strength, and that he
will be compelled to nothing; yet to show he is master of good nature to, and
can be flexible, he meekly resigns up the Conclusion at the foot of Page 11.
admitting this in some degree to be done upon the account of punishment; But
his inducement is remarkable, For the further clearing up the Justice and
Rationality of this work (i. e.) Transplantation, admit, etc. He confesses he
cannot fully clear up the Justice and Rationality of this work without
admitting it to have been done on a principle of punishment; and yet was
displeased with my saying it was done on this principle, that is, because I did
not say, this work was unjust and irrational; And now in mere compassion to my
credit, and his own ease, he resolves to discover no more of my mistakes; I
would he would be equally courteous to himself, and discover no more of his own
neither.

But now, Tam Marti, quam Mercurio; The Historian throws away his Gown, and the
Colonel draws his Sword; he is Polemical as well as Practical. Like a
Plaintane leaf, as he heals on one side, so he draws on the other; as he has
smiles for his favorites, so he has frowns for his enemies: Among whom he has
the greatest Antipathy against the Author of the Case of Transplantation (that
is) anger, of which there can be assigned no reason.

With whom he is resolved to dispute pro and con, 1. Introducing his Arguments
against me. And secondly, Resolving to answer most of my swaying Reasons, that
is, I suppose those, that he can best make answer to, and are least swaying.

In the pursuing this design of his, I must here premise this one thing; that I
do not condemn Authority, but acquit my felf; that I am not opposing what they
shall do, but maintaining what I have formerly said; that I censure not their
actions, (which are good) but Colonel Laurence's Reason's, which are bad; That
though Transplantation be fit to be proceeded in, yet doubtless they do it on
better grounds and reasons then those maimed ones that he produces for them;
it is him, not them I dispute against.

That he may do the first, he is feign to beg my lately so despised principle,
That this Transplantation was grounded on punishment, which now it serves his
turn, he tricks very fine and gay, and enlarges its Base at page 12. and 13. of
his Treatise, that so it may uphold the figure of Transplantation to be set on
it.

But his Order is full of very fine confusion and mazes; it is sport to see how
he is lost in his own labyrinth; I will but repeat his own words; at the end of
Page 11. there are five or six lines of most incomprehensible Seraphical sense;
Thus they enter, For the further cleaning up the Justice and Rationality of
this work, admit it in some degree to have been done upon the account of
punishment, which in a sense may be admitted, for had they never offended, they
had never been liable thereto; Therefore consider what punishment it was they
did incur by their offense, which will be the better done, 1. by, etc. Is not
here a fine civil wilderness with exquisite art contrived, for a man to lose
himself thus many times in poor five lines, as you shall see.

First, Here Is Peleon tumbled upon Ossa; All the degrees of comparison jumbled
together; he will clear up the Justice and Rationality of this work, which that
he may do, he will admit it to have been done on the account of punishment;
which that he may do, he will enquire what punishment it was they incurred;
which that he may do, he will consider first the offense, etc. Cannot a ready
Master now cut out presently work enough for nine Journeymen? Why here is a
circuit taken in, as if the Pyramides were to be reedified, Rise up
Transplantation, and go to your Consideration, for your Considerations
Consideration has a Consideration: O for a Midwife! What a thing it is for a
man to have a costive brain; But

Secondly, As we have seen this Masterpiece of Art show so well together, so no
less curiosity is in every limb, if you view it asunder.

1. He admits the Transplantation in some degree to be done on the account of
punishment; Pray to what is in (some degree) referred, to Transplantation?
There are no degrees in that, it is a continued act, and of one kind: unto (To
be done) the action I hope will be perfect, and not admit degrees; To
punishment, it is very remote from that; besides, are there future sufferings
prophesied (besides it self) which is some degree of punishment, but not all.

2. Having thus begun his sentence, and brought it, to a Colon, he makes one
Parenthesis ride in the neck of another (which in a sense may be admitted) (for
had they never offended, they had never been liable thereto) and so sweetly and
most melodiously concludes the Period. Did ever two Parenthesis's finish a
sentence before? This is just like a horse, that (running full speed) stops on
a sudden, and throws his rider over his neck.

3. Therefore (says he) consider what punishment it was they did incur by
their offense; Wherefore? What did just now precede? Because if they had never
offended, they had never been liable thereto; Therefore consider what
punishment they did incur by their offense; And very good reason too; an
excellent connection! Just like such an introduction as this, because if the
Angels never had sinned, they had never fallen, Therefore let us consider the
Nature of Hell: A sublime Preface! O that the Masters of Rhetorique wanted so
fine a Platform to commend to their boys for the pattern of an Exordium; Me
thinks a speech would begin most gracefully and heroically in such a flow
spondee pace as this; because most noble hearers, if Paris had not taken Helen
away from Menelaus, Hector had never been killed by Achilles; Therefore be
pleased to hear the Tragedy of the wars of Troy; This is a Marriage between
East and West; Just as if this Gentleman should desire one to peruse his late
elaborate piece, for this reason, because if I had not writ against
Transplantation, he had not writ for it; Who will despair but that the Poles
may meet and hang about one another neck, since they see as unlikely
conjunctions?

4. To consider their punishment, he must first consider their offense; and
after the first, the Reader will look for a second; But his passionate
Discourse, quite drowned his memory: So that he forgets to introduce that ever
after; though this were a fault in the literal sense, yet it may be in the
mystery it is not; which doubtless was to show, that the Irish offense was so
great, that there could be never another found to second it.

5. After he has painted out their offense in good and true colors (to give
every thing its due) he tells you not, but leaves you to your own guesses
concerning their punishment, though this Discourse was begun for that end,
tumbling again, Page 13. into the consideration of Transplantation; this cannot
it self be the punishment he intended, 1. Because he will hardly yield it a
punishment: And secondly, were it one, it is not sure commensurate to the
offense treated of universally; Of this Preface, I shall only add this one
thing more, That as he very feelingly deplores the sufferings of the English
dead, so that he would exercise some of his compassion toward those that are
living, is my desire, and may it be his practice; God will require it, if any
shall so far mock him, as to punish the Irish for being cruel to the English
and themselves be so too; There were Pharisees that abhorred their fathers
killing the Prophets in old time, and yet themselves slew them in their own
time; What mean those words, that the old Protestants are as bad, nay worse
then the Irish? yet they are too common in the mouths of some in Ireland.

And thus, if from good beginnings we may flatter our selves with a fair issue,
then sure Colonel Laurence may not despair, who in five lines has fallen but
five times, as he was entering on what was material; But it may be he does this
as a Soldier likewise, who having now drawn down his Artillery to play on me,
threw up this blind work before, for their security.

But now, Arm, Arm; The Alarm is given, the enemy is near; Long looked for comes
at length; now near half of his book is done, he will prove (that which he
should have done at the beginning) that the Transplantation is necessary; for
which end he produces but a brace of Reasons, Page 13. 1. It is the most
probable means to secure the present English interest. 2. To maintain one for
the future without charging England either in men or money.

To prove the first, His Argument runs thus, That which was the ruin of the
English chiefly in the last Rebellion, ought for the future to be avoided: But
the living mixedly with the Irish was so; on the showing of which he dilates,
Page 14, 15, 16. Therefore they ought now to be separated. To which I answer,

1. That I do answer, and not call his Argument an impertinency (which
doubtless I might) as he does mine, so in safety to escape him.

2. That here he fights against no enemy (at least of me) for I was not against
a particular Transplantation (rightly ordered) though it may be I thought it
not so absolutely necessary; my whole Book runs against, what the Order ran
far, A general Transplantation.

3. But yet I think the reason on which he affirms it, weak, viz. 1. That the
mixtion of the Irish with the English, was the cause; and secondly, though it
was a cause heretofore, that it should be a cause now, is a non sequitur: For
the first consider,

First, It is irrational, That the scattering of the Irish among the English,
was the cause of the English ruin; for whilst they continued scattered, they
wronged them not, but when they became imbodied, they did the mischief; which
is the design this Gentleman pursues; and therefore provides doubtily for the
English safety, from that which was the cause of their destruction.

Object. But it was their numbers and power which was the cause, and the
cohabitation with the English gave them opportunity to make use of these by way
of surprise, which transplanted they cannot do, p. 14.

Answ. That is not prevented by the Method which the Respondent propounds
neither; hear himself speak, page 17. lin. 19. The Proprietors, and all
relating to them, cannot be rationally judged to be (near) the twentieth part
of the people of Ireland, and there are none to go besides (according to him)
but those that have been in arms; More then 19 parts then of the people are to
remain among us, and cohabit with the English; there is no great danger of them;
but if the twentieth stay, we are all undone: Look to lin. 29. of page 17. and
he puts it out of all question, where he musters all to be (in his opinion)
transplanted, both Proprietors and men in arms, and his rolls give us this
account of them; any man that knows (says he) the state of Ireland, must
acknowledge they (i. e.) all to be removed, are so inconsiderable, that hey
will not be missed or discerned as to the numbers in the Countries from which
they remove, further then one friend, may want another.

Is not here great ingenuity, and rare wisdom? Ingenuity, to tell you the Irish
must be transplanted, because mixing with them ruined the English, and yet
afterward to tell you the number transplanted will not be so considerable as
to be mist. Prudence, to foresee the cause of a mischief, and to remove it by
letting what produced it remained still: Yet these contrary resolutions served
him in their proper starions, the first to oppose me, That numbers in Ireland
must be transplanted, least they ruin the English for the time future: The
second, to mollify the Reader, and take off his hard conceptions of
Transplantation, that the number would be so inconsiderable, as could not be
mist. Indeed it was uncivilly done of me to be peeping further into a man's
meaning then he expected, and unkindely to bring his witnesses thus to confront
one another face to face, which he as little desired.

2. But on the contrary, Cohabiting with the English was a means probably to
have quasht the Rebellion, if other wholesome concurrents (appointed by Law) had
been duly executed; as, 1. Care taken for spreading the Protestant Religion,
the neglect of which left them to their own, the strongest incentive to
Rebellion, and tie to unanimity in it, and this would do well to be heeded for
the time to come, which would work a change in their minds, for changing of
place will never make them honest. 2. Educating their Gentry in Civility and
Religion, for which the Court of Wards was erected, and doubtless was then
convenient there for that Nation. 3. Suppressing their Language, Manners, Laws,
Septs, etc. Many more are observed by Historians. These and such like things
neglected, next (the provocation of the Divine Majesty by the sins of the
English) were the causes of that horrid bloody Rebellion, and not their
dwelling among English, which if helped with the assistance of such provisions
as the Law did make, might probably have produced the contrary; that I am not
singular in my opinion, but the Gentleman in his: Hear our Historians
themselves, Sr Joh. Davis, of the causes of former Rebellions in Ireland, 1.
The intolerable oppression of the Armies (p. 28.) 2. Too large proportions of
Land given to the Soldiers, though they warred at their own charge (p. 133.)
contrary to the practice of other Generals, as Scipio, Pompey, Caesar (page
156.) 3. The English seating themselves in the rich plains, and driving the
Irish to mountains and barren Lands (page 160.) 4. The Irish being together,
making their conspiracies undiscoverable (page 161.) 5. Their cohabitation gave
them power to rise (page 173.) 6. A discretionary way of governing them, more
martial then civil (p. 253.)

3. Though this should in likelihood prevent surprises to come, and that
Colonel Laurence should not be taken napping, yet it prevents not Rebellion,
and so is too narrow a plaster to cover the sore of Ireland; nay it seemed to
me to lay the seeds of an everlasting feud, 1. By perpetuating the distinctions
of English and Irish, Protestant and Papist. 2. By joining Irish forces, to
make them considerable. 3. By sequestring them, to give them the advantage of
privacy in all their conspiracies.

4. If he had nothing but safety before his eyes, without either considering
any thing else (which I believe was far from Authority) then he might have
thought on a safen way yet, which was to knock them all on the head, that will
make them sure, and us safe for certain.

5. If we will believe those that write the History of Ireland, they tell us,
this Gentleman's remedy of severing the English and Irish wholly, wrought not
that safety for the English which he fore-tels; the account they give of it,
is; In the time of Hen. 2. the Irish were wholly subdued, and all or the
greatest part of them, says Spencer, shut out by the Conqueror into the
mountain part of the Land; but in the Division of York and Lancaster, the great
English Lords and Gentlemen repaired to the assistance of their friends, which
advantage the banished Irish taking, came down, and vanquishing the remaining
English, repossest themselves of the Land again: we cannot always promise our
selves the guard of an English Army, of which we see some are drawn into
England already, nor assure our selves against such changes as have been.

His instance of the British preservation of themselves by being imbodied, is
Causa pro non causa, and a false allegation of Story besides: For, 1. It arose
not from thence, but from the dissimulation of the Irish, who fearing to deal
with both parties, gave out at first, that their quarrel was only against the
English, whom whilst they were worrying, the others contrived their own
preservation.

2. Sir John Davis says expressly, that Vlster was a mixed Plantation of British
and Irish.

3. What he says of fact is false too, for 100000 were murdered in Vlster in
three days, and this he calls preservation.

6. Yet this does not conclude so great a necessity of this course as he lays
upon it; that it is essential to their safety, as necessary as the stopping a
leak in a ship to its preservation (that is, without which it cannot be) for
the bare compassing his end by this, does not exclude the attainment of it by
other means; Now it may be, all the considerations in the world that conduce to
safety, may not one time come into his memory, if some of them be not above his
understanding: But I am sure he has not been pleased to think one of them worth
the mention, and so they cannot be justly condemned before they are heard: The
safety of the English may be compassed by the transplanting of the Irish;
Therefore by no other way, is just such an Argument as this, Richard Laurence
is a Colonel in Ireland; Therefore there is never another Colonel but he: I am
sure the Argument is as pitiful, as that Land would be, if it were so; Our old
doting Ancestors thought Communion one of these ways; Where had been our
Empire (says Seneca) if wholesome Providence had not mixed the conquered with
the Conquerours? And Livy, The State of Rome was advanced by receiving their
enemies into them.

But I must proceed to the other head I proposed, which was to show the
infirmnes of his consequence (as well as the error of his Proposition) That
though the Irish mixing with the English were the cause of their easy
perpetrating their bloody resolutions, yet there is no such danger of the like
in time to come, and so his reason is no reason; this will appear by
considering how the case is changed with the Irish from what it was then, in a
double respect.

First of all, Their inability to do us harm; they were strong, they are weak;
they were numerous, they are consumed by Sword, Pestilence and Famine; they
were hearty, they are out of courage; they were rich, they are poor and
beggarly; they had Soldiers, they are left naked; they had Cities,
strongholds, they have now but cottages to put their heads in; they had civil
power, they have lost it; they had Priests to harden them, they are banished;
the Tables are just turned; the English are what the Irish were; rich, high,
powerful, etc. the Irish what the English were, poor, few, etc. The English
never had so great a strength in Ireland since the conquest of it, the Irish
never so small; now the conditions are changed, men's expectations may be
likewise; What can they do? What may not they be made suffer? What fear is left
for us, or hopes for them? Our condition is not so desperate, as that we need
run to extremes to guard it; we may safely taste the good of the Irish without
fearing the ill; they have more reason now to fear ns, then we had to fear them.

But secondly, Advantages we have of doing them good; they are few, the English
many; we may overspread them, and incorporate them into our selves, and so by
an oneness take away the foundation of difference and fear together; we may
breed up their youth, habituate them to our customs, cause a disuse of their
Language: we have opportunities of communicating better things unto them, and
probabilities they may be received, the Priests being gone that did harden, and
affliction on them which may soften: I had no temptation to say these things,
other then proceeded from a prompting reason, and a convinced conscience; I
have lost as good an estate almost, as Colonel Laurence has got by them; They
could neither serve me by their power or riches: The Lord knows I spoke only
from the bowels of a man toward men, and the charity of a Christian to
miserable blinded Christians, and one who had read a little what has happened
to others by this practice, and therefore would that we should avoid their
rocks: My end was good, if I had been mistaken in the means.

If I had thought it would have brought the least damage upon the interest in
England, I would have abhorred what I writ with my heart, and burrt it with my
own hand: But if Colonel Laurence and I were not of one judgment, I know no
reason but we might have preserved one affection.

I expected now to have untied his second Argument he proposed for
Transplantation, viz. from the future interest of the English; but either he
had a horrible treacherous memory, (and 'twas a strange carelessness, that
having but two Arguments in a Cause, wherein he is so violent, and was opposed
with above twenty, he should lose one of them by the way) or a great obstinacy,
that he will neither show his reasons, nor change his mind: Well it seems
(though I find him a bitter enemy, yet) he can be as good a friend, for he
never forsakes where he once takes; if he carry not a cause it is not his fault
but his evidences (whom he has summoned) but they refuse to appear; he will not
forsake his one trusty Argument, which was faithful to him when all the rest
forsook him, but in his great humility marches up (though a Colonel) but with
one after him, which is a command too small for a Corporal.

Well, having offered his service to his cause, with this one Melancholy stray
Argument, page 17. scorning to tread all rodes and beaten paths, he finds out
a new way of reasoning, altogether unknown either in the Schools or at the Bar;
for they, fond men as they are (which of it self is a sufficient quarrel
against Universities and Innes of Court) first tell you a long tale, which they
call opening the Case, or stating the Question, and then they offer their
Reasons, or (as they call them) Arguments for or against; But he skirmishes
with his single Argument first, and then after begins to state the Question:
Just as if Colonel Laurence should in a quarrel draw his Sword, and then
looking about him, ask, what is the matter? Or as if a man should aim at
nothing, or go to no place, or a dog should hunt no game; or lastly, an
Argument (as his does) conclude nothing; but it was but one, and not very
considerable, he may hazard it as he please, for the loss cannot be great.

Yet let us do our selves so great a courtesy, as to hear him read his
Thesis, and first his distinctions are many, sharp and new.

The Question is confined (says he) to the extent and manner, that is sharp; by
extent he means persons (as you may see) and by manner time and place, as if
time and place cannot be extended, and persons could be transplanted, and it be
done in no manner; his branches are apposite, but not opposite: 2. Confined to
extent, it is universal or partial: This is new; to be confined to a
universality: It Is just as if a man were a prisoner to the Universe. 3. Partial
Transplantation is twofold, 1. What part. 2. Which part: This is high again,
so high, I confess, that I am not able to reach the meaning, I wonder if
himself can find a difference between what part, or which part.

Secondly, I would fain know, what is the meaning of his asking Questions, and
disputing now? If the manner be resolved on, it is past dispute; If it be still
disputable, why has he so often asserted, that Authority resolved on such a
particular Transplantation? Even in this very page he says, it is out of
question, and yet dashes it with a proviso: So far as I or he know, who are
not acquainted with the mysteries of State; What does the State publish one
thing, and intend secretly another? This is a mystery indeed; yet this
Gentleman takes the boldness to publish it: But I will not too believe it.

Thirdly, So far as I or he knows, who (he adds) are but private men; If he
knew the Author of the Case of Transplantation, then he knew whom he so often
called Malignant, Incendiary, and so must know himself mistaken; if he did not,
why does he here so positively say, he is but a private man?

Fourthly, If Authority have resolved on the manner, how comes he to offer his
opinion here? If they have, it is needless; If not, why was it so criminal in
the Author of that Case, to offer his? How comes the same thing to be a virtue
in the Respondent, and a vice in me?

Fifthly, He says, it is disputable whether all shall remove at one time; it
seems then, that though a part only be transplanted now, yet the residue may
happen to follow hereafter; and so he contradicts himself, who says elsewhere,
A general Transplantation is resolved against; and so I had reason to write
against general Transplantation, which may happen (it seems) if not at this
time, yet at some other.

Sixthly, He is unsatisfied with the Orders of Authority, as well as he thinks
I am; for if I doubted of the excess, he scruples at the defect; he judges a
less number then what is intended is not safe (if so little.) Nay, in another
place, it is not safe to let above the fifth part stay, and yet, he says, it
is resolved, that not above the twentieth part shall go; From whence the result
will be this easy Conclusion, that Authority have given out Orders, which in
Col. Laurences judgment are not safe.

Seventhly, He contradicts himself again, when in Page 17. (he says,) The
twentieth part of the Irish are not to remove; and yet (so near as Page 16.)
says, It is not safe to admit above the fifth part of Irish Papists to stay.

But since he is able to say nothing for himself, he is resolved to answer what
can be said against himself; To which purpose he propounds four Objections.

Object. 1. That putting them together, may enable them to make a war.

He answers, Page 18. First, That the English are not afraid of Armies, but
Tories; But I reply, That is not the Question, Whether the English fear them?
But whether it would not enable the Irish to war, to put them all together?
He said himself before, That the English imbodied need not fear the Irish, and
why should the Irish imbodied fear the English? Does Union strengthen one, and
weaken the other?

2. He answers, That united they will require less forces to subdue them, then
turning Tories to pursue them; I reply,

1. Either they have a mind to turn Tories or not; if they have, then besides
our forces to defend Connaught, we must have others to attend the Tories out of
it, and so the charge will not be lessened but doubled; if they have not a
mind to turn Tories, then an unnecessary charge will be upheld still, to
attend them with an Army, lest they should raise a war; Transplantation
cannot hinder those that will be Tories; Nontransplanting cannot further those
that would not.

2. Does not this oppose all the reason in the world, that a power united
should require less force to oppose it? Yet this is the Gentleman's paradox; We
use to say, United force is strongest; and does that which is strongest require
only that which is weak to overcome it? Divide and reign, said the seven
Wisemen; but the eight, Unite your enemies, if you would reign.

3. I would entreat this Gentleman to submit the trial to sense; Are a few
sparks of fire hardlier quenched then a flame? Is a bank against the Sea easier
made then against a puddle? Is a river weaker in the unparted channel, then in
the rivol^^s? Let him try if he can break a faggot quicklier bound, or untied;
What shall we say to him, that bids battle to all the Topics together? And yet
he that cannot pretend to sense, offers to nibble at wit in the close of this
answer, Thus by bringing them into a body (says he) we play our game in
English with them, but by leaving them dispersed, we play our game in Irish
with them; Playing in Irish, and playing in English; Do men use ^o play in
games, or at games? You may know by his terms of Art, that he is but a bungler,
and that if the Irish had not met with shreuder gamesters then himself, they
had never in likelihood been so soundly beaten, as they have been.

2. The next Objection he answers, is only these two words of mine ('It Is
strange) he names the Tories indeed, but having devoured them in the last, he
will not chew the cud in this, Page 19.

Answ. It Is strange! so it is indeed a strange Objection, Who made it? He
assails a poor Parenthesis in its trenches, O valiant, the Fortification about
it was not able to resist him! But he relinquishes the Objection that it will
make Tories: It seems the Colonel likes not that sport: that is above his
strength; nor says a word to the Objection, that is above his reason: So I have
seen a young Spaniel solemnly pursuing his game with the rest of the dogs, when
on a sudden, a Bird springing out of a bush diverts him from the company, and
he runs barking and staring after that: If the Tories do rise, who can help it?
let others look to that: he is resolved to run down the poor parenthesis.

3. But the Colonel foresees his credit is engaged, and therefore back again
he turns, and will not let those Tories go so; he will venture to speak with
them at least; thus he shuffles and cuts, run backwards and forwards: this is
neither good pace, nor good trot; Well, What says he at length? What if they
will not go but turn Tories? He answers to this page 20. that he should be
loath to force them, if it be impossible or hazardous; but if from a rebellious
spirit they refuse, he judges it best to put it to the trial, before the Army
disband.

Rep. 1. He is kind, he will not force men upon impossibilities; but by his
good leave I think he offers a little force to sense; for if a man be forced
on it it is possible; if it be impossible, the force is so likewise.

2. If it be a desperate hazard, he will not force them; this is kinder yet, he
deals as he would be dealt with; he loves not desperate hazards.

3. But the condition of this present Obligation is, That the above bounden
Richard Laurence be convinced of these things, otherwise this Act and Deed of
his to be null, and of no force: This will I fear rescind his former
Concessions. There are but two ways of convincing a man, by reason or
experiment; the first has been used, and though he cannot answer it, yet he can
reject it; I can advise him no other way then the second; That he vouchsafe the
persons transplanted his company in a suitable equipage to them, and that will
better inform him of the hazards.

4. But if they will turn Tories, he says, it is best put it quickly to the
trial; His answer ought to have been, That this is not a way to make them
Tories: but it seems his reason can dictate no such thing to him, and therefore
he must try it before he can answer you; till when he grants the Conclusion.
But Sir, some trials are dangerous (as if fire will burn) and such things it is
better to keep from trial; you have forgot you said before, that Tories have
been so destructive to our Armies; now you will have our Army be as destructive
to them; but yet I perceive you are wise for your self; it is enough for you to
give counsel, the executing of it as a Legacy you kindly bequeath to others;
the Army must try before more be dissbanded; But why may not Colonel Laurence
try it after, who fears not disbanding? No, the Ape will have coals out of the
fire, but she will pull them out with the Cats foot; This Gentleman is like a
Cipher, joined with an Army, he adds much to them, but take him by himself, and
he signifies just nothing.

5. In stead of answering, he wonders (page 20) that the business of
Transplantation should engage them to a new war; so slight a thing, and yet
page 19. he says, It is not strange that they should resent it more then death
it self, and gives many reasons for it; Strange that they should (fight)
against it, and yet not strange that they should (die) against it: Apollo
reconcile me these two; Thus it is done in a word, Colonel Laurence had rather
die then fight it seems.

The Respondent affects confusion as much in word as deed, and therefore has
suffered two Objections to straggle from their company, to the rear of his
Book, Page 26. which I shall desire to march up into their proper place, that
so I may take a view of them with the rest here, and the Reader see the whole
strength he musters at one view.

1. The last and great Objection (he says) is the impossibility of
Transplantation, which I prove not (he thinks) but impliedly, 1. In saying,
they may have still a dram of rebellious blood left: And secondly, That the
power and strength of England is but a scarecrow, and Hat on a stick, fit to
drive Geese; To the first he answers, it may show it difficult, but not
impossible, because they can let that out; and for the second, his Answer is to
the same (or no) purpose.

Reply 1. I must take off the calumny the Respondent lays on me, That I
resemble the power of England to a scarecrow, or a Hat on a stick, fit to
drive Geese; Is it not enough that he feigns me to abuse Authority in Ireland?
But he will compel my words to an abuse of the Authority of England: Strange
ignorance never to understand me, or malice always to pervert me! When will he
leave wronging himself, for me he cannot? 1. Scarecrow is a word of his own
foisting in. 2. There is not a word spoken there (in that passage) of
Authority, either in England or Ireland. To any person of an uncraz'd brain, my
meaning was very obvious, that the Irish would not go according to Orders, nor
drive by force, for so that innocent Proverb only signifies, and is as
harmless as those creatures I used in the comparison: I have too high an
esteem of the Army to give them such language, I know their worth, and the
greatness of their actions and sufferings in Ireland; of which I wish they may
be near an end, to enjoy rewards proportionable to their very great deserts.

2. He had no reason to be offended that I did suppose a dram of rebellious
blood to lie still in the Irish; I would there were no more: But he is hard to
be pleased; if I speak charitably of them, then I am a friend to the Irish, and
if I speak ill of them, then I am an enemy to the English, and incite the Irish
to rebel; and as he uses me, just so he does them: For when he must justify
Transplantation, then they are the wickedest people in the world; but at
another time pretty honest. There are two passages which brought together make
him a good Advocate for the Irish, page 11. of his Book, he says, All Persons
that had contrived, advised, promoted, assisted, or abetted the Rebellion, must
transplant: yet Page 19. he says, Those to go will hardly be mist being not
near the twentieth part of the people (besides Soldiers.) Now surely we have
done the good honest people wrong all this while, for we slandered them, as if
few of them were honest; and it seems not above the twentieth part were
otherwise; well but all their honesty shall not save them from going to
Connaught, and so he makes us amends for the commendations he gave them.

3. I said, it is impossible to make them go if they would not; To which he
answers, It Is not impossible, for he can let out this dram of Rebellious blood
in them: What then? And will that make them go, or not? They will not go when
they are alive, and can they go after they are dead? He cannot make them when
it is possible, but he will make them go when it is impossible. He does ill sure!
This is the third time (as I remember) that he has frightened us with these
Stories of dead folks walking.

4. Did not I prove this (and he approves it likewise) when I showed they
abhorred this more then death it self; Can you compel a man to an act that
prefers death before it? Compel him before you cannot, he will die or you can
but kill him, compel him after you cannot, he is dead.

I have given a single Answer to both his, because they shrink into one
likewise, and for his making me the encourager of a second Rebellion, I think
that worth none; like a Hedgehog it is his nature to roll up and down, and to
prick.

You might imagine that I had now put in my final Answer, having untied his to
the last, and great Objection, as he terms it; but he that (you may remember)
before makes a first without a second, finds out something here after the
last, which is this; It may be objected, he says, that yet this
Transplantation will be the destruction of the Irish Nation, having nothing to
subsist on, either in their journey, or when they come thither. This he
answers, 1. With examples of transplanting in others.

2. With the tender care of Authority for the Irish in this, Page 27, 28. To
the first Answer I reply,

1. If the Respondent had pleased he might have taken notice of my proofs,
where I lay down this Proposition, but those had fore-stall'd his Answer; he
loves to use bare affirmations himself without proof; and if others will not do
so too, it had been as good they would; for he will deny their Affirmations, but
not trouble himself to answer their Arguments.

2. Unless it were (upon so fair an occasion offered) to give us an account of
his reading in History, he need not have traveled so far for examples to
confute me withal, but proved this by his own example, since he could not by
his reason; Might he not too have oppressed us with instances of all sorts,
whereas he only culs a few that are select? Do not flowers recover their lost
colors by removing? Fruits and berries come to their grateful taste: Is not
Colonel Laurence fortune much bettered, since he was transplanted? And does
not change of pastures make fat --

Secondly, Is the Gentleman in jest or serious? If the first, and it be only to
show his wit, he maintains paradoxes, good leave have he, since these occasions
return not often upon him; But if he does not show his wit in it (as I believe
indeed he does not much) then I wonder how he could be deceived himself, or
deceive others with such examples as he produces, which do as much illustrate
the things they are brought for to prove, as a dark Lanthorn does the Candle
that is in it; nay are so extremely different, as light and darkness are not
removed further asunder; View but these few parallels, and that will show their
agreement: 1. Says he, The English are to remove into Ireland, the English,
Dutch, French have transplanted themselves into America; which are greater
journeys, then from one part of Ireland to another, yet these were not undone
by it, those we hope will not be: This indeed has a shadow of reason to
strangers, but cannot delude those that look thoroughly into it. For

1. Does he make no difference between those that go out of a place, and those
that are driven out (as the Irish) between those that hope for gain by it, as
those Nations, and those that receive punishment in it (which is the Irish
condition) why does he not let the Irish stay till the same invitations that
drew other Nations to transplant, invite them also? Did he not confess
heretofore, That the Irish were as willing to embrace death as going into
Connaught? and proves, that they had good reason so to do: yet here (having
forgot what he said there, and it being for his behoof to say the contrary) he
scruples not at the contradiction, but would make you believe, That
Transplantation is so facil a thing, that it is but like going out of England
into Ireland, nay less; Thus occasion is the wind, and his invention the
sail, and as that veres, so he hands and shifts this without any dread at all
of doing violence to truth, or injury to his Reader; going is but going with
him, it is no matter how or where.

But secondly, Those Nations that transplanted themselves into foreign parts,
did not thereby lose those Estates they left behind them, but get those they
found before them, nor change one for another, but add one to another: Do the
Irish thus?

3. They had all necessary provisions and accommodations along with them, else
they might have refused to have gone, but the Irish must go, whether they have
them or not; Does not this make a difference?

4. The Dutch and French that made foreign Transplantations were rich and full
of treasure, commencing their actions either on their Kings account, or the
stocks of united Merchants, so to improve their new possessions; but the Irish
are beggars* an und one people, they have nothing to begin with; the English
that are to come are men that have bought Estates, the Irish that go are men
that have sold or forfeited them: Does not this vary the case somewhat?

5. Those that you say transplanted themselves, went into places where either
none were to oppose them, or they had power (at least as they conceived) to
force their possessions: But the Irish go naked and unarmed to be settled upon
other men's Lands, in Connaught; who (to their encouragement I believe the
Colonel speaks it, Page 19. of his Book) will bid them (he says) such
welcome, as they will bid the Soldiers and Adventurers upon their Land.

6. Those Planters he speaks of, went with a Commission as large as their power
could write for them, to take what they would, do what they could, but the
Irish go with chains at their heels, as prisoners at large; when they are
there, they must not on such a penalty come near the Sea, or a Garrison, or cut
a stick of wood to build a house without particular license, etc. I write not
this as if the Commonwealth injured them in putting such conditions on them,
but to show the Colonel abuses his Readers in producing such comparisons to
them.

7. These Planters did only subdue, not turn out the Nations where they came;
What would the Spaniards Indies be worth him else? The Romans mixed their
Colonies with the Natives (says Rosinus) nor did the English pale in Ireland
insinuate any of this practice (as his pitiful ignorance in History makes him
say, page 26.) for Campion tells us, 'twas the English necessities not will made
that distinction: His words are, When the Irish had raised tumults continually
against the English planted here with the conquest: at last they coursed the
English into a narrow circuit of ground, out of which they durst not peep,
whereupon it was called their pale: It Is wonder he did not tell us of a like
design of the English in France; for the French History tells us, (but he
wanders not so far I hope in his reading) That in the time of our Henry the 3d,
there was an English Pale in France, which reached from the river Charent in
Xantoirgue to the Pyrenaees; and yet I hope the French were not transplanted,
but it showed how far the English had Dominion over the French.

And now, who would believe that a man in such eminent place as Colonel
Laurence is, should be so weak to hope to convince any body with such childish
Sophisms as these? Therefore what he begins his Answer withal, page 27. That
if this were the true state of the Case, there were much in it; I shall
conclude mine, since it appears that this is the truer* state of the Case, by
his own confession it remains, that there is much in it; and so I pass to the
second branch of his Answer, which is

2. The Authority in Ireland has a tenden regard of them; To which I answer,

1. That his Excellency the present Lord Deputy in Ireland, has had a tender
regard unto them, as he has unto all persons, and of all actions; and 'twas
well for the Natives he was there, for else I doubt the fingers of some had
been heavier on them then his loins.

2. But yet he must exercise this kindness to them in what he may, not in
what he will, he must do according to orders, not his own intentions, unless
he have a secret unlimited power, which this Gentleman has taught me to say, he
and I being private men are not in a capacity of knowing.

3. The bending of Transplantation so hard on the Irish does not altogether so
much rest on the persons that are to execute it, as on the nature of the thing
it self, and the persons to undergo it, and the place to which, and the
condition how they must abide there: The Lord Deputy may make some alleviations
(and will I am sure as many as he can) but cannot take off the burden; He may
delay their going but not hinder it; he may (like a good Physician) give them
some ease.

And thus I have been patient to attend particularly upon all Colonel Laurence
has said that respects me in his Book, a short Scheme of which I shall here
offer to the Readers eye for the confirmation of his memory; He has attempted
to bring one Argument for Transplantation, and answer four Objections against
it, and a poor Parenthesis; with what success the Reader may judge, if any
shall be so much at leisure, and will be so friendly as to hear the cause of
this Difference; This Modicum is the meat he has invited his friends to, the
rest are feathers to choke me, Railings, Threatenings, Falsities, Mistakes, and
Self-contradictions; These swell the Volume* else his Iliads might have been
put into a Nutshell; These Arguments of mine he throws by as impertinencies;
some drawn from Religion, some for profit, and some for safety, which branch
into above twenty several heads; If he have satisfied himself with this kind
of dealing, I believe he has not others, I am sure he has not me; his friends
may cling to his person, mine to me, but persons uninterested in both, or
interested in the Transplantation will be swayed by reason, and will not be
satisfied without it.

But the thing is now beyond consideration, being put into action; which I
shall submit unto as freely as Colonel Laurence; and what I here write is not
to condem it, but to justify my self. States and Governors have grounds and
reasons for their actions better then, and above ordinary comprehensions; such
I doubt not theirs are that establish this, which as they are not bound to give
an account to any of, so 'twere insolence to demand it, and impudence not to
obey them; I bind up my reason in theirs, and shall condemn my own rather then
theirs; I wish them all happiness in this, as well as their other Counsels,
and doubt not but to find from them better reception, or at least a milder
interpretation of that which was aimed only at their service, then from
Colonel Laurence, if I happened to transgress in some particulars through
frailty, not malice.

Besides, that Authority as it is more benign and powerful then commonly
private persons are, so there are two things I here present them that may
invite them to it:

The first is, that when that first Paper of Transplantation was penned by me,
it was intended not in opposition, but always in subordination to the
pleasures of his Excellency the Lord Deputy, and Council of Ireland, not by way
of prescription, but submission to their wisdoms; nor in retrenchment of what
they had done, but to be presented to them for approbation and liking, in case
they should judge it expedient; It was not an appeal from, but to them, which
in case it had been further considered of here in England, would have been
remitted to them for their censure or approbation.

The second is, That that Paper being a draught only of Reasons, and briefly,
made some things to appear in a rougher hue, then if attended with those
qualifications that I promised in that Book, and was ready to have presented to
the Parliament in case they had required them; which qualifications it was not
seasonable to publish with the Book it self, because it might have given too
timely a notice of what would have been acted by them: And after their
Dissolution it was too late, the thing being past all debate: But is not too
late for me to allege to manifest my own innocence, nor for his Excellency the
Lord Deputy and Counsel to consider of, to show the just respect had by me to
their Authority, however others have labored to suggest unto them the
contrary; I suppose I have hitherto served the Commonwealth of England, above
being now liable to the just censure of Malignity against them; and although my
actions have not been so considerable, as myself desired they should be; yet
neither can I think they ought to be so slighted in comparison of Colonel
Laurence and his Adherents, as if they were the only men, the pillars whose
strength upheld all: so I have seen at the entrance of some magnificent
building, a carved antic groan with bowed shoulders, as if he sustained the
whole weight, as if he upheld the house, whereas the house upholds him; This I
take to be their case.

The rest of his work (not yet taken notice of) is only a short Catechism
composed by him from page 20. to page 26. for the Irish to learn as they travel
unto Connaught, having little else to do, put (but not digested) into Questions
and Answers; or Cases of Conscience to satisfy the scruples of the Irish, who
are somewhat troubled in mind at their being transplanted; where himself
asking the Questions, and giving the Answers, it may be thought he will be more
discreet then to pose himself (whatever another robustiously may do:) And yet I
have heard some young Novice conjurers, have rashly raised spirits, which after
they could not lay; and it may be this may be his case, I shall examine it, and
(that he may not complain of any part of his Book being rejected, as
impertinent, for he that had taken up that resolution, had discarded the whole)
set down some short Observations on it.

Quest. 1. Why the Landlord must go, not the Tenant; He answers, he is not
transplanted qua Landlord.

Rep. 1. He tells you of his not transplanting, when the Question was moved of
his transplanting.

2. The Question asks (why) he is transplanted; he answers (How) he is not; i.
e. qua Landlord.

3. He answers, he is not transplanted qua Landlord, but tells you not whether
he be transplanted qua Tenant, or qua man, or qua Rebel; Well though the qua
may be doubtful, yet the best on it is, the transplanting will be certain.

4. It Is strange that he is not transplanted qua Landlord, when most of the
Landlords are to be transplanted; if it be a lot, the Dice runs shrewly against
them.

5. They are not to be transplanted qua Landlords, and yet the Tenants go not
though they are men and Rebels as well as the Landlords; This is a likely story.

6. He forgets himself, for afterward p. 22. he there tells you the Reasons why
the Landlords go, they had more means, and more influence, and therefore are to
be transplanted; and had they not this as they were Landlords? and as having
this he grants they shall be transplanted, and yet denies they are as Landlords
transplanted. He has a notable Metaphysical head (it seems) thus to be able to
abstract things; if he were a Chemist he would either find out the
Philosophers stone, or knock out his brains against it, he is so good at
separation.

7. As a Landlord he is not to be transplanted: that is it may be, if he had
not been a Rebel; and so he starts a curious new notion, that all men that have
Lands in Ireland shall not go to Connaught; and that this is the subtilty he
springs, his own words assure us page 22. lin. 21. It is not their having Land
is the fault, but mis-improving the ability it gave them.

8. He goes not away as a Landlord; I am confident now I have hit on his sense,
and this is it; for he has lost his estate by forfeiture before he goes, and so
is none.

His second Question, Whether the Tenants have not been equally guilty, and yet
are not transplanted; and then this is with child of another young question;
If this be not partiality; To the first he answers nothing: To the second, No.

Reply 1. This question seems to be to the former, like one of Hopkins or
Sternholds Psalms, Another of the same.

2. Yet now I rub my eyes, methinks I spy a glimering difference; for his first
question was before, Why the Landlord should be transplanted, and not the
Tenant? But his second is, Why the Tenant is not transplanted, but the
Landlord? and between these two you know there is a vast difference; Just as
much as was between Colonel Laurence and the Marshal-General, though not so
much as between a horse-mill, and a mill-horse; though they are terms
convertible.

3. His second Answer is true, if he can prove his supposition, That
Transplantation is a free mere act of grace, but that is not true. For

1. He must remember that (before) he granted it (in some sense) a punishment;
and if so, 'twill then come to be (in some sense) injustice, where an offense
is equal to make the suffering unequal according to his own resolution.

2. Is this now an act of grace, which himself says Page 19. the Irish have
reason to accept of death rather? Is not this to make the State ridiculous, to
tell men they hold forth great acts of grace to the Irish, such as they have
reason rather to die then accept of?

His third Question; What are the Reasons the Landlord is transplanted, not the
Tenant?

I shall speak to this, 1. in general; and then, 2. in particular to his
Answers, which (as the Legion said of himself) are many, and yet there was
never a good one.

1. I observe this is the the third concoction of this question, whereby you
may perceive (though his Book shows his stomack's very great) his digestion is
not very good; What has an Ignis fatuus met him, that he strayes thus up and
down? Nothing but the same question? It Is a conjecturers circle, and he cannot
get out on it. But it may be I have the mystery on it; It Is a knotty question
this, and fit to be searched into; But his invention is obstinate, and will
confess nothing directly, and therefore he resolves to circumvent her with
multiplying and varying the forms of the same question; It may be thus he may
pump out something out of her at length; Well howsoever, what he cannot furnish
you with in answers, he supplies in questions.

2. He now answers what the Reasons are of this act; and yet before he asked the
same question twice, and pretended to give answers; What Is the reason of this
act of his? Why you must understand that now he is come to his answers with
reason, and those before are his answers without reason. His reasons are,

Reas. 1. The Landlords maintained the Rebels; Therefore merit to be
transplanted most.

Reply. And the Tenants maintained the Landlord, and the Rebels too; The first,
Immediately, the second, Mediately.

Reas. 2. The Landlords, maintaining the Army should have had an equal share in
the booty; and to justify this he brings Scripture to confirm the Irish
dividing the goods after they had plundered the English.

Answ. But how know you they should? Have the English Landlords that maintained
the English Army had an equal share in the booty they got? Or are the Rebels
acts which were looked on as inhumane, now become sacred, and parallel to David's
actings in the Scripture? The plundered English will hardly believe the
Preacher that brings this Divinity.

Reas. 3. It will break their Septs, which I confess to be necessary, Page 22.
of the Case of Transplantation.

Answ. 1. I did, and do so still, by which he may see I was for the good of the
English, and therefore needed not have been in such choler with me.

2. Yet it does not infer his Conclusion; for the Septs will be broke if the
Tenants be transplanted, and the Landlords stay.

3. Yet are not the Septs broke by this, for only Proprietors going, their
eldest sons and other stay, who when their fathers die will still head their
Septs of parties.

4. The Law has provided for this (without transplanting) An. 5. Ed. 4. as by
taking sirnames, etc. and for breaking their dependencies, An. 11. Eliz. but
this Gentleman studies only martial Law.

5. The Septs may be broke by removing the Landlords mutually out of their own
into remoter Counties, which was the way of Transplantations our Historians
speak of, and former Statesmen advised to.

3. But if it be only this he intends to put in execution, I shall not quarrel
with him. But how to salve this proceeding with public Orders already given
out, I confess I know not; Those being general, if I have either eyes or ears;
and for private Orders (if there were any) they were only to be taken notice
of, by those to whom they were no secrets, and so could not by me; Colonel
Laurence then being resolved to condescend to me in the thing, I shall not
quarrel with him for differing from me in words; for what he knows I writ for
him before; And I am sure he acts for me now, if his sayings and doings differ
not. Choler in him began the quarrel, or a worse principle; necessity made me
take it up; I must either submit to those crimes he charges me with, or by a
reply discharge my self; If he had used fewer ill words, he had not received so
many; which though perhapssharp, are neither scolding nor lies.

If he had stayed to right Authority, till I had wronged them, he had never
been an Apologist; nay, it may be he has wronged them more (in scribbling so
weakly for them) then another could in writing strongly against them. If a
conceited injury done to others made him thrust himself into print, a real one
done me speaks my excuse: Let no poor sufferer by the Irish betray his Reason
or Religion to his passion here, to think no evils can be too great to be
brought on the Irish. It was their being cruel makes thee hate them so much; to
punish them, do no not run into their sin, least God punish thee; Do not think
that he that writes this, and the Case of Transplantation pleads for them, but
thy cause; It Is safe, profitable for thee, that some be removed, not all; This
Colonel Laurence says shall be done, this I desired might be done; Where is
my offense against Authority more then his, my love to the Irish more then his,
or my care of thee less then his; I was far from being moved by them to do
what I have done, but by the English interest, as I apprehended; I was by the
English of Kinsale and Bandon chosen a Member of the last Parliament, and
though their generosity was such, as by their own disbursments to offer to
defray my journey for England, yet I accepted it not; it is unlikely the Irish
should corrupt me, and it is a lie whoever shall say it, because he wants
something else to say; But I have tired my self to refute slanders, and am glad
I shall now end.

FINIS.

