THE Right of the Church ASSERTED, Against the POWER Usurped over it.

By J. Gailhard, A. M. and D.

August. de Civit. Dei. Philautia Dei contemptui insita satanae civitatem
edificavit, sed suimet contemptus Dei amori junctus Dei civitatem instauravit.

LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwell at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-row in
Cheapside. 1660.

The Right of Christ's Church asserted, against the Power usurped over it.
IN this weighty undertaking of mine, to vindicate the Right, Liberty and
Privilege that Christ Jesus with his own blood has purchased unto his Church,
although we account it needless to insist upon Principles which our Adversaries
and we are agreed upon, yet that we may build upon some grounds, we will lay
the following foundations.

In the nature of things there is a Church really existing, which was saved,
sanctified and purchased with Christ's Blood and Life; and as this Church has
her Being from the Lord Jesus, so the continuation and preservation of the same
is from him: to which effect he has appointed food in the Word and Sacraments
to be distributed to the Church, by those who are Pastors and Ministers in it,
by way of Office; in which sense our Blessed Savior has promised to be with
his Spouse unto the end of the world.

And further, as there is no Body, either Natural, Civil, Political or
oeconomical, without some Laws and Order, so Christ Jesus has not left his
Church without Law, and in Confusion; there is a certain Government properly
belonging to it: For our Savior has not left it to men's liberty to invent and
forge what Government they please, but he has himself instituted one, which
must not be changed by men, and which is strictly to be observed in the Church.
That there is, and ought to be a Government, it is clear from the Nature of the
Church, for it is the House of God; wherefore as God is the God of order, so
his House must be an House of order, so that in some respect, order is
essential to the Church, in that it cannot be the House of God, except in it
there be some order. Now since the voice of Christ alone is to be heard in the
Church, so the Rule of Christ alone is to be observed in it, in the giving
whereof he has not been wanting; for as soon as he had formed his Church, as
soon he stablished some orderly constitution in it, as the comparison of a
natural body (where there is an harmony between all the Members) used by St
Paul, Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 12. where he speaks of the Gifts and Office; of the
Church, do clearly declare it.

The Lord Jesus Christ therefore who is the only Lord and great Shepherd of his
Church, having instituted a Government in it, did also appoint those that were
to administer and execute it, to the end that all intrusions and usurpations
might be avoided: For as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does say,
Chap. 5. That Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Nay, he
does not so much as send his Disciples without showing his Commission, As the
Father has sent me, so do I send you: Likewise none ought to feed the Church
or rule the Church, except he be called thereunto; whence this must be
concluded, that as there is a Government in the Church, so they that administer
it, ought to be named of Christ.

But to find out who these Rulers ought to be, we must have our refuge to holy
Scriptures, where Christ has clearly and fully revealed his will and mind unto
us, we must not scorn nor be ashamed to make that our Rule here, which shall be
our Judge hereafter: Peace and Mercy will be to as many as walk according to
this rule, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6. Contrary practices must be left
to that Antichrist who exalts himself above God, and sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God, 2 These. 2. But it becomes Christian
Kingdoms, such as England, Scotland and Ireland, wherein the light of the
Gospel has so clearly appeared, to be ruled by the Word. In the days of
Ignorance God winked at men's ways, but now he will not have men's Traditions to
make void his Commands, neither will he have will worship preferred to that
which he has instituted. Since Christ Jesus his Ascension, never a Nation had
such knowledge of Heavenly Mysteries, neither did a Land so abound in godly and
powerful Preaching as we have enjoyed within these Twenty years last past. We
may then justly desire that to be settled which is according to the Will of God,
revaled in his Word, and that Traditions be not preferred above Scriptures,
namely, in the point of Church Government: So that though there may be some
Government good of it self, as some would plead for Monarchy and Hierarchy in
the Church, yet none is to take the place of that which is set down in the
Word; for of all Rules in the Church, that is the best, and the only to be
kept, which Christ has instituted.

And this I press the more, when I consider the abuse in this and other
Church-Offices, as it has provoked God to wrath, so it has procured Gods
judgments: Observe the case of Ely's Children, and their Fathers remisseness to
administer the Natural and Ecclesiastical power which he had over them; yea,
the neglect of administering this Discipline, in not restraining his Children,
was so great a sin, that God did swear that the iniquity of Elies House should
not be purged with Sacrifice nor Offering for ever, 1 Samuel 3.14. And the end is
known to all: And under the Law, it was ordinarily one of the greatest
complaints of God, to express the corruption of Churchmen in the neglect of
their duty, either in giving instruction or bearing rule, when they prophesied
falsely, corrupted the Law, and when they did not administer judgment in the
House of God: So under the Gospel, this is one of the few things Christ has
against the Angel of the Church in Thiatira, that he suffered Jezebel to seduce
Gods Servants, and to commit fornication. And so it was the blemish of the
Angel of Pergamus, that he had them that held the Doctrine of Balaam; when on
the other side, it is the great commendation of the Angel of Ephesus, that he
could not bear them which were evil, Rev. 2. And indeed remisseness in
Church Government has ordinarily been followed with licentiousness,
profaneness, depravation in doctrine, and at last, with the removing of the
Candlestick, and overthrow of the Churches: This some observe to have been the
case of those seven famous Churches of Asia. An Army without Discipline, will
soon be destroyed, and an House without Order will quickly be undone: Hence I
may observe how unjustly Presbyterians are condemned for their strictness in
Church Discipline, and how undeservedly the Episcopal Party is commended for
their remisseness in it: So that I hope it will not seem to be impertinent, if
from the Governors of the Church, I have passed to the necessity of the
Government it self; for hereby I do convince of the necessity of having
Governors, and these to be chosen according to Gods heart and will.

The Prelatical Party will or must hitherto agree with us, and then our work is
more than half done; for they will be hard put to it, when we shall desire them
to show out of Scripture their Hierarchical way; Let them prove Archbishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Canons, Chapters, etc. as we will prove Pastors,
Teachers, Rulers and Deacons. But perhaps they will have refuge to their humane
right, and say, that many things were left to the judgment of the Church; It is
true of circumstantial and accidental things and cases as to the Censures,
which ought to be proportionable to the sins and offenses, whether such a man
does deserve to be suspended from the Sacrament for such a Fact, and whether to
be excommunicated, about which yet we have certain several Rules, as that of
Charity, Decency and Edification, which we must not trangress: But I do account
it is a necessary thing, and not indifferent, who it is that must administer
Church Discipline: For it is not an accidental thing, as that it may be
executed or not executed without any prejudice to the Church; neither is it
indifferent as that any one may indifferently administer it, but it is thus far
necessary, as that every one that does administer it, must be called thereunto,
and every one that is called thereunto, must execute it.

But now we must proceed, and show how they that are to govern the Church, must
be chosen out of the Church; here by Church I understand a Body or Assembly
distinct and different from the civil or political Body; although sometimes one
may be chosen a Ruler in the Church, and be a Civil Magistrate, yet he is
elected, not because he is a Member of the Civil, but of the Ecclesiastical
Body: And to speak the truth, every member of the Church is a member of the
Civil body, yet in a different respect; and here from the whole and universal
Church, we must come to particular Congregations, who must have in themselves
all the right which belongs to them, as parts and members of the whole: For
when we say that Christ has instituted a Government in his Church, we must not
conclude it not to be instituted and necessary in particular Congregations,
because it is not said, he has instituted it in his Churches; for the word
Church being collective, does include all the parts, and if you will Parishes
or Congregations belonging to it: For I say that every particular Church has
all that which is essential and necessary to a Church, as it is a Church, as
well as the Universal Church, or else it will not be a Church; and therefore as
Doctrine and Discipline are necessary to the Church in general, so it is to
every Church in particular: According to this Maxim of Philosophy, he that
says the whole, does also say the parts in the whole; hence therefore I do by
way of inference conclude, that they who are to administer Church Government in
particular places, ought to be chosen out of the Church in particular places;
and the proof of this will also confirm my former universal indefinite
Proposition, how the Rulers of the Church are to be chosen out of the Church.

My first reason to prove this, is drawn from the sufficiency of the Church,
whereby the Church has all things necessary to it, having no need to borrow
from others any thing conducing to it: Herein does the perfection of the Church
appear; for as it is a body distinct from other bodies, so it has within it
self from Christ alone her dependency for being and well-being: Nay, it would
not be a Church, if it had not within her self all things necessary to it as it
is a Church: If therefore the Church be perfect in it self, then she does
receive no perfection from without; this perfection consists in the being and
well-being of the same, that is, Doctrine and Discipline; so that if the Church
had not her Discipline within her self, it would be very defective and
unperfect; by perfection, I mean all things necessary: And who could think that
Christ Jesus after all that which he had done and suffered for his Church,
would have left something yet which it needs to borrow from others? What his end
was, when he gave himself for his Church, the Apostle tells, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. And
in 1 Timothy 2.15. It is called the House of God, the Pillar and Ground of truth.
And elsewhere, the Spouse of Christ, with whom Christ has a conjugal
communion, and from him she receives Grace for Grace: But I need not to insist
upon this perfection and sufficiency of the Church within her self: I will wrap
it all in David's words, Glorious things are spoken of thee O City of God; so
that I conceive that Government being so necessary to the Church, the Church
has it within her self, and they that are to be Rulers, must be chosen out of
it.

The second Proof is from the Right of the Church; I call the Right of the
Church, that which Christ has given to the Church, that which the Apostles and
others after have yielded to the Church; this right is the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, as it is, Mat. 16. Where Christ says that he would build his Church
upon Peter's confession, and give the Keys to the same; it is then the Churches
Privilege, to choose her Governors out of her self; but because the right of
the Church has several Branches and Particulars, I will name some of them: It
does consist,

I. In choosing their Ministers when they are ordained: Teachers must not be
forced upon a Church, as that notwithstanding the dissent of the People, they
should be maintained in it; no Patron or other may lawfully present a Minister
in a Parish, or maintain him in it against the mind of the Congregation.

This Right of the Church in this, is proved by Three Reasons.

1. Christ who is the Author of Ministry, has given this right to the Church
alone, as we have showed before. 2. Because Ministers were given by Christ to
the Church, that by an ordinary and certain manner they might be procured by
the whole Church. 3. If it were not so, then the Church could not voluntarily
submit her self to her Pastors, which is as necessary in Ministers, as it is in
Marriage, where the consent of both parties is required. And truly this right
has been continued to the Church for the space almost of a thousand years
after Christ, as we have proved by some Instances in our Letters to a person of
quality. But here when we say that the people of a Church have a right to call
a Minister to themselves, we mean not to ordain him, for Ordination is not made
by every Member of the Church, though it belongs to the Church, as it is
proved, Acts 1.23, 24, etc. and 16.22. And witnessed by Cyprian in his
Epistles, Book 1. Epist. 4. But we say that the calling to a certain place
those that are ordained, is of the Church.
II. This Right of the Church does consist in this, that the Church has power
to choose her Rulers from within her self, this is evident in the case of
Deacons, Acts 6. The Twelve called the Multitude, and said to them, look ye out
amongst you seven men of honest report. So it is in the case of Elders, which
Paul and Barnabas did ordain, not without the votes of the people, Acts 14.23.
And indeed since the fundamental right of Government dothly in the whole
Congregation, it must be their Prerogative to elect whom they think fit for the
Administration of it: It is an Article of the Waldences, written 500 years ago,
that amongst other Privileges which Christ has granted to his Church this is
one, they must choose their Rulers from among themselves, yet always provided
they choose them according to the will of Christ, revealed in his word, and if
it be according to his appointment he will fit them with gifts to rule, and so
he will prosper their weak endeavor: besides that as after the Election, the
Congregation must obey their Rulers, so before their Election they must give
their vote, and consent to that effect, or else that Obedience which is due to
Rulers, Heb. 13.17. will not be very free and voluntary, as it ought to be,
for, as we have said before of Pastors, so we say of this, it is a kind of
Marriage, where consent of both Parties is required.

And, as we have said, That the Church so called in distinction of any Civil
body, has right to choose her Rulers from among herself, so here by this
amongst her self; we speak of the Laity of it, from the Flock, distinguished
from the Pastor or Teacher, In the 2 Chronicles. 19.8. there were chosen, as Priests
and Levites, so also, of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the Judgment
of the Lord: and since it is well known that the Synagogue had a Council of
Secular men, chosen out of the Congregation, to rule it, which was continued in
the days of our Savior; for we read often of the Rulers of the Synagogue,
which Jewish Church we know to have been as well governed as any that ever was:
and since our Savior, although he much condemned their corruption in Doctrine
and Conversation, yet he never had a word against this Form of Government, the
continuation of which the Lord Jesus foretold his Disciples, when he said, they
should be brought and beaten in the Synagogues: in the Christian Church these
also are appointed to be Rulers, as in our Letters to a Person of Quality, we
have demonstrated out of several Texts of Scripture: This only I add, as the
Church did choose their Messengers, of whow we read, 2 Cor. 8.19, 23. as they
chose their Representatives, Acts 15.23. So also they elected their Rulers,
called Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17. to whom the relief for the brethren was to be
delivered, Acts 11.30.

III. The Right of the Church does consist in the Administration of Discipline,
the power whereof is in the Church, or her Representatives, by virtue of which
they may suspend erroneous and scandalons Persons from the public hearing of
the Word, receiving of the Lords Supper, and exclude them from communion with
Gods people, 2 Thessal. 3.6.14. until they repent and give a public Testimony
of it. In the Primitive Church there were several degrees of these Church
Censures according to the Nature of their Offenses, some were only censured in
private, others in a more public way, others were not permitted to come into
the Church, to hear the Word, although they were permitted to stand just at the
door, some were suffered to go in until Sermon was done, and then they went
forth, some were permitted to stay till after Prayers, but they were to go out
before the blessing was pronounced, and others might tarry till after the
Blessing, but not to be admitted to the Lords Supper, when it was to be
administered; All those things may be accounted circumstantial, because left to
the prudence of the Church, for now adays we do not follow it altogether,
although we know thus much to be necessary, to use Censures against Offenders,
but the manner is left to the Discretion of the Church; however they must not
be so absurd, and ridiculous, as to give a white sheet (as the Episcopal
Custom was.) I cannot but admire at some, who fearing to disoblige men rather
than to displease God, do connive at the licentiousness and profaneness of
others, as if in imitation of these unruly persons, they were resolved not to
perform their duty, and this upon this account, that such and such men are of
such a temper, as that if they were censured, they would altogether forsake the
Church; but I must tell them that they will be wiser than God, as if to prevent
an evil not in being, but only feared, they were to suffer and comply with a
real and actual evil: they to whom Discipline is committed must be careful to
execute it, for says the Apostle, Romans 12. He that rules let him do it with
diligence, as for the success, they must commit it to the hand of God; however
let the event be what it will, they have that comfort, to have discharged their
duty: The case of the French Church is notable in this, where the Offenders
have liberty to forsake the Reformed Religion, and be welcome amongst Papists,
the King being that way, yet notwithstanding this Consideration they strictly
administer Discipline, and such is the Blessing of God, that he overrules men's
hearts; for instead of a postatising, they submit to the power and Censures of
the Church, and although upon this they would depart from the Church, (of which
I cannot bring so much as an Instance, although I have reason to be aquainted
with their Affairs) yet they may say, They went from among us, because they
were none of us: Rotten Members, if obstinate, must-be cut off, lest they
corrupt others, as S. Paul says of Hymeneus and Philetes, 2 Timothy 2.17.

That this Right is belonging to the Church is clear out of our Blessed
Saviors saying, Matthew. 15. v. 17, If he will not hear thee, tell it the
Church: wherein is employed, That the Church had Power to procure some
satisfaction for the Offense received, which power, if a man will not submit
unto, he must be unto us as an Heathen and a Publican. This Right the Church of
Corinth made use of, according to S Paul's Exhortation, 1 Cor. 5. which was not
committed to a single Person, but to the whole church to which the Apostle
writes this Epistle: and S. Paul, by virtue of this Right, delivered up, that
is, excommunicated Hymeneus and Philetes, 1 Timothy 1.20. Yet from hence one must
not infer, That this Right is administered by a single person; for 1. It cannot
be demonstrated, that Paul alone did it, but it is more then probable, that he
had the Advice and Assent of the Church which these two were of, perhaps of the
Church of Laodicea, whence that Epistle was written, for this was his practice,
1 Cor. 3. When ye are Assembled, and my Spirit with the power of the Lord, J.
chapter 2. Neither must every one draw this Consequence, Whatsoever Paul did I may
do, for his Calling was immediate from Christ, and extraordinary in it self;
The Sentence of the Church, in the Execution of this Discipline is passed by
the Representative of it; and in case the Nature of the thing be such, as that
because the power of the Party, or of some other Consiedration, it is not, or
cannot be decided, in particular Congregations, by the Pastor and his Elders,
it must be referred to a Classis, from it to a SYNOD, according to the Pattern,
Acts 15. So that, It is a Sacrilegious usurpation of any particular one, as
POPE, or any other that will do it alone without the Church, or her
Representatives, in the choosing of which there ought to be such care, as that
they be not Idiots, or Ignorant men, but men of Piety, understanding, and of
Credit, as much as can be, to meet in a certain place, and always they must
remember, that their Authority is not supreme, but Ministerial, and therefore,
that they are bound only to the Laws, and Rules given by the Holy Ghost, in
the Word and therefore, as in point of Doctrine, so as to Discipline, in all
things they must follow the Word; For it does not belong to the Church now
established to make any Laws different from, or contrary to the Rules of the
Word.

The Right of the Church does (in the 4th place) consist in the power of
advising and voting in Synods, Councels, and Ecclesiastical Assemblies, by
their Elders, Deputies, and Representatives, not only Arch Bishops, and
Bishops, as Papists would have, and not only Pastors, and those that are
professed Divines, as the Prelatical Party desires, but also other godly and
knowing Persons, chosen and sent by the Church, before called Elders, Deputies,
and Representatives, are to be admitted, to vote in the decision of
Controversies, this I speak not of my own, neither must it be called a new
thing, since for the confirmation of it I will bring, 1. Scripture. 2.
Antiquity. 3. Reason. As to the 1. in the Counsels, Synods or Assemblies, held
by the Apostles, not only the Apostles themselves, but also the Elders and
Deputies of the people, who were not professed Divines, were admitted; so in
the Council of HYERUSALEM, of which we read, Acts the 15, out of which place
these 2 things do appear; 1. that the Church Deputies were admitted into the
Assemblies, v. 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church;
which is interpreted the next Verse, The Brethren, representing the Church. 2.
it does appear, that they were admitted, not to be simply and mere Spectators,
but also to be Judges, and to decide with their Votes, Affairs propounded in
the Assembly, for they are named among those whom the Letter came from, who had
not been named in the Letter except they had a Vote in the Decree. Wherefore,
in these times, except the Prelatical Party do think themselves wiser and
greater than the Apostles, they ought not to deprive the Church of this right,
as they do, through Usurpation, but rather to restore them to that share which
they ought to have in the Government of the Church, which to deny is to commit
a heinous Sacriledg, and to be guilty of as great a tyranny as can be usurped
over the people of God.

And, as the Apostles yielded to the Church her right, so in the Primitive
times the Church was not deprived of it, for in the most famous and Ecumenical
Councils this was granted to the Church; 1. In the First Council of Nice,
called by the Emperor Constantine the Great, against Arius, who denied the
Deity of Christ; the Elders of the People and Representative of the Church had
their Votes in it. So in the First Council of Constantinople, called by the
Emperor Theodosius the first, against Macedonius, who denied the Deity of the
Holy Ghost, in this also the Deputies of the Church voted in the ARTICLES
therein debated, as it does appear, by the Subscriptions of the Acts of these
Two Synods.

For further confirmation of this Right of the Church, to my judgment no
better reason than this can be given; These Synods and Assemblies do represent
the Church; If it be a Provincial Synod, it represents the Churches of a
Province, if National, of a Nation; so, if universal, it represents the
whole Christian Church. Now, If this Church either Provincial, National, etc.
represented by these Synods, does consist not only of Bishops, or Pastors,
Doctors, Teachers, and Ministers, but also of Lay, or Secular Persons, (among
whom sometimes there happen to be men no way inferior, in parts and Piety to
many of the Clergy;) So it is of good consequence to say, that some of the body
of the Church, consisting of Lay men, are to be admitted to these
Church Assemblies, for since they are interessed in the Transactions of such
meetings, they must send their Deputies to be present, to the Conclusions taken
there, or else all these Assemblies, shall be no better than a Council of
Trent, called, not to debate of, but to confirm Errors, where one of the
Parties shall be excluded, and the other shall be the Party, and Judge. These
Assemblies cannot be said to be free and Lawful, when there is so much
violence and corruption, as that one shall be admitted as guilty, and accused
Persons, when he should be equal to his Adversary in such a meeting; wherefore
I say, in case a Synod was called in this Nation, consisting of Episcopal men;
for the most, if the business was to be decided by plurallity of Votes, it
would not be a right and competent Assembly, except things were resolved by
strength of Reason, and by an equal number of the different Parties.

But to be brief, This right of the Church (in the 8th place) does consist in
this, That the Church is subject to no power but to the power of Christ; The
Church ownes no Authority but his: and it ought to be free from any others
Dominion, Christ Jesus is the only Lord and Potentate of his Church, which to
signify, he is called sometimes the King, other times the Lord, Master,
Husband, Head, and Shepherd of his Church: If any other Secular or
Ecclesiastical Officer does aspire to this Power, He is a Thief, and a Robber.
We must not think that Christ Jesus has so dearly purchased his Church, to
submit her afterward to the will and lust of men, He has Redeemed us, says
the Apostle, that we should be a peculiar people unto himself, therefore not
addicted to others; One cannot lay any claim to the Church, except he has
purchased it, except he does protect and preserve it, providing it with all
necessary Graces: This is the end of his giving some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, etc. for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. This is a Song proper
to the Church, to say, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, Cant. 6.3. So
that, to find her other Lords, is to make her an Adultresse: I am jealous over
you with a godly Jealousy, says Paul to the Corinthians, for I will present
you as a chaste Virgin to Christ, for I have spoused you to one Husband, 2 Cor.
11. Let therefore no man, no not the Angels themselves pretend any Power and
Superiority over the Church of Christ, for the Lord Jesus has purchased his
Church a Freedom from all other powers but from his own.

And to speak more exactly to this, No man in civil or ecclesiastical Office
ought to pretend any Right and Authority over the Church: 1. No civil
Magistrate, for, as we render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, so we must
render to God the things that are Gods. It is ordinary in Scriptures to make a
difference between civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions. Christ's Kingdom is
described, Psalm. 45. His Government spoken of, Isaiah 9.6, 7. It is seen in a
Dream, by the Stone cut out without hands, which broke the Image of all other
Dominions, Dan. 2.34. Christ does profess, His Kingdom is not of this world,
and he makes a clear difference between civil powers, and that of his Church,
when he said to his Disciples, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion
over them, but it shall not be so among you, Matthew. 20.25. In such a case
therefore let every one abide in that whereunto he is called: There is indeed a
gracious Promise made of God, that Kings should be nursing Fathers to the
Church, which began to be fulfilled in the time of Christian Emperors, It is
now continued, and I believe, it will be to the end of the world; but there is
never a Promise to any Prince (Except to the Prince of Peace, Isaiah 9.6.) to
receive any power or Dominion over the Church. It is one of the greatest points
of the Popes Usurpation, that he will confound these two Jurisdictions, and
assume not only S. Peter's Keys, but also S. Paul's Sword, as they call it, so
that which the one cannot open, the other shall cut it: In a word, He will
undertake the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, since he boasts to have
power in spiritual and temporal things: But thus much here is not approved of
by the Word of God. As the Pope is a temporal Prince, so let him govern his
Subjects; as he is a Bishop, let him use tyranny as he does, over his Church:
But every Christian Reformed Prince ought to be careful not to Administer the
Government of State and Church together.

But besides the not preaching of the Word, there are two things specially,
which the civil Magistrate may not do: The First, He may not ordain Ministers,
because he has not Commission to that effect, it belongs to those that have
already been ordained themselves, and this would be to destroy Ministry by way
of office in the Church: this was the practice in the Primitive Church, that
Bishops or Pastors were chosen by other Bishops; and the people, that is, the
Representatives of the people, without any civil Monarch, or any one pretending
Monarchy in the Church, as it will at large be found written by Cyprian, who
lived 250. in his Epist. 55. and 68. But the Second thing that the Civil
Magistrate must abstain from, is, The Administration of Ecclesiastical
Discipline; For though his Office be about the Church, yet it is not in the
Church: Although some Magistrate may be an Officer and Ruler in the Church, but
not as he is a Civil Magistrate, for under that notion it does not belong to
them: It is indeed the Right of Kings to call COUNSELS, to see the Church
Reformed, (for he is the Keeper of both Tables) yet in this they must make use
of Church Officers, He also must protect the Church from the power of her
Enemies, for to that effect he is called the Servant of God, Romans 13. So it
becomes Princes to protect Ministers from the Power usurped by their
Fellow Servants, as it is Observed of the Duke of Lancaster, who, to his great
commendation secured Wickliffe from the malice and power of his enemies, that
were Bishops, as is observed by FOX, in his Book of Martyrs, Fol. 413. But we
have briefly, yet clearly spoken to this Power of the Civil Magistrate in the
Churches affairs, in a Latin EPISTLE, as an Answer to a Letter from a Learned
Friend; only I do add this, If the Civil Magistrate does not pretend any Power
over the Church, this is so far from tending to his Prejudice, dishonor, and
discredit, as, that it is the greatest glory to abstain from that which does
belong to him, yet it will be their highest prasie, to submit to the Church
Rules, as they are Members of the Church: It is well known, how Ambrosius used
this Right with Theodosius, and the words of Chrysostom, showing the Power of
the Church in administering Discpline, in relation to any one, are very notable:
If any wicked man (says he) come to the Table of the Lord, give him not the
Body or Blood of Christ; but if he will not desist, tell it me, and I will
rather shed my blood, than to admit such a one.

And as it is the right of the Church not to be subject to the power and
dominion of any Civil Magistrate, so Christ has not purchased this freedom,
that it should be subject to any Officers and Ministers in it, but this liberty
will be encroached upon, if any Monarchy or Hierarchy be settled in the Church,
which do follow one another: For when there is a Prince and a Sovereign, there
will be Lords and persons of a quality superior to the common people. Now I
say, any tittle signifying Monarchy in the Church, is tyrannical, such as the
Prince of the Church or the Supreme head thereof, and it is necessary for any
Christian to abstain from such a Title: For,

1. It is known out of Scriptures, that Christ Jesus is the only Head of his
Church: One Text will serve for all, it is Ephesians. 1.22. So that to talk of any
other Head under the notion of ministerial or subordinate, it is to form a
monstrous body with two heads, for in the same place, v. 23. The Church is said
to be the Body: any one that does aspire to the title of Head of the Church,
must have these three qualifications.

1. Excellency above the members in power and dignity.

2. Perfection in himself greater than any of the members have.

3. Infusion of all things which the body has need of: But these three
qualities are to be found in Christ Jesus alone, who being God and man, a King,
a Prophet, and a High Priest, and infusing life, motion and being into the
Church, is the only head of the Church, exclusively to any other, under what
notion soever. It is a notable saying of Gregory the great, who was a Bishop of
Rome, because about his days he saw some of his Predecessors had affected
Supremacy over all the rest, yet much different from that abominable abuse that
crept in after his times: He lived 600 years after Christ. In his 6th. Book,
and Epist. 24. he has these words; I say confidently, that any one who calls
himself, or desires to be called Universal Bishop, he is the forerunner of
Antichrist: And I do believe that where there is an Archbishop over a whole
Kingdom, or the half of it, he is a kind of Monarch and Universal Bishop over
that whole Kingdom or part of it, and the Title of Archbishop is as dangerous,
and as much to be avoided in such a Kingdom, as the name of Universal Bishop:
For I account our controversy with Hierarchy here, to be the same in nature,
which we have against Popery, though in not so high a degree; but this
usurpation by Archbishops is so palpable (so all the Hierarehical way, which I
am confident is not a way of Gods appointment, because in no wise grounded upon
Gods Word) as that I will not insist on it, but only upon that which has a
more specious pretense, and to show few of the grievances of Christ's Church
against this Hierarchical tyrannical Government.

We call Heaven and Earth to record, that we desire nothing else but to be
judged by the Word of God alone, and that no customs, humane inventions and
traditions, but Scriptures only are to be looked upon in this controversy; and
therefore we stand not for any ways of our own, but for the ways of God.
Wherefore we do abhor Bishops by way of superiority, as usurpers over the right
of the Church, as being without Scripture and against Scripture; So that God
may say in this, as he does in another case, They set up Church-Governors, but
not by me. And to argue the case; I would know from the Adversaries, whether
Bishops are different from the Ministers of the Church? that is, whether this
be an Office by it self, or what kind of difference this is? To the former, If
it be an Office by it self, then they must prove it out of Scriptures, but this
cannot be; for in the three places of Scripture where St. Paul does acquaint us
of the Offices in the Church, there is not a word of Bishops, the Texts may be
seen, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. So that if they assert,
that there ought to be Bishops in the Church, then they must acknowledge that
the nature of Bishop is comprehended under one or other of the Offices named in
these places, or else they must confess that there ought to be no Bishops at
all by Divine institution: But the truth is, the nature of Bishop is in the two
former places comprehended under the name Teacher, and in the last Text under
the word Pastor; For he cannot be called Prophet, Apostle, Miracle, Healings,
etc. And this truth Scripture does hold forth in other places, Acts 20.28. St.
Paul said to the Elders of Ephesus, Feed the flock, (from the word feeding
comes the word Pastor,) over the which God has made you overseers, or Bishops,
so that Pastor and Bishop are one and the same: They that have perused Tit.
1.7. will find that Minister or Elder, and Bishop are one and the same:
likewise, 1 Timothy 3. Neither are they Lords over the Flock, if St. Peter speaks
truth, 1 Pet. 5. Feed the Flock. Here again the word Pastor is implied, so the
word Elder whom he exhorts, so the word Bishop, v. 2. taking the oversight,
(...), to whom he says, v. 3. Not being Lords over the flock. Neither must
they be Lords, or affect to be greater than their fellow-Pastors and Ministers,
for nothing can be more expressly and clearly set down, than Christ Jesus
forbidding his Disciples to use dominion and authority one over onother, even
upon this occasion, when they disputed amongst themselves of superiority, Mat.
20.25.

I think therefore that any man, especially a Minister cannot suffer upon a
more righteous account, than in opposition to this Supremacy; and I make no
question but to bring many to this truth (through grace) when I have showed how
godly people opposed this usurpation when it began to creep into the Church,
and how for this same cause some were crowned with Martyrdom: Ambition being
the sin of the Devil, who is a murderer from the beginning, it does infuse
cruel and bloody dispositions into those that are stained with it: But when
pride meets in an Ecclesiastical man, as it is the most detestable, so it
produces most fatal and pernicious effects. Any one that is acquainted with
the names of Bonifaces, Leo's John's, etc. who ever heard of Guelphs and
Guobellines, may have an illustration of what I say; this furious ambition did
formerly rage with more violence than now, that the Light of the Gospel is
clearer than before. Yet although the stump be in Italy, there are some little
Branches of the pride of that great Harlot even amongst those that profess the
Reformed Religion, and it is to be wished men were now as studious to extirpate
these relics, as some were at first to prevent the growth thereof. That some
of the Bishops of Rome were censured by the Bishops of Alexandria or
Constantinople and some other places, they that have been acquainted with
Eusebius may testify of it. Bonifacius the third of that name, who first
publicly assumed the ambitious Title which the Bishops of Rome do retain, did
write a Letter to the Bishops of Carthage, which must needs to be interpreted
of Ministers, for there could not be many Diocesan Bishops, as they call it,
requiring them to have their appeal to Rome (being countenanced in it by Phocas
that wicked Emperor, but pretending some authority out of the Council of Nice;
but the Bishops of Carthage called a Council (the sixth of Carthage) of 217
Bishops, which must have been Ministers, for how could so many of Bishops in
the adversaries sense, be found about Carthage, and they disowned that
pretended power of Bonifacius. This Council was called in the days of Phocas.
Bernard in his 2 Book to Eugenius, declares to him, that he could not
challenge any Dominion over the Church or other his Fellow-Pastors: Hearken,
says he, what S. Peter says, 1 Pet. 5. Not bearing rule as Lords over the
Clergy, but as examples to the flock, wherefore, if thou will be a Lord, thou
shall lose thine Apostleship, if thou will be an Apostle, thou shall lose thy
Lordship: How fitly does this here hit our times? And they need not to tell me
that this was to Popes, provided I find it to be the same thing which now we
condemn in the Prelates of these days; for I have already said how I look upon
this Episcopal supremacy as an Effect of that Cause, and as a Fruit of that
Tree, they and we do condemn the same thing, though in different persons, and
perhaps in a different degree: Those of Carthage would not make their appeal to
Rome, What reason is it for the Pastors of Warwick, Worcester, etc. to make
their appeals before the Archbishop of Canterbury? (observe that Rome and
Carthage were then under the same Emperor) Bernard reproves Eugenius for
affecting the Title of Lord; Why shall not also those that are called here
Lords, be in the same condemnation?

Wickliff who lived in the year 1379, opposed this usurped Preeminency and
superiority, for which doing, and other things, he was condemned as an
Heretic, his bones taken from his Grave, and burnt: against him one Woodfort
exhibited a Charge, the 18th Article whereof was this; There be says
Wickliffe, Twelve Disciples of Antichrist, Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops [by way of Prelacy] Archdeacons, Officials, Deans, Canons, etc. And
for the testimony of this truth as of others, John Hus, Jerome of Prague,
obtained Martyrdom, and had their blood shed, because they asserted it: In the
Council of Constance, in the year 1414, certain Articles were exhibited against
them, specially John Hus; the 4th. Article runs thus, He erreth touching the
Church, in that he says, all Priests are of like power, and therefore he
assirmeth that consecration of Bishops was invented only for covetousness:
Hence does appear how God did formerly stir up men to oppose this usurpation,
which was not known amongst the Waldenses, who professed the true Doctrine
since the Apostles times till now, as I have demonstrated in a Latin Epistle
to a Learned man. Howsoever I know that there are some who would not have
Bishops altogether so high, as to be Lords, but nevertheless they would have
them as Presidents over one or two Counties, and to direct his Presbyters, but
this is a Branch of the former, unwarrantable from the word of God, as that
such persons should be at all times in all places, and during their life
Presidents over all Ministers of so many shires, which cannot be denied to be a
kind of superiority, which in any kind being introduced into the Church, we
disclaim against.

The Adversaries being not able to hold this kind of Bishops out of Scripture
(which they refuse to be judged by in this case) they are forced to have a
refuge to humane Right, saying, it is a benefit and, gratuity from Princes: But
alas, Princes may not alter the Government settled by Christ in his Church; for
the Church receives no rule in necessary things, as this is, but from Gods
Word. It was a Christian saying of the Lord Cobham, strongly persecuted, who as
it is quoted by Fox, Book of Martyrs, Fol. 515. said to his Judges, The
Precepts of God ought to be obeyed; If any Prelate of the Church does require
more, or else any other kind of obedience to be used, he contemns Christ,
exalting himself above God, and so becomes an open Antichrist: In such a case
therefore we say, that in the Church no voice but that of Christ is to be
heard, and to any that shall go about to persuade or force us to it, we must
with Peter answer to the Pharisees, judge your selves whether it be just to
obey men more than God; when it seems it was not much that they were required,
not to forsake Christ, or to preach against him, but only not to preach in his
name: Herein therefore lies the first grievance of the Church of Christ, that
those who are appointed to be her Pastors, do usurp a Dominion over the Flock,
and a superiority over their Fellow-Ministers.

But a second grievance depending from the former, is from spiritual Courts (so
called) and the exceeding corruption and irregularity of the same, whereby
Ministers are made Ciphers as to the administration of Discipline in their
respective Congregations, and the Church is deprived of the right it has in
matter of Government. Is it not more conformable to the will of God and better
in reason, to have every Minister with his Elders to rule in his Parish, (and
when things come to be decided in it, to refer it to a Claffis or Synod) than
to have a Bishop, Dean and Archdeacon to rule all the Parishes of two or three
Counties, and not seldom their Servants being bribed, they are earnest
Sollicitors with their Masters for Causes howsoever unjust they be; and sure I
am that these few persons are more easily bribed than many; these Courts are
grounded upon humane invention, and contrary to the form of Government by
Christ settled in his Church, whence follows, that it being not a way of Gods
appointment, there are gross and many abuses committed therein, which being
well known, I will observe only one of the chief, and this is Fines, it is very
strange that they should practice that in the Church for which they have no
pattern in Scriptures or Primitive Church; it is ridiculous that men should pay
money for their offenses in the Church, it is sacrilegious to make any trafique
in the Church, and it is a great impiety to turn Church Censures into Fines,
these practices are good for Rome, where all things are sold, we are not the
first that condemn it; Wickliffe lived long ago, and in the 17th. Article
exhibited against him, he is charged to have written, that Christ's Ministers
have no power by any civil (and less spiritual coaction,) to exact temporal
things by their censures, this godly man as he disclaimed much against the
pride, and so the usurped superiority of the Clergy, so he much inveighed
against their covetousness and their spiritual Courts (which word is odious in
the Church) and although the abuse now adays committed, be not so exceeding as
then, yet it is as bad and as much to be condemned, because of the greater
light we have now. And that which makes it the worse, is, that these Fines are
exacted from those who do well; if a Minister does preach within the Diocese
of a Bishop without his license, he shall be fined for it: Is not this to
hinder the preaching of the Gospel, and to restrain the liberty of it? We may
hear what Wickliffe (whom God extraordinarily raised to oppose those abuses in
his days,) says to it; in one of his Articles which in a Convocation held
1382. were condemned as erroneous; this is one; It is lawful for any Priest or
Minister to preach the Word of God as without any license from the Apostolic
Sea ( or Rome) so of any of her Catholic Bishops.

Further a third grievance is, the pressing of a Canonical Oath, so called, for
no man shall be admitted to any place, or have his Institution and induction
into any Living, except he has sworn obedience to his Bishop and pretended
Superiors, and a conformity to the Canons of the Church, that is, to the
Traditions, as they are called in the 39 Articles, a thing very tyrannical:
this is not much different from that blind and absolve obedience which Jesuits
do promise to their Superiors: Is there any shadow for this in Scripture? Did
the Apostles impose any such Oaths upon their fellow-Ministers, the end whereof
is to keep up this Diana Prelacy? Can this be confirmed from the practice of
the Primitive Church? or is there any good reason for it? This, this is the
Flag of Faction, and the Colors of self ends and ambition; and although the
clause (in lawful things) were added, it would be no lessening of the burden,
for the things therein sworn, are accounted lawful, neither will they suffer a
man to inquire whether it be so or not, without danger of forfeiting his place,
and of being exposed to the displeasure of those Reverend Superiors, whose
excellent practices are plainly discovered, in turning out of the Universities,
men eminent for Piety and Learning, who cannot in conscience submit to these
Oaths, Ceremonies and Hierarchical Government, and constituting in their places
men of corrupt and dangerous practices and principles, who will infect the
Fountains of Learning with error, heresy, superstition and prophannesse.

From hence does proceed another grievance, which is, that the subscription of
the 39 Articles is forced upon Ministers thus far, as that they shall enjoy no
Living unless they do it, although they be ignorant of the meaning of some
Articles; for it has clearly been proved they are ambiguous and defective, and
the 36 is absolutely false, where it is said, that the Government of the Church
by Archdeacons, Deans, etc. has nothing repugnant to the Word of God, this a
man cannot in conscience subscribe, for thereby they presumptuously do belie
Scriptures, this is the cause why some godly men did formerly prefer the loss
of all Ecclesiastical preferments to the wounding of their Consciences, and to
a submission unto that which is contrary to Gods Word.

It was therefore to reform these and many other abuses, to stop the Flood of
Atheism, Popery, error, superstition and profaneness, that the sacred
Covenant was taken, it was high time to appear when some men did publicly and
unpunished deny the Deity of the Lord that bough us, when they asserted a sound
nature without original sin, when they destroyed the grace of Christ, by
establishing certain conditional decrees, whose condition was in the power of
man's will, when the Sabbaths were highly and ordinarily profaned, in such sad
days it was need of some restraint, to which end the Covenant was taken, not
by few inconsiderable persons, but by the whole Nation represented in
Parliament, by a House of Lords and a House of Commons, and this not rashly but
after a mature deliberation, and by the advice of as famous an Assembly of
Divines as ever England had, or I believe shall, and this warrantable by the
practice of the people of Israel, and of the 2 Precept of the Law of God,
wherein implicitly is a command of promoting the worship of God in a true
manner, and withal this Covenant being taken so solemnly, God being called not
only as a witness to the sincerity of the heart of those that took it, but also
as an avenger of the perjury in case it should happen, as he has punished it
in those who intended to raise their fortune upon the Ruins of that sacred
Engagement, I wish all those that are so forward for the breach of it to
remember the Five Kings who had sworn to Ched^^l^^mer, Genesis 14. so Hoshea to
Salmanasser, 2 Kings 17. Zedechie to Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Kings 25. and Ezechiel
17. and of Saul and the Gibeonites: Let them blush at the History of Regulus, a
Roman Heathen, who having given his word to his Enemies that he would come
again to them, though he knew that grievous torments were prepared for him, yet
he returned to discharge his Promise; let them take notice of Uladislaus and
Amurat, and also tremble at their several Punishments, because they had
forsworn; Why do we so much condemn the Council of Constance, because they
decreed, that Faith was not to be kept to Heretics: What shall we say of those
who will not have it to be kept to Orthodox men, may not to God himself, to
whom the Covenant was sworn: and, Can be that is Faithless to God be true to
men? Shall be that breaks his Covenant to the Lord, keep his Oath of Allegiance
to the King? This holy Oath cannot be made void, except it be proved to be evil
in its nature; Neither can it be proved to be evil, except it be reduced under
some Precept of the Law, as contrary to it; This the Adversaries have never
undertaken to demonstrate, rather we may show here it is good to the substance,
and to the End. Their objection of the KING's not consenting to it is
superfluous, for every public Oath has a twofold Relation, one, a Civil, and
the other a Spiritual: this Covenant is a complete Law, for the two HOUSES gave
it, and his Majesty passed it, and took it: As to the Spititual Account it is
the more considerable; and in this respect the consent or dissent of Persons is
but circumstantial, for Oaths are a part of Gods Worship, God commanding the
Fathers to teach their children to swear by his Name; as if having sworn
privately to a man to do such a thing, whether I am not bound in conscience to
perform it, because I did not swear before the Magistrate. It is indeed
strange that the Laws of God should be tied to certain Customs of a Nation,
so that the Oath which shall bind my Conscience beyond Seas, as Holland, etc.
the same Religious vow shall not bind me here; We know the Ceremonial Law was
tied to times, places, and Persons, but the moral was not so.

Upon this point of the Covenant, a Declaration set forth in the year 1650.
dated Dumferlen, is to be taken notice of, as expressing much Zeal and Piety,
and they that would dispense men from it became guilty of the Popes usurpation,
who undertakes to dispense from Oaths, that is, to create a new Divinity, and
to preach another Gospel, but the truth is, they do it under hope of a Miter,
or in expectation of some other such Preferment, yet let such peruse Romans 1.31.
where they may find Covenant Breakers reckoned amongst the worst sort of men,
and they who draw back from it do wound their Conscience, give scandal to the
Church, and become a scorn even to the Episcopal Party, who know, it is not out
of affection, but out of an interest, thereby do triumph in their Inconstancy:
and further, thereby they lose their Reputation, (if they have any) for they
show themselves to be men of no Principles: But I must no longer insist upon a
matter which has already been handled by some Learned men.

From the things aforesaid it does appear how greatly mistaken are those who
say, that Presbyterians, and Episcopal men differ only in Indifferent and
circumstantial things. For if we consider the debate about Ordination, whereby
the Adversaries go about to make the Reformed Churches beyond Seas, to have no
true Ministers, because they are not ordained by Bishops: if we find some of
that Party to be Arminians, if surther we take notice that they refuse to be
ruled by the Word of God in point of Discipline, not willing to admit to the
Government of the Church those whom Christ has appointed to that end, then we
will find that the controversy is about high and mighty things! It is an
amazement to me to behold, how in their practice they are incorrigible under
Judgments, and unthankful under Mercies: they are not wiser for the
chastisement of 20 years, they have been smitten, yet they return not to him
that has smitten them, neither do they repent of their evil deeds, Rev. 16. as
pride, Ambition, Profaneness, and Superstition, they do not hearken to the
voice of the rod, and who is it that sent it, and for what. Now after that God
has raised them up again from the dust, and even from the dead, they will not
forsake their former practices, for the which wrath was poured upon them, but
like the Dog they will return to their vomit, and like the Sow to her wallowing
in the mire.

We do desire the Settlement of the Church, nor in outward glory, and pomp,
which are the expressions of an Adresse from Surrey, presented August last, but
in the purity expressed in the Word of God. It was a pious conclusion in the
Council of Laodicea, That nothing should be done in the Church, (even as to
Discipline) except it were warrantable from the Word of God: yet Hooker in his
History does say, That though there were many more such Articles, he would not
be conformable to them. Cyprian speaking of the Apostles, and so applicable to
all Ministers, he says in his Book de Vnitate Ecclesiae, They were all equal
in honor and dignity: But the Episcopal Party so pertinaciously maintaining
their pretended Superiority, do show how much they differ from him. As to the
right of the people in Church Affairs, it is observable, that Bonifacius, he
who obtained the supremacy from Phocas, and who thereby became usurper over the
Church, yet he was so knowing, as to the Right of the Church, that in a Synod
of above 200 Bishops, by him called, it was decreed, that nothing should be
done without the Votes and consents of the people.

I know the Adversaries do bring Examples of their Church Government, from the
Churches in Sweden, Danmark, Saxony, and some few parts of Poland, why? to
dazzle the eyes of a Reader, in making such an enumeration: they had sooner
done, to have said, the Lutheran Church, which they call the Reformed Church. I
confess it is so in some respect, but if we consider their having Images in
the Churches, which to defend, they take off the 2 Precept, if we take notice
that most of their Service in the Church, as singing of Psalms, is done in an
unknown Tongue, how they confound the property of both Natures in the person of
Christ, as to say; that the Deity it self suffered, so their Administering the
Sacrament not with Bread, according to the constitution, but with Wafers, and
there their Consubstantiation, as absurd as the Popish Transubstantiation; all
this being considered, we will find, that the Lutheran Church is none of the
best reformed, and therefore to answer the Adversaries in their way, we say,
That Transylvania, part of Hungaria, most of Bohemia, the Palatinate under the
Pa^lsgrave, the Landgrave of Hessen, and other parts in Germany, the
evangelical Cantons of Switzerland, France, the United Provinces, and the
Italian Churches, wheresoever they be, the Waldenses, and Scotland. All these
have their Church Government different from that which the Episcopal Party is
here so much for: However we do not ground our Discipline upon such Examples,
as we do upon the Word of God.

But, Because now there are endeavors used by Learned and Godly Persons, to
find out a way of Reconciliation, I pray to the Lord, to open the Eyes of the
Adversaries, that they may see the truth, and yield to it, and cease to prefer
their own ways, and interest to the ways and interest of God, not refusing to
be taught by his Word: Whence will proceed a well grounded Peace: Or else, What
peace as long as they shall admit of no Moderation, (For I heard some say, They
knew not what I mean'd, by it?) What Moderation, as long as they will maintain
their Primacy? wherein, if they persist, we may answer them in a way not much
different from that of Jehu to Joram, 2 Kings 9.22. only changing the word
Whoredoms and Witchcrafts, into Pride and Ambition of Superiority. But if they
are still resolved to go on, I will say in the Words of S. John, in the last
Chap. of his Revelation, Let him that is filthy be filthy still: Howsoever I
make no doubt but that God will, in his due time, assert the Right of his
Church, and vindicate it from all humane Inventions and tyrannical usurpations
by those means, that shall be the more suitable to the work, and most
conformable to his Holy Will, For the Stone cut without hands shall grind and
crush all other Interests, contrary to that of Christ, wherefore we be
confident that maugre all humane designs, Force, and Policy, and in spite of
all Hellish Conspiracies the Council of the Lord shall stand.

FINIS.

