A Great and Famous VICTORY Obtained by the Parliaments Navy Near the Isle of
VVIGHT, AGAINST Fifty Sail of Hollanders: With the paticulars of this great and
desperate Engagement, the manner of the Fight, and the number of ships sunk and
taken, and the great loss on both sides.

ALSO The King of Denmarks Declaration, touching the Hollanders, the setting
forth of his great Armado, the drawing down of all his Landforces to the
Seacoast; and the Queen of Swedens Proclamation, touching the King of Scots,
the Parliament of England, and their Fleet at Sea.

Published according to Order. November. 2

LONDON: Printed for Georg Horton, Anno 1652.

A great VICTORY Obtained By the English against the Hollander on Thursday near
the Isle of Wight.
Honored Sir,
ON Sunday last, from very clean hands, we reeived a most exact and fair
account of the proceedings of our Navy at sea, and that they are again put
forth, and became Masters of several prizes: but purchased at too dear a rate;
for one of our Frigots has been extremely engaged, with the Hollander, and her
mainmast, and misn, both taken off by chain-shot; she maintained a very
gallant dispute for many hours, but at last being overpowred was forced to tack
about, and strike into Portsmouth, with the loss of some men; the Free-booters
are extreme busy, and have trussed up some of our ships near Berwick; laden
with excellent commodities; but on the contrary we have taken diverse of the
Flemings; amongst the rest diverse Amsterdam Merchants laden with Wines, Sugar,
Salt, and other considerable prize: yet notwithstanding the enemy seems as
resolute as potent; for on Thursday last, a great fleet, consisting of about 50
sail, began to act a new Tragedy upon the Neptune Ocean, near the Isle of
Wight; which the English perceiving, prepared to receive them, and accordingly
30 gallant men of war hoisted sail, and bore up to them: and after a sharp
conflict expelled their powers, and forced them to decline engagement, and
after two hours chase, sunk four, took eleven, and dissipated the rest: but not
without loss.

From several parts beyond the sea this week thus. The Senators with the King
of Denmark are yet at Copenhagen, and the rest of those that make up the
National Senate, are summoned to appear within a time limited. His Majesty of
Denmark has also sent Commissioners to view all the fortifications on the sea
side, and to provide with all necessaries, as also given Commission to all the
Officers of the Navy may be in a readiness to set forth upon any occasion;
some of the Dutch ships riding near Copenhagen did lately seize upon three
Dantzick ships which were bound for Ostend, and having detained them some days
upon pretense that they were bound for London, the parties grieved having made
their addresses to the King, and made it appear that there was no such thing
intended, the said ships and goods were set at liberty, and remained under the
Kings protection, waiting for a fair wind to depart thence. The Queen of Sweden
and her Council are very busy in giving audience to several Ambassadors both
from Germany, as also from diverse other Kings and States, they have made a
Proclamation to all the Senators which are absent to repair within a set time
to Stockholm, that so with all convenience they may proceed to the choice of
new Senators, in lieu of those that are lately dead: all things are now
working toward the general meeting at the Imperial Diet at Ratisbon.

The long siege of Barcelona is now come to an end, the Generallissimo Don Juan
de Austria, and the Marquess of Mortara, General of the Spanish army by land,
having brought that City for want of provisions to make a composition, and
thereupon to surrender, which was done about the latter end of September, after
they had endured a very hard siege for the space of fifteen months within
which time there has perished a very great number of people, of all ages and
sexes, by the sword, the Pestilence, and famine, and the first and last of
these has likewise destroyed many of the besiegers, so that considering money
spent and men lost, the place is dear bought, as for particulars we can say no
more, but that they have honorable terms granted. The French Vice-King with
the Governor of the City have liberty to march out with the rest mentioned in
the articles and are both gone to Perpignan, by the next we shall give you a
more particular account. You have heard of the surrender of the City of Casal
to the Duke of Mantua the true owner thereof, but the Citadel stood out, being
kept by a French garrison commanded by Monsier S. Angelo, who having refused to
surrender upon the summons, the batteries were thereupon made ready, and the
place being stormed twice, the besieged considering their condition, and how
little hopes there was of any relief, did at last come to composition. which
was granted them upon honorable terms, and so they marched out, and had a
convoy to bring them into Piedmont.

By Letters from Edinburgh, October 24. came thus. On Wednesday the 20 instant,
the English Commissioners for administration of Justice sat upon criminal
matters at Edinburgh: The first day was spent in reading their Commission from
the Commissioners at Dalkieth, calling the Sheriffs of the several Counties on
this side the Frith, viz. Barwick, Selkirk, Pebles, Linlithgow, Hadington,
Lothian and Roxborough. Those Sheriffs that appeared not, were fined 200 l.
Scotch each. Afterward the Gentlemen of the Counties, who were to do their
service were called, and such as appeared not, fined 100 l. Scotch; and then
several Delinquents were called, and set down for trial. Since that, these
three days have been spent in the trial, and fining of several persons for
Adultery, Incest, and Fornication, for which there were above threescore
persons brought before the Judges in a day. And it is observable, That (such is
the malice of these people) that most of them were accused for facts done
diverse years since, and the chief proof against them was their own Confession
before the Kirk, who are in this worse than those of the Romish Religion, who
do not make so ill an use of their Auricular Confession, some of the facts
committed 5, some 6, 10, 16, 18, and 21 years since. There was one Ephraim
Bennet, a Gunner in Lies, indicted, convicted, and condemned for coining of
Sixpences, Shillings, and half Crowns; also two Englishmen, Wilkinson and
Newcome, condemned for robbing and killing one Scotch man near Haddington in
March last. But that which is most observable is, that some were brought before
them for Witches, two whereof had been brought before the Kirk, about the time
of the Armies coming into Scotland, and having confessed it, were turned over to
the Civil Magistrates. The Court demanding how they came to be proved Witches,
they declared that they were forced to do it by the exceeding torture they were
put to, which was by tying their Thumbs behind them, and then hanging them up
by them, whiles two Highlanders whipped them; after which they set lighted
Candles to the soles of their feet, and between their toes, then burned them by
putting lighted Candles into their mouths, and then burning them in the head;
there were 6 of them accused in all, four whereof died of the torture. The
Judges are resolved to enquire into the business, and have appointed the
Sheriff, Ministers, and Tormentors to be found out, and to have an account of
the ground of this cruelty. Another woman that was suspected (according to
their thought) to be a Witch, was kept 28 days and nights with bread and water,
being stripped naked and laid upon a cold stone, with only a hair cloth over
her. Others had hairy shirts dipped in vinegar put on them to fetch off the
skin. It is very probable there will shortly be more discoveries of this kind
of Amboyna usage, but here is enough for reasonable men to comment upon.

On Wednesday last, the Marquess of Argyle came to Edinburgh, he had so far
perfected the work in the Highlands, that our prisoners are released out of
Carversara Castle, (where about 60 of them were kept) 20 miles from Innerrara,
where they had near perished, had not they been allowed some of their own
Biscuit and Cheese. The Marquess of Argyle used them very civilly at their
coming by his house, allowing them good quarters, some money to bear their
charges, and giving them Passes through his Country.

The most illustrius Princess, the Queen of Sweden, has set forth a
Proclamation, adjuring and commanding all her Captains and Officers of her Navy
Royal, to yield obedience unto her special Edict and Decree, for the protection
and preservation of the English ships (commissioned either by the titular King
of Scots, or the Parliament) from the violence of the Hollander: and that they
shall likewise receive protection as well upon their Naval Affairs throughout
the Baltic Seas, as within their own confines and territories; In pursuance
whereof, her Majesty has given Order for 50 sail of Men of War to be
immediately set forth, to attend the motion of the English and Dutch.

FINIS.

