THE Marquess of Argyle HIS PETITION TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND; Craving a
Precognition of his Case, Containing many weighty Reasons urging the necessity
thereof.

Presented to the Parliament February 12. 1661.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

To my Lord Commissioner his Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament.
The Humble Petition of Archbald Marquess of Argyle.
Humbly shows,
THAT for as much as the Petitioner can with a safe conscience affirm, and
solemnly protest, that whatever his actings or accession has been in relation
to public business since the beginning of the troubles, till his Majesty's
departure hence in the year 1651. though he will not purge himself of errors,
failings, and mistakes, both in judgment and practice incident to humane
frailty, and common to him, if not with the whole, at least with the greatest
part of the Nation; yet in one thing, though he were to die, he would still
avouch and retain his innocence, that he never intended any thing treasonably,
out of any pernicious design against his Majesty's late Royal Father of ever
glorious memory, or his present Majesty, (whom God may long preserve) their
Persons or Government; but endeavored always to his uttermost for settling the
differences betwixt their Majesty's and the people: And as to any actings
before the year 1641. or from the said year, till his Majesty's being in the
Parliament at Perth and Sterling, your Petitioner did with a full assurance
rely upon his gracious Majesty, and his Royal Father, their Treaties,
Approbation, Oblivion, and Indemnity for what was past, and firmly believed
that the same should never have risen in judgment, or that the Petitioner
should have been drawn in question therefore; and during his Majesty's absence,
and being forced from the exercise of his Royal Government by the late
Usurpers, and long after that the Nation by their Deputies had accepted of
their authority and government, and they in possession, the Petitioner was
forced to capitulation with them, being in their hands, and under sickness, and
the same was after all endeavors used, according to the duty of a good
subject, and upon the Petitioners part, so innocent and necessary for self
preservation, without the least intention, action, or effect to his Majesty's
prejudice; That albeit upon misinformation (as the Petitioner humbly
conceives) his actings and compliance both in their designs and quality have
been misrepresented, as particularly singular and personal, stating the
Petitioner in a degree of guilt beyond others, and incapable of pardon, the
same have so far prevailed upon his Majesty, as to cloud and damp the
propitious and comfortable rays of his Royal Grace and Favor, and have
strained his gracious Inclination beyond its natural disposition of clemency
expressed to his other subjects, to commit the Petitioners person, and give way
to the trial of his carriage and actings; yet so firmly rooted is the
Petitioners persuasion of his Majesty's Justice and Clemency, and that He
intends the reclaiming, and not the ruin of the meanest of his subjects, who
retein their loyalty, duty, and good affection to his Person and Government,
that upon true and right representation of the Petitioners carriage and
actings, he shall be able to vindicate himself of these aspersions, and shall
give his Majesty satisfaction, at least so far, to extenuate his guilt, as may
render him a fit object of that Royal Clemency, which is of that depth, that
having swallowed and past by not only Personal, but National guiltiness, of
much more deep a dye as any the Petitioner can be charged with, or made out
against him; and so will not strain to pass by and pardon the faults and
failings of a person who never acted but in a public joint way, without any
sinistrous or treasonable design against his Majesty, or his Royal Father, and
against which he can defend himself either by acts of approbation and oblivion
in verbo principis, which he conceives to be the supreme, sacred, and
inviolable security, or which he was forced to much against his inclination, by
an insuperable necessity. And albeit his Majesty's grace and favor is strictly
tied to no other rule but his Royal Will and pleasure, yet his Majesty's so
innate, essential and inseparable a quality of his Royal nature, that the
Petitioner is persuaded in all humane certainty, that the leaving and
committing to his Parliament (as is expressed in his Majesty's Declaration of
October. 12. last by past) the trying and judging of the carriage of his subjects
during the late troubles, as indeed it is in its own nature, and ought to be so
accepted of all, as an undoubted evidence of his Majesty's affection to, and
confidence in his people; so no other trial or judging is therein meaned, but a
fair, just, legal, and usual trial, without any prejudice, passion, or
prelimitation, or precipitation; like as by the said Declaration there was a
freedom for all the people interessed, to make their application to the
Parliament, or in the mean time to the Committee, from whom only his Majesty is
pleased to declare he would receive address and information: And seeing it was
the Petitioners misfortune during the sitting of the said Committee, to be
prisoner in England, whereas if he had been prisoner here in Scotland, he would
have made application to them, and would have craved, and in justice expected
that precognition might have been taken by them, to whom the preparing and
ordering of that affair (to wit, anent the trial of the subjects carriage
during the troubles) was recommended, that the Petitioners absence, which was
his punishment, not his fault, may not be prejudicial, seeing the Petitioner
has lately received two several ditays wherein there be many crimes grossly
false, with all the aspersions and aggravations imaginable laid to his charge,
importing no less then the loss of his life, fame, and estate, and the ruin of
him and his posterity, which he is confident is not intended by his Majesty;
and that by the law and practice of this Kingdom, consonant to all reason and
equity, the Petitioner ought to have upon his desire a precognition for taking
the deposition of certain persons, which being frequently and usually practiced
in this Country, when any person is defamed for any crime, and therefore
incarcerate before he was brought to a trial, at his desire precognition was
taken in all business relating thereto, which the Petitioner in all humility
conceives ought much more not to be denied to him, not only by reason of
respect to his quality, and of the importance and consequence thereof to all
his Majesty's subjects of all quality in all time coming, but also, in regard
it has been so meaned and intended by his Majesty's Declaration foresaid, like
as the manner of the crimes objected being actings in times of wars and
troubles, the guilt thereof was not personal and particular, but rather
National and universal, and veiled and covered with acts of indemnity and
oblivion, and so tender and ticklish, that if duly pondered after a hearing
allowed to the Petitioner, in prudency and policy will not be found expedient
to be tossed in public, or touched with every hand, but rather to be
precognosced upon by some wise, sober, noble, and judicious persons, for their
and several others reasons in the paper hereto annexed; nor does the Petitioner
desire the same animo pro telandi, nor needs the same breed any longer delay,
nor is it sought without an end of zeal to his Majesty's power, and vindication
of the Petitioners innocence, as to many particulars wherewith he is aspersed;
and it would be seriously pondered that seeing Cunctatio nulla longa ubi agitur
de vita hominis, far less can this small delay, which is usual, and in this
case most expedient, if not absolutely necessary, be refused, ubi agitur non
solum de vita, sed de fama, and of all worldly interests that can be dear or of
value to any man.

Upon Consideration of the Premises, it is humbly craved, That your Grace, and
the Honorable Estates of Parliament, may grant the Petitioners desire, and to
give Warrant to cite persons to Depone before your Grace, and the Estates of
Parliament, upon such interrogators as your Petitioner shall give in, for
clearing of several things concerning his intention and loyalty during the
Troubles; And for such as are out of the Country, and Strangers, residentars in
England, Commissions may be directed to such as your Grace and the Parliament
shall think fit, to take their Depositions upon Oath, and to return the same;
And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Edinburgh, Febr. 12. 1660. This
Petition being read, was refused.
Edinburgh.
At the Parliament House, Febr. 13. 1661.
THe Marquess of Argyle (being accused of High Treason, at the instance of Sir
John Flo^cher, his Majesty's Advocate for his Interest) was brought to the Bar:
His Lordship humbly desired but to speak a few words before reading the
Indictment; assuring to speak nothing in the cause it self* Whereupon he was
removed a little, and after some debate, the House resolved that the said
Indictment should be first read. Then his Lordship desired that a Bill which he
had caused his Advocates give in to the Lords of the Articles, (desiring a
precognition, with many reasons urging the necess^ty of it) to which he had
received no answer, might be read before the said Indictment; which being
likewise refused, the said Indictment was first read; and after the reading
thereof, the Marquess (being put off hi^ first thoughts) was compelled to this
extemporary discourse following, as it was faithfully collected from several
hands, who writ when his Lordship spoke.

May i^ please your Grace
MY Lord Chancellor, Before I speak any thing, I shall humbly protest my words
may not be wrested, but that I may have charity to be believed; and I shall
with God's assistance, speak truth from my heart.

I shall (my Lord) resume M^phi^^sh^ths answer to David, (after a great
Rebellion, and himself evil reported of) says he, Yea, let him take all, for
as much as my Lord the 2 Samuel 19. 30.
King is come home again in peace into his own house; So say I, since it has
pleased God Almighty graciously to return his Sacred Majesty to the Royal
Exercise of his Government over these Nations, to which he has undoubted Right,
and was most unjustly and violently thrust therefrom by the late tyrannizing
Usurpers.

It is (my Lord) exceeding matter of joy to us all, that that iron yoke of
Usurpation (under which we have these many years sadly groaned) is now broke,
and with much freedom this High and Honorable Court of Parliament are meeting
together, under the refreshing warm beams of his Majesty's Royal Government,
(so much longed for by our almost starved expectations;) and I do earnestly
wish his Royal Presence upon his Royal Throne amongst us; but since at this
time that great happiness cannot probably be expected, I am glad that his
Majesty's Prudence has singled out such a qualified and worthy person (as my
Lord Commissioner his Grace) to represent himself, whose unspotted loyalty to
his Majesty we can all witness.

I cannot (my Lord) but acknowledge that these two grand mercies which
comfortably attends my present condition; one is, The high thoughts I
deservedly entertain of that transcendent and Princely clemency wherewith his
Sacred Majesty is so admirably delighted, abundantly evidenced by many noted
and signal testimonies in all the steps of his Majesty's carriage; as those
most gracious Letters, Declarations, and that free and most ample Act of
Indemnity, granted to all his Majesty's Subjects, (excepting some of the
immediate Murderers of his Royal Father) to eradicate any timorous Jealousies
of his Majestie^ g^^cious pardon (which might happily arise by serious
reflectings) convincing them forceably of their own miscarriages in these
unhappy times of distraction: The effects (my Lord) of which Princely
deportment (I am confidently hopeful) his Majesty has experimentally, and shall
find, prove one effectual cement to concilliate the most antimonarchick and
disaffected persons (excepting some of those barbarous phanaticks) in all his
Majesty's Dominions, most willingly to the subjection of his Majesty's Royal
Scepter; and with a perfect hatred abominate all disloyal practices in
themselves or others, in all time coming.

The second is, (my Lord) When I consider that my Judges are not such as we had
of late, (strangers,) but my own Countrymen; both which jointly (together with
the real sense and solid convictions I have of my innocence of these calumnies
most unjustly charged upon me) encourages my hopes the rather, to expect such
dealing, as will most sympathize with that clement humor (to which his Sacred
Majesty has such a natural propensity) and such equal administration of
Justice (void of all byassing prejudices) as will be most suitable to such a
high and honorable Meeting.

I shall therefore (my Lord) desire to use Paul's answer for himself, being
accused of his Countrymen) may not be mistaken, he having a learned Orator
(Tertullus) accusing him, as I have in my Lord Advocate; Paul's was heresy,
Acts 24. 14, 15, 16.
mine of another nature; but I must say with him, That the things they allege
against me cannot be proved; but this I confess, in the way allowed by solemn
Oaths and Covenants, I have served God, my King, and Country (as he said) which
they themselves also allow.

I shall (my Lord) remember (not with repining, but for information) my hard
usage, never having had my hearing, nor allowance of pen, ink, nor paper, nor
the comfort of seeing my friends freely, until I received this Summons, which
was in effect a load above a burden; enemies, both Scots and English, out of
malice calumniating me for all the same things, excepting what relates to his
Majesty's most Royal Father of ever glorious memory.

Therefore (my Lord) I beg charity and patien^ hearing, not doubting but the
wisdom and goodness of the Parliament will be so favorable, and not as the
inconsiderate multitude (as a learned and able man writes, says he) As Sir
Walter Raleighs Preface to the Histary of the World.
we see in experience, That dogs they always bark at them they know not; and
that is their nature, to accompany one another in those clamours; so it is with
the inconsiderate multitude, who wanting that virtue which we call honesty in
all men; and that special gift of God (which we call charity in Christian men)
condemn without hearing, and wound without offense given, led thereunto by
uncertain report only; which his Majesty King James only acknowledges to be the
Father of lies: I shall not desire to be in the least mistaken by any that hear
me: But sure I am, it is pertinently applicable to my case.

I entreat your Lordship likewise to consider the words of another notable man;
who says, As the tongues of Parasites Speed in his H^story.
are ill balances to weigh the virtues of Princes and great men, so neither
should theirs, nor other men's blemishes be looked upon as they are drawn with
the deformed pencil of envy or rancour; which do always a^tend eminency,
whether in place or virtue. I shall not (my Lord) be so presumptuous as to
arrogate any thing to my self in this, only I want not the two companions; for
I am but a weak man, subject to many failings and infirmities, (whereof I do
not purge my self) for as we must confess to God Almighty, If he should mark
iniquity, who Psalm. 130. 3.
can stand? Neither shall I say, That there cannot a hole be discovered (as the
Proverb is) in my coat; and it cannot but be so with any, specially such as
have labored in such times business; but I bless the Lord, that in these
things which have been, and are here cast upon me, I am able to make the
falsehood and miscenstruction of them palpably appear.

My Lord, before I mention any thing in particular, I must show this Honorable
Meeting of Parliament, and all that hear me (who doubtless have various
apprehensions of my being present in this condition) that I am here ^ather as
my misfortune, nor my injury; wherein I desire to explain the difference, as
Plato and Aristotle does very well; calling injuries such things as are done
purposely with a wicked mind; and misfortunes, such things as are done with a
good mind, though the events prove bad, yet we could not foresee them.

So (My Lord) I shall take God to record (who must judge me one day) upon my
Conscience, That what I did, flowed not from any injurious principle to any,
though I acknowledge the events were not still so successful (which was my
misfortune) indeed; but it has been my lot often in these times (wherein I and
many others have been inevitably involved) to be by the malicious tongues of my
calumniating enemies, misconstructed for the worst; yea, even in many things
that the Lord was pleased to make successful: for the truth of this, I may (I
hope) safely appeal to many in this Honorable House, who can abundantly
witness my faithful and loyal endeavors for both my King and Native Country:
whereof I should be very sparing to be an Herald my self; were not the contrary
so impudently affirmed. There are five main calumnies that I desire (my Lord)
to satisfy all that hear me a little in; to the end that the rest of less
moment may be likewise in its own due time heard afterward abstract more from
personal prejudice.

The first calumny is (my Lord) concerning that horrid and unparalleld murder
of his late Royal Majesty of eternally blessed memory; I do here publicly
declare, that I neither desire, nor deserve the least countenance or favor, if
I was either accessory to it, or on the counsel or knowledge of it; which to
make clearly appear, is under oath in the Parliament Books 1649. whereof I was
the first starter my self, to the intent we might both vindicate our selves,
and endeavor a discovery, if any amongst us had any accession to that horrid
and villainous crime; as also in my latter Will which I made going to England,
in Ann^ 1655. or 1656. fearing what possibly might hereafter be obtruded by any
upon me or my family upon that account, I set it down to clear my posterity,
That I was altogether free of that detestable and execrable crime, or of any
prejudice to his Majesty, in either Person or Government: I left this with a
very worthy Gentleman, I believe well known to your Lordship, and never saw it
since; so your Lordship may be pleased if ye will to call for it, and try the
truth; whatsoever other thing may be in it, I hope (my Lord) this opportunity
is a mercy to me, to have that vile calumny (amongst many others against me to
be cleared.

And (my Lord) to make this particular yet more evident, I did still, and do
positively assert, That I never saw that monstrous Usurper (Oliver Cromwell) in
the face, nor ever had the least correspondence with him, or any of that
Sectarian Army, until the commands of the Committee of Estates sent me, with
some other Noblemen and Gentlemen to the Border, in anno 1648. to stop his
march into Scotland after those who retired from Preston fight; neither after
he left the Border in the year 1648. did I ever correspond with him, or any of
that Sectarian Army, so unsatisfied was I with their way, after the wicked and
sinistrous courses he and they were upon afforded evident presumptions for us
to apprehend, that he and they intended prejudice to his Royal Majesty; only
one letter I received from Sir Arthur Hesilrig, to which I returned answer,
That he might spare his pains in writing to me, for I blessed the Lord who had
taught me by his Word, To fear God, and honor the King, and not to meddle with
them that were given to change; though Sir Arthur be now dead, yet he
acknowledged to several in the Tower, that he still had my Letter: and when I
was there, I often desired he might be posed and examined about it; which I can
presently instruct. And during (my Lord) my being in England neither in London
nor Newcastle in anno 1647. There was not any thing so much as mentioned
concerning his late Majesty's person; all that ever I heard of, was in public
Parliament 1647. The Commissioners papers at London, and Committee books at
Newcastle will clear this fully.

The second calumny is anent the inhumane murder of Duke James Hamilton: (My
Lord) It Is well known my great respect to that truly Noble and Worthy person,
whereof (upon all occasions) I gave ample testimonies, and can yet convince any
of his friends with the reality of it; and evidenced my true sorrow for the
wicked cruelty committed upon him: But indeed I cannot deny I refused to
complement Cromwell on his behalf (he having (my Lord) been immediately
preceding, so instrumental, and so very active in that most horrid and
lamentable murder of his late Sacred Majesty) and if I had done otherwise,
undoubtedly it had been a more black Article in that Libel now read, then any
that is in it.

The third calumny is, That which breeds a great part of these groundless
clamours, (though it be not in the Indictment) is my Lord Marquess of
Huntley's death; wherein I may truly say, I was as earnest to preserve him, as
possibly I could, (which is very well known to many in this Honorable House)
and my not prevailing, may sufficiently evidence I had not so great a stroke
nor power in the Parliament as is libelled; And (my Lord) for his Estate, I had
nothing in that, but for my own absolutely necessary relief, and was ever most
willing to part with any interest I had therein, getting his friends (who
professed much zeal for the standing of the Family) engaged for warrandise to
me, of any portion that should happen to fall my satisfaction; and to evidence
that I was no means to harm the Family, I stood with my Right betwixt all Fines
and forfeitures of Bonds, and accounted for any thing I could receive: and to
manifest yet further, that the burden of that Family was not from any
extrinsick cause to themselves, I have under the old Marquess his own hand,
and his Sons, George Lord Gordone (who was a very worthy young Nobleman,) the
just Inventory of their debts, amounting to about one million of marks, in anno
1640. It would I fear (my Lord) consume too much of the Parliaments precious
time, to hear many other circumstances to make this particular more clear,
which I shall at this time forbear.

The fourth calumny is, the death of the Marquess of Montross; There are many
in this House (my Lord) who know very well I refused to meddle either in the
matter or manner of it; and so far were we from having any particular quarrels
at one another, that in anno 1645. he and I were fully agreed upon Articles and
conditions contained in a Treaty past betwixt us; the Gentleman is yet alive
who carried the messages both by Word and Writing betwixt us; and it was
neither his fault nor mine that the business did not end at that time, which
(is known to all) proved very obnoxious to the Kingdom thereafter.

The fifth calumny is concerning my dealing with the English after Worcester
fight: It is well known (my Lord) to many, that my self, and the Gentlemen of
Argyleshire (my Kinsmen, Vassals, and Tenants) endeavored cordially to engage
all their neighbors about them on all hands, against the English, (which they
did not prevail in,) but was most unhappily made known to the English
Commanders for the time; which they caused immediately publish (as a very
notable discovery) in their News books; which occasioned two sad disadvantages
to us: for they not only crushed our attempts in the infancy, but also
determined the severer resolutions against us; whereby two strong Regiments of
Foot, (Overtons and Reads) and very near the number of one of Horse (under the
command of one Blackamoir, were sent to Argyle; and when Dean came there, it
pleased God to visit me with a great distemper of sickness, (as Doctor
Cunnynghame, and many others who were with me, can witness) What (my Lord) I
was pressed to when I was violently in their hands, may be instructed by the
paper it self (written by Deans man's own hand yet extant to show) which I did
absolutely refuse upon all the hazard of the uttermost of their malice; as also
what I was necessitate to do, is likewise ready to be shown, whereby I was
still controuled their Prisoner upon demand.

I shall (my Lord) add one Reason more to clear this (besides many other
weighty public Reasons and Considerations which I shall forbear to mention at
this time, it being more natural to bring them in by way of defenses afterward)
my own Interest and of all Noblemen and Superiors in Scotland. It may be
rationally presumed, that I had been a very senseless fool, if ever I had been
for promoting such an Authority or Interest over me, as Levelled all, and was
so totally destructive to all that differenced my self and other Noblemen, from
their own Vassals, (which many says I was too earnest in) Yea it being
absurdly derog^tive to all true Nobility, and my Ancestors and I (as is said in
that Libel) having had so many Titles of honor, dignity, and eminent places of
trust, conferred upon us by His Majesty's Royal Predecessors and himself, (all
for our constant Loyalty and adheherence to the Crown at all occasions (as the
Records and Histories of this ancient Kingdom holds forth, besides the
Narratives of all our Grants) and asserting the just privileges thereof
against all opposers) I did [My Lord] ever (even when the English were at the
intolerable height of Usurpation) declare my true abhorrence to a
Commonwealth Government; which was well known to them all: I was not indeed
[My Lord] very dissatisfied when there was rumors spread abroad of Cromwells
being made a King, (as some here present can witness) for I told them it was a
most probable way for His Majesty; and the more it were encouraged, would tend
the more to Cromwell, and their deformed Commonwealths Government ruin, and
promote His Majesty's just interest the more. My Lord, I shall not much blame
my Lord Advocate for doing his endeavor [it being an essential part of his
Function to accuse] but I must say that it is very hard measure, that so able a
man has taken near as many months, in taking pains to prompt as many enemies as
his persuasions could possibly invite, to vent out the highest notes of their
malice, and laying out search by them for, and collecting all the bad reports,
or rather [to give them their genuine term] I may call them a confused Mass of
the common Clashes of the Country, thereby to devise mis constructions of all
the public actings, of both Parliaments and Committe^es, during the late
troubles, and with strange and remote inferences to adduce all those to the
Channel of my particular actings; he has taken, I say, [My Lord] as many
months, as I have had days, to answer them, being an exceeding disadvantage.
But My Lord, that is not all, I am likewise extremely troubled, that he labors
in that Libel all along to draw an obscure vail of perpetual oblivion over all
my good services; and specially my faithful and Loyal endeavors in restoring
of His Sacred Majesty to the Crown of this His most ancient Kingdom of
Scotland, and the exercise of His Majesty's Royal authority therein, with my
cordial endeavors for His Majesty's restitution to the rest of His Dominions
also, which His Majesty both knows, and has been pleased often to acknowledge
it to have been good service; yea and many present in this honorable House
knows, that I extended both my zeal and affection to the utmost of my power for
His Majesty's service in that particular, which I willingly acknowledge
nothing, my Lord, but my duty, whereunto I was tied both by natural, civil, and
Christian Bands to my Sovereign, and specially such a King of whom I may say
well [as I have often affirmed] That he is a King in whom the Lord has been
pleased to take such pleasure, as to possess his Majesty with so many
superlative degrees of excellency, that will certainly exalt His Majesty's same
both in our age, and to subsequent posterity, above all the Monarchs in the
world; so that my Lord, we may consequently discover a high demonstration of
the Lords singular kindness and special providential care for us his Majesty's
Subjects, in preserving such a rich blessing as His Sacred Majesty (in whom the
happiness of these Nations is wrapped up) under the safe wings of his divine
Protection, I may say, even when the extravagant malice of men would have Psalm.
56. 2.
swallowed him up.

After my Lord had ended this discourse (being heard by all very attentively,
without any interruptions) Thus the Lord Advocate spoke to my Lord Chancellor;
My Lord, What can the Marquess of Argyle* say to the opposition at Sterling, in
Anno 1648. The Marquess replied, That he sound my Lord Advocate endeavored to
bring him to debate the particulars (which he hoped should be cl^ared at
another more convenient time) and waved answering the thing it self, but
insisted thus; My Lord Chancellor, I have (informative only) hinted a little
at the main things which I am often charged with, my memory cannot fully reach
all, neither will time permit to circumstantiate these particulars, which I
have only touched in the general; nor is it my purpose at present to fall on
the debate of any of that Libel (not having yet consulted the Process) by
reason these Advocates your Lordship was pleased to allow me have not yet all
embraced, and the excuses of my ordinary Advocates (in whom I had confidence)
being admitted as relevant. And their Gentlemen, that has been pleased (in
obedience to your Lordships command) to come here with me, not being much
acquainted with matters of this weight, and not having unbraced till within
these two or three days, so that they are strangers altogether to my case) I
shall therefore my Lord humble desire, that a competen^ time may be allowed me,
that I may prepare my defenses, and I shall (God willing) abundantly clear every
particular in that Lybel. And also my Lord, I humbly desire that these other
Advocates* who were ordained by your Lordships to assist me (and after the
honorable Lords of Articles had heard them, rejected their excuses) may be now
reordained to consult and appear for m^.

The Marquess his Advocates entered a protestation, that what should happen to
escape them in pleading (either by word or writ) for the life, honor, and
estate of the said noble Marquess, their Client might not thereafter be
obtruded to them as Treasonable, whereupon they took instruments.

The Marquess assured my Lord Chancellor that he knew not of any such
protestation to be presented, and that it flowed simply of themselves;
Whereupon my Lord Chancellor desired the Marquess and his Advocates to remove,
till the House should consider both of my Lords desire, and the Advocates
protestation.

The Marquess and his Advocates being removed. The House (after some small
debate) resolved, as to my Lord Marquess desires, his Lordship should have
till the 26 of February to give in his defenses in writ, and ordained Mr.
Andrew Ker to be one of his Advocates.

As to the Advocates protestation, the House resolved, That they could not be
allowed to speak Treason either by word or writ but upon their perril, only
allowed them in the general, as much as in such cases, as indulged to any. The
Marquess and his Advocates being called in, my Lord Chancellor intimate the
foresaid resolutions of the House, both in reference to my Lord Marquess; and
to the Advocates protestation,

When my Lord Chancellor had done, the Marquess spoke ^^ follows;

My Lord Chancellor;
THere is one thing that had almost escaped me, anent that opposition at
Sterling, 1648. That my Lord Advocate was speaking of, That it may not stick
with any of this honorable meeting, I shall ingeniously declare, That after
the defeat at Preston, I was desired to come and meet with the Committee of
Estates (meaning those who were in the then engagement) And being come with
some of my Friends to Sterling, in fearing harm and suspecting nothing, I was
invaded by Sir George Munro, where several of my Friends were killed, and my
self hardly escaped, which is all that can be said I acted in Arms as many
here knows.

My Lord, Not that I am any ways diffident but I shall in due time clear
every particular of that Lybil; Yet I am not a little troubled that some who
have heard the Calumnies therein; may let them have such an impression (being
asserted with such confidence) as to conceal a possibility, if not a
probabillity of their being true; I shall therefore desire so much Charity from
this honorable Meeting, That there be no hard thoughts entertained till I be
fully heard.

The Marquess therefore with the joint concurrence of his Advocates, humbly
desired, That the Bill (containing many pungent Reasons) for a precognition of
his Process, given to the Honorable Lords of Articles, might be read and
considered, in plain Parliament.

To which my Lord Chancellor replied, That it had been formerly refused at the
Articles, and that it would not be granted.

So his Lordship was carried back to the Castle. Edinburgh. March 5. 1661.
At the Parliament House.
The Marquess of Argyle being called in, gave in a Bill containing several
weighty Reasons, desiring a continuation till the meeting of Parliament to
morrow. His Lordship being removed, after long debate it was carried against
him by two or three Votes; and his Lordship being called in, my Lord Chancellor
told him it was refused, and ordered his Lordship to produce his Defenses,
whereupon he spoke as follows;

May it please your Grace
MY Lord Chancellor, This business is of very great concernment to me, and not
small in the preparative of it to the whole Nation; Yea it may concern many of
your Lordships (who are sitting here) and your posterity;) And therefore I
desire to have your Grace (my Lord Commissioner) and the remanent Members of
this honorable meeting, your patience to hear me a few words without prejudice
or misconstruction, which any thing I can say is often obnoxious to.

I shall my Lord begin with the words of that Godly King, Jehosaphat that good
King of Judah, (after he was come back in peace to Jerusalem) in his
instructions to his Judges, he desires them to take heed what they do, for they
judge not for men, but for the Lord, who is with them in the judgment.

My Lord, I shall speak another word to many young men, who were either not
born or so young that it is impossible they could know the beginning of these
businesses, which are contained in the Lybel against me (being all that has
been done since the year, 1638.) so that they might have heard by report what
was done, but not why, or upon what grounds, and what some have suffered, but
not what they have deserved. -- Therefore I desire your Lordships charity,
until all the particulars and several circumstances of every particular be
heard, without which no man can judge rightly of any action. For as it is well
observed by that incomparable Grotius, that Aristotle asserts, That there is
more certainty in the Mathematics then morals, for as Grotius has it, the
Mathematics separates forms from matters, as betwixt straight and crooked
there is no midst, but in morals, even the least circumstances vary the matter,
so that they are wont to have something betwixt them, with such Latitudes, that
the access is near sometime to this, sometime to that extreme; So that betwixt
that which ought to be done, and that which ought not to be done, is
interposed, that which may be done, but is nearer now to this, then to the
other extremity, or part, whence ambiguity often arises. The particular
circumstances are so obvious to every understanding man, that I need only to
mention them.

Polybius my Lord makes much of his History Concilia, Causa, et Counsels,
Causes, Events. Time, Place. Persons.
Eventus; and there are likewise other three, Tempus, Locus, et Personae, The
change whereof makes that which is lawful duty, unlawful, and on the contrary,
so likewise in speaking or repeating words, the adding or paring from them,
will quite alter the sense and meaning; as also in writing, the placing of the
Comma's or Points, will change the sentence to a quite other purpose then it
was intended.

There is my Lord, another Maxim, which esteeming former Laws, Crimes; In such
a case I say the safety of the people is the Supreme Law.

There is another Maxim, which is not Necessity has no Law; For even the Moral
Law of God yields to it, and Christ's Disciples in David's example: For this
Seneca says, Necessity (the defense of humane imbecility) breaks every Law; Nam
necessitas Legum irridet vincula, Necessity scorns the fetters of Laws: So he
that answers that Libel, The long Parliament revived, speaking of this last
Parliament (which his Majesty calls a blessed healing Parliament,) he says, the
necessity to have it, may dispense with some formalities: so Ravenella (so much
esteemed in matters of Scripture) after he has divided necessity in absolute
and hypothetick, makes that of submitting to Powers of absolute necessity:
Josephus also (my Lord) that famous Historian, when he mentioned David's speech
to his children, after he had made Solomon (being but younger brother) King, he
exhorts them to unity among themselves, and submission to him and his
authority; for if it should please God to bring a foreign sword amongst you,
you must submit to them, much more then to him who is your brother, and one of
your own Nation.

There is another Maxim, (my Lord) Inter arma silent leges; and it is well
known, that diverse retours and other things in Scotland, were done in
consideration of times of Peace, and times of War.

Another Maxim, Ex duobus malis minimum eligendum est cum unum eorum negunt
evitari, says Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian, cum diversa mala inter se
comparantur minimum eorum locum boni occupat.

There is another Maxim, No man's Intention must be judged by the event of any
Action, there being oftentimes so wide a difference betwixt the condition of a
Work, and the intention of the Worker.

I shall only add another Maxim, It cannot be esteemed Virtue, to abstain from
Vice; but where it is in our power to commit the Vice, and we meet with a
Temptation.

As I have named shortly some few Maxims, (my Lord) I shall humbly tender some
weighty Considerations to your Lordships thoughts:

The first Consideration is, That there is different there is no King in Israel.

The second is, That there is a different

Thirdly, That there is a difference betwixt have submitted to, and accepted of
their Authority and Government, and they in possession several years, the
Nation acknowledging their Constitutions, and all the Lawyers pressing and
pleading them as Laws.

Fourthly, The actions of Subjects are to

That there is likewise consideration to be had of the actions of such
subjects, being still

Sixthly, It is to be considered likewise of

Seventhly, It is to be considered, That there ad lucrum captandum, and those
done ad damnum evitandum; that is to say, actions to procure benefit, and
actions to shun detriment.

Eighthly, It is to be considered, That there

Ninthly, It is to be considered, That his has been so abundantly manifested
to his subjects in England, even to all (except to some of the immediate
murderers of his Royal Father) that it cannot be doubted, that the same will
be wanting to his people in Scotland, who suffered by them (whom his Majesty
has graciously pardoned) even for their dutiful service, and affection to his
Majesty.

Therefore without thought of any prejudice to the Parliament, or this
Honorable Meeting, I must make use of my Lord Chancellor of England his words,
though in another case, saying, There cannot too much evil befall those who do
the best they can to corrupt his Majesty's good Nature, and to extinguish his
Clemency: For his Majesty's self declared his Natural Inclination to Clemency,
in his Speech to both his Houses of Parliament in England, whom he has (with
all his people) conjured, desired, and commanded, to abolish all notes of
Discord, Separations, and Difference of Parties, and to lay aside all other
animosities, and the memory of past provocations, and to return to a perfect
Unity amongst themselves under his Majesty's Protection; which is hoped all
your Lordships will concur in, having so worthy a pattern to follow: And as
these are his Majesty's inclinations expressed, so it is suitable to the Arms he
bears as King of Scotland, which is the Lion, whose Motto is known to all,

-- Nobilis est ira Leo^is
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.
Which is to say, To vanquish and subdue the proud, and spare such as are
submissive; of the which number I am one: and for that effect, in all humility,
present this humble Submission to his Majesty, and your Grace, My Lord
Commissioner in his Majesty's Name.

To my Lord Commissioner His Grace, and High Court of Parliament.
March 5. 1661.
FORASMUCH as I Archbald Marquess of Argyle, am accused of Treason at the
instance of His Majesty's Advocate before the High Court of Parliament; and
being altogether unwilling to appear any way in opposition to his Sacred
Majesty; considering also that this is the first Parliament called by his
Majesty after his happy Return to his Kingdom and Government, for Healing and
Repairing the distempers and breaches made by the late and long Troubles; I
have therefore resolved that their Consultations and Debates about the great
Affairs and Concernment of his Majesty and this Kingdom shall have no
interruption upon occasion of any Process against me; I will not represent the
fatality and contagion of these times, wherein I, with many others in these
three Kingdoms have been involved, which have produced many sad consequences
and effects, far contrary to our intentions. Nor will I insist upon the defense
of our actings in this Kingdom before the prevailing of the late Usurpers,
which (if examined according to the strictest interpretation, and severest
censure of Law) may be esteemed a Trespass of his Majesty's Royal Commands, and
a Transgression of the Law; But (notwithstanding thereof) are by his Majesty's
clemency covered with the vail of Oblivion by diverse Acts of Parliament, and
others, to that purpose, for the safety and security of his Majesty's subjects:
And that my actings since, and any compliance with so prevalent a Power, (which
had wholly subdued this, and all his Majesty's other Dominions, and was
universally acknowledged) may be looked upon as acts of mere necessity, which
has no law; and it is known that during that time I had no favor from these
Usurpers.

It was inconsistent with, and repugnant to my Interest, and cannot be thought
(unless I had been demented and void of reason) that I should have had freedom
or affection to be for them, who being conspired enemies to Monarchy, could
never be expected to be friend or tolerate Nobility. And whereas that most
horrid and abominable crime of taking away the precious life of the late King
of ever glorious memory, is most maliciously and falsely charged upon me; If I
had the least accession to that most vile and heinous crime, I would esteem my
self unworthy to live, and that all highest punishments should be inflicted
upon me; But my Witness is in heaven, and my Record on high, that no such
wicked or disloyal thought ever entered in my heart. But choosing to shun all
debate, rather then to use any words or arguments to reason with his Majesty,
whom though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but would make my
supplication to my Judge. And therefore (without any excuse or vindication) I
do in all humility throw my self down at his Majesty's feet (and before his
Grace his Majesty's Commissioner, and the honorable Estates of Parliament) and
do submit and betake my self to his Majesty's mercy; And though it be the great
unhappiness of these times (the distempers and failings of these Kingdoms being
so epidemick and universal) that his Majesty should have had so much occasion
and subject of his Royal Clemency; yet it is our great happiness, and his
Majesty's high honor, that he has expressed and given so ample testimony
thereof, even to those who did invade his Majesty and this Nation, for no other
cause then for their faithful and loyal adherence to his Majesty, and his just
Royal Interests; which renders his Majesty's goodness incomparable, and without
parallel, and gives me confidence, that his Grace his Majesty's Commissioner,
and the Honorable Parliament, of their own goodness, and in imitation of so
great and excellent a pattern, will compassionate my condition; and seeing it
is a special part of his Majesty's Sovereignty and Royal Prerogative, to
dispense with the severity of the Laws, and that it is a part of the just
Liberty and Privilege of the Subjects, That (in cases of greatest extremity
and danger) they may have recourse to his Majesty as to a Sanctuary and Refuge.

It is in all humility supplicated, That the Lord Commissioners Grace, and the
Honorable Parliament, would be pleased favorably to represent my case to his
Majesty, and that the door of his Royal mercy and bounty, which is so large and
patent to many, may not be shut upon one, whose Ancestors for many ages
(without the least stain) have had the honor (by many signal proofs of their
loyalty) to be reputed serviceable to his Majesty's Royal Progenitors in the
defense of the Crown, and this his ancient Kingdom; and if his Majesty shall
deigne to hold out the golden Scepter of his Clemency, as an indelible
character of his Majesty's Royal favor, it will lay a perpetual obligation of
all possible gratitude upon me and my posterity, and will ever engage and
devote us entirely to his Majesty's service: And the Intercession of this
honorable Parliament on my behalf to his Gracious Majesty, will be a real
evidence of their moderation, and they shall be truly called a Healing
Parliament; and God whose Mercy is above all his works, shall have the honor
and glory which is due to his great Name, when mercy triumphs over Justice.

THe foresaid Submission being read, the Lords of Articles would give him no
present Answer; But resolved to Report the same to the Parliament the morrow.

Edinburgh. Martii 6. 1661.
At the Parliament.
MY Lord Chancellor having Reported what had been done the former day before
the Lords of Articles anent the Marquess of Argyle ^is Process, presented his
Submission, which was immediately read; and after a long debate the first
Question was stated;

If it was satisfactory, or should be accepted or not.

The second Question was, Whether they should proceed presently in his Process,
without regard to his Submission or not?

Both which were carried in the Negative against him. Then he was brought to
the Bar, and the Lord Chancellor told him, That his Submission was rejected,
and that notwithstanding thereof, the Parliament commanded him to give in his
Defenses. He Replied, That his case was very hard to be debarred from that
which was his just Privilege, and of all Subjects, in such extremities to
refuge themselves at his Majesty's Mercy and Clemency; and that as it was the
undeniable Privilege of the Subject, so also it was a special Prerogative of
his Majesty, and the grandeur of it consisted much in the eminency of the
subject, whom his Majesty should graciously be pleased to extend his mercy
unto: And besides many other strong persuasions that encouraged his Submission,
his Majesty's own Proclamation (which he acquiesces in) wherein his Majesty is
graciously-pleased to Declare, That his just Interest, and Royal Prerogative
being first asserted, and trial only taken of his Subjects carriages, then he
is most willing to pass an Act of Indemnity to secure them. And the like being
already done in our neighboring Nation, and his Majesty having performed his
Royal promise there already, he desired that their study might be to imitate
his Royal pattern; considering, that as it was a practice most agreeable to his
Majesty's clement Inclination, so also, that as Solomon that wise King said,
That the King's Throne is established by Righteousness and Mercy: He entreated
therefore their Lordships seriously to confider his condition, and not to
single him out, and aim at his ruin, and not only his, but also (he feared)
both his Family and Name, their ruins also.

As for giving in his Defenses presently, he told, That the confidence and firm
hope he had that his Humble Submission should have been accepted, and so cut
off totally all further trouble either to their Lordships or himself, made him
the more secure and slack, not resolving to lean to them, or any way (as he had
expressed in his Submission) make use of them, though he were altogether
innocent: and if he were necessitated to make use of his Defenses (as he
declared he was most unwilling to do,) it should be simply in obedience to
their Lordships commands, and no otherwise.

Not having fully ended, The Chancellor told him, If his Lordship had them not
in readiness at that time, to have them ready to give in to the Lords of
Articles the morrow. So he was returned to the Castle.

March 7. 1661.
At the Lords of Articles.
BEing called before the Articles to give in his Defenses, he declared that he
had seen their Lordships Order, That he might forbear his coming, if he would
produce his Defenses; therefore he told their Lordships ingeniously, that if he
had them in readiness, he would neither have troubled their Lordships nor
himself; for having a Petition ready to desire a delay, he thought it rather
his duty to come and propose it himself, hoping their Lordships would consider,
that his presenting his Defenses either lame and wanting something, or blotted,
so as they could not be well read, was a very great prejudice to him; but a
delay of a few days, was no prejudice at all to any thing my Lord Advocate
could say; and therefore hoped their Lordships would not refuse him some
competent time, whereby he might have them in readiness. Upon the which he was
removed, and after some debate being called in again, my Lord Chancellor told
his Lordship in one of the Articles, That he was ordered to give in his
Defenses before Monday at ten a clock to my Lord Advocate, otherwise the Lords
of Articles would take the whole business to their consideration, without
regard to any thing he could say.

The Advocate told his Lordship, that he must give in his whole Defenses: To
which he answered, That that was a new form to give in peremptory Defenses
before the discussing of relievances; whereupon Sir John Bychmore did rise up,
and told his Lordship, That he was commanded to inform him, that there was a
different way betwixt a Process in Writ, and the ordinary way before the
Session, or chief Justice. To which his Lordship answered, That he was very ill
yoked with so able men; but he must tell them, that he had once the honor to
sit as Chief Justice in this City, and he knew the Process before them was in
Writ, and yet the relievance was always first answered, before any peremptor
proponed, for relievance is most to be considered in criminals. Sr. John
Therester said, and so did the Advocate, That it was his Lordships advantage to
give in as strongly his Defenses as he could, otherwise the Advocate might
refer the whole business to the Judge, and make no other answer. His Lordship
replied, That he would do in that by advice of his Lawyers, and hoped any Order
of their Lordships at present, was without prejudice to his giving in more
Defenses afterward, since he was so strainted with time, and commanded to give
in what was ready: His Lordship likewise added, if their Lordships and the
Parliament had been pleased to grant his desire of a Praeeognition, which was
agreeable (as he humbly conceived) both to Law and Practice, and his Majesty's
Proclamation, (which he acquiesced in) it could not but have been the readiest
way for trying his carriage during the late troubles; where now of necessity he
must in the Process (which he hopes will not be refused) crave one way for
exculpation in many particulars; for he both was resolved, and is resolved to
deal very ingeniously, as to matter of Fact; and if that had been first tried
(which he was most desirous of, both from the Committee, and since from the
Parliament) he is hopeful there would not remain so much prejudice against him
in the most part of things of greatest concernment in his Libel; and for his
own part, he desired nothing more then the truth to have place, do with his
person what they pleased; for by the course of Nature he could not expect a
long time to live, and he should not think his life ill bestowed, to be
sacrificed for all that had been done in these Nations, if that were all.

Thereafter he was returned to the Castle.


