THE GRAND Case of Conscience Concerning the ENGAGEMENT Stated and Resolved.

Or, A strict Survey of the Solemn League and Covenant In Reference to the
Present Engagement.

(...).

sc. Cum Tyranno Romany nulla fides, Nulla juris jurandi religio.

Brutus apud Appianum. Tunc fidem fallam, tunc inconstantiae crimen audiam si
cum omnia eadem sint quae erant promittente me, non praestitero promissum;
alioqui quicquid mutatur libertatem facit de integro consulendi, meam fidem
liberat; nam omnia eadem esse debent quae fuerint cum promitteres ut
promittentis fidem teneas.

Senec. de benef. l. 4. c. 35. LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Francis
Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at the three Daggers near the Inner
Temple, Fleetstreet. 1650.

The Grand Case of Conscience Concerning the ENGAGEMENT Stated and Resolved.
AS there is no Engagement on man more sacred and solemn, then that which is
contracted by Oaths and Covenants, (God himself being expressly appealed unto,
both as Witness and Judge;) so there is nothing more dangerous and ensnaring, if
not warily and honestly entered into, and kept, as well with a clear and sound
judgment, as with pure and crystal affections. The truth of this is evidently
demonstrated in the late League and Covenant between these two Nations, England
and Scotland; which although it wanted nothing of Ceremony and Solemnity in its
administration, yet has proved sad and ominous in the use and application of
it unto this Commonwealth: And though it was first intended as the best and
most proper medium of union and strength to both Nations against the common
Enemy, yet has proved (in several hands) a stratagem to obstruct the most
prudential and providential essays of perfecting the Peace and Happiness of
both; yea, is only left as the last reserve and ultimate plea of all sorts of
disaffected and abused spirits, who having (with little effect) made use of
all sort of weapons, would by it make us miserable, by our own Consciences.

It is not now time to look back, when this Covenant was made, and where, viz.
in Scotland; or upon what occasion it was entered into at first: I have so much
charity to think there was on all sides good and honest intentions active in
the modelling of it, though some had their eyes in their heads, and many
objections were made at diverse expressions, and many desires for explanation of
some Articles more fully; yet it was not fit to insist on them, our affairs not
admiting any delay in our Brethrens assistance, nor their conjunction to be
obtained without a Covenant, though the cause was common to both. But after it
past the gulf, and was taken by the Parliament and Assembly of Divines, and
honest men of all sorts had freely lifted up their hands to God in it (not
fearing the after-reckoning would be so costly and dangerous) every one began
to make his advantage (through the multitude and ambiguity of expression, most
unsuitable to a Covenant, which ought to be plain and simple in its terms) and
by it to promote his several interest; as if it had been made to engage unto a
particular party, not to unite two Nations in a common Interest: Yea, so many
several interpretations, variety of senses, have been fixed upon it, as if it
were intended rather for Debates then Obedience, and to exercise men's wits,
rather then enforce their Consciences to honest and necessary duties; yea
(which we may remember with sad hearts) England never knew what it was to have
so many sad divisions of parties and interests, until the Covenant came, by the
design of some disguised Politicians to be improved to some particular
Interests and Parties, who insisting some on one Article, and some on another,
in opposition to the rest, as they saw their advantage, have divided the
Covenant into several parts (to engage several parties;) others have made one
and the same Article to speak several Senses, dividing the sense from the
words, torturing the very Comma's and Colons, making a separation between them
and the words, which they necessarily distinguish, and all but to strengthen
their own Interest, and destroy another; that the abuses do seem to be worse,
and more heinous, then the breach of it would be.

The first and main advantage that was made of it was to set up the
Presbyterial Government in ENGLAND, without any bound or limitation of the
Civil Magistrate; and the Scots (who best knew the design of the Covenant) urge
their pattern first, as supposing their Church to be the best Reformed: and so
strongly and vigorously was it managed, that they got so far on the affections
of the people by such pleas, that the brand of Heresy and Schism, in the first
Article, was fastened on all those that differed or dissented in Discipline
from that pattern; and so far on Authority, that none should either preach, or
be fit for any place in Government of State, but he that subscribed to that
sense; That moderate and wary spirits, (which through Reason and Conscience
differed only in these circumstances) had nothing to relieve themselves by,
and avoid the direful sentence of perjury, laid on them, for not bringing up
their Congregations to the Presbyterial Model, but only that clause which was
(happily inserted) [According to the Word of GOD;] But to salve that, and press
on the former Interest, the Reformed Churches were brought in (and not only
Scotland proposed) as the main and absolute Rule, and the Word of God to be
exegetical and expository, virtually included in them: and so vehemently has
this first Article been pressed to that Interest, that all union besides, and
agreement in Doctrine, and the absolutes and necessaries of Religion have been
accounted of as low and ordinary, in comparison of it, that most men have
thought it was a design either to make men doubt that there is any
Church Government Jure Divino, or else that any will serve the turn, which is
but popular, and suitable to a present Interest.

And of such a fundamental consequence has the Covenant bin judged in
Scotland, that they used it as the characteristical difference of all persons
both in Church and State, and looked on it as the best constituting principle
of Saint-ship and holiness, and the visible qualification of members of
Churches, and as the only way of admission at first, or readmission on
relapse; for when in the first expedition many had revolted from them to the
common Enemy, and were excommunicated, both whole Shires and Parishes, It was
put unto the question in the General Assembly, What way should be taken for the
Trial of their REPENTANCE, and to receive them in again? It was absolutely
carried by Vote, by a new taking of the Covenant.

And that there might be no further difference between England and Scotland, it
was often urged, that by it we might be made one Kingdom, and no more be
distinct in Privilege, seeing we were all one by Covenant, that the name of
great Britain might contain us all, yea by the Covenant our brethren challenged
a Privilege in framing our own Propositions for our own safety, and to
determine what we should Propose, and what not, with the Order and method of
them, and a mutual disposal of the Offices, and Officers, with the rest of our
affairs, claiming an equal share in all our Privileges, and the management of
the Government it self.

The next, and more special use of it, was to further a Personal Treaty,
wherein the Scots Commissioners had the principal hand, as being most privy to
the first intention of its compiling: For when the interpretation of the first
Article was out of credit, and the disguise of it plucked off by that
expression, The word of God, that the Ecclesiastical mediums would not serve
the turn, they fall on another Article, wherein they find but only a bare
mention of the Kings Person, (charitably, and yet limitedly inserted) and
propose, and press the Parliament upon pain of perjury, and without any
reserve, unto a Personal Treaty, waveing the safe and best resolved on way of
Treating by positive, and Fundamental Propositions: And so eager and fierce
were they on it, that the Commissioners in the name of the rest, in that
notable Remonstrance of theirs for a Personal Treaty, quoted the name of the
Covenant more then Twenty times in one Page, and tax the Parliament with breach
of Covenant, but for omitting a supposed method, not placing of it in that
order in the Propositions which they thought most fit, urging still no way of
fulfilling the Covenant but by Personal Treaty, forgetting all the rest of the
Articles that speak of Religion, a Common Enemy, the Privileges of Parliament,
of bringing Delinquents to Justice, and so procuring Liberty; but these were
first in intention, and must be last in execution.

The next party that entered the stage with the Covenant in their hands, was
the old Malignant and Common Enemy (who waited on our trifling Transactions)
who seeing what use was made of it by the Scots Presbyterian Party, and how
nigh the Commissioners of Scotland had driven it to their interest, improve all
their former Transactions with the Parliament, and on that stock graff a design
of a new and bloody War, and the scean being changed from England to Scotland,
Duke Hamilton (having got the major Vote in the Parliament) Levies an Army of
Scots, who joining with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and other desperate English
Malignants, enter England with a great Army, seconding the Commissioners
Remonstrances, using their own expressions in their Declarations, holding forth
the Covenant as their Ensign both of honesty, and hopes of Victory, professing
to be moved to that expedition by nothing but the Covenant; and for more
effectual prosecution of the ends of it in a Personal Treaty, to suppress
Heresies, and Schisms, and settle the affairs of the Church in greater
security, and beauty, free from Error or Faction: Thus the Covenant was used,
(and in as good words) to maintain the Malignant interest, and to unite the
Common Enemy both in Scotland and England, which was intended against both; and
though many of the Kirk disclaimed these proceedings, and saw the disguise
rather in the Persons, then the things, yet they professed, and acted no more
above board, then their own Delegates had beforehand with public approbation
by them, and intentions are only known unto God.

Thus has this Solemn League and Covenant, which our Brethren and others may
well call Sacred, and the most sure engagement between creatures in this world,
been by every hand made common, and profane, ravished by the interest and ends
of sinister and self-ish Spirits; tossed up and down, and turned, as a nose of
wax, into the form of every design; yea, so abused and rent one part from the
other, the Means from the End, and one Article from another, that it seems to
have no more substance left entire, then what you find preserved in the
Stationers shop by a true impression, or in the Churches, and Public places,
by the careful hands of the Wardens kept untorn; nor any more Soul and Life in
it to bind a man's Conscience, then only what the disaffected Spirits of some
persons have of late breathed into it.

But the last and worst abuse of it (which may well be put down Instar omnium)
is, That it is now sent forth as a Bull, to denounce the Dreadful sentence of
perjury on the Parliament, and High Court of Justice, for taking away the Kings
person, and as the great obstruction, and plea against compliance with this
present Government of a Commonwealth; and is so ordered in this last use, That
when through the glorious actings of Providence we have escaped the Common
snare, we must by our own Consciences be made Religiously miserable: And how
sad must it needs be to all honest hearts, That the Covenant which was at first
intended as the most adaequate means of peace and happiness to these two
Nations, should at last be formed into an Engine of division, and the greatest
and only Impediment to a complete Setlement of Peace, and administered as the
last Cordial to revive the lost hopes of our dying Enemies? And after we have
(through God) struck out all the Carnal weapons out of their hands, yea,
separated the Head from that great body, we should furnish them with refined
and Spiritual Artillery, and having cast off their chains, should bind our
selves by the wriths of Circumstantial, and supposed Engagements. What are now
the eryes and Lamentations in prayers, and Pulpits, but the breach of The
Solemn League and Covenant? all the discontents, Animosities, disobediences to
Authority, take their Sanctuary in the Covenant; there they are maintained and
live, and at length are resolved into this Grand case of Conscience, viz:

Whether we may without perjury submit to the Government of a Commonwealth,
and take the new Engagement enjoined by the Parliament, seeing they have taken
away the Kings Person whom we Covenanted to preserve, and have altered the
Government, all which is contrary to our former engagements in the Covenant?

Though this be an old way used by most men to countenance their dislike of
present duties, by flying to conscience, and urging former engagements, as the
Malignants did against the first Protestation, and of late against the
Covenant, pressing their former Engagements by the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance: Yet because it is the utmost, and last Plea that can be made
against this Government, and that honest and Conscientious men (with whom I
only desire to deal in this discourse) may see what a weak Foundation they
build their disaffections on, and how little reason they have to stand off from
obedience to this present happy settled Authority, notwithstanding all that they
have been formerly bound unto by The Solemn League and Covenant, I shall offer
to their view these following considerations about the nature of Obligations by
Oaths and Covenants, the ignorance or mistake of which, is the cause that men
either bind themselves to what they should not, or else look on themselves as
bound when they are free.

An Obligation is nothing else but a bond or tie on men, to do or omit any act,
the force of which is to contract and fix the strength of men's abilities to
some certain object, and manner of acting, or utterly to restrain and keep in
that power from the doing of any such act which is unsuitable and contrary.

The most usual distinctions of such Obligations, are by Promises, Oaths, and
Covenants, which do not differ in their nature, but in the Solemnity of
expression; a promise binds as well as an Oath, but the one binds with more
Religious ceremony, an Oath being a Religious Act whereby we bind our selves to
the doing, or omitting any Act, Deo test, and vindice, Gods name being
invocated to judge and revenge, if there be any guil in the intentions, or
willing defect in the performance; and the same is implicitly in every
promise; for what I promise I mean to perform as in the presence of God; and my
Conscience as Gods Vicegerent, takes Record of the Act as if it had been
expressed; only an Oath by its public and Solemn addition of Gods name, does
more fix the Obligation on the heart, and makes men more careful out of fear of
punishment to perform.

But as in all Acts which are employed about any Object, there is a presupposal
of some formal reason, which is the ground of the Act, and unto which the Act
must necessarily and sutably answer; so much more in Obligations, by any Moral
or Religious Act (wherein the best of our understandings and hearts should be
employed) must there be presupposed some fundamental Consideration and Reason,
which gives life and power to any such Engagement for which a man does engage
himself: Else no man can act Rationally, or Honestly, or swear in judgment or
truth, nor perform in righteousness the three absolute requisites to the
Obligation of any Promise or Oath. Therefore there can be no Obligation to what
is in it self sinful or unlawful, or what is impossible to be done, because
there is no reason to bind a man to it, neither can that be the Object of
Obligation which God has forbidden, or has not given ability to perform, or
what may cross any moral or absolute good.

And these formal reasons or conditions, are either so in regard of the
Objects, as flowing from the nature of the things themselves to be done, and so
are essentially annexed to them, that they are absolutely Independent from any
Human will or power to alter and change them, or disingage men lawfully from
them.

Or else these reasons are not simply and necessarily annexed to the nature of
the Object, but may be added at pleasure, and no Obligation arises from the
thing it self until it be made by us.

Of the First sort are all Divine Acts of Worship, and all the Moral rules of
Honesty and Goodness which do bind for ever, and at first sight, (no other
reason intervening) but what they carry in their own natures; therefore is not
left to any humane power or arbitrament, whether they shall worship God, or in
what form, and way, whether men should be temperate, and just, and honest, and
do acts suitable to these, the mention of them does oblige all men to conform
their wills and practice to them, and yet oftentimes (to help our natural
dullness and indisposition) we bind our selves again to these things we were
formerly and necessarily bound unto, that we may be more hearty and careful in
the performance of them, most men thinking they are bound unto nothing so
strongly, but what they bind themselves unto, and by their own consent stablish
as a Law.

But these Obligations which are of the latter sort, do only depend on our
Wills, and Voluntary judgments, and are then Valid, when the Object of them is
good, and honest, and the Conditions on which they are made be kept.

And because the Object, and matter of these Obligations, being Humane affairs,
are changeable, and subject to several perplexities in the mannagement, and
under many casualties (being rather intended as Mediums to other good ends,
then having any real excellency in themselves) no man can judiciously, as a
prudent, and knowing man, bind himself absolutely, and swear to the performance
of any such thing for the future; for the matter it self is obnoxious to
Providence, and to be changed whether the person will or no; and that which is
for present, necessary and convenient (in these things) are in materia
contingenti, for the future contingent, and hazardous afterward, and the
Object is in its nature separable from the Oath.

And as some things carry their reasons with them, and need no act of ours to
stablish them in their Authority, and just Obligation; so other things have
their reason of Obligation from us, and are only binding, as they are fit means
to attain to more Fundamental and necessary ends, and their reason lies in
their convenience, and proportion to moral and honest effects.

Hence it follows, That these special reasons, or absolute respects ceasing,
the obligation which is drawn from them wholly cease also, these Principles
being not only as Causa fine qua non, without which no man would engage, but
constitutive principles of the goodness of the action; for by the absence of
these, the whole Essence and Nature of the thing is changed as in respect of
Obligation, for there is nothing left in the nature of the matter to oblige me
to it, and the first and only Reason that engaged me is taken away, which does
not hold the same in all circumstances, which accidentally and occasionally
adhere: For the destruction of them does not alter the Nature of the thing it
self; as he which takes away the Rational soul destroys the Man, but not he
that takes away his Beauty, or acquired learning.

It is therefore apparent, and undeniable, That in all Obligations there must
be some conditions either puctually expressed, or tacitly implied, which are as
first motives to actions, and the only ground for which they are to be Acted,
and according to the terms, and respects of which they are to be performed,
which being either not kept, or removed, the Obligation is no more: for this
Condition is so essential, and so fixed in the heart of him which is engaged,
That if it be lost, the whole Foundation is overturned, and the man cannot act
as a man, or as a Christian afterward, notwithstanding his verbal engagement;
and take it whether tacitly, or expressly, yet without such a condition, no man
would engage in such an act; neither has the man a mind to do it, (other
things considered) though he may have a full power of effecting it.

And therefore its concluded by the most Critical Casuists, That if the thing
alter and change from what it was in the eye when the Obligation was made, the
Obligation is also null; for that thing is not in rerum natura which I engaged
my self unto, or if it have a being, yet is under another form, and shape,
different from the first reason, and ground of my Obligation; and no man can be
obliged unto that which he never thought of, or when he does think of,
abominates; therefore its unlawful and most deregatory unto Reason, that any
man should bind himself to all eases, and circumstances, come what will come,
or notwithstanding what ever may fall out; for in the most peremptory, and
absolute obligations, wherein there is scarce a condition (through love and
modesty) conceived, yet men are not bound to all emergencies, casualties,
circumstances, but only so long as the Special, and formal reason remains
entire, and whole, and only unto these cases, unto which the Foundation will
extend. Thus some Obligations are made absolute, not because there may not
possible be an excepted case, but because the very mention, or supposal of the
Condition, may create suspicion, and jealousy, and seems to be so much against
nature, that no ingenious, or modest heart will admit the thoughts of them,
therefore they are utterly omitted. As for example; Man promises simply and
without condition, never to depart from his wife as long as he lives, which yet
contains a secret condition, if she behave her self as a wife; the expression
of which condition, that love and endearedness to her would not admit, no not
of the thought; and the very apprehension of it would be a temptation, and most
contrary to the unprejudiced and single thoughts of lovers, and most dissonant
to that simple and individual union between man, and wife; among whom there
should be but one Soul in two Bodies, or one body acted by two united Spirits;
and yet if any wife should commit Adultery, or seek to destroy her husband,
(things that the pure and chaste intentions of love durst not suppose, yet may
be possible in corrupted nature) he is free from all other Obligations to her,
she having unnaturally, and beyond expectation dissolved the union by
destroying the main ends of marriage, which are communion, and mutual comfort
and preservation; and so having acted contrary to the Fundamental reason of
that Obligation, has ipso facto put her self into another condition, and
discharged by her own act, all former Engagements. The like may be said (as
hereafter) between King and people.

Hence therefore its demonstrative, that if any through ignorance, or
overactings of a design, should not foreseeing the nature of things, or
forecasting events, engage himself to two things imcompossible, or which
through any necessity of divine acting, or in the order of natural and moral
affairs, should prove inconsistent by some special emergence; he is bound to
omit that which is less principal, and perform that which is most positive, and
necessary. As suppose one in taking the degree of Doctor in the Popish
Dominions, (as its used in the form of their Oaths) does solemnly bind himself
to embrace the Doctrine of Christ, and as much as in him lies, to promote the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is really contrary to Christ; does not
sound Reason, as well as Christianity teach us, That he is only bound to do the
one, and neglect the other? And though the thing we swear to perform, be not in
it self unlawful; but magis bonum morale impediens, hindering a more special
good, as Grotius (lib. 2. de jure Belli, and pacis, p. 245.) well observes: the
Obligation cease from that, and is necessarily contracted on that which is
most necessary and best to be done. If this were not so, in the multiplicity of
humane transactions most men would be bound only to one act, and so be kept
from performance of all other duties which did not depend on that, or were not
Subordinate to it; and by one engagement (though it may be hastily entered
into) a man must be for ever unuseful in matters of higher, and more peculiar
importance; and have no remedy, no not of repentance and better thoughts for
his sudden surprizal.

And as no man is bound thus to any thing less considerable, or opposite to a
Common and public good, so neither can there be any Obligation to any medium
which any man has bound himself unto, if by that means he cannot most
effectually obtain the principal end: as if the Hebrews had by Covenant engaged
unto Pharaoh, that they would use no other mid-wifes but the Egyptian women,
the edict being proclaimed of killing all the Male children, they were
disobliged from any necessity of obeying it, it being contrary to principles of
nature, (which must be first served) whereby all men are taught to preserve by
the best ways they can themselves, and what is properly their own; and had they
kept such an engagement, they had been not only witnesses of, but legal
completters in the murder of their own children.

By all this we see as it falls out many times, That even Scelus est sides, the
very swearing is sin, as Seneca (lib. 2.) expresses it; so as Ambrose says
(off. 1. c. ult.) est contra officium nonnunquam solvere promissum, juramentum
custodire, it is sometimes against a man's duty to keep his promise, or perform
his Oath; and in the most solemn engagements (especially about temporary, and
controvertible things:) the first grounds and reasons must be most weighed,
(omitting prejudice, and accidents) and what is most positive, and humane,
insisted on, and adhered unto.

By all this I may seem but to waste paper, and take up time, but I hope the
application will make amends for the defects in the doctrine: having laid this
general foundation, let us now come particularly to see how far we are engaged
by this Covenant unto the Kings Person, and his Posterity, and Monarchichal
Government in them, and how far we are free and disingaged from them, and at
liberty to embrace any other form of Government.

To this purpose let us as warily view the Covenant, as we have done the nature
of Obligation, and consider the matter, and ends of it, and we shall find in
the Preface and Contents these formal Reasons positively expressed, The honor of
God, the safety of the two Nations in the preservation of Religion, and
Liberty, which were first in the eye of the imposers, and the golden apples
cast before us, to allure us unto the engagement, and are as the vital spirits
that run through every vain of it, without which it were but an unnecessary and
dead ceremony. And these being as Fundamental to the Obligation of the
Covenant, as the form in Phisicals to the constituting of a distinct being, the
whole strength of the Obligation lies on it, and only unto the performance of
these things, which are most apt to effect these ends; and if any thing we have
engaged our selves unto, shall be found either not fit to promote these, or
destructive to them (though at first they have seemed never so convenient, and
plausible) they must be removed out of the way, as diseases in the body, which
hazard the dissolution of the union.

This being laid as the Primum mobile of the engagement, and set in the
Covenant as the common center, many lines were drawn toward them on every
side, in order to an union in the first principle, and many Articles proposed
as mediums thought most suitable and necessary to advance these ends.

And as these ends or first reasons were of two sorts, viz: Religion, and
Liberty, the means were proportioned (as was then thought fit) for the happier
effecting both.

Religion being chief, it was first proposed, and the preservation of it taken
care for more expressly in the first, and second Articles against the Common
enemy (who was then well known:) and as in order to that, we engaged to a
Reformation of it in Doctrine and Discipline, according to the word of God, and
the best Reformed Churches, to extirpate Popery, Heresy, Episcopacie with all
its attendants, that being unto Religion as the suckers to the tree which
diverts the moisture from the natural branches, and by this we thought Religion
sufficiently provided for in its preservation, and Reformation.

The next in order was the just Liberty, and Freedom of the Nations, and the
advancement of it, and as mediums unto that, the Covenant in the third and
fourth Articles, as most absolutely necessary to preserve the Privileges of
Parliament; and because we would let nothing out that might be probable (though
ex suppositione remota, and from a strained charity) we engaged to preserve the
Kings person, yet with a wary Salvo, in the preservation of Religion, and
Liberty.

And lastly, to prevent any design against both, we engaged to discover, and
bring to condign punishment, all Delinquents and Incendiaries that acted
contrary to these proposed ends.

Thus you have the whole Covenant anatomized, the two great pillars on which
its Obligation stands, which though of different Natures, yet are inseparably
united to the preservation of each other: Now if any thing without should
oppose either Religion or Liberty, or any thing in any Article expressed should
afterward prove malignant to either or both, or interfer with any other
Article which has more of the efficacy of a medium to these ends, the
Obligation to that cease, because it will destroy the Formal Reason by which
I am obliged. Thus it will follow, That if the Kings person, which we are
engaged to preserve, (take him in his best capacity) shall set up Popery and
Prelacy, contrary to Religion, and advance Malignancy and Tyranny, contrary to
Liberty, we have no Obligation by the COVENANT to preserve him, seeing be is
destructive to these absolute Ends, for which, and in the PRESERVATION of
which, we engage to preserve Him.

But that we may deal plainly and freely in a Case of Conscience, let us a
little compare the King, and his actings, more particularly with the Convenant,
and we shall find at last, that we are not only not engaged to preserve him,
but bound by the strength of the Covenant to cut him off, as a dead member that
is gangrened.

I have often wondered out of what sort of charity or design the Kings name was
inserted in the Covenant, as distinct from the Common Enemy (against whom we
were first sworn) seeing he was the Head that gave life and motion to every
part of that Body, (without whom they were but as a great Body without Soul or
animal Spirit) they only fought under his Banners, for his Interest, in
opposition to the first grounds of the Covenant, to distinguish the Head and
the Members in one Common Cause, and to swear against the one, and swear to
preserve the other, was too great a Criticism to be put in an Oath that must
bind the Conscience. For my part, from the first I saw that name there
(considering the state of Affairs then) I looked upon him as SAUL among the
Prophets, or as in superstitious times they set up stately Images to draw men
to Church, and more to reverence the place; or as sugar put on bitter pills to
make them down the better, with less scruple of the palate, or nauseousness of
the stomach: And if I may use the words of Learned Calvin, in another case,
which you shall find in his Epistle prefixed to his Commentary on the
Corinthians, having been forced to change the Dedication, and alter the Title
of it which was in the first Impression, he to whom it was first dedicated
proving an Apostate: Vtinam (says he) quo primum tempore in lucem prodiit hic
Commentarius,vel mihi ignotus, vel saltem probe notus fuisset ille cujus nomen
huic paginae hactenus inscriptum nunc delere cogor: It had been happy for
ENGLAND that we had either not known him, or known him better (as we had
Reason) and either wholly let out his name, or had better reasons to have put it
in; for he ever stood as the great errata in it, and we might easily have
foreseen what end he was designed to make, which had such a beginning: But
however, though through hope and charity his name was inserted, yet now Reason
and Conscience, yea the COVENANT it self, has given just grounds to blot him
out, he being the only obstacle to attaining all the honest and necessary Ends
of it.

Let us but (without prejudice) view, how that one name, and the preservation
of it, stands opposite to all the other Articles and expressions in the
COVENANT, and makes them all useless and of no consequence, that there is an
imcompossibility of keeping our Engagement to him, and to keep the others.

First, for Religion, and these Articles which are sworn unto in order to its
preservation, the preservation of the Kings person would directly be the
overthrowing of them: we had absolutely sworn to extirpate Popery and Prelacy
without any limitation, which could not possibly be done with the preservation
of his Majesty's person; for Popery, though I cannot tax him with the
profession of it, yet many correspondencies have been between him and Rome, and
Spain, even from a child; his QUEEN a professed and Jesuited PAPIST, who not
only lay in his bosom, but ruled and guided most of his counsels, that you
must have either left him a Husband without a Wife, and have divorced him from
his own Soul and Self, (and from her whose he was eternally) or else grant at
least a TOLERATION to POPERY, after we had sworn against it; Besides his
MAJESTY was in Debt, and so far in Arrears to the Popish party in England and
Ireland, for their faithful services to him, that he could not be free of
regal promises, and Covenant-Engagements to them, which must have been
remembered upon every advantage, neither could he in honor or ingenuity have
consented to extirpate them, who had so great an influence to his affairs, and
ventured so hard for his Prerogative; thus the King and the first and second
Article are become incompetible, cannot stand together, and be both preserved.

The next thing we engaged in order to Religion, was the extirtion of Prelacy,
and all that Hierarchy, as that which hindered the strength and growth of the
power and life of it, which could not be hoped for, with the preservation of
his Person, nothing being so dear and precious in his eyes, or more sacred then
that Order; and he professed, never to give consent to abolition of it, though he
was willing to have a reformation of it, or to give a toleration or trial to
Presbytery, until he could get power enough to set up the other; so that what
would become of the two first Articles, while the Kings name stood in force in
the Covenant, except Popery and Prelacy could help to the reformation and
establishing of Religion? And as the religious part of the Covenant would not
only be weak'ned, but absolutely destroyed, so the secular and humane part,
viz. the preservation of Liberty and Freedom, and all the Articles concerning
it, could not be kept, or possibly be made isntrumental to their end, if his
Person were preserved; for besides the first wide breach he made on the
Liberties of both Nations by his tyrannical Power and Prerogative, after we had
wrung the weapons wherewith he fought against us, out of his hands, and had
tendered to him by Bills and Propositions once and again, the just foundations
of our Liberties and Freedom, he continually refused to sign them, and only
picked out some which we could best spare, and went on in raising of a second
war, that we had almost lost both name and thing. And whereas we had engaged
to preserve the Privileges of Parliament, it was impossible we could do it,
while he still retained his power of a Negative voice, and challenged a right
in ordering the affairs of the Kingdom by a Supreme power; much less could
we imagine to bring Delinquents to justice, while he himself was the head of
them: And if the native and true sense of the Covenant be the maintenance of
Religion and Liberty, against a common enemy, and the King has proved the
chief and most dangerous Enemy against both, does not the Covenant oblige all
men against him? yea, to remove him out of the way, that all the other Articles
may have their full power, tie and efficacy, and the ends not have their
authority and goodness subordinate to one rash expression? The putting his
name in the Covenant showed enough the real desires we had for his safety, and
happiness, (though there was too much ground of suspicion, yea for unbelief,
that he would never prove isntrumental) and too much honor and respect to be
given to the first and grand enemy of both Nations; but it would be sad and
desperate, that our love and good hopes should be so ill requited, as to be
left remediless, and at a perpetual loss in all our concernments by one
exotic name thrust into the Covenant, the very mention of which, expunges all
the other Articles.

If experience or sense could open our eyes, we must needs see that there was
nothing the King hated so much as the Covenant, yea, so hated it, as it is
thought he ever loved his name the worse after he saw it there; and if his
(...) may be his judge, that supposed book of his, which most of his friends
own, there is nothing he spends his venom at more then Covenant and
Presbytery, as if he had an Antipathy to both, not a sigh of sense ever came
from him for all the blood shed, nor a repenting expression for any Act done,
but his consent to the Bill for taking off the Earl of Straffords head, being
more touched for a Parasite then the ruin of three Kingdoms; not any thing
could ever be gotten from him in consent to any Bill or Proposition proposed
for our Liberties, but came as a drop of blood from his heart, and as under
force, with many premeditated reserves, and at last sealed his Prerogative with
his own blood, without showing the least remorse for former Acts, or
acknowledging any boundary to his will but God himself.

And yet this man (as if he were the unum necessarium, and all Religion and
Liberty were essential to his Person) must only be lamented, and all the
breach of Covenant fast'ned on the Act of Justice on him, without which neither
the Covenant or any Article in it could be dutifully performed. And how much
have men lost of their understandings, and the purity of their affections to
the Covenant, that shall be willing to have the Covenant rejected, and all the
ends and engagements of it broken, so they might have but one expression
preserved? Had the Parliament given a toleration to Popery, set up Prelacy,
protected Delinquents and Incendiaries, that our Religion and Liberties might
have been plucked up by the roots, and set up the King in his Throne, and
entailed the Crown more firmly on his posterity, notwithstanding all these
considerations in the Covenant, besides, taking hold of that one clause; would
the Covenant have been then kept? let all honest men judge; and yet they had
done all these vertually, and would have done them really in time, had they but
complied with the King, or done any otherwise to him, then passing a legal and
judicial sentence on him.

But we need go no further then the words of the Engagement concerning the
King, which are very observable, and will end the controversy if honestly
observed: For whereas all the Articles of the Covenant are positive and
absolute, Religion to be reformed according to the Word of God, Popery and
Episcopacy to be extirpated without any distinction, the Privileges of
Parliament to be maintained, Delinquents and Incendiaries to be brought to
justice, without any discrimination or favor, when we come to Covenant
concerning the Kings Person, (as justly fearing, if not foreseeing what he
would prove) it is with an express restriction, and his whole Person and
concernments wrapped up in this clause: In the preservation of Religion and
Liberty, which was not only an Exposition of what we intended concerning him,
or only a limitation, or qualification of our endeavors concerning him,
(though that were enough) but an absolute and express condition and
determination of the way and means of preserving him only in the preservation
of Religion and Liberty, in which he was included as the lesser in the greater;
that if these two cannot be preserved in preserving him, he is left alone, for
they are not to be preserved in him, but he in them: And this condition is so
plain, that you must either be bound to the King absolutely, without
consideration of Religion or Liberty, or must when they become incompossible,
stick to that which is principal, and of most concernment; and if this clause
had not been either expressed or supposed, no knowing man who loved his
conscience could engage, that being the fundamental reason of our Engagement,
neither can it be well supposed that most of the godly and understanding people
of both Nations would desperately svvear away all the privileges both of
Religion and Liberty, in a kind and loving mood, and to preserve the Kings
Person, prove he Tyrant or Turk, which they must needs do, if they did not
engage to preserve the King in the preservation of Religion and Liberty; seeing
therefore that these were the essential conditions of our Obligation to his
Person, and they have grown incompatible together, yea diametrically opposite,
and the ends primarily intended in the Covenant, could not be attained without
removing his Person, who has so little reason to doubt, but with a good
conscience, yea by the very constraints of conscience, we are discharged from
that part of the Covenant, and capable of closing with any other that is more
fit to prosecute these ends.

So that you may now perceive that the Kings name was in the Covenant but as
a separable accident in its subject, Quod potest adesse vel abesse sine
subjecti interitu, the Covenant stands firm on its true and sound basis, and
is kept in its best intentions and ends, though his Person be removed, and that
else the Covenant it self would have been a mere Skeleton and religious
cipher, that could neither be rationally binding, or possibly kept.

Neither can it be by any observant eye conjectured, that his Son should
promise better things, (by whom the Succession is challenged) yea far less
may be expected from him, who has naturally sucked in all his Fathers
principles, and been at a greater distance from all good counsel and advice,
and has had the most desperate of the first Incendiaries to breed him up, and
be his only counsel, that nothing but the change of the Government can free us
from the succession of tyranny and Prerogative, or give us any hopes of being
happy in after days.

And if we do soberly consider it, we have not broken at all the Covenant, nor
changed it in any special condition of it, but only blotted out an unnecessary
and destructive name, and inserted a more direct medium, for the preserving the
Covenant, and advancing the more noble and best intentions of it, and by taking
this new engagement (which is short, and plain without ambiguity) we take away
the grand obstruction, and set it right in its primitive beauty, and free it
from any future hazards or misinterpretations, the nature of a Commonwealth
being to promote common and public concernment, both of Religion and Liberty.

By this time I hope all men may see that (among the most) its not conscience
but choler, animosity, if not malignancy that keeps men from taking the late
Engagement of the Parliament, there being nothing in the Covenant contrary: and
seeing no man can be obliged unto any act which is contrary to a natarall, and
moral good, and that all obligations cease with the first reasons, or
conditions on which they were made, it must necessarily follow that all our
Engagements to the Kings person, and Monarchical Government cease also, there
being nothing left of reason to engage us to them, but our own affections, yea
the whole state and nature of persons, and things being necessarily changed
from what they were, when we first engaged our selves, and better and more
effectual ways propounded, we ought to close in with them, and make
conscience of it.

But what need I spend time, and put any to pains to read this discourse, when
the Assembly of Divines have determined the cause concerning the obligation of
former oaths, and Covenants, in their exhortation to the taking of the solemn
League and Covenant, ordered by the Parliament to be added to it (p. 4.) which
is specially spoken to persuade Clergy men from that plea of their former
engagements to the Bishops, as you may read in these words.

And as for those Clergy men, who pretend that they above all others cannot
covenant to extirpate that Government (meaning Episcopal) because they have
(as they say) taken a solemn Oath to obey the Bishops in licit and honestis:
they can tell if they please is that they that have sworn obedience to the Laws
of the Land, are not thereby prohibited from endeavoring by all lawful means
the abolition of these Laws, when they prove inconvenient or mischievous, and
if yet there should be any oath found, unto which any Ministers or others have
entered, not warranted by the Laws of God, and the Land; in this case they must
teach themselves and others, that such oaths call for repentance, not
pertinacy in them.

There needs no Comment on this, its a full solution to all such Pleas which
are drawn from former engagements, when new and more necessary duties are to be
presently performed, or the former oaths prove mischievous to more fundamental
and special actions. There remains nothing now, if we mean to reconcile the
Covenant with it self, and make it whole and entire again (having razed out the
grand Errataes of it, and written it over in fairer and more legible
Characters, and all ominous expressions expunged) but to take the new
Engagement to the Commonwealth of England, and which is the most fit Appendix
that can be imagined to be added, and the last and most probable means of
preserving all the ends, and Articles in it; without which we may fondly think
to satisfy our consciences, but shall never be able to keep the Covenant, it
being not rationally to be supposed, that any thing but Popery, Prelacy, and
Malignancy should flourish under either the late King or his Successors, who
were and are engaged only to these interests, by education and acquaintance, by
contract and relations, by disposition and revenge, yea by all the common ties
of friendship, and love, yea and of debt and duty also: that if we now pass
this year of Jubilee, we deserve not only to have our ears boared, but our
consciences, and to be made by a divine judgment perfect slaves, as we shall
be by our voluntary consents.

FINIS.

