A Great and BLOODY FIGHT AT Dublin in Ireland, BETWEEN The KING of Scots Army,
and the Parliaments; UPON The landing of three thousand Horse and Foot of the
Lord Governor Cromwell's Forces, under the Command Of Col. Reynolds, Col. Moor,
Col. Venable, Col. Hanks, And Major Elliot.


WITH The particulars thereof, and three thousand routed taken, killed, and
dispersed; the beating up of 7 Guards, seizing of 8 pieces of Ordnance, and
burning of the Tents and Hutches.

ALSO, A new Rising in the West, and forty Sail of the Princes Ships come to
the Western Coast, with a Resolution to engage against the Parliament of
England; together with a Copy of the Royalists Prayer for the KING of SCOTLAND.

London, Printed for G. W. MDCXLIX.

A GREAT FIGHT IN IRELAND Upon the landing of 3000 Horse and Foot of the Lord
L. Cromwels Forces at Dublin, under the command of Col. Reynolds, Col. Moor,
Col. Venable, Col. Hunk, and Major Elliot, with the particulars of the fight,
and number killed.
SIR,
THe Lord Governor of Ireland is come hither, in order to his transportation;
We are over joyed to see him, and his Armies readiness to advance so
unanimously for that service; some forces go off, but the number not so many as
may be reported: Moneys is the expectation of the Soldiery, and doubtless the
Nerves and Sinews to expedite that service. Three thousand of the forces
designed, are landed in safety at Dublin; but upon their first attempt to set
footing on the Irish Soil, they were welcomed by the Sons of Mars with a
resounding echo from the Enemy, who gave them several Vollies at their first
greeting, as they came down the Harbor: yet notwithstanding their sudden
Onset, the undanted English Heroes soon forced their p^ssage by them,
answering them with great gallantry, and fiting to the last minute of their
landing; which done, after some respite of time, it was unanimously resolved,
that the next morning early they would give them a salley, and like Alexanders
disciplined Martialists put the same in speedy execution; for about three of of
the clock on Friday morning last (being two days after their landing) Col.
Reynolds, Col. Moor, and Col. Venable, accompanied by Lieu. Col. Wyborough (a
true stamp of Chivalry, and well experien'd in the Irish Soil) with 1500 Foot
and 500 horse marched forth of the City in a very private posture, cut off 9
Sentinels and perdewes, without giving any allarum to the Enemy, advanced
within half pistol shot of their Works, before they were discovered, fell in
amongst them, beat up 7 Guards, killed many, took about 200 prisoners, and
routed the Marq. of Ormonds Brigade, consisting of 3000 Foot, forced them to a
disorderly retreat, burned their Tents and Hutches, and (as it is said) took 8
pieces of Ordnance, returned tryumphantly into the City, with the soffe of 30
men. During this action col. Hunks and Major Elliot made good another passage,
fighting the enemy, and performing very gallant service. Col. Jones was
likewise in readiness with a Reserve Ormond is drawn to a further distance
from the City: the Lord Governor is hastening over, and many Regiments of Horse
and Poot are crossing the Neptune Seas.

Tinby July 28. 1649.

Letters from the Navy represents the remarkable action of Capt Popp^n the
manner thus. Sir, Since my advance from England, I went convoy over for
Rotterdam with five vessels belonging to Yarmouth, being richly laden with
Merchants goods, and on Satturday last I delivered them all safe at the Brill,
and afterward I stered to Sea all night, and about three of the clock in the
morning, I saw a sale which came close by me (within musket shot he standing to
the Southward, and I to the Northward, we passed on by the other, without much
taking notice; but when I discovered him, we set sale toward, and five hours
chase I had him at my merry, but at first he fought with me stoutly, until I
had killed and wounded him 14 men, and then he asked quarter, he had but five
Guns, and one murderer, and fifty odd men.

There came further intelligence to the parliament, out of Bedfordshire, that
one Sunday last a Minister was apprehended, for incerting this ensuing passage
in his prayer We pray unto thee for thy truths protector, thy young, ancient
Catholic faiths defender, thy Servant our Sovereign: defend him in it;
preserve him from it: be good to them that have the tuition of him, that with
alacrity and cheerfulness, he may at all times, but especially in the needful
time of trouble defend and provide for the fatherless and VViddows. Son of God
we beseech thee to hear us, Moreover, that it may please to thee to strengthen
such as do stand with him, to comfort and help the weak hearted for him, to
raise up (if it be possible) them that are fallen from him: and finally to beat
down Satan under his and our feet.

From Jreland further thus: Several attempts has bin lately made by the
Enemy; as appears by these ensuing Occurrences, but not any since the coming in
of the additionall Forces.

Since the enemies receipt of the intelligence of the Lord Lieutenant Crumwels
designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger
allarms, and (as we hear) have entered into Protestation, to live and die, stand
and fall together, and to fight it out to the last man, and that upon receipt
of the foresaid intelligence, Ormond called a Council of Officers, at the head
quarters near Fingles, the result was, whether they should prepare for a storm,
before his Lordships landing, or whether they should begin the City, streighten
other Garrisons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw into a
Body, and give him battle at his landing: Upon mature deliberation thereon, it
was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Prelaticall faction, That if
he set footing there they would fight him; in the mean time they would use their
utmost endeavors for the reducing of those Garrisons which the Parliament had
in possession.

But the thing that our Soldiery are most doubtful and dubious of, is, that
they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the additionall forces
landing, but that they will rather betake themselves to the Bogs and Woods.

On Thu^sday morning last, a party of the Marq. of Ormonds horse and foot laced
our frontier Guards, keeping a great careering up and down near the City Walls,
and making four or five desperate attempts within Pistol shot of our Line,
Spurs, and Sconces, which continued for the space of half an hour; till at the
last Capt. Freeman (Commander in chief of the new Fort) made a salley out with
a party of horse and foot, who placed the Musketeers in an obscure trench, for
an Ambuscado; he himself being the Coy, for the calling in and ensnaring of the
adverse party; but upon his first advance toward them with his horse, he found
it a Work very full of difficulty, by reason that they had used the like point
of poliep: However, he resolved to dispute the place, and thereupon divided his
horse (being 60 in number) into two parties, he himself commanding the one, and
Cornet Jackson the other; Capt. Freeman charged the Van of the Enemies Forlorn,
Cornet Tomson flanked them, and upon their first charge exchanged ground, with
the loss of three men on both sides; but upon their present wheeling, both
parties received each other with a second desperate Onset, who with great
courage and resolution kept their stations, disputing the place with great
gallaniry; but at last our men being overpowred (by the coming on of a fresh
supply of horse) were forced to embrace an honourrable retreat; the enemy
pursued to the very turn-pikes, where they were soon welcomed by the sons of
Mars, both from the mouth of the Canon and Musket, at which Volley, 7 of them
were forced to yield obedience to the earth, which caused the enemy to desert
further dispute or engagement, leaving dead and wounded upon the place about
27. of our party five slain and two wounded.

By Letters further from Dublin it is advertized, that the Marq. of Ormond, and
the L. Inchiquin with 20000 Horse and Foot, have entrenched themselves (in many
places) within Musket shot of the Walls, and by their strong allarums (being
very resolved, since the taking of Tredah) keeps us in continual action: the
last night their Pioneers wrought exceeding hard, and raised an half Moon
within musket shot of our Outworks, where was placed about 400 musketeers, and
four pieces of Ordnance; it was contrived very artificially and strong, with a
running Trench from their frontier incampings, which secures their men from
great annoyance of our round shot: this morning we sallyed out upon them, with
a resolution to beat them off from the said Fort; but finding too much
opposition retreated to our, Redout, which was within Pistol shot thereof;
about 4 of the clock several parties of horse and foot were drawn forth on
both sides, who engaged each other, and after a sharp conflict disputed with
great gallantry the enemy retreated, and having a Reserve ready at hand our men
durst not embrace the pursuit, but returned Victors with 17 prisoners, and left
dead and wounded upon the place about 15 with the loss of 14 men, which the
enemy in the night time set off and buried.

There came a true relation of the design against Weymouth and Portland, sent
up to the Council of State by a Messenger from the ^overnour of Waymouth, viz.

The design was laid so, as that with four hundred men Jersey Isl^nd, and s^x
hundred from France, having correspondence with a party in the County o^
Dorsets and other places nea^, they might secure Waymouth, and the Isle of
Portland for the use and service of Charles the second; the persons that were
by a special providence apprehended in executing this cruel design, was one
called King Gardner, a man who says he was ever true to the first Charles, and
resolves to be as constant for the second; there were also two of the Garrison
Soldiers, one Mortimor and Thorny, two Islanders, the ones name But the other
Roberts, and one Mr. Gallot with half a dozen more, the Islanders do publicly
abhominate the design, and the persons guilty thereof earnestly desiring
judgment to be executed therein. This plot was further manifested on Saturday
last, where at least forty small boats did attend the Isle of Portland, but
what will be the Issue of it a little time will discover, only I conclude,
that Gods work shall stand against all opposition.

FINIS.

