A GREAT FIGHT AT SEA, Between the English, French, Dutch, and Portugals, near
Gibralterre in the Streights: With the manner of their Engagement; the
particulars of the Fight; and the number of Ships sunk and taken by Captain
Pen, Vice Admiral for the Parliament of England

Also a bloody Fight in Ireland between the Parliaments Forces, commanded by
Colonel Axtel, Col. Pretty, Col. Zanchey, and Col. Cook; and the Irish under
the command of Commis. General Dungan.

With a List of the Colonels, Lieutenant-colonels, Majors, Captains, and the
rest of the Officers and Soldiers, killed and taken prisoners on both sides.

Imprinted at London, for G. ^amuel, 1651.

A bloody Fight at Sea, between the English, French, Dutch, and Portugals; the
particulars thereof, the number of ships sunk and taken; and the manner how the
Parliaments ships boarded the French three times, but were still repulsed and
beaten off; but laying them aboard the fourth time, forced them under Decks,
killed many, and took diverse prisoners.
SIR,
ON the 13. of this instant (after a tempestuous storm) it pleased God to admit
us a fair Gale, and a seasonable calm, until such time that we had coasted
near the point of Gibralterre, where we made a discovery of the rest of our
Fleet under the Conduct of Vice Admiral Pen; and coming up to them, our
Captain was called aboard the Fairfax Frigate, where a Council of Officers were
present; and after some serious consultation touchin the French and Portugal
Fleet in the Streights, unanimously resolved to steer toward that coast, and
fight them; and accordingly on the 14 instant, we weighed anchor, and after 9
hours sail came within sight of them; which they perceiving, immediately
prepared to receive Us, opening their port-holes, put forth their Guns, and
manned their Decks; for indeed they were at least three to one; being about 33
Sail, and most consisting of those Bankers which were the only Pirates that had
most annoyed the English and Dutch: Our Fleet consisted of but nine sail, but
very resolved men; as appears by the ensuing Narrative, viz.

When we came within a league of their Rear. Admiral, Orders were given for
each man to make ready to man the Decks, the Gunners and their Assistants to
prepare and open their port-holes; and so each man according to his place and
calling, to endeavor what in him lay to perform that duty and service which
God had called him unto: This was with great care and prudence observed; and
immediately the Red Flag in every ship was put forth; which being done, the
Trumpets sounded, the Mariners shouted, and soon after the Canons played; for
when we came within half a league of them, about 13 of their best ships were
manned forth, who gave us several broad sides; which Captain Pen perceiving,
immediately made up to them with the Fairfax, the Lion, the Dolphin, and the
George, and gave them eight broad sides; insomuch that the Enemy declined
engagement, and would fain have deserted us; but C. Pen keeping close up with
them to the rest of their ships, the whole Fleets became engaged; and a bloody
fight ensued, which continued for the space of two hours, and very gallantly
maintained on both sides: For the Lion laid the French Admiral aboard three
times, and was still repulsed and beaten off; but the fourth time she carried
it, and hailing her close, entered the ship, and put most of the men to the
sword, for they denied quarter. During this dispute, the valiant Fairfax, and
the rest of our Fleet, plied them close with great and small shot, and killed
many of them, especially the Portugals, who lay the most open to out shot, for
they charged their Canon on the outside of their ships: In this conflict we
sunk 7, and boarded five more; and at last dispiersed the whole Navy, taking
about 15 sail of them; so that there are not many got off, but some few
Pickroons, which were too swift for us; but I am confident, they cannot be very
serviceable; for the ships that we have taken are exceedingly torn, and most of
the men either killed or wounded; so resolutely did they fight it out. And
truly I may say, that such a mercy never did God bestow upon his poor servants
at Sea, as he has done upon Us, in giving of Us Victory over our Enemies, and
making Us instrumental for the vanquishing such a formidable pyratical power as
these were, with so little loss; for from the beginning to the ending, we lost
not above 20 men, some few wounded, and our ships not much defaced or torn: God
grant that we may live to praise and glorify the Name of the Lord for this
happy deliverance: And likewise for the many and wonderful deliverances which
He has dispensed to his servants.

Two Dutch men of War came in to our assistance about the middle of the fight;
but its conjectured, that it was more for their own ends, then for any love
they bare to us: however, I shall censure charitably; for we have lost nothing,
but they have gained; having by this means enlarged their liberty upon these
Coasts.

From aboard the Dolphin November the 19. 1651.

From Ireland we have received certain particulars of the manner of the Rebels
falling upon the Parliaments Forces at Rosse, and how ^hey carried scaling
ladders with them, entered the Town, and took Col. Mackworth, and diverse others,
prisoners: as appears by the ensuing Letter.

Honored Sir,
ON the 19. of this instant November. 1651. Commissary General Dungan with about
600 Horse and 800 Foot drew near to Ross, nity, g^t-over that place about 300
Foot, who marched down to the main Guard of the Town, and secures them without
fire on either side, so that the Church and the Block-house had not yet
received the allarm, that from thence they went to the great gate, and made
shift to break it open to let in their Horse, that before the Garrison had
received alarm both horse and foot were possessed of the Town, from whence they
marched down, beating Drums, and sounding Trumpets, by which the Blockhouse and
Church received an alarm, and being overpowred, endeavored only to keep what
they had, and left the Town to their mercy, where they took Col. Markham, Lieu.
Abbot, Ensign Brown, and about 12 private soldiers: killed about 15 plundered
the Town, sparing neither friend nor foe; ransackt the Magazine, seiz^d 12
barrels of powder, match and bullet proportionable; with some Hats, stockings,
and other good booty. About 9 a clock the next day they sent to the Governor
for a cessation, who finding it would be no ways prejudicial to him to delay
time, he being in want of provision and accommodation, (they coming so
unexpectedly upon them,) they agreed upon a cessation, until 7. a Clock next
morning. We had no intelligence of the business at Waterford, until 4. a Clock
on the Lords day, but upon notice thereof we made out with all the Boats and
Vessels we could procure, and fell down that night within a mile of the Town,
and about 10. or 11. a Clock at night the Enemy quitted the place and marched
away, having agreed with the Townsmen to pay them 400 l. to save the Town from
burning. Since which time we have received intelligence that Col. Cook, and
Col. Axtel, with Col. Prette, have given the same Enemy a repulse, coming upon
them in the County of Kildare, fell upon their rear as they were going over a
pass, put them to the run, pursuing them 4. or 5. miles, about 100. kil^d in
the pursuit, some prisoners taken, besides Col. Zankey has fallen upon the
Enemy about Clonmel, took about 50. prisoners: we also hear that Col. Axtel
has lately had some such success, and several small things of this kind, which
though it be worth our praising the Lord for, yet not worth troubling you with
unless places and persons were better known to you; the Enemy took advantage of
the Armies being engaged before Galway and Limrick to make a great deal of
busling and noise up and down the Country, but the greatest business that they
can effect, is to meet at a Randezvouz some thousands of them together, and
have the advantage of intelligence, the Country being so wholly theirs, that
presently they disperse and vanish away in their Woods and Boggs, upon the
least intelligence of any party coming toward them.

Waterford 22 November. 1651. POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Had no sooner drawn to a conclusion of my Letter, but immediately here
arrived a Post, giving a further account of what was before recited; and also
presenting a List to the Governor touching the particulars thereof; a Copy
whereof I have hereunto annexed.

A List of the Officers and Soldiers killed and taken prisoners at the several
fights at Ross, Kildare, and Clonmel.
Taken of the Parliaments Forces at Ross. Col. Markham, Lieu. Abbot, Ensign
Brown, 12 Sergeants, Corporals, and private soldiers. 12 barrels of powder,
100 skeins of match, 400 weight of bullet, And diverse Hats, stockings, and
other rich booty.
Taken of the Rebels by Col. Axtel in Kildare. 1400 Horse and foot totally
routed, under the command of Genesis Dungan. 200 Killed upon the place. 100 in the
pursuit. Col. Kilmock taken One Lieut. col. 3 Majors. 9 Captains. 20
Lieutenants. 7 Cornets. 9 Ensigns. 5 Quartermasters. 500 Sergeants, Corporals,
and private soldiers. 600 Arms. 15 Colors, and other rich booty, which they
had plundered. 150 more taken by col. Zankey.




FINIS.

