A GREAT AND BLOODY FIGHT AT DUBLIN in IRELAND, between the King of Scots Army,
commanded by the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin; and the Parliaments
Army under the conduct of Col. Jones; upon their close besieging of the City,
with twenty thousand Horse and Foot, since the taking of Tredagh: Showing the
manner, how the L. Inchiquin with a select, stout, and resolute party, fell
into the Trenches of the Parl. forces, with the number killed and taken; his
Letter to Col. Jones concerning the Lord Lieut. Cromwell; a new Standard,
erected and set up, for Charles the II, and the proclaiming of him King of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, with all his Titles thereunto belonging, and
Col. Jones his resolution.

a town besieged with cannon

London, Printed for R.W. Anno MDCXLIX.

A BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND BETWEEN The King of Scotlands Army, and the
Parliaments forces, since their taking of the strong Garrisons of Tredagh,
Dundalk, and Trim, upon the advance of the M. of Ormond, and the Lord
Inchiquin, with 20000 horse and foot, for the close besieging of the City.
Right Honored,
SInce the taking of the three impregnable Garrisons of Tredagh, Dundalk, and
Trim, the Enemy has exceedingly straightened us, and have now gained more then
ever they lost before, having encamped themselves within half a mile of the
City, and many of their Outworks and trenches are less then musket shot of
our walls: The la^^ night about 10 of the clock they alarmed us, our Governor
and the Captains of the Guards were soon in a readiness to receive them, and
gave them a great volley^; insomuch that we received some respite of ease, till
two in the morning; at which time, the Lord Inchiquin (with a select party of
horse and foot of his own Brigade) gave us a visit and very desperately and
resolutely fell upon our man in some th the Outworks, who being overpowr'd,
were forced to quit the respective places, and make their retreat to the next
place of sanctuary, but not without loss; for by their sudden assault, the
poor Defendants felt the terror of their bloodthirsty Sword, and about 30
sacrificed their lives in the place; which action being with great vigor
prosecuted, Inchiquin returned to his Tents, singing hallelujah for his
tryumphant success; but we doubt not, but to make our scor^s even, before many
days are expired.

The Enemy make their near approaches to our Line, and threaten a storm; but
its believed, their repuls the other night at the storming of Patrick Fort,
will somewhat retard that work; for they were disorderly beaten off with the
loss of about 50 men. The Lord Inchiquin has sent a peremptory Letter to our
Governor, intimating, That he heard Crumwell was advancing into that Nation
with an Army of English Rebels, to relieve him; but if he durst come thither,
he should be welcome, and better entertained by his Lordship then he was ever,
either by England, Wales, or Scotland, etc. Our Governor returned a very
mode^^ and resolute answer, That as he had undertaken a Trust, so he should be
faithful therein to the last moment, whether any forces or none, came for
relief of him.

But the thing that our Soldiery are most doubtful and dubious of, it, that
they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the additionall forces
landing, but that they will rather betake themselves to the Bogs and Woods.

And although we cannot but represent our selves in a very sad condition
(without timely relief) yet we cannot but exceedingly rejoice at the gallantry
of faithful Col. Jones our Governor, under such a state, in this his present
condition.

Since the enemies receipt of the intelligence of the Lord Lieutenant Crumwels
designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger
allarms, and (as we hear) have entered into Protestation, to live and die, stand
and fall together, and to fight it out to the last man, and that upon receipt
of the foresaid intelligence, Ormend called a Council of Officers; at the head
quarters near Fingles, the result was, whether they should prepare for a storm,
before his Lordships landing, or whether they should begir the City, streighten
other Garrisons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw into a
Body, and give him battle at his landing: Upon mature deliberation thereon, it
was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Prelaticall faction, That if
he set footing there they would fight him; in the mean time they would use their
utmost endeavors for the reducing of those Garrisons which the Parliament had
in possession.

On Wednesday morning last, a party of the Marq. of Ormonds horse and foot
faced our frontier Guards, keeping a great careering up and down near the City
Walls, and -- making several bold attempts within Pistol shot of our Line,
Spurs, and Sconces, which continued for the space of half an hour; till at the
last Capt, Cambray (Commander in chief of the new Fort) made a salley out with
a party of horse and foot, who placed the Musketeers in (...) obscure trench,
for an Ambuscado; he himself being the Coy, for the calling in and ensnaring of
the adverse party; but upon his first advance toward them with his horse, he
found it a Work very full of difficulty, by reason that they had used the like
point of policp: However, he resolved (...) dispute the place, and thereupon
divided his horse (be^^g 60 in number) into two parties, he himself commanding
the one, and Cornet Jackson the other; Capt. Cambray charged the Van of the
Enemies Forlorn, Cornet Juckson flanked them, and upon their first charge
exchanged ground, with the loss of three men on both sides; but upon their
present wheeling, both parties received each other wit^ a second desperate
Onset, who with great courage and reso^ution kept their stations, disputing the
place with great g^^lantry; but at last our men being over powered (by the
coming on of a fresh supply of horse) were forced to e^^race an honorable
retreat; the enemy pursued to t^^ very turn-pikes, where they were soon
welcomed by the ^ons of Mars, both from the mouth of the Canon and Mu^quet, at
which Volley, 7 of them were forced to yield obedience to the earth, which caused
the enemy to desert further dispute or engagement, leaving dead and wounded
upon the place about 17. of our party five slain and two wounded.

By Letters further from Dublin it is advertized, that the Marq. of Ormond, and
the L. Inchiquin with 20000 Horse and Foot, have imrenched themselves (in many
places) within Musket shot of the Walls, and by their strong allarums (being
very resolved, since the taking of Tredah) keeps us in continual action: the
last night their Pioneers wrought exceeding hard, and raised an half Moon
within musket shot of our Outworks, where was placed about 400 musketeers, and
four pieces of Ordnance; it was contrived very artificially and strong, with a
running Trench from their frontier incampings, which secures their men from
great annoyance of our round shot; this morning we sallyed out upon them, with
a resolution to beat them off from the said Fort; but finding too much
opposition retreated to our Redout, which was within Pistol shot thereof;
about 4 of the clock several parties of horse and foot were drawn forth on
both sides, who engaged each other, and after a sharp conflict disputed with
grew gallantry the enemy retreated, and having a Reserve ready at hand our men
durst not embrace the pursuit, but returned Victors with 17 prisoners, and left
dead and wounded upon the place about 15 with the loss of 14 men, which the
enemy in the night time set off and buried.

Our Governor is very vigilant, and resolved not to surrender upon any
conditions. By the next I shall impare my self more fully. Dublin 19. July,
1649.

By Letters from Bristol it is advertized, that the Inhabitants in those parts
show themselves very forward to propagate the Work in hand, for the relief of
bleeding Dublin, the Citizens having also declared a great willingness to
expedite the same, and to accommodate and furnish the Lord Lieutenant with such
necessaries, as shall become isntrumental for so great and faithful a patriot
and true a pernage. The Colors of his Lifeguard are black and white, and in
his ma^ch not far beyond Windsor, a shepherds boy espying them, said, perhaps
they might be died red enough before they returned from thence who being
over-hard he was apprehended, and committed to safe custody.

Letters from the Navy say, that there has lately have (...) some dispute and
action between the Parliaments Fleet and the Princes near Kingsale, and after
several Volleyes, the Parl. Navigators became Victors, and have taken (as is
said) the Swallow, and the Black a more Lady, above one hundred prisoners, and
about 30 pieces of Ordnance. It is further said, that the L. Inchiquin has
proclaimed Prince Charles King of Great Bri tain, and Ireland, with the rest of
the additionall Titles thereunto belonging, and has caused a new Standard to
be erected, and set up against Dublin.

The like (we hear) should have bin done in the West o^ England where the
Royal party in Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall, had
entered into an engagement, ^nanimously to rise (upon a day prefixed) and
proclaim^ CHARLES, Son of the late KING, to be KING CHARLES THE SECOND, and
immediately to set up his Standard, and proclaim open Wars against the
Parliament. This Design was to receive all possible assistanc^ from the young
King of Scots forces in the Islands of Gersey Scilley, and other places. But
being miraculously discovered, all means (possible) are used, for the seizing
and taking into custody the chief Actors and Contrivers thereof.

EXtracted out of the original Papers, and printed according to Order, to be
published without interruption or molestation.

FINIS.

