A great and Bloody Plot discovered against His Royal Majesty, CHARLES, by the
Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. And the names of the
chief Actors and Conspirators, who desperately threatened to wash their Wicked
Hands in His Royal Blood. With the beheading of one of the grand Traitors.

Ezekiel. 21.27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn; and it shall be no more;
until He come whose Right it is, and I will Give it Him.

Psalm 132.18. His Enemies I will Cloth with shame; but on Hine his Crown
shall flourish.

depiction of a beheading

London, Printed for Samuel Chamberlain, living near the White Swan at
Holborn-bridge, 1660. April:

A great and Bloody Plot disc overed against His Royal Majesty, CHARLES, by the
Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain. France, and Ireland, etc.
THe many unpleasing echoes and reflections of these Times, and the sore and
itching Ears of some men in all Ages, are such, that they will not endure
healing, or sound and wholesome Doctrine, though the pain rises from the
soreness and inflimation in themselves, and not from the plaster or hand which
honestly applies it; yet they are as prone as in fell boles and acute tumors,
when touched, though but gently, to fall upon those that are next them, and cry
out aloud, O you hurt me; when the hurt is within and from themselves. Thus it
is, that the Fanatics of these Times are become Our Disturbers; and not only
against the person of the King, but against the root and foundation of all
Monarchy, as well as against the Holy Priesthood. This is the Patient, with
whose Hurts, Sores, Bruises, Wounds, and Sorrows, these particulars have most
impudently pudled and cruelly pleased themselves, in turning public miseries
of Church and State to their private advantages: Long has been these National
sufferings, (which has caused the Kingdoms unsetledness) with daily breaking
out, and angry tumors, with new purging and loathsome Potions, with Launcing
and Bloodlettings, with cutting off and canterisings, which will not heat,
restore, close, and retintigrate the body, but maim, defame, and cripple the
same for ever. To prevent which successive miseries, let every one endeavor to
improve the Sanctity and solemnity of all occasions, for a thankful and hopeful
opportunity of future miseries; and to vouchsafe us the only means and
directions for the right method and honest way of curing an Afflicted Kingdom,
and to preserve her from all such pestring and cheating Undertakers, those
false Quacksalvers, those wanton and cruel Leeches, who did not want skill and
knowledge to wrong both Church and State, to conspire the death of their
Lawful Sovereign, a Plot unparallel! and what in them lies, to obstract the
settling of his Gracious Son, and Great Britains Royal Sovereign King Charles
the Second. But blessed be God for his deliverance, in that he is pleased to
give us Physicians of better eyes and hearts, that may both wisely discern our
maladies, and seasonably encounter them with fit remedies. To which posture of
Providence we are prone to hope, that we are this day restored by the Valor,
Honor, and integrity of those who now have the conduct of Power and Council; I
pray God we may have cause to rejoice long in good earnest, for every days
delay of our cure is a chargeable and painful delusion to the Nation,
threatening such a Consumption of Spirits, and such delititations of the Nations
strength and estate (besides the debasing of its honor and reputation) as must
necessarily [at last] betray us with our Posterity, Estates, Laws, Liberties,
and Lives; yea, and with our Reformed Religion (which ought to be dearer to us,
as it was to our Forefathers, then both our lives and estates) to that
sorraign invasion and Romish superstition, which is the grand design of the
Jesuitick agitation, whereto are subservient all the fanatic factions of those
who are enemies to the just and legal closing or composing our Distractions in
Church and State: For does not experience make it evident, That a Kingdom
divided in it self cannot stand. And the apparent demonstrations of Gods
evident and eminent wrath of indignation, expressed against the enemies of the
King, appears in these most memorable and remarkable examples, viz.

1. One Sir Thomas Martin, Knight of Cambridgeshire, a great complier with the
times, having been a Hunting in Holmby Park, and the Deer being fallen, stuck and
opened, he desired (together with the other Gentlemen) to wash his hands in the
Deers blood: No (said he) I had rather wash my hands in the blood of the young
King of Scots. And immediately after this, riding home the same day at evening,
his Horse violently threw him off his Back on the ground; in which fall, he
pitched on his Head with such force, that he broke his skull and shoulder, and
so for a few days continued in great pain and died.

2. The Constable of Shaw in Lancashire, taking the Engagement, was suddenly so
troubled in his Conscience, that notwithstanding the godly exhortations and
comforts administered unto him by reverend Divines, yet the apprehension of Gods
wrath for what he had done therein, so increased upon him, that he fell
distracted, and so continued for many years together.

3. One Mr. Smith Minister of Stoke and Prior in Worcestershire, having taken
the engagement for the procuring of an augmentation to his living, returning
home from London after he had taken it, fell presently into such a frighting
horror of his Conscience, that he did often endeavor to beat out his own
Brains: At length recovering his senses by Gods great mercy, repented bitterly
of what he had done, and thereupon departed his life in peace.

4. One Thomas Hoyl, who was always accounted a very pious and religious
Gentleman, an Alderman of York and Member of Parliament; having taken the
engagement (even against his Conscience) turned a great complyer with them at
Westminster. Not long after, it pleased the Lord so to leave him to himself,
that on the very same day 12 month that King Chrales was beheaded, yea as near
as possibly could be judged about the very same hour of that day the same
Gentleman hanged himself at his own house at Westminster, and was found dead by
his Wife when she came home, who went out early that morning.

5. Mr. Shereman a Silkman in Paternoster Row, at London, who had been looked
upon as an honest Gentletleman, had been a Tryer and an Elder in the
Presbiterian Church Government, a very good friend to Mr. Love, then his
Pastor; but afterward turning with the times, he took the engagement, and
that in form of an Oath; whereupon he was made a Common Council-man; and turned
an utter enemy and hater of the party aforementioned; who shortly after being
in the shop with his Wife, and in very good health, yet in the evening standing
at his Counter in his shop, and his Wife close by him, he on a sudden fell down
dead by her and never spoke one word.

6. Colonel Ven, a Citizen of London, formerly a great Professor of religion,
and a Member of Parliament in the House of Commons, but he being turned with
the times (as others were) became an engager and mighty stickler for and with
them at Westminster, and proved a great enemy unto the Presbiterian Government,
and would often use these words against them; That they at Westminster should
never be quiet till they had provided a pair of shoes and a staff for the
turbulent Presbiterians, and banish them out of the Kingdom. But it pleased the
Lord, that on the next day after that horrible abuse dome to M. Jenkin then
minister of Christ Church, London, in both sequestring him out of his living,
and banishing him out of the City, wherein this Colonel Ven was one of the
chief Actors, and had most churlishly carried himself toward the said man
aforementioned in the Committee even that day, whereon this godly minister was
so censured, which was July the 6 1650. being Thursday. It pleased the Lord, I
say, that Ven next Friday following, July 7. going to bed, as perfectly well
and in health, as ever in his life, and his Wife lying by him, he fell asleep
by her immediately, and slept without making any complaint of the least
distemper, but the next morning she awaking, found him quite dead by her in the
bed, he never having made the least groan. And thus God banished him from the
living!

7. I shall conclude all with the memorable example of Gods Justice upon
Lockier, an active Agitator and Leveller in the Army, who had a great hand in
bringing the King to his death, and cried out, Justice, Justice, Justice,
openly against him, and spit in his face at Westminster Hall as he was going to
his Trial, before his condemnation, conducted him to the Block: Not long after,
this Lockier was Tried for his life by a Council of War, who condemned him to
beshet to Death, as a Mutineer; in Paul's Churchyard, London.

It is reported, That two of the Fanatic party having imbarqued themselves for
Flonders, with a resolution to stab or Pistol the King; the one of them, when
he arrived at Brussels was very much troubled in Conscience, and the third day
after his arrive, resolved to declare that bloody attempt, and to acquit
himself of the horror, which consequently depended upon so notorious a
Soul-damning-Guilt; and thereupon devoted himself to His Majesty: And humbly
begging pardon, discovered the whole design; for which he was well rewarded,
and the other secured.

One John Frith, a Franciscian Friar, for attempting to Poison the King, was
also beheaded by Orders from the most Christian King of France.

FINIS.

