THE GRAND CHEAT Cried up underhand by many in the Factious and Giddy part of
the Army; and greedily swallowed down by many People that do not discern the
Poison and Danger thereof; in several Particulars, as follows.
By One that was A Member of the Army whilst they were Obedient to Authority.
FIrst, If you Accept a Free Parliament, as the Case now stands, you Conclude
the Army to be Supreme; than which nothing is more dangerous: for that the
first Question that would be moved in a Free Parliament, will be, How the
Nation shall be Governed? It is easily to be Resolved, what would be the
Resolution in a Free Parliament, that is to say, A King. This will be the way
and means to keep the Nation in perpetual Slavery; for that the difference
between the Honest part of the Army now under Monck in Scotland, and elsewhere;
and the Disobedient Officers of the Army, who Usurp the Erecting a Government,
and the giving their Military Sanction: The Honest part of the Army, they
desire that the Settlement of the Nation may be from a Civil Power; therefore
they Endeavor, That the Parliament lately Interrupted, may again Return to the
Exercise of their Authority: For several Reasons; The Chief of which are, This
Parliament, although they are under the Evil Aspect of a great part of the
Nation; yet, let it be duly considered, and it will be found, that the Reasons
for which the Nation does so much disrespect them, is, for that they were for
the most part overruled, and their Councels were Influenced by the Factious
and Disobedient part of the Army; so that they never could accomplish the good
they Declared for, or Intended to the Public. But now the Case is far
different, of which they have given ample Testimony, in their Endeavoring to
bring the Army to their Duty and Obedience (in their last Sitting); So that as
formerly they did adhere to the Army against the Public Interest out of
Necessity; Now they must adhere to the Interest of the Public, against the
Interest of the Factious and Disobedient part of the Army, that have been the
Cause of All the Unquiet, Unsettlement, and Changes that have been of late
years produced, to the Detriment of the Public: and unless the Army be purged
of them, they will be the Authors and Abettors of more Changes, to the Ruin of
All.

Therefore it is the Interest of the Nation to expect Settlement by Succession
of Parliaments, conveyed to Posterity by their Authority: A Free Parliament,
it is true, will please most of People; yet if they shall receive a Free
Parliament from the Army, or by their permission, the Authority of the Army is
then, and thereby, granted and concluded to be Supreme. If so, Then how will
Posterity be bound to curse Us, if We do submit to such a Snare and Bait as
that will prove in the Issue?

Likewise, If the Nation does submit to any kind of Government, that shall be
instituted by the Army, let it be a Free Parliament or a Parliament under
Qualifications, still the Case is the same; you receive your Laws from the
Sword, and make the Army the Legislators, for which Power no Balance can be
found: So that they will run into all Extremes of Tyranny and Uncertainty,
which are equally dangerous with the worst of Mischiefs.

If they permit a free Parliament, then they will quarrel with them, and turn
Them out of Doors for adhearing to a King or Single Person: If they give You a
Parliament under qualifications, then they will be the Interpreters of those
qualifications, and so often as the Parliaments so qualified, shall not keep
tune to their Lusts, Pride, and Ambition; so often shall the Nation be bereaved
of Parliaments: So that if that the Parliament now in being, by Virtue of that
Act that makes Them no less then a Parliament, until They shall disolve
Themselves: Do not settle your Government, and establish a Law for succession
of Parliaments. The Army will be your Supreme Authority and Standerd to your
Liberties, to measure out to you what Liberty or Slavery they please: as the
Case stands, it appears to be nothing less then madness, That People should
be contented to submit to a proud Insolent Army, rather then to this
Parliament, if they cannot have a free Parliament; But some may say, That the
Sheriffs may Elect a Parliament, by Virtue of the Act for Tryenial Parliaments,
To that I answer, then you make the Sheriffs to be the Supreme Authority, or
else Him or Them, That shall appoint the Time for their Convention, That
proviso was made in respect to an orderly Convening and Determination, which is
discomposed by the many and various Events of affairs that has happened
amongst Us; the which, must be set right by the again sitting of the
Parliament, the which, is the Interest of every Individual Englishman; without
which, every Interest in the Nation will be destroyed by an Ignorant and
Unskilful, Proud Malicious, and Insolent pack of Giddy Fellows; Who will
adventure to Change the Government of three Nations upon half an hours
Consideration: the Effect of their Ambition, and then say God led them to it.
If these Persons be fit to fit at the Helm of Affair? Let the World Judge.

If it were so, That the Insignificant General Council of Legislating Corporals
and Landsprizadoes could hitt upon the best Form of Government under Heaven, (a
thing impossible for them, to do any thing else then what shall be nonsense it
self, above which their Capacities cannot reach,) It would be dangerous to
receive it from them, for that those that have absolute Power to do Good, have
also absolute Power to do Evil; and the Nation can expect no assurance to the
contrary from them, but from such a Power as are limited by time, or otherwise
they may.

This Parliament is already limited to May the 6th. as to Time, and are more
especially limited by Interest, which will not, nor cannot support them in
Power beyond that time: So that by this means, whatever the Nation can expect
by Succession of Parliaments, will be convayed to them, without running the
hazard of trusting a perfidious Army.

FINIS.

