A GREAT CONSPIRACY OF THE PAPISTS, Against the worthy Members of both Houses
of PARLIAMENT.

And also against the City of London, and generally the whole Kingdom.

Discovered by diverse wicked and bloody Letters, which by Gods providence came
to light, and was read in the House of COMMONS the 10. and 11. of January, 1641.

With the Names of those Honorable and Worthy Members in PARLIAMENT.

Whose lives they conspire against, and seek to take away.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

A Letter directed to Mr. Bridgman, the fourth of Ian. and a Letter enclosed in
it, to one Master Anderton, were this day read, and ordered to be entered.

To the Worshipful, and my much honored friend Orlando Bridgeman Esquire, and
a Bu^gesse of the Parliament, at his Chamber, at the Inner Temple, these
present.
SIR,
WE are your friends, These are to advise you to look to your self, and to
advise others of my Lord of Straffords friends to take heed, lest they be
involved in the common Calamity, our advise is, to be gone, to pretend
business till the great Hubbub be passed, Withdraw, lest you suffer among the
Puritans, We entreat you to send away this enclosed Letter to Mr. Anderton
enclosed, ^o some trusty friend, that it may be carried safely without
suspicion, for it concerns the Common safety* So desire your friends in Coven
Garden, Ian. 4.


To the Worshipful, and my much honored friend Mr. Anderton, These present.
SIR,
ALthough many designs have bin defeated, yet that of Ireland holds well. And
now our last Plot works as hopefully as that of Jreland, we must bear with
something in the Man, his will is strong enough, as long as he is fed with
hopes, the Woman is true to us, and real, Her Council about her is very good:
J doubt not but to send you by the next very joyful news, for the present,
our rich Enemies, Pym, Hampden, Strode, Hollis, and Hasterigg, are blemished,
challenged for no less then Treason: before J write next, we doubt not but to
have them in the Tower or their heads from their shoulders.

The Solicitor, and Fines, and Earl we must serve with the same sauce: and in
the House of the Lords, Mandevill is touched, but Essex, Warwick, ^ay, Brook,
and Paget, must follow, or else we shall not be quiet. Faulkland and Culpepper,
are friends to our side, at leastwise they will do us no hurt. The Protestants
and Puritans are so divided, that we need not fear them; the Protestants in a
greater part, will join with us, or ^^and Neuters, while the Puritan is
suppressed, if we can bring them under; the Protestant will either fall in with
us generally, or else, if they do not, they are so indifferent, that either by
fair, or foul means we shall be able to command them.

The mischievous Londoners, and Apprentices, may do us some hurt for present,
but we need not much fear them, they do nothing orderly but tumultuously:
Therefore we doubt not but to have them under command after one brunt, for our
Party is strong in the City, especially Holborne, the new Buildings, and
Westminster, we are afraid of nothing, but the Scots appearing again, but we
have made a party there, at the Kings last being there, which will hold their
hands behind them, while we Act our Parts at home; Let us acquit our selves
like men, for our Religion and Country, now or never, The Kings heart is
Protestant, but our friends can persuade Him, and make him believe any thing,
he hates the Puritan party, and is made Irreconcilable to that side; so that
the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, are for us: there are no less then twenty
thousand Ministers in England, the greater half will in their places, be our
friends to avenge the Bishops dishonor, Let our friends be encouraged, the
work is more then half done.

Your Servant! R. E.


Another Letter sent to a Papist of London.
THe Grand Committee of the Parliament sitting at Grocers Hall London, about
the weighty affair of the State of the Kingdom; There was notice brought unto
them of a Letter directed out of Jreland to a great personage of this City a
Papist, which Letter by accident coming into the hands of a woman, and the
housekeeper of this Papist, upon great suspicion of some evil Accidents that
might thereby happen, caused the said Letter to be opened, whereby by the great
Providence of God, the secrets thereof was disclosed. The contents thereof was
to this effect.

Worthy Sir,
OUt of the care of your welfare, I make bold to advertise you for your good,
that you would be pleased speedily to convey your self and Family out of the
City, and that you repair as far Northward as conveniently you may, for
there is a terrible and sudden blow expected to be given shortly against the
City of London, for though I am of opinion the Kings Majesty be a good
Protestant in his heart, yet Jam persuaded that by the persuasions of the
Queens Majesty, and the advice of the Catholic Lords and other Gentlemen, the
wished design may take full effect. The truth of which premises was delivered
to the Court of Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, from the
Committee.


The Copy of a Letter sent by Mr. Hearne, one of the last convicted and
condemned Jesuits, unto one Mr. Napper a Catholic, and now an Inhabitant in
Hollowell in Oxford, Ian. 7. 1641.
WORTHY SIR,
LEt not our present danger deter or affright you from the constancy in your
profession, let the goodness and Justice of your cause encourage you, and
prevail over the present danger, we think it but our duty to suffer for the
Law and dignity of our Religion, and it is our credit that we are thought
worthy to be subjects of this present persecution, The benefit J could not
perform to the Church of Rome in my lifetime, I shall be glad to finish with
the Seal of my blood, I am provided for the present hazard, and expect nothing
but present destruction, let not your Prayers be wanting for our eternal
welfare, interceed for us, that we may obtain the merited reward of our
labors, be you constant in the faith, and not dismay with the present
troubles of the times, for you shall shortly see an issue o^ all these things,
and we hope shortly that the distractions and distempers of the King and
Parliament, with the fears and insurrections of the City of London, and
generally over all the Kingdom will work for our good, and bring ^ Period to
the cruel Tyrannies which the Heretics of this Kingdom inflict upon us, and
the Sun which now seems set, will arise again, that we shall see glorious
days, your constancy and perseverance cannot want its reward, J must be short,
and take my leave, for J have much to do, Farewell.

From the Prison at Newgate, Jan. 5. 1641. Your constant friend and welwisher.
J. Hearne.


FINIS.

