A Complaint TO THE Lord Protector,

By THOMAS GRANTHAM, Minister of Waddington, near LINCOLN.

Concerning the unjust, and illegal ejecting of miserable MINISTERS.

These are to be distributed by the Author, Professor of the speedy way of
teaching the Hebrew, Greek and Latin tongues, living at Mr. Martins in the
great Old Bailey, near the Ship.

The Complaint of THOMAS GRANTHAM, Minister of Waddington.
IN the greatest Persecutions, the Christians ever set forth their Apologies;
look upon Justin Martyrs Apology for the Christians, look upon Jewels Apology
for the Church of England; And he that will not hear the Oppressed complain, is
worse then that unjust Judge, that neither feared God, nor reverenced man; It
was lawful amongst the Romans, if a man was unjustly dealt withal, to Appeal
to Caesar; The great Turk walks once a month in a certain place to hear
any man complain of injustice done to him, and he is sure to have satisfaction:
Solomon himself was much given to do Justice to particulars, witness that Case
of the two Women striving for the Child, and the glory of his Throne of
Justice, sh^ws that he resorted to it, what should I speak of Moses, when he
sat from morning to night judgof causes; and Augustus, Caesar was so given to
it, that Ovid wonders he could be at leisur to read a little Poem of his;
Horace sets him out highly in this kind, Qvum tot sustineas ac tanta negotia
solus, lib. 2. Ep. 1. What should I speak further, Justice is an Attribute of
God, and Mercy is a higher Attribute; for although all Gods Attributes are
equal in themselves, where Justice has her Thousands, Mercy has her ten
Thousands; he punishes the faults of the Fathers to the third and fourth
generation of the Children of those that hate him, but shows Mercy unto
thousands of those that love him and keep his Commandments; Mercy then is the
highest Attribute in God; And thrice happy are we who have a Ruler whose Name
implies that Attribute; Whence is Mercy expected to come, but from a PROTECTOR?
And indeed it has come unto us, and no question but will continue. That we may
all say as Tertullus the Orator said, Act. 20. verse. 2. Seeing that by thee
we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done in this Nation
by thy Providence, etc.

There is nothing grieves a man more than a false accusation laid upon him; but
for an innocent man to continue all his life time under the burden of it, and
to let a Knave, nay rather a Devil, (for he is called the accuser of the
brethren) to go away victorious and bragging over the ruin of a man, what
patience can bear it? Actum est de homine quando actum est de nomine; A man in
an ill name is half hanged.

The Case is thus, There came two or three ignorant lying men of my Parish to
the Commissioners, and said I was insufficient for the Ministry; there was no
Oath given, the Commissioners without any trial of me, ejected me; at my next
summons, so soon as they read the Article to me, I desired to be tried: without
any Trial they ejected me; The Ordinance runs thus, There must be five
Commissioners at the least; and five Ministers at least; and if upon
Examination or proof made upon Oath, it shall appear, and be declared under the
hands of the said Commissioners, or Ministers; who shall be present at such
examination or proof, that the Minister or Schoolmaster is ignorant or
insufficient, then to be ejected; it is repeated often that five Ministers
should be there at least; now there was never a Minister there present, and the
five Commissioners differed, but let them all agree, there must be five
Ministers at least, and I desire but the Oaths of these five Commissioners
present; now in this case, I think it necessary to set down the names of these
five Commissioners, Mr: Harvey of Lincoln an Attorney, and Sequestrator for
Lincolnshire when time was, the Major of Boston, Mr. Whiting the Chairman for
this purpose, I should have named him sirst but only I saw him rely much upon
the Attorneys discretion, Mr: Yarborough, Capt: Tompson, Capt: Heart: Now Mr:
Harvey received a great sum of money of my Parish some years before this
Commission came down to put me and my Curate out; and upon this score I except
against him; I must needs be short, and so I bundle up all their cruelties as
quick as I can. Before ever they called me to trial, they took all my profits
of Hay, and corn, for that was the time the fittest for them to begin; I was
eighteen weeks after that before I was ejected; they left me not one farthing
to maintain me all this while; now there is two things sticks in my stomach;
first to have my goods taken away before I be proved to be guilty; secondly,
when I come to my trial, to be put out without any. Trial or Examination at
all; which is plum against the Ordinance; As they took my Tenths; take you but
notice of the tenth part of their cruelties; they summoned me to Sleeford in
Lincolnshire, when my Parish was in the Liberty of Lincoln, but two miles
from my Personage at Waddington, and forced me to ride thirteen or fourteen
miles, and to be there at eight of the Clock in the morning, and say two or
three days, and have never a word said to me: All this while; they knew I had
no money, nor a bit of bread to eat, nor drop of beer to drink, nor bed to lie
on; all the relief that I had, was from a very poor Alehouse; and my enemies
did strive to dry up that little spring, to starve me, or put me to flight.

Take a little of the witnesses, one being so poor a man, that he could not get
to be a Soldier, and was but an Innemate lately come to Town; the other
confessed he went to speak against me in heat of blood, because I would not
take such a one for my Curate; and he being told how he was bred from a boy to
be a Coachman to my Lady Grantham, and being charged of Ingratitude, he fell so
mad, that he openly professed himself sorry for what he had done: there was
another that would often come to his Wife, and say, Wife let me cut thy throat,
for now the evil spirit is upon me, and I must do it whether I will or no; and
this he did very often; besides stranger things that I will not now speak of:
to speak further of the Cruelty of these five Commissioners, and some of the
dreggs of of my Parish: I forbear at this time to do it; because that I will
not spot this Paper, which I dedicate to my Lord Protector, only let me end
with this as I began, My Lord Protector has found the hand and finger of God,
in Gods Mercy of his deliverance: and Gods finger, when he pointed him out to
those that sought his ruin: I desire only a fair trial and proof against
me, and not to be hanged until I be tried.

Any man may guess, that I can write a volume of this; but I end now in brief,
and will be bold to say, That those men shall be more excusable before God and
man; who have sought my Lord Protectors life, than these men who do Tyrannize
under him, and do scratch and bite, and tear and worrie the lives and Estates
of his peaceable Subjects; for God and man will defend him from treachery; but
it was never known that oppressing hungry barking, sharking, hollow bellyed
Committeemen; of whom Pulpit and Plow has complained of to every Government,
that they brought ruin to it; Let them take notice but of one thing; it is in
Gods Law, Thou shall not be an Informer; and if there be a necessity of such
Vermin, yet be sure to credit them as little as you can. If any thing can be
proved otherwise, I shall think my self worthy of the hardest censure; I have
just now done, and let them take this for the first Allarm.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis.
FINIS.

