A Great and Terrible FIGHT IN FRANCE, BETWEEN His Majesty's forces, and the
Prince of Conde; with the total routing of General Seneterre, above 2000 slain
upon the place, and Cardinal Mazarine forced to SEDAN.

ALSO The cruel and bloody proceedings of the Dutch against the English, the
taking of the Parliaments Dove, and their resolution to tie all Englishmen to
the mouth of their Canon, that will not fight against the Parliament.

Likewise, The proceedings of the Lord Craven in Holland, the uniting of the
English, and the Agreement made between the King of Scots, and the Estates
General.

Nouemb. 22. LONDON: Printed for George Horton, Anno Dom. 1652.

A BLOODY FIGHT IN FRANCE.
SIR,
THe Lord Ambassador Boreel, has had audience before the Kings Majesty; where,
in a very learned Oration, he declared to his Majesty, the joy and happiness
his Lords and Masters the States of the Netherlands had conceived by his
gracious Accord, and Royal Condescentions to the League Offensive and Defensive
against poor England; but withal, complemented his Majesty into a Restitution
of Depredations done by Sea. From this Audience he repaired to the little Queen
now in the Palace Royal, where he staid 3 hours in conference with her and the
Lord Jermin, at which time, (it is said) they were agreed upon the Terms, for
the States to admit her Sons shipping to a retreat into their Harbors upon all
occasions. But that which most disturbeth the Court of France in their affairs,
is, the fatal blow given by the Pr. of Conde to some of their forces abroad;
the manner thus.

The King having given Order to Marshal De Seneterre to go and conduct the
Cardinal Mazarine back to the Court, the said Marshal was advanced with 2000
horse to Vitry, when the Cardinal being at Sedan, sent Monsieur L'Estrade the
late Governor of Dunkirk, to march before him, and clear the passages, with
1200 men, and join with the said Marshal, while he, the Cardinal himself,
followed after, he being then also on his way. But the Prince of Conde having
notice of the place, and intended junction of these parties, commanded out his
Lieutenant General the Prince of Tarante with 3000 horse, and 3 Regiments of
Foot toward Vitry, to intercept (if possible) the designed union; but coming
to Vitry, and finding them united, fell upon them, and gave them a total
overthrow, the most of them being cut in pieces.

Marshal De Seneterre himself is mortally wounded, and now dying in Vitry.
Monsieur L'Estrade was killed upon the place, together with the Count of Grand
Pre, besides other Officers and Soldiers to the number of two thousand flain:
so that the Cardinal was glad to run for it to Sedan, where he must stay til he
be relieved with new supplies for his conduct. This is an ill Omen for him,
that being to re-enter France, he should thus stumble at the threshold; and it
has given such an alarm at Court, that Orders are issued out for a
re-inforcement of Turein's Army, which will be well recruited by the three
thousand horse and one thousand foot, that are coming to him out of Normandy,
from the Duke of Longueville, besides such forces as are hereabouts, and those
in Picardy, that are ordered to hasten to him. This day there has been a full
Assembly of the Parliament, who have sat all day, and are not yet risen. The
Court party drive hard, and its thought will carry it, upon this provoking
news, for declaring the Prince of Conde Traitor, and rasing all his hostels,
houses, and Castles. It is now said, Charles Stuart would for Holland, were he
supplied with moneys for the journey; and a rumor goes, as if he had a design
for Ireland, or Scotland. But his party here often have made many the like
reckonings to no purpose.

Paris, November. 13. stilo novo. 1652.
A Letter from Rotterdam, Dated November. 9 still. nov. 1652.
SIR,
THe business about De Wits Captains is not yet at an end; for they are still
kept in prison, as Renegadoes and Runaways at the late Engagement with the
English. Perhaps they may at the last be let go upon promise of better
behavior, especially when the new Council of War is established, which must
sail along with them at sea, and snap them off, if they carry not themselves
stoutly. This is a miserable argument of the valor of their Captains, when if
they show any hereafter, it will be said they were valiant for fear of the
Halter. De Wit himself we hear is now fallen sick, I know not whether it be of
his Employment. But Trump is like to become the Man of men again, and his last
Summers misdemeanors, and the accusations drawn up against him shall be buried
in Oblivion. Having received Orders from the States to hasten out with the
Fleet, he is gone himself to Helver-sluys to them, to set forward the
Expedition.

Another Letter from Holland.
SIR,
THe States of Holland proceed vigorously for the carrying on of the work in
hand, and diverse of those shaded Cavaliers whom the world thought worthy of
nothing but exilement, begin to be looked upon according to their worth and
known gallantry: The Lord Craven has admitted diverse Gentlemen into places of
high trust and command, and several other Regiments have their chief dependence
upon the English; who swel with nothing more at present, then full bouls to the
health of their distressed master, this is a symptom of a sad spring, which we
may justly fear to prevent, though not to encounter. The King of France in a
Majestical crack, has promised to assist them with 60 sail, toward the
carrying on of their conceived hopes; but you may better trust his forces at
sea, then at land; for though the French are siery coursers upon dry ground,
yet Naval discipline quickly dasheth their tilt yard passions: but to deal
plainly and ingeniously, the Lords are much heightened at the general peace
between the King and his subjects, and attribute that great work (under God) to
the King of Scots, unto whom, many say, they are much obliged, for his great
pains he has taken in the healing of thole sad breaches between the King and
his people; which Christian office, say they, has gained him at Court the
title of Magnae Brittaniae and Hiberniae Rex fidei Defensor, pericli Dissipator
Gallici, pacisque Compositor Generallissimae; that is, Defendor of the faith of
Great Britain and Ireland, Dispercer of the dangers of France, and Composer of
the general peace.

His valiant brother James (we hear) is in great favor, and is cried up for the
most accomplished Gentleman, both in arms and courtesy, that graces the French
court: His presence is much desired both in City and Country, but especially
in the Army, where he has the general respect even from the greatest Commander
to the private soldier; he has a great influence upon the people, by reason
of his civil carriage toward them, and so absolute is his power over the
Soldiery, who bear so great affection, that in obedience to his Command, they
will accord to any thing that be proposes. We hear that the Duke of Lorrain in
a solemn pro^estation, h^t^ tendered both himself and Army, for the playing of
the Scots Kings Game; but I shall wave the truth of this, until that great
Discoverer, the little Eye witness, does make it more manifest. In the mean
time I conceive it to be only a Rant, although the Royal party give out, hat
the Articles of Amity are sealed; which carries as much credulity as the States
new levy here of 30000 men and 5000 gallant Martialists selected forth to man
the Navy. The Spanish Army are marching to take up their Winter Quarters in
Flanders, and it is said the Prince of Conde hastens after with what possible
speed he can, as not able to make good his ground against the Kings forces, who
are as numerous as valiant: Genesis Thurene, and the (pretended) Duke of York, we
hear, pursues him with 9000 Horse and Foot, so that of necessity, he is like to
quit France till the next Spring, and then peradventure he may receive the
reward of Justice, and all his arrears together.

The States great Fleet here is lanching forth, and the Lords for encouragement
of the Seamen, have paid them off all their arrears, so that there is a general
concurrence of the Mariners to be in action, as many say; but I believe in God.

Bril, November. 10 stilo novo, 1652.
Legorn October 8.
I informed you of the cruelty that the Dutch exercised against every one of us
in particular, but God has been pleased intender mercy since our surprizal, to
remember us, and disappoint the purposes of our adversaries, who under pretense
of landing us at Genoa, steered their course for Messina, where they might be
well assured we should be deprived of any means of returning home; but meeting
with our English men of war, after a great fight took one and some prisoners,
whom they daily solicit to take up arms against their country; which if they
refuse to do, they are threatened to be made to stand to the guns in fight.
There have been several means used for their inlargment, but nothing would
prevail. An exchange of some of them for some of the Dutch in England, might
perhaps be a means for their relaxation; for their condition is as sad as may
be. Neither is there any permission given by the Dutch. whereby they may be
relieved with clothes and other necessaries, which they are destitute of.

Here are 15 Dutch ships that would ply up and down toward the Streights
mouth, but they are employed in blocking up the ships that lie under the Castle
of Portolongon, where they intend to fire, (if they can) the English Admiral;
and have to that end made a fireship of the Dove, which they took from us.

FINIS.

