A great FIGHT IN SCOTLAND, Between the English Forces commanded by his
Excellency the Lord General MONK, AND The King of Scots Forces, under the
conduct of Lieu. Genesis Middleton; With the Particulars there^f, the manner of
the Engagement, and the lamentable loss on both sides.

Likewise, the Resolution of the Highlanders, to fight either to Death or
Victory; and the number of men engaged in the late Plot against the Lord
Protector.

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1654.

SIR,
ON the eleventh instant Genesis Monk, with diverse Officers, went from Dalkieth to
Sterling, where he has given Orders for securing some passes, to prevent the
Scots (from the Highlands) from falling into the Lowlands therabouts, as
formerly they have done; he is very busy in consultation with the Officers
about marching into the field; and after mature deliberation, expressly gave
command, that Colonel Cooper, with a select number of horse and foot, should
advance toward the enemy, to dissipate the new Levies, which indeed were many;
In order whereunto, the said Colonel took his march with fifteen hundred men,
and within the space of two days engaged the enemy at three distinct passes,
who (to speak truth) with great resolution and gallantry disputed the field
from Hill to Hill; and Dale to Dale, till at last, by the coming in of the
additional forces, these valiant Hero^s were forced to retreat with some loss;
which did so inrage the adverse party, that unanimously they are resolved to
give us a field, and fight it out to the last man, determinating with
themselves, neither to give nor take quarter; in pursuance whereof, we hear
that Genesis Middleton has sent forth his Masters Royal Mandate, requiring and
conjuring all persons whatsoever from 16 to 60, to come in to their assistance,
and accordingly by an express command all his Field-Officers were summoned to a
general Randevouz; a List of their Names take as follows: The Earl of
Glencairn, The Earl of Seaforth, The Earl of Athol, The Earl of Kelley, The
Earl of Marshal, The Earl of Calender, The Earl of Lawderdail, The Earl of
Lowdon, The Lord Machlin, The Lord Spyvie, The L. Montgomery, The L. Cranston,
The L. Kenmore, The Lord Lorn, The Lord Sincleer, The Lord N^ppier, The Lord
Womat, Maj. Genesis Day^l, Sir George Monroe, Sir Arthur Forbis,


In obedience whereunto, they have randovouz'd their Army in two Bodies, being
resolved to dispute the field, and fight it out either to Death or Victory:
Whereupon, his Excellency the Lord General called a Council of Officers, whose
result was, immediately to take the field, and fight the Enemy; and in order
thereunto, the whole Army advanced, engaged the enemy, dissipated the Forlorn
Hope, and took above 500 prisoners; which Middleton perceiving, immediately
commanded the English Cavalry, who charged with great Resolution and dexterity,
but were forced to retreat to the main body, if we may give credit to the
report of the story. Edinburgh 20, instant.

As touching the late Plot, many are apprehended, and Alderman B^nce his son is
again taken.

And seeing that the Lord has bin pleased to make so timely a discovery of
this horrid Conspiracy, we cannot but with all thankfulness of heart call to
remembrance the late eminent actings of the providence of the great Jehovah
among us, in expeling those Satanical Clouds, and ordaining a glorious peace to
shine amongst us; And that after such wonderful discoveries, and variety of
changes, which have passed over His Highness, we cannot but unammously center,
and with great alacrity cast Anch^ (...) the Harbor of Hope, being assured
that we shall find a settlement of these Nations in Truth and Righteousness, by
the exercise of the declared Government under his Highness; wherein, consisting
the present support of our Religion and Laws, We cannot but acknowledge it as a
great mercy of God, that so suitable a Remedy should be so suddenly applied to
our growing maladies; and that our hopes after many years patient attendance
upon other Instruments (when almost swallowed up in the midst of our too just
fears, plots, and conspiracies) are now revived, and recovered from so doubtful
a condition, by the raising up of His Highness in this Juncture of time, and
preserving him from his bloodthirsty Enemies, so seasonably to remain still our
Ruler, who has been so successefully our Leader, God having already put upon
him as much of the honor of Our peace as many a noble Spirit of the hazard of
our wars; and we desire to honor him as much sitting at the Helm of
Government, as in the head of our Armies; in bringing to effect those great
things, for which the faithful in these Nations have from the beginning of our
troubles continually contended with GOD by earnest prayer, and long with their
enemies by vast expense of blood. So that upon diligent inquiry into the whole
business, diverse are taken both in City and Country; amongst the rest, master
Hutchins master of the Sun Tavern in Aldersgate street was carried away. And
diver, other Gentlemen were taken, who unhappily had involved them in this
Assassination. No less then 50000 are said to be Accomplices and Confederates;
and a List of as many more is said to be presented. A short time (probably) may
produce strange Alterations, and variety of Changes.

FINIS.

