A Great and Bloody FIGHT IN FRANCE: BETWEEN The Kings Army commanded by the
Marshal of Thurenne, and the Prince of Conde's Forces.

With the particulars of the fight; the number killed on both sides, the Prince
of Conde's Horse being shot under him, and the Duke of Nemours, and many other
persons of eminent quality dangerously wounded; and the manner how the Kings
forces won their passage over the River Seine, and fell upon their enemies,
forcing them to retreat to the City of PARIS.

Also the Rising of the Citizens of Paris in a Muteny; their drawing the
Chains, with their firing the Townhouse, and killing diverse of the Assembly of
the City-Officers.

Likewise, A Message sent from the Duke of Lorrain to his Brother the Duke of
Orleans, concerning his late treaty with the King and Court, and his return
again into France to assist the Princes.

July 2. LONDON: Printed by B. A. 1652.

A great and bloody FIGHT IN FRANCE Between The Kings Army commanded by Marshal
de Thurenne, and the Prince of Condes forces.
SIR,
HIs Royal Majesty the King of France, desiring to terminate the sufferings of
his subjects, purposed to come to Paris, intimating the same unto the Citizens,
expecting an invitation from them to come, without any condition or exception
of persons, and sent a Message to the Assembly of the Town house to that
purpose. Many in that Assembly moved for a submission, but they were overswayed
by the plurality of voices, and the Messenger from the King was imprisoned. The
Court resenting very much this indignity, resolved that the Kings army should
engage against that of the Princes, and fall upon them in their quarters at St.
Cloud, and Mont Valerica. In order to which, on Sunday last Marshal Thurenne
with his army of 8000 men, met the King with his forces hard by St. Dennis,
where they concluced of making a bridge over the river Sein, by which means they
might with the more facility fall upon the Princes. The 1 of July, the Prince
of Condi and the Duke of Nemors came to St. Cloud, where there happened some
dispute between both armies, about the passage, where the bridge was making,
which continued a good space with much gallantry, but at length the Kings
forces became Masters of it and took several prisoners. The same day in the
evening, the Kings forces having finished their bridge of boats, they resolved
to fall upon the Princes quarters, who having notice of their design, and that
Marshal Thurenne was ready to cross the river to come to him, he drew his
whole army to this side of the river, in the Bois de Boulogue, where the said
Marshal Thuren fell upon his rear. Whereupon 1200 of the Princes horse thinking
to cross the City of Paris, to pass to their randezvouz in the Suburbs of St.
Anthony, the Citizens opposed it; but the Duke of Orleans prevailed so much as
to get them their passage through the City, so that they came timely enough to
the Princes assistanc. The Duke of Beaufort rid up and down the City on
horseback, to move the Citizens to send supply to the Prince, but prevailed but
little. Mademoiselle de Orleans did likewise ride on horseback to the Bastile
the better to see the fight, and caused twelve pieces of Ordnance to be shot
and play upon the Kings forces, but they did work small effect.

The fight grew very hot in the Suburbs, both parties having planted their
Ordnance there against each other, which continued playing a great while, great
numbers of men were killed and hurt; the loss was equal on both sides, there
being slain about 2500 whereof above 1200 of the Princes men, and many wounded.
The Prince of Conde had his horse killed under him, the Dukes of Neaumours and
la Rochefoucalt, the Count of Tavanne, and several others of great quality, are
dangerously wounded on the Princes party; the Marshal of Thuren and some others
of the Kings party.

During the fight, the King, Queen, and Cardinal, were hard by upon a little
hill looking upon the fight. The Marshal of Thuren removed his forces to St.
Owen, and the King with the Court is at St. Dennis.

The Prince of Conde is retreated to Paris, where at first he was denied
admittance, by reason that the King had sent an express command under his
Signet, requiring the Officers of the City not to permit the Princes forces to
enter in; but the Duke of Orleans and his daughter Mademoiselle coming to the
Town house, backed with multitudes of people, the Mazarinists were overvoted,
and the Princes with their Army admitted to pass through from one end to the
other, which extremely enraged the King and Court, that no more regard should
be had to the Letter of Signet, insomuch that they have once more given a stop
to the Bakers of Goness and other places, not permitting them to bring any more
bread hither, so that the people are in great want of bread here: Yet
notwithstanding they arm apace, and something will suddenly be done to purpose,
a great Assembly being to be held, to consult about the present affairs. If the
Citizens once resolve upon an absolute Union with the Princes, (as it is
probable they may) the Court will then be brought to a parting with the
Cardinal upon any reasonable terms.

Paris, July 3. still. nov. 1652.
Another Letter from Paris, Dated July 6, new style, 1652.
SIR,
THe Cardinal Mazarini is still possessed of the hearts of the King and Court,
they will not yet part with him, which puts all things out of hope of an
accommodation; The people of this City are so much incensed thereby, that they
have burst forth into a great muteny, ready to make the whole Assembly of the
City Officers at the Townhouse a sacrifice to their fury. The same morning
they sat, the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde walked through the
streets of this City with a Hatband made of straw; this badge was presently
taken up by all sorts, although for different ends; some to be distinguished
from the Mazarinists, and others for fear of being torn in pieces. In this
posture great multitudes came together about the Townhouse, crying out, that
the Queen should renounce all State Affairs, that the Cardinal should be gone,
and some speedy agreement made for a Union betwixt the Princes and the City:
The Assembly being moved with fear at this sudden uproar, sent five thousand
Firelocks to the Princes party; yet were not the people herewith satisfied,
but that still they cried out. That Cardinal Mazarine should depart, and some
speedy Agreement made for an UNION betwixt the Princes and the City: The
Officers of the Assembly thereupon came forth unto the people, desiring they
might have eight days liberty to consider of their desires. But the people grew
so furious at this delay, that they set the Gates of the said house on fire,
and shattered all the windows with their Muskets and Guns; but the Architecture
being of stone, withstood the fire, so that they were but a little smoaked, and
some Statues against the wall spoiled.

The Priests of St. Esprit came forth in solemn Procession to appease the
uproar, but to little purpose; for the Assembly were detained as prisoners, and
at night some of them offering to get away, five or six were slain as
Mazarinists, though indeed they were not. The better sort of Citizens fearing
in this Hurly-burly to be plundered and dispoyled of all, betook themselves to
arms, and drew the Chains throughout the City, the better to secure themselves
and their Goods. But at length, Mademoiselle daughter to the Duke of Orleans,
and the Duke of Beaufort coming amongst the people, with much ado their fury
was a little mittigated, upon promise of an Union, which at last the Assembly
concluded, and passed a formal Act, which wants nothing but the signing by
those that dare not deny.

The Princes Army marched, the evening after the fight, through this City of
Pont Neuf to the Suburbs of S. German. It is thought they will not dare to
budge out of Town.

The Duke of Lorrain has sent a letter to his brother the Duke of Orleans,
wherein with many complements he excuses himself concerning his late actings
in this treaty with the Court; saying, that he had no reason to make terms with
the Court, because Conde used many delays, and would not make good to him what
he had promised; yet nevertheless, he says, that now he has according to his
promise and engagement with the Court, retired himself and his army out of
France, he is ready to return again to the Princes assistance without any
condition. But having proved himself so perfidious unto them in his underhand
Treating with the Court, it is thought they will be unwilling to trust him
again, and will rather rely upon the promise of the Archduke, who has a
message sent to the Duke of Orleans, intimating to him, that he will give over
the siege at Dunkirk, and bring all his forces to assist him.

FINIS.

