THE ANTIQUITY and EXCELLENCY Of GLOBES. What a Globe is, and of the Circles
without the Globe, what the Horizon is with the things described thereon, also
what the Meridian is, the Poles, Axes, Hour circle and Index.

Moreover of the Circles which are described on the superficies of the Globes;
of the Equinoctial Circle, Zodiac, and Eccliptick, of the Tropicks, what the
Artick and Antartick Circles are; of the Vertical Circles, and quadrant of
Latitude, of the Zones and their numbers of Climates and Paralels.

All which are proper to the Celestial and Terrestrial Globes, with their
uses, profitable for all that would be instructed in Geography.

He stretches out the North over the Empty place, and hangs the Earth upon
nothing,

Job 26.7. LONDON, Printed, by M. S. and are to be sold by Tho. Jenner at the
South-Entrance of the Old Exchange, 1652.

Geographie and the Principles thereof.
Certain terms of Land and Water plainly defined and described.
THe Terrestrial Globe is defined to be a Spherical body, proportionably
composed of Earth and Water: into which two parts it is divided. Whereof the
Earth comes first to view; whose parts are, either Real, Imaginary:
and the real parts either Continents, Islands.


Now a Continent is a great quantity of Land, not interlaced or separated by
the Sea; in which many Kingdoms and Principalities are contained; as Europe,
Asia, Africa, America.

An Island (called in Latin, Insula, quasi in salo) is a part of the earth,
environed round with waters; as Britain, Java, St. Laurence Isle, Burmudas.

These again are sub-divided into Peninsula, Istmus Promontorium.


A Peninsula, is almost an Island; that is, a tract of Land, which, being
almost encompassed round by water, is joined to the firm Land by some little
Istmus: as Poloponnesus, Taurica, Cymbrica, and Parvana.

An Istmus is a little narrow neck of Land, which joyneth any Peninsula to the
continent; as the straights of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece.

Promontorium, Is some high mountain, which shoots it self into the Sea, the
utmost end of which, is called a Cape, as that great Cape of good hope, and
Cape Verde in Africa; Cape Comori in Asia, and that of Saint Michaels Mount in
Cornwall; the North Cape up in Norway, and diverse others.

There are likewise other real parts of the earth; as mountains, valleys,
fields, plains, woods and the like.

The other general part of the Globe is the water; which is

Divided into 1 Oceanus. 2 Mare. 3 Fretum. 4 Sinus.


1 Oceanus, The Ocean is that general collection of all waters which
invironeth the whole world on every side.

2 Mare, the Sea is part of the Ocean; to which we cannot come, but through
some strait, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Balticum, and the like.

These two take their names.

Either from the adjacent places, as the British Ocean, the German Sea, the
Atlantic Sea.

Or from the first discoverer, as Mare Magellanicum Davis and Forbishers
straits, etc.

Or from some remarkable accident, as Mare Rubrum, from the red color of the
sands. Mare Aegeum, Pontus Euxinus, and the like.

3 Fretum, a Srait is a part of the Ocean, restrained within narrow bounds, and
opening-a way to the Sea; as the straits of Gibralter, Hellespont, Anian.

4 Sinus, a Creek, is a crooked shore, thrusting out as it were two arms to
embrace the lovely presence of the Sea; as Sinus Adriaticus; Sinus Persicus,
and Corinthiacus.

To this also belong Rivers, Brooks, and Fountains, which are engendered of
congealed air in the earths concavities, and seconded by the Sea-waters,
creeping through hidden crannies thereof. Thus much of the real parts of the
Globe in general.

Of the Circles of the Map and their uses.
THe Earth and Sea, composed themselves in a Sphericall figure, and is caused
by the proper inclination of each part, which being heavy falls from every
point of the circumference, and claps about the center, there settlers as near
as it may toward his place of rest: we may ilustrate both the figure and
situation by a familiar similitude to an ingenious apprehension; Suppose we a
knot to be knit in the midst of a Cord that has many ends, and those to be
delivered to sundry men of equal strength to be drawn several ways round
from every part above, and below, and on each side.

Questionless while every man draws in the boes of the knots, it must needs
become round, and whilst they continue to pluck with equal strength it must
rest immovable in the middle betwixt them, since every strength that would
destroy, has a strength equal to resist it; so it is in the bosom of the
earth, where every part wheels upon equal privilege of nature, nor can any
press farther then the center to destroy this compacted figure, for it must
meet there with a body that will oppose it, or if not, yet could it not pass,
since every motion from the middle were to ascend, which nature will not permit
in a body of weight as the whole earth is.

The compass of the whole is cast by our latest and most learned, to be 21600
English miles, which though none ever yet so pared as to measure them by the
foot, yet let not the ignorant reject this account, since the rule by which
they are led cannot fail: for we see by continual experience, that the Sun
for every degree in the heavens, gains sixty miles upon the earth, toward his
Circuit round, and after three hundred sixty degrees, returns to the same
point in respect of us as before it was: repeat the number of 60 so often and you
will find the account just, and so by proportion of the circumference to the
diamiter, which is tripla sesqui-septima, the same which 22 has has to 7. We
may judge likewise of the earths thickness to the center. The whole diamiter
must by rule be somewhat lesser then a third part of the circuit, that in
proportion to 21600 will be 6872. half the number will reach the middle of the
world, and that is 3436 in this report both of the quantity and form of the
earth; we must not require such exactness as cannot vary a hairs breadth, for
we see the mountains of the earth, and oftentimes the waves of the sea make the
superficies unequal, it will be sufficient if there be no difference, sensible
to be reckoned in so great a bulk; for let us rudely hew a ball out of rough
stone, still it is a ball, though not so smooth as one of Crystal, or suffer a
mote to fall upon a sphere of glass, it changes not its figure, far less are
the mountains which we see in respect of the whole lump.

What a Globe is.
A Globe we define to be an Analogicall representation either of the heavens or
of the earth, and we call it Anagolicall, not only in regard of its form,
expressing the figure of the heavens, as also of the terrestrial Globe,
consisting of the earth it self, together with the interflowing seas, but
rather, because that it represents unto us in a just proportion and distance
each particular constellation in the Heavens, and every several region and
tract of ground in the earth, together with certain circles, both greater and
lesser, invented by artificers for the more ready computation of the same.

The greater circles we call those which divide the whole superficies of the
Globe into equal parts or halfs and those the lesser which divide the same
into two unequal parts.

Besides the body of the Globe it self, there is also annexed a certain
frame, with necessary instruments thereto belonging.

The Fabric of the frame is thus; first of all there is a base or foot to rest
upon, on which, there are raised perpendicularly six pillars or columns of
equal length and distance, upon the top of which there is fastened to a level
a round plate orcircle of wood, which they call the Horizon, because that the
uppermost superficies thereof performs the office of the true Horizon, for it
divides the whole Globe into 2 equal parts whereof that which was uppermost,
represents unto us the visible Hemisphere, and the other, that which is hid
from us. So likewise the circle which divides that part of the world which we
see from the other, which we see not is called the Horizon, and that point
which is directly over our heads in our Hemisphere, and is on every side
equadistant from the Horizon, is commonly called Zenith, and that point which
is opposite to it in the lower Hemisphere, is commonly written Nadir these two
points are called also the Poles of the Horizon.

Furthermore, upon the superficies of the Horizon in a material Globe, there
are described first, the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and each of these is
divided again into thirty lesser portions, so that the whole horizon is
divided into 360 parts, which they also call degrees, and every degree is
divided into sixty parts, also each of them is called a scruple or minute, and
so by the like subdivision of minutes into sixty parts will arise seconds, and
of these thirds, and likewise fourths, and fifths, etc. but the like partition
still of each into sixty parts.

There is also described upon the Horizon, the Roman Calender, and that three
several ways, to wit, the ancient way, which is still in use with us here in
England, and the new way appointed by Pope Gregory 23, wherein the Aequinoxes
and Solstice were restored to the same places they were in at the time of the
Celebration of the counsel of Nice, and in the third, the said Aequinoctiall
and Solsticall points are restored to the places they were in, at the time of
our Savior Christ's nativity.

The months in the Calender, are divided into days and weeks, to which are
annexed as their peculiar characters the 7 first letters of the Alphabet

The innermost border of the Horizon, is divided into thirty two parts,
according to the number of the winds, which are observed by our modern
Sea-faring-men in their Navigations, by which also they are wont to design
forth the quarters of the Heavens, and the Coasts of Countries, the names of
the winds are set down both in English and Latin, in the Horizon of the
material Globes.

The use of the Horizon is manifold, First it divides the heavens into 2
Hemisphears; Secondly it shows what stars never set, and what never rise from
under the earth, and so likewise what stars do both rise and set; Thirdly, it
shows the cause of the equality and inequality of the artisiciall days and
nights; Fourthly, it conduces to the finding out of the latitude of any place;
Fifthly, it is the cause of the rectitude and obliquity of the Sphere, whereof
we have occasion to speak more largely hereafter.

There is also let into this Horizon two notches, opposite one to the other, a
circle of brass, making right angles with the said Horizon, and placed so that
it may be removed at pleasure up and down by those notches, as need shall
require; This Circle is called the Meridian because that one side of it which
is in like manner divided into 360 degrees, supplyeth the office of the true
Meridian. Now the Meridian is one of greater circles, passing through the Poles
of the world, and also of the Horizon, to which when the Sun in his daily
revolution is arrived in the upper Hemisphere it is midday, and when it
touches the same in the lower Hemisphear it is midnight at the place whose
Meridian it is.

The Meridian (which comes first to be considered) is a great Circle compassing
round the Earth from Pole to Pole; and is that which you see in the
circumference of both Planisphears of the Map, and wherein are written the
names of the Zones and Climates, This chief, first, fixed Meridian passes
through the Islands called Azores, according to the ancient Cosmographers; and
there are two reasons why they did there begin to reckon the longitude of the
Earth.

First, for that at that time there was no land known further to the Western
then that place.

Secondly, Under that Meridian the Needle in the Mariners compass had no
variation, but did point directly North and South.

There be also many Meridians according to the diverse places in which a man
lives, the number of them equal to so many points as may be imagined in the
Globe; but the usual setting them known to view, is by ten degrees asunder;
and are those black lines which you see in both Planisphears, running down
along from the North to the South Pole.

The use of the Meridian, is to show the longitude of any place. Now the
longitude of a Region, City or Cape, is the distance of it East from the first
great Meridian; and this longitude is measured and numbered in the Aequinoctiall
line by Meridians from the general and fixed Meridian into the East, and
contains the whole compass of the Earth, viz. 360. degrees.

To prove this by example, cast your eye on London, and you shall see it
something to the East of the second black Meridian; pass down with that black
line to the Aequinoctiall, and look as much East there, as London is from that
Meridian above, then count the degrees of the Aequinoctiall, from the first
great Meridian to that place, and that distance is the longitude of London,
which you may perceive to be 20 degrees and better: And the like manner of
working is to be made for all other places.

That line full of degrees crossing both Planisphears straight along in the
middle, and dividing the world into two halfs (viz.) North and South halfs; is
called the Aequinoctiall line, or the Equator; either because it is of equal
distance from both Poles of the world, or else because the Sun coming in
this Circle makes the days and nights throughout the world of a length; which
happens upon the 10. or 11. of March, and the 13, or 14. of September. It
passes through Abassia or Prester John's Kingdom, and Manicongo in Africa,
through the great Island Sumatra, and the Maldive Isles of Asia; and in
America, through Guiana.

The use of it is to show the latitude of any Country, City, Promontory, or
the like: Now the satitude is the distance of a place toward the South or
North, from the Aequinoctiall line or middle of the world; and is reckoned and
measured upon the Meridian toward either Pole. Those therefore have Northern
latitude that inhabit between the Equinoctial and the North Pole, as they have
Southern latitude that are between the same Equator and the South Pole.

Those black lines thwarting the black Meridians from East to West, are
parallels, and are also called Aequidistants, being distant one from another 10
degrees toward both Poles; and are here set down for the easy counting the
latitude of any place from the Aequinoctiall: as for the latitude of London;
count so many decimall Parallels, till you come to the Parellel which is
nearest London, (you shall find them to be five) then follow that line to the
Meridian, and see the figures set thereat; they are 50.) moreover, add to that
number of 50. so much as London is situate above that parallel, the space is one
degree and a half; thus you shall find the latitude of London (that is, the
distance thereof from the Equator toward the North Pole) to be 51 degrees and
a half: and in like manner must the latitude of all other places be sought.
Thus much of Longitude and Latitude, by which two, the whole Earth is reckoned.

The Meridian and Aequinoctiall, as also the Zodiac, are filled throughout
with degrees, the number 360 and every degree consists of 60 minutes, and
contains, according to our ordinary account, 20. leagues, or 60 miles.

The great circle that is drawn bending bias in one planisphear up to the
Tropic of Cancer, in the other down to the Tropic of Capricorn, is the the
Zodiac; it is replenished with degrees, and bears on it the Characters of the
twelve signs.

The uses of it are to show over what Countries and people the body and beams
of the Sun come perpendicular at some times or other in the year, and it shows
to all (where the days increase and decrease) the longest and shortest days of
the year, for the Sun (which causes the same) being always in this circle,
and therein moving about one degree a day, all the while he is coming up from
the Tropic of Capricorn to that of Cancer, the days increase in the
Northern Climates; but contrariwise in his course back from Cancer to
Capricorn they shorten to us, and lengthen to those in the Southern Climates;
and this Circles shows the four quarter of the year; Spring, Summer, Autumn,
Winter.

The Tropic of Cancer, (so called, or the Caelestiall sign Cancer) is a
circle, whose distance from the Equinoctial toward the North, is 23 degrees
and a half. When the Sun is come so far Northward as to touch this Circle, then
is our longest day in the year.

It passes through the Southermost parts of Barbary and Egypt, Arabia, India,
China, Nova Hispania, and the Island Cuba.

The Tropic of Capricorn, (likewise so named of the sign Capricorn in the
starry heaven) is a circle of like distance at the other Tropic from the
Aequinoctial Southward, that is 23 degrees and a half. When the Sun is gone
down to the Circle Southward, it is our shortest day in the whole year.

This Tropic passes throngh Monomopata, Saint Laurence Island, Peru, and South
coasts of Brasile.

The Artick, or North polar Circle, is distant from the North Pole, 23 degrees
and a half; so much as the Tropic of Cancer from the Aequinoctiall; but the
distance between that Tropic and it, is 43 degrees.

You may see it pass through Island, Norway, Boddia, Moscovy, Tartary, cross
Davis Straits, and Greenland.

The Antartike or South polar Circle, is distant from the South Pole, 23.
degrees and a half; so far as the Tropic of Capricorn is from the
Equinoctial.

The Circle passes through Magellanica, or Terra Australis Incognita only.

Now these four lesser circles, (viz.) the two Tropicks, and Polar Circles, do
fitly part the Earth into five Zones.

The Zones.
A Zone is a space of Earth, contained between two of the smaller circles, or
within the compass of either Polar Circle: the name signifies as much as a
girdle, by reason that each Zone compasses about the Earth in manner of a
girdle. Of these there be two kinds, one temperate, the other untemperate.

There be two temperate Zones; the one North, the other South.

The North temperate Zone is that space of earth contained between the Tropic
of Cancer, and the North Polar Circle.

The South temperate Zone is that space of earth stretched along between the
Tropic of Capricorn, and the South Polar Circle.

They are called temperate Zones, for that the air thereof has a far better
and more moderate temperature, and meeter for man to inhabit, then the
untemperate Zones. The breadth of them is forty three degrees a piece, which
degrees make either temperate Zone to be 2580 English miles broad a piece.

The untemperate Zones are twofold; one exceeding in the extremity of heat, the
other as much in cold; they have been thought in former times altogether
unhabitable, but latter experience has found them more fit for habitation.

The Torrid or burnt Zone (which is the hot untemperate Zone) is that space of
heaven which you see contained between the Tropic of Cancer, and that of
Capricorn. It has the name of Torrid, because the Sun continually passes
thereover, and casting down direct rays, affects it with a mavelous heat;
thereby making it not so inconvenient for the Inhabitants, as the temperate
Zones are. The breadth of this Zone is comprehended between the two Topics,
and contains 47 degrees, that is of English miles 2820.

The frozen Zones are spaces of Earth enclosed within either of the Polar
Circles: of these there are two, one North, the other South.

The North frozen Zone, is that space of Earth contained within the compass of
the North Polar Circle. The breadth thereof reckoned twenty three degrees and a
half, viz. from the Pole it self to the Polar Circle, which of English miles
is 1410.

The South frozen Zone, is that space of Earth compassed all about with the
South Polar Circle: It has the like breadth from the South Pole, as the other
frozen Zone has from the North Pole: and likewise the number of miles is the
same.

They are called frozen Zones, because they (for the most part) exceed in cold;
and that is caused in regard that the Sun, for a good part of the year, is
under the Horizon, and sees them not; and when he is come up into their sight,
his appearance (which for a pretty long season together) rather comforts them,
then any vertuall heat proceeding from him; for there the air is stuffed with
thick foggy vapors, and his beams at highest fall but very oblilely on them;
so that what through his want and unability to dispel the cold and the colds
force to resist, and bear back the Suns heat; these Zones remain almost
unhabitable, and even (as the word is) frozen.

The names of all these, set in the right place of each Zone you shall see in
that Meridian going about America and Magellanica.

Of the Climates.
IN that great meridian going about Europe, Asia, and Africa, are described the
Climates; Now a Climate is a space of the Earth included within the space of
two Parellels. The use of them is to show the difference of length and
shortness of days over all the world, as you may see in the midst of every
climate, set the number of the hours of the longest day in the year, under
that Climate: the longest day in one Climate, differing half an hour from the
longest in another. so that there are four and twenty Climates, consisting of
forty eight Parallels, ere the day come to be twenty four hours in length,
which is twelve hours longer then the ordinary Aequinoctiall day is. Now this
is to be understood; Under the Aequinoctiall line, and thirteen degrees, that
is, three Parallels, on either side thereof, the days exceed not the length of
twelve hours, but after in every Clime increase the length of half an hour,
so that there are numbered (as is said before) 48 Parallels, which make twenty
four Climates, before the days become twenty four hours long; the which
length they being grown to, their increase is then by whole weeks and months,
till in the four and twentieth Clime: about the Pole, the day is full half a
year long. And it is thus between the equator and the North Pole, so it is
between the said Equator and South Pole: wherefore there are 2 sorts of Climes,
that is 24 Northern, and as many Southern. The Climates Northward are thus
named; the first is Dia Meroes, because the middle Parallel thereof passes
through the midst of the Inland Island Meroe, in the Continent of Africa; the
second is Dia Sienes; the third Dia Alexandrias; the fourth Dia Rhodos; the
fifth Dia Romes; the sixth Dia Ponton; the seventh Dia Boristhenes; the eighth
Dia Ripheos; the ninth Per Dianam. The South Climes has the same names, save
only that the word Anti is thereunto added; as Anti Dia Meroes; the next Anti
Dia Sienes, and so along to the ninth Southward: further then the ninth Clime
on either side the Aequinoctiall they are not named, but yet the Climes run on
both ways to the number of twenty four as is seen in the Meridian. That there
be but nine named; the reason is, because when these names were given, no more
then nine Climats were known to those of ancient times; but since, though the
number of them be increased to twenty four, the rest are not known by proper
names, but remain innominate.

In the two opposite points of this Meridian are fastened the two ends of an
iron pin, passing through the body of the Globe and its center, one of which
ends is called the Artick, or North pole of the world; and the other the
Antartick or South Pole; and the pin it self is called the Axis; for the Axis
of the world is the Diamiter about which it is turned, and the extreme ends of
the Axis are called the Poles.

To either of these Poles when need shall require there is a certain brass
Circle or ring to be fastened; which Circle is divided into twenty four equal
parts, according to the number of the hours day and night, and it is therefore
called the hour Circle, and this Circle is to be applied to either of the
Poles in such sort as that the section where twelve is described may precisely
agree with the points of midday and midnight in the superficies of the true
Meridian.

There is also another little pin to be fastened to the end of the Axis, in
the very Center of the hour Circle; this pin is so made as it turns about and
poynteth to every of the twenty four sections in the hour Circle, according as
the Globe it self is moved about, so that you may place the point of it to
what hour you please.

The use of this hour-circle and Index, is to denote the hours of the rising
and setting of the Sun, and other stars, which must be pactised after this
manner; First you mnst set the Globe to your elevation or pole, and then apply
the degree of the sign in which the Sun at that time is, to the Meridian and
the Index to that 12 hours which is uppermost, and so having thus done you
must turn the Globe about till the degree wherein the Sun is come to the
Eastern side of the Horizon, which done the Index will point out the hour of
his rising, and if you turn it about to the West side, you shall in like
manner have the hour of his setting.

There is also belonging to the Meridian, a quadrant of Altitude, being made of
a long thin plate, of steel or brass and fashioned crooked, so that it may be
applied to the convexe superficies of the Globe.

And having the fourth part of the Circle in length and this Quadrant is made
in such sort as that it may be fastened on the Meridian, and so be applied to
the Zenith of any place whatsoever, being divided from one end to the other
into 90 equal parts or degrees.

There is besides at the foot of the Globe, a Mariners Compass placed, which
serves to show how to place the Globe rightly, according to the four winds or
quarters of the world.

Besides these circles expressed in the Globe, there are also some certain
other circles in familiar use with the Practical Astronomers, which they call
vertical Circles; these are greater Circles drawn from the vertical point
through the Horizon, in what number you please; the office of these Circles is
supplied by the help of a Quadrant of altitude which is a thin plate of brass
divided into 90 degrees; this Quadrant must be applied to the vertex of any
place, when you desire to use it, so that the lowest end of it noted with the
number of 90, may just touch the Horizon in every place, this Quadrant is made
moveable, that so it may be fastened to the vertical point of any place.

Of the Figure of the heavenly Orbs and Elements.
THe whole world is divided into two parts, viz. Elementall, and Etheriall or
Celestial parts.

The Elementall part is fourfold; viz. Earth, water, Air, Fire, as may be
seen in that round figure of the frame of the Heavens and Elements one within
another; the inmost and middlemost Circle containing Earth and water intermixed
together; the next, the three Regions of the Air, and immediately above that
Orb, is the Element of Fire; all which you may easily discern by their
several names in their proper places.

The Etheriall or Celestial parts do compass the Elementall part, and contain
the ten upper Spheres, viz. 1 The Moon, 2 Mercury, 3 Venus, 4 Sol, 5 Mars, 6
Jupiter, 7 Saturn, 8 the starry Firmament, 9 the Christaline Heaven, having no
stars at all; the 10. is the Primum mobile, or first mover, containing all the
rest within it; and moving from the East to the West carries about with it in
violence all the other Spheres.

The rest of the Spears have contrary motions, every one in his kind, though
far slower then the other: and their motions are contrary, from the West to the
East, and so are carried about oftentimes by the first mover, before they make
one perfect revolution in themselves.

The Christaline or ninth Sphere his motion is almost immensible, and is called
the Trembling Motion, and is performed, according to the opinion of later
Astronomers, in 49000 years.

The eight Sphere being the Starry Firmament performs his motion in 7000
years.

The rest of the Spears are the seven Planets, each Sphere contains in it
but one Star; whereof the uppermost and slowest is Saturn, which perfecteth
his course in thirty years. Jupiter being next under that, makes his revolution
in twelve years. Mars beneath him finisheth his course in two years. Sol
passes through the Zodiac in 365 days and 6 hours, which is one whole year.
Venus ends her course in somewhat more then a year. Mercury holds equal pace
with the Sun. Luna courseth about the Heaven once every eight and twenty days.

A Star of the first bigness, is 107 times bigger then the earth. A Star of the
second bigness, is 90 times the globe of the earth. A Star of the third bigness.
is 72 times the globe of the earth. A Star of the fourth bigness, is 54 times
the globe of the earth. A Star of the fifth bigness, is 36 times the globe of
the earth. A Star of the sixth bigness, is 18 times the globe of the earth.
Of the Use of the Globes.
THe first whereof is concerning the position of the Globe, and the other
Climates. Now touching the position of the Globe, you are first of all to take
care that it be placed perpendicularly to the true horizon; Secondly, That the
distinction of the winds answer directly to the winds of the real Horizon,
that so the East on your material Globe may look directly toward the true
East of the world; for which purpose especially there is usually placed a
Nauticall compass in the bottom of the frame. When you have thus placed your
Globe so that it may be turned any way at pleasure, yet so that the base or
foot be not moved out of its place. The next thing that is to be inquired
after, is the latitude of the place wherein you live, which according as it is
greater or less, you must elevate the Pole of your Globe above the horizon
proportionably. As for example, if the latitude be 50, 51, or 52. grad. or more
or less Northward, then must you elevate the Artick pole, just so many degrees
above the Horizon, and so likewise if the latitude be Southern, you must do
the like by the Antartick or South Pole, But under the Equator where there is
no latitude at all both the Poles must be placed in the very Horizon at
opposite points.

Now if you desire to know the longitude of any place expressed in the Globe,
you must apply the same place to the Meridian, and observing at what place the
Meridian cutteth the Equator, reckon the degree of the Equator from the
Meridian of St. Michaels Island to that place; for so many are the degrees of
longitude of the place you look for.

In the same manner you may measure the difference of longitude betwixt any
other two places that are described in the Globes.

Now if you desire to find the latitude of any place expressed in the Globe,
you must apply the same to the Meridian, and reckon the number of the degrees
that it is distant from the Equator, for so much is the latitude of that place.

To find the distance of two places, set your Globe in such sort, as that the
Zenith of one of the plates be 90 degrees distant every way from the Horizon,
and then fasten the Quadrant of altitude to the vertical point and so move it
up and down until it pass through the vertix of the other place, the number
of the degrees intercepted in the Quadrant betwixt the two places, being
resolved into furlongs, miles or leagues, as you please will show you the true
distance of the places assigned, and the other end of the Quadrant that
touches upon the Horizon will show on what wind or quarter of the world the
one place is in respect of the other, or what angle or position it has for the
angle or position is that which is comprehended betwixt the Meridian of any
place, and a great Circle passing through the Zeniths of any two places
assigned, and the quantity of it is to be numbered in the Horizon.

As for example, The longitude of London is 26 degrees and it has in Northern
latitude 51 degrees and a half. Now it is demanded, what distance and angle of
position it bears to Saint Michaels Island, which is one of the Azore we must
proceed thus to find it; first, let the North Pole be Elevated 51 degrees
which is the latitude of London, then fastening the quadrant of altitude to the
Zenith of it, that is to say 51 degrees and an half Northward from the
Aequtor; we must turn it about till it pass through Saint Michaels Island,
and we shall find the distance intercepted betwixt these 2 places to be 11
degree, 40. m. or thereabouts, which is 280. of our leagues, and if we observe
in what part of the horizon the end of the quadrant rests we shall find the
angle of position to fall near upon 50 gr. betwixt South-west and by west, and
this is the Situation of this Island in respect of London. The distance of
place differing only in latitude may be found out after this manner; First,
you must substract the lesser latitude from the greater, resolving a degree
into minutes, if the substraction cannot be done otherwise conveniently, then
multiply the degrees by 15, and divide the minutes by 4. and the sum produce
will be the distance of those two places in common German miles, one whereof
contains four of our English miles.

To find delineation of the Sun for any day given.
HAving first learned the day of the Month, you must look for the same in the
Callender described on the Horizon of your Globe, over against which in the
same Horizon you shall find the sign of the Zodiac, and the degree of the
same that the Sun is in at that time, but if it be leap year, then for the next
day after the 28th. of February you must take that degree of the sign which is
ascribed to the day following; As for example, if you desire to know what
degree of the Zodiac the Sun is in the 29th of Febru. you must take that
degree which is assigned for the first of March, and for the first of March
take the degree of the second, and so forward.

Now when you have found the place of the Sun, apply the same to the Meridian,
and reckon thereon how many degrees the Sun is distant from the Equator, for
so many will the degrees be of the Suns declination for the day assigned; for
the declination of the Sun, or of any other Star, is nothing else but the
distance of the same from the Equator reckoned one the Meridian.

You also find out the Suns greatest declination by his greatest and least
altitude, both in Summer and Winter, by substracting the least out of the
greatest, for then half that which remains will the declination on you seek
for.

Now to know the longitude of the Sun for any time, that is to say in what
degree of the Zodiac he is, you must do thus, seek in the limb of the
Horizon for the day of the month for which you would know the longtiude of the
Sun, which found, you shall see over against it, among the signs of the
Zodiac discribed also upon the Horizon the degree of the sign that exactly
answers to it, and which is the place of the Sun for that day and month, but
if it be leap year you must remember after the 28th of February to add one day
more still as you go, as if you would look for the place of the Sun on the
13th of March, you must take that degree which is set for the 14 of March which
is the 3 gr. of Libra.

To find the latitude of any place.
HAving found the place of the Sun in the Eccliptick, apply the same to the
Meridian, and so move the Meridian up and down through the notches it stands
in, until the place of the Sun be elevated so many degrees above the Horizon
as the Suns altitude is; and the Globe standing in this position the elevation
of either of the Poles will show the Latitude of the place wherein you are.

The like effect may be wrought by observeing the Meridian altitude of any
other star expressed in the Globe, for if you set your Globe so as that the
star you mean, to observe be so much elevated above the Horizon, as the
Meridian altitude of it is observed to be the elevation of the Pole above the
Horizon will show the latitude of the place.

To find the Latitude of any place by knowing the place of the Sun or other
star, and observing the altitude of it two several times, with the space of
time betwixt the two observations.
FIrst having taken with your compasses the complement of the altitude of your
first observation, now the complement of the altitude, is nothing else but the
difference of degrees by which the altitude is found to be less then 90
degrees you must set one of the feet of your compasses in that degree of the
Eccliptick that the Sun is in at that time, and with the other discribe a
Circle upon the superficies of the Globe, tending somewhat toward the west, if
the observation be taken before noon, but toward the east if it be made in the
afternoon; then having made your Second observation, and observed the space of
time betwixt it and the former, apply the place of the Sun to the Meridian,
turning the Globe toward the East until that so many degrees of the Equator
have passed by the Meridian as answer to the space of time that passed betwixt
your observations, allowing for every hour 15 degrees in the Equator, and
marking the place in the parallel of the Suns declination, that the Meridian
crosses after this turning about of the Globe, and then setting the foot of
your compasses in the very interfection, discribe an arch of a Circle with the
other foot of the compass, extended to the complement of the Second
observation, which arch must cut the former Circle, and the common interfection
of these two Circles, which show the vertical point of the place wherein you
are, so that having reckoned the distance of it from the Equator, you shall
presently have the latitude of the same.

The same may be effected if you take any Star and work by it after the same
manner, or if you discribe two Circles mutually crossing each other to the
complements of any two stars.

Seeing the Zenith or vertix of evry place is distant a quarter of a Circle,
that is 90 degrees from the Horizon, if then the Sun being in either of the
Aequinoctiall points, the Meridian altitude be substeacted from 90 degrees, the
remainder will be the distance betwixt the Zenith of the place, and the
Aequinoctiall Circle, which will be the latitude of the same place.

To find the hour of the day, Rising and Setting of the Sun.
WOrk thus, First set your Globe to the latitude of your place, then having
found out the place of the Sun for the time assigned, apply the same to the
Meridian, and withal you must set the point of the hour Index at the figure
12 in the hour Circle, and having thus done, you must turn about the Globe
toward the East-part, till the place of the Sun touch the Horizon, which done,
you shall have the amplitude of the Suns rising, also in the Equator which you
must reckon as we have said, from the East-point or place of interfection,
betwixt the Equator and the Horizon, and then if you but turn the Globe about
to the West side of the Horizon, you shall in like manner have the hour of his
setting and Occidentall amplitude.

To find out the Longitude, Latitude, and declination of any fixed star as it
is expressed in the Globe.
TAke the Quadrant of altitude, or any other quadrant of a Circle, that is but
exactly divided into 90 parts, and lay one end of it on either Pole of the
Eccliptick, either Northern or Southern, as the latitude of the Star shall
require, then let it pass through the Center of the Star, to the very
Eccliptick, and there the other end will show the degree of the Longitude of
the same which you must reckon from the beginning of Aries, and so that portion
of the Quadrant that is contained betwixt the Star it self and the Eccliptick,
will also show the Latitude of the star.

The declination of a star is the distance of it from the Equator, which
distance must be reckoned one greater Circle passing through the Poles of the
Equator; and therefore if you but apply one Star to the Meridian you shall
presently have the declinaion of it, if you account the degrees and minutes of
the Meridian (if they be any) that are contained betwixt the Center of the Star
and the Equator.

Of the Constellations of the Northern Hemispheare.
THe first is, Vrsa minor, the lesser bear in this Constellation are reckoned
seven stars.

The second is Vrsa Major, the great bear in this constellation are reckoned
twenty seven stars, some say but twenty four, both the bears are called a
Wagon or Chariot, but this name does properly appertain to those seven bright
stars in the great bear, which do something resemble the form of a Wagon.

The Third, the Dragone In this constellation there are reckoned 31 stars.

The fourth is Cephens to this Constellation, they reckon on in all 11, among
which, that which is in number the 4th, is called in Arabic, Alderaimin, which
signifies the right arm.

The fifth is Boots; which signifies an Heards-man, or one that drives Oxen;
betwixt the legs of this Constellation there stands an unformed star of the
first magnitude which is called Araturns, the whole Constellation consists of
22 stars.

The sixth Constellation is Corona Borea, the North Crown the whole
Constellation consists of 8 stars.

The seventh is Hercules, It resembles one that is weary with labor; this
Constellation has 8 stars, besides that which is in the end of his right foot,
which is betwixt him and Boots and one unformed star at his right arm.

The eighth is the Harp, It consists of ten stars, but Timochares attributed
to it but 8; and Alfraganus 11, the bright star in this Constellation being the
first in number.

The ninth is Gallina, the Hen or Swan, to this Asterisme is attributed besides
those two unformed near the left wing 17 stars.

The tenth is Cassiopea the Lady in the cheer, it consists of 13 stars.

The eleventh is Perseus, bearing the head of Medusa, for that star which is on
the top of the left hand is called the Devils-head, this Constellation has
besides those 3 unformed, 26 other stars.

The twelfth is Aurgia the Wagoner, this Asterisme has 14 stars, of which that
bright one in the left shoulder, which is also the third in number, is called
Capra a Goat, and the two which are in his left hand, and are the 8th. and 9th.
are called Haedikids.

The thirteenth is Aquila the Eagle, In this Asterisme is reckoned nine stars,
besides six other unformed.

The fourteenth is the Dolphine, and it has in it ten stars.

The fifteenth is called in Latin Sagita, the Arrow or Dart, it contains 5
stars in all.

The sixteenth is Serpentarius the Serpent bearer, it confisteth of 24 stars,
and 5 other unformed.

The seventeenth is Serpens, the Serpent, It consists of 18 stars.

The eighteenth is Equiculus the little horse, it consists of 4 obscure stars.

The nineteenth is Pegasus, the great Horse, it has in it ten stars.

The twentieth is Andromida, the chained woman, this Constellation contains
in it 23 stars.

21 is Triangle, it consists of four stars; Among all these constellations in
the Northern Hemispheare, which are in all 21, there are but three stars only
of the first magnitude, the first of which is that in the left shoulder of
Erichthonius, or the Wagoner, called in Latin Capella; the second is the
bright star in the Harp; the third is Arcturns betwixt the legs of Boots.
Now the whole number of stars in this part of the Heavens, reckoning in these
also which are of the 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6th. magnitude, with the obscure and
cloudy ones also, arises to 360.

Of the Northern Sgnes of the Zodiac.
THe first is Aries the Ram; This Constellation has thirteen stars, some
reckon but 12, besides the other 5 unformed ones that belong to it.

The second is Taurus, the Bull in the eye of this Constellation is a very
bright star, and those 5 stars that are in his forehead are called in Latin
Suculae, they usually cause rain and stormy weather; those oaths 6 or rather 7
stars that appear on the back of the Bull the Greeks call Plyades, perhaps from
their multitude; this Constellation has 33 stars in it, besides 11 unformed
stars that belong to it.

The third is Gemini the Twins. these some will have to be Caster and Pollux
others Apollo and Hercules; it contains in it 18 stars besides the seven
unformed.

The fourth is Cancer the Crab, consisting of 9 stars, besides 4 unformed.

The fifth is Leo, the Lion, in the breast whereof is a very bright star, being
the 8th in number; this Constellation contains in it 27 stars, besides 8
unformed, of the unformed stars which are betwixt the hinder parts of the Lion
they have made a new Constellation.

The sixth is Virgo, the Vergin, and that bright star she has in her left
hand, the Greeks call an ear of Corn, the whole constellation consists of
twenty six stars besides the six unformed.

Of the Constellations of the Southern Hemispheare, and first of those in the
Zodiac.
FIrst Libra, which is the seventh, in order of the signs Libra was not
reckoned anciently among the signs, till that the later Astronomers, robbing
the Scorpion of his claws translated the same to Libra, and made up the number
of the signs; this Constellation contains in it 8 stars, besides 9 other
unformed belonging to it.

The eight is Scorpio, the Scorpion, this constellation consists of 21 Stars,
besides three unformed.

The ninth is Sagitarius the Archer, it has in it thirty one stars.

The tenth is Capricornus the Goat, to this Constellation they attribute 28
stars.

The eleventh is Aquarius the Water-man, it contains in all 42 stars.

The twelfth is Prices the Fishes, it contains 34 stars, and 4 unformed.

Of the Constellations of the Southern Hemispheare which are without the
Zodiac.
THe first is Cetus, the Whale consisting of 22 stars.

The second is Orien which the Arabians call sometimes the madman, sometimes a
strong-man or Giant; it consists of 38 stars, it is called the madman,
because that when this Constellation rises with the Sun it causes great store
of tempestuous weather in all places.

The third is Eridanus, the River, it has in it 34 stars.

The fourth is Lepus, the Hair, it contains 12 stars.

The fifth is Canis, the Dog; this Constellation has in it 11 stars.

The sixth is the little Dog Anti Canis in Latin, because it rises before
the great Dog; this Asterisme consists of two stars only.

The seventh is Argo, the Ship; the whole Astorisme contains in it 45 stars.

The eight is Hydra, it has in it is 25 stars, besides two unformed.

The ninth is Crater, the Cup, it has in it 7 stars.

The tenth is Corvus, the Crow, consisting of 7 stars.

The eleventh is Centaurus, the Genture, it contains 37 stare

The twelfth is Fera, the wild beast, to this constellation they reckon 19
stars.

The thirteenth is Ara, the Alter, it contains 7 stars.

The fourteenth is Corona Australis, the South Crown, it consists of 13
stars.

The fifteenth is Prises Austrinus, the South-fish, it contains in it 12
stars.

There is also discribed in the Caelestiall Globe, a certain broad Zone or
Cirlce, of the color of Milk, which represents that which appears in the
Heavens, and is called, Via Lactea, and milky way, which Zone or Circle is not
drawn regularly or equally, either in respect of latitude, color, or frequency
of stars, but is different and various both in form and situation, in some
places appearing but as a single Circle, and again in others seeming as it were
dividing in two parts, the delineation whereof you may see in the Globe.

Now the whole firmament, reckoning in the Northern and Southern Hemisphears
together with the Zodiac, contains in all 1022 stars which make up 48
Asterismes or constellations.

How to make a Sun Dyall by the Globe for any latitude of place.
FOr the making of a plain Horizontall dyall, having first prepared your flat
dyall ground parallel to the Horizon, draw a Meridian on it as exactly North
and South as possibly you can, which done, draw another East and West, which
must cross it at right Angels; The first of which lines will show 12, and the
other 6 of the Clock both morning and evening. Then making a Center in the
interfection of these two lines, describe a Circle on your dyall to what
distance you please, and then divide it as all othr Circles usually are into
360 parts and it will not be amiss to sub-devide each of these into lesser
parts if it may be conveniently done. And now it only remains to find out the
distances of the hour lines in this Circle, for any latitude of place, which
that we may do by the use of the Globe, let it first be set to the Latitude of
the place assigned, and then make choice of some of the greater Circles in the
Globe that pass through the Poles of the world. As for example, The
Aequinoctiall color if you please, and apply the same to the Meridian, in
which situation it shows the midday, or 12 a Clock, then turning about the
Globe toward the West (if you will) till that 15 degrees of the Equator have
passed through the Meridian: you must mark the degree of the Horizon, that the
same color crosses in the Horizon, for that point will show the distance of
the first and 11th hours from the Meridian both of which are distant an hours
space from the Meridian, or line of Midday; then turning again the Globe
forward till other fifteen degrees are past the Meridian, the same color, will
point out the distance of the 10th hour, which is 2 hours before noon, and of
the second hour afternoon; and in the same manner may you find out the
distances of all the rest in the Horizon, allotting to each of them 15 degrees
in the Equator, crossing the Meridian; but here you must take notice by the
way, that the beginning of this account of the distances, must be taken from
that part of the Horizon on which the Pole is elevated, to wit, from the
North-part of the Horizon, if the Artick Pole be elevate, and so likewise from
the South part, if the Antartick be elevated.

The distances of the hours being thus noted in the Horizon of the Globe, you
must afterward translate them into your plain allotted for your dyal ground,
reckoning in the circumference of it so many degrees to each hour as are
answerable to those pointed out by the color in the Horizon; and lastly,
having thus, done the Gnomon or Style must be erected, where you are to observe
this one thing, which is indeed the chief thing to be carefully looked unto,
namely, that that edge or line of the Gnomon, which is to show the hours by its
shadow in all kinds of dyals must be set parallel to the Axis of the world, that
so it may make an angle of inclination, with its plain ground equal to that
which the Axis of the world makes with the Horizon, now that the style is to
stand directly to the North and South, or the Meridian line is a thing commonly
known.

Now if you would make a plain erect dyal perpendicular to the Horizon, which
is commonly called a Mural, and respecting either the North or South, you must
remember this one thing, that that which is an erect dyall in one place will be
a Horizontall in another, whose Zenith is distant from that place 90 degrees
either Northward or Southward.

And so likewise by this rule may be made any manner of inclining dyall, if so
be that the quantity of the inclination be but known, as for example, if a
dyall be made on a plain ground, whose inclination is ten degrees from the
Horizon Southward, and for a place whose latitude is 52 gr. Northward, you
must describe it in that plain and horizontall dial for the Latitude of 62
degrees Northward, and if in the same Latitude the dial ground do incline
toward the North 16 gr. you must take in horizontall dial for the Northern
latitude of 36 gr.

And thus much for making dials by the Globe.
FINIS.
world map surrounded by figures and illustrations A Figure of the Sphere
map of the western Hemisphere AMERICA was first discoverd ye year 1492 by
Christopher Columbus at ye charge of Ferdinand and Isabella K: and Q: of
Castill but denominated of Ameri^cus Vesputius seven years after.

map of the eastern Hemisphere To the Right Hon:ble Henry Mountague, Baron of
Kimbolton, Viscount Maundevile, Lo: President of his Ma:ties most Ho:ble Privy
Counsel: this Mapp of the World, with Himself, and his best services. Will:
Grent.

This South Land undiscouered commonly known by the name of Terra Australis
incognita and Magellanica cannot certainly be affirmed either continent or
Islands only some few coasts thereof have appeared to Seamen Driven thereupon by
extremity of weather whose names are set down. the rest must remain clouded
in obscurity till future times and further discoueries produce them to light.




