A great and glorious VICTORY Obtained by the Lord Inchequin, Lord President of
Munster, over the Irish Rebels, not far from the Castle of Conmell, September.
the 6th. where were slain upon the place, Four Colonels, Four Lieutenant
Colonels, Five Majors, Two thousand three hundred Officers, Gentlemen, and
other Soldiers. The Earl of Glamorgan taken and wounded. Twenty Colors
taken. Seven hundred Prisoners. Ten Carriages. A thousand Muskets. Three
thousand Pistols and other Arms. Four hundred head of Cattle. Two thousand
Sheep. One thousand serviceable horse. Five thousand horse and foot totally
routed. Owen Oneale totally routed and fled.


With a List of the names and particulars on both sides.

7ber. 14th.

Printed for V. V. in the year, 1647.

A great and glorious VICTORY Obtained in IRELAND.
My Lord,
I Received your Letter dated September the third, concerning the proceedings
of the Parliament and Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army, in which (I most humbly thank
your Lordship) I received abundant satisfaction; I shall not fail, in some
manner of requital, to give your Honor a particular account of the Affairs of
this Kingdom, and more especially of the great and most remarkable Victory,
which it pleased God to give my Lord Inchequin, and the forces under his
command, begun at Conmell Castle on the Lords day at night on September the
fifth, and perfected on the day following, September the sixth, where all the
Cavalry of the Rebels under the Lord Muskry, and the Earl of Glamorgan were
deeply routed, and above 2000 foot slain under the command of that Arch-rebell
Owen-Roe-Oneal.

And surely, though the mercies of Almighty are spread over all his works, yet
they are no where more visibly to be seen, nor more legibly to be read then in
his most gracious deliverance of this Kingdom of Ireland, from the hands of
the most barbarous and insulting Rebels, at what time with a wicked confidence,
they threatened to root both us and our Religion out of the Kingdom, and with
open-mouth were ready to devour us, but blessed be the Name of the Lord of
Hosts who will not be seen on their side, who boast of the numbers of their
Chariots and Horses, and put their trust in the arm of flesh, but is pleased
to give the Victory, who, though weak in outward strength do make him their
shield and their buckler, who fighting for the truth of the Gospel, and for the
cause of Christ in the purity of Religion, he is always found to be
miraculously near unto them in the day of their visitation.

On Wednesday, September the first, my Lord President having quieted his Army,
and removed a great part of their discontent, by assuring them that there was a
considerable sum of money coming from England to their relief, he drew them
into the field, and so much of the Artillery with him, for which he could
provide himself with carriages, which was one Demiculverin, and three field
pieces, with these he marched the first night to Ballekerry, and next morning
having secured the the pass of Addor, he marched to Limbry, and quartered that
night at a little Village called Nully, where our forces that were sent to
gather cattle, and drive them toward the camp, came very late, but with a
considerable booty of about 2000 Cows and Sheep: The next day we sat down
before the Castle of Conmell, having not the sight of any Enemy in all our
march.

My Lord President had no sooner placed his posts, and made his approches unto
the Castle, but he sent his Trumpet to summon it, but the Rogues (though they
had quarter offered for life, and their wearing apparel) obstinately denied to
yield, and returned answer by his Lordships Trumpet, that rather then they
would surrender the Castle, they would bury themselves in the ruins of it,
whereupon my Lord President commanded the Pioners to open the ground, and draw
a line about the Castle, who immediately undertook the work, and that with such
diligence and celerity, that by Saturday on three of the clock in the
afternoon, the Line was almost perfected: On the Lords Day some works were made
whereon we began to plant our Ordnance to make our batteries. In the mean time
the Enemy shot very violently from the Castle, their great Guns and their
Muskets without intermission, playing perpetually on us by day and night: but
with little or no execution, only a common soldier shot in the shoulder, and
Captain Dothick lightly razed with a Musket Bullet on his thigh: About five of
the clock in the Evening, our Scouts brought word that they had discovered a
Body of the Enemies horse, consisting of about 400 on the other side of the
Hill Westward by the River: Immediately Major Trenchard was commanded with 200
Horse to march up the Hill, and Lieutenant Colonel Knight to follow him with
400 foot; Major Trenchard had order to observe the motion of the Enemy, and if
he could find any advantage to fight with them, and upon all occasions to
return advertisements to my Lord President.

The enemy perceiving a considerable party advanced on the hill, durst not
adventure the encounter; but retreated back into the woods, which did not a
little befreind them, for though a forlorn was sent out after them, by reason
of the thickness and un-frequentednesse of the woods, they could not take any
one prisoner, whereby to learn certainly the number or design of the enemy,
insomuch that night coming on, our men were enforced to retreat to the main
body of our Army before Conmell Castle, without being able for the present to
put any thing in execution.

That night a very strong guard and Sentinel was appointed, and about one of
the clock in the morning, the enemy in a full body issued out of the woods, and
in great silence advanced up the hill, the moon at that time shone very bright,
and casting a great shade down the hill, the body of the enemy seemed to be far
more and greater then indeed they were. However, it could nothing discourage
the gallant resolution of Major Sefford, who having received orders to that
purpose, was not only in a preparation to sustain them, but on his advance to
meet them half the way, which be performed with such dexterity and success,
that though the Rebels horse came pouring down upon him, and gave an Alarm to
all the Camp, yet he stopped at the first, the course of their career, being
assisted for that service with about 300 foot, and the Dragoons of Captain
Trumball, and forced the enemy to retreat from whence they came, and not long
after he did heat them from the advantage of the hill, and forced them to fly
amayn into the woods, from which they first did issue, but not thinking it
expedient to follow them further into the woods, for fear of Ambuscadoes, he
returned to the top of the hill, where he continued till the morning.

The day appearing, they found among the slain diverse Renegadoes, belonging
heretofore to Sir John Barlase his Regiment of horse, and the Lord Muskryes
Cornet, and many others of eminent note and quality. But my Lord President not
willing to lose any opportunity to prosecute the victory, gave order to enter
the woods, and that in as quick a posture, and close a body as possibly they
could, which immediately was put in execution, and the enemy forced by degrees
from one hill of defense, and from one wood unto another. As they were upon the
assent of the second hill, the enemy gave fire almost from behind every tree,
and maintained the narrow pass with great resolution, but such was the courage
and expertnesse of our Soldiers, that by fireforce they did beat them from it,
and having got the top of the second hill they found the whole Army of Owen
Ro-neale in a plain on the bottom of the hill, who at the first sight of our
men gave a loud shout, that the woods and hills did echo with the sound thereof.

On this my Lord Inchequin, who knew how to carry himself in all necessities,
dissembling the danger, did immediately cause the greatest part of his Army to
be drawn off from Conmell, leaving only a party to save the works. And a
Council of War being called, it was suddenly resolved, that it was the best
and most honorable course to fight with the enemy, which immediately was put
in execution, and his Lordship ordering the battle in his own person, he
commanded Major Purdon to the right wing; with about 500 horse, Major Jefford
and Major Trenchard had the ordering of the left wing, His Lordship brought up
the maine body himself.

The Enemy stood fast on the foot of the Hill, and covered their Infantry with
their horse, that their numbers might be less discovered, but perceiving our
Army to march down the Hill with a resolution to fight with them, their Body of
horse did cleave a sunder, being at the least 2000 in number to serve as wings
on each side of their foot, who being now open and within Musket of our Forces
gave upon them very gallantly, who were not slow in answering them. The Lord
Inchequin showed excellent demonstrations of his valor, and by his example
encouraged all the Army to acts of Chivalry and Honor: The place where they
fought was large and very plain, and the Armies so near, that in a manner, both
horse and foot charged all at once: Major Jefford at the first impression
charged clean through the left wing of the Enemies horse, and fell upon a
Reserve of their, wherein was the Earl of Glamorgan, who held him to it very
handsomely, insomuch, that he began to wheel about, but the Lord President
having found their mayn Body, and broke through it like a thunderbolt, this
Reserve of Horse followed the example of the foot, and fled also with what
speed they could: In the mean time Major Jefford, and M. Trenchard gave a deep
Rout to the Lord Muskryes Horse, on the right wing, and pursued them with great
execution, although they were extremely harrassed with the service of all the
morning and the night before.

There were sl^^n in this Battle and in the pursuit above 2300, not any of the
English had quarter for life, but only the Earl of Glamorgan, who by marriage
is allied to my Lord President whose second wife is daughter to Henry O Bryan
late Earl of Thomond, There were 700 Irish taken prisoners. I have here sent
unto your Lordship a list of who were slain, and what was taken at the Battle,
which I beseech your Lordship to accept from him who is,

My Lord, Sept. 7. Your Lordships most humble servant, Henry Tirrell.
Colonel Cowran. Colonel O Rork. Colonel Rowland. Colonel Butler. Lieutenant
Col. Talbot. Lieutenant Col. Jones. Lieutenant Col. Farely. Liev. C.
Fitz-Simmonds Five Majors. Two thousand three hundred Officers and Soldiers.
Owen Neal totally rowted and fled. The Earl of Glamorgan taken and wounded.
Twenty Colors taken. One thousand Muskets. Ten Carriages. Thirty
Field-officers. Seven hundred prisoners amongst which two hundred Officers and
Gentlemen. Three hundred Pistols and other Arms. Four hundred head of cattle.
Two thousand Sheep. Five thousand horse and foot toally routed. One thousand
serviceable Horse. Four load of powder and Match.


FINIS.

