A GREAT AND BLOODY FIGHT AT SCARBOROUGH-CASTLE in Yorkshire, between the
Kings Forces under the Command of Col. Bointon and the Parliaments Forces under
the Command of Col. Bethel: With the number that were killed and taken, and the
total routing of the Foot, near the Cliffs, and breaking then necks down the
great Rock, and casting them into the Sea. Also the Declaration of Col. Charles
Fairfax, and Major Genesis Poyntz. Marshall Genesis for the King, and their joining
with Col. Boynten against the Parliament. Likewise, another Fight near Skipton
Castle in Yorkshire, between the English and the Scots, and the Scots
Resolution and Design touching the City, of York. Together, with the
Parliaments Message and Propositions, to their Brethren of Scotland, concerning
the Kings Majesty.

depiction of two mounted combatants

Aug: 14 London, Printed for G.W. And are to be sold in the Ol^-Baily. 1648.

A GREAT FIGHT IN YORKSHIRE, NEAR Scarborough Castle, between the Kings Forces
under the Command of Col. Bointon, and the Parliaments Forces under the Command
of Colonel Bethel.
Dear Friend,
SInce the revolting of Scarborough, and Col Bointons declaring for the King,
here has happened some action very considerable, which is as follows: On
Wednesday last, Col. Bethel with his Regim^nt of Horse, and Col. Legard with
his Regiment of Foot faced the Town and Castle, which c^used action; Col.
Boi^ton (the Governor) drew forth a pa^ty of horse and foot, Col. Bethel did
the like, the said forlorn engaged, and disputed the ground, the encounter was
great, and gallanly m^intained by both parties; insomuch, that some blood was
spilt, and diverse h^roick spirits sacrificed their lives at the point of the
Sword, and 7. gallant charges were made by the Forlornes of Horse, till at the
last, Col. Bethels men being overpowred, retreated, the Cavalry pursues;
whereupon Col. Bethel adva^ces wi^h his whole Body, Col. Bointo^ m^kes toward
him, both parties engaged, and after some dispute, our men became victorious
routed the Enemies whole Body, pursue^ the Enemy to the Castle Gates, doing
great ex^cution, beat the Foot down the Cliff, who for expedition, diverse of
them ^umbled down the Rocks, and broke their necks: In this action and bloody
conflict, we took about 17. prisoners, killed 20. upon the place, and
vanquished, the rest with the loss of 15. men, killed and wounded, Col. Bethel
with his forces, lies at Salsgrave, a quarter of a mile from Scarborough Town,
and so soon as a co^siderable party comes up, intends to lay close siege to
the Castle: We hear, that Col. Charles Fairfax, who were designed for the
service of Ireland) and one Captain Wilkins, that was Marshall Genesis to Maj.
Genesis Poyntz, and one C^ptain Buck, which was a Captain in Col. Bethels Regiment
formerly, are gone to Scarborough to Col. Bointon, and have declared for the
King, and tendered their service to the Governor. We hear, that part of L.G.
Cr^mwells forces are joined with M.G. Lambert, and th^^^ there has been some
action between the Scots and them near Skipton, and diverse slain on both sides:
which action, has much retarded the Scots Design, intended to march toward
York, to act things of high concernment, to uphold their tollering Cause.

Salsg^ave Aug. 11. 1648. Sir I am, Your Friend, Nath: Gibson.

The Parliaments Proposalls to the Kingdom of Scotland.
WE the Commons assembled in the Parl. of England, taking it into our
consideration. That however the late possessing of Berwick and Carlisle, and
the coming of the Scottish Army and Forces into this Kingdom, be most notorious
and unparalleld Breaches of the Solemn League and Covenant, and the many
Treaties, National Agreements, and Acts of Parl. p^ssed both in England and
Scotland.

Yet, because we are assured these impious and unwarrantable Actions cannot be
done with the Approbation and Consent of the Religious and Wel-^ffected people
of the Kingdom of Scotland; and that we understand there are very few amongst
these who are in this Ing^gement against us, that first engaged with us in the
Covenant and Cause, but such as have been professed En^mies to them, however
they be now content to pretend thereunto, that they may the better deceive the
people of this Kingdom: We are unwil^ing to impute such Evi^ls to the Nation in
general, but to those persons that own and appear in them, whom we are
confident, God (that has still so remarkably manifested his displeasure
against Truce breakers) in his due time will judge, what ever we may suffer in
the mean while.

Therefore we now send to you, that it may appear we will no^ by any provocation
be induced to withdraw our selves from those in Scotland who retain their
former Principles, and still own the Cause wherein we have (with blessing from
heaven) been engaged and solemnly United.

And because the Peace of the Church, and power of Religion cannot long
continue without good order and Discipline established therein, they called an
Assembly of Godly Learned, and Orthodox Divines from all parts of the Kingdom,
with whom some Commissioners of the Church of Scotland joined, to sit at
Westminster; and after Consultation had with them, both Houses took away the
Service Book, commonly called The Book of Common Prayer, and established A
Directory for Worship, commanding the practice of it in all the Churches and
Chapels of this Kingdom: And, in stead of Episcopacy they have set up
presbyteryal Government in the Church, which is already settled in many parts of
the Kingdom, and do (by Gods assistance) resolve to p^rsue the further
perfecting and establishment of it in all parts, bothin England and Ireland.

1 They have ^pproved and passed The Confession of Faith (or Articles of
Christian Religion) as it came from the Assembly of Divines, with some sm^ll
alterations (only some small part is yet under consideration) the rest being
printed and published by Authority of Parliament.

2 They have passed a greater and less Catechism that came from the Assembly of
Divines.

3 They have taken away all supersti^ious Ceremonies and popish Innovations.

4 They have given authority for the demol^shing of all R^presentations of any
persons of the Trinity, S^int or Angel, and taking away all Alters, Crosses,
Crucifixes, P^ct^res, and all other Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition in
any Church, Chapel or Place within this Kingdom.

5. They have passed an Ordinance for the punishing of blasphemies and heresies,

6. They have passed an ordinance for the ejecting of scandalous Ministers and
schoolmasters; and thereupon have removed many, in whole stead they have placed
godly and able men.

7. They have passed an Ordinance That none shall enter into the work of the
ministry but such as are Ordained there^o.

8 They have given all the encouragement, and made the best provision they
could for the maintenance of a godly Preaching Ministry through the Kingdom,
not only in removing the ignorant and scandalous, but in augmenting maintenance
for painful Ministers, both out of the Impropriations of Bishops, the Estates
and Revenues of Deans and Chapters, and out of the Improptiations of
Delinquents, which they brought out and settled upon Churches that wanted
maintenance, to a very great value.

9. they have purged the Universities and chei^ Schools of the Kingdom (which
are the Seminaries of Learning, and education of Youth) of many heads of
Houses, Fellows and Scholars that were Superstitious, Prelatical and
Malignant, and have placed in their stead such as are well affected to
Reformation of Religion, and uniformity with other R^formed Churches.

10. They have passed several Ordinances for the better observation of the
Lords day, and days of public Fast and Thanksgiving, and have condemned all
licentious practices upon those days and have ordered the books formerly
written to be publ quely burnt.

11. They have passed an Ordinance for suppressing all S^age-P^ayes and
Inte^ludes (the Nurseries of Vice and Prophannesse.)

And although we must needs say, That the greatest let and impediment which we
have met with in settling the Reformation of Religion (according to the
Covenant) has come from His Majesty, who by His refusing hitherto to grant our
desires for the taking away of E^iscopy and the Service Book, and to settle the
directory for worship, and Presbyteriall Government; and by denying ^^s
concu^rence to establish them by act of Par^iament, has given grea occasion to
men of unsound judgmen^s, to spr^ad their opinions and errors (which is not
unusual in times of Reformation) when the settling of it is long delayed.

And further, by his declaring in his late Message from the Isle of W^gh^. That
he thinks himself obliged both a^ a Christian and (...) King, to employ
whatever power God shall put in his hand for the upholding of Episcopacy, he
has given great encour^g^m^nt to the Popish, Malignant and Prelaticall party
to endeavor by plots and designs, and ^ew again by open force, the
reintroducing of Episcopacy and the Service Book, which by the Conjunction of
the Scottish Army with their Forces, they have now great hopes to effect; yet,
by Gods assistance who has helped us hitherto) it shall be our care and
endeavor against all dangers and discouragements whatsoever, to proceed in the
work of Reformation until it be perfected.

For other things wherewith we are commonly aspersed, as, That we should have
intentions to alter the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom; both Houses
have endeavored so to stop the mouth of malice by declaring several times
formerly, and of late the 26. of May, That they will not alter the Government
by King, Lords and Commons, that we shall need to say no more of it.

And for our desires of Peace, our 7. several Addresses to the King, with
Propositions for a safe and wel-grounded Peace, will sufficiently speak for us:
And although the several denials which we have received from his Majesty
formerly, and the present preparations for War by the Malignant par^ie of both
Kingdoms under pretense of Peace might wholly discourage us, yet we
(notwithstanding all the hazards that may attend it) now again agreed to try
whether a Peace can be settled by a Treaty with his Maj. in the Isle of Wight,
upon the propositions presented to him at Hampton Court, wherein we shall (by
the help of God) approve our selves such as are both desirous of a firm Peace,
and mindful of the trust reposed in u^ by the people of this Kingdom, for the
securing of Religion and their Liberties.

Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

