THE Grand Concernments OF ENGLAND ENSVRED: Viz. Liberty of Conscience,
Extirpation of Popery, Defense of Property, Easing of Taxes, Advance of Trade,
Sovereign Powers of Parliaments, Reformation of Religion, Laws and Liberties,
Indemnity, Settlement,


By a constant Succession of Free Parliaments, the only possible Expedient to
preserve us from Ruin or Slavery. The Objections, Answered; But more largely,
that of a SENATE.

With a Sad EXPOSTVLATION, and some smart Rebukes to the ARMY.

Quae Rerum nunc geritur in Anglia? LONDON, Printed, 1659.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IF thou art prejudicate, save thy purse and thy pains; it is the considerate
man, he that ponders his ways, I had rather deal with: I promise thee thus
much, I have no design to seduce thee, but whatsoever I have written, is my
very thought: it may be thou art persuaded thou may better employ thy time in
Reading; I believe no less, however thou shall find some things here, not
altogether unworthy of Consideration. I am well assured, I can never please
all; nor has it been my study, to please any, and yet willingly I displease
none. It may be, the first sheet may go for waste paper, but I hope the rest
will make some part of amends: I had some thoughts of wholly omitting that
part of the Discourse, but am persuaded not to conceal the grounds of my
adventure; the work has been under my hands too long, but at first was mostly
designed in Answer to a Paper, Entitled, The Interest of England Stated; and
was well nigh finished so much of it as I then intended; but finding my self
cast behind by a swifter pen, which did not run in vain, I laid it aside, being
overpressed by much business; but after a while finding some little leisure,
and my thoughts multiplying upon me, it has sweld under me beyond my
intention. I have cut short that work I first began, that thou may be staid
but little from what since fell in; which I make public not expecting it
should yield me much credit, but hoping it may turn to some public benefit If
I am counted besides my self to walk in Print, it is for my Countries sake.
This I am bold to say, If some Pens had the Managing of many matters herein
contained, and would do their best, the Nation could not think the pains ill
bestowed. For the Errata's of the Press I pass not much, if I escape thy lash
for what I have written, I will stand to thy courtesy for what the Printer
has mistaken; only desire thee to take notice, that the four first sheets were
Printed before this our mad change. Farewell.

THE Grand Concernments OF ENGLAND ENSURED.
A While since there came to my hands Two sheets of Paper, under this
Inscription, The Interest of England Stated -- Promising a faithful account of
the Aims of all Parties, now pretending; with their Effects in respect of
themselves, of one another, and the Public: offering an Expedient for the
composure of the respective Differences, to the Security, and Advantage, not
only of every single interest, but to the bringing solid lasting Peace unto the
Nation -- Matters that I am very solicitous about; which easily persuaded me to
look into it. In the perusal, I found the hand was the hand of Esau, though the
voice (or Title Page) was the voice of Jacob: and though here and there, he
salutes all parties with -- All hail Sirs -- and falls on their necks, and
kisseth them; yet it is but to get the closer advantage of some, that he may
strike them to the heart, or at least may smite them in their hinder parts: and
he lays about so furiously, that none escape his Vengeance but the Cavaliers,
his only white boys; which makes me believe, the man has some wit in his
anger, and knows what he does when he drinks; else I should have concluded the
man had been mad, to make himself the Umpire of our Differences; while he
conjures all Parties, to put their necks under their feet, who will show their
teeth, when they cannot bite: one would think he should have given better
words, if he would have led us into a fools Paradise; Is it not a great piece
of confidence, to persuade men to come under their yoke, the most courteous of
whom (for such no doubt this Reconciler would be thought) though they be yet
upon their good behavior, by the clemency of the Conquerors, think it their
virtue, to spit their venom in our very faces? we shall guess what quarter is
to be expected, when you become our Lords. It Is (no doubt) a most plausible way
to provoke these Parties, to an overture for agreement as is pretended; while
you bespeak them in such friendly language as this: It Is the aim of the Army to
Govern the Nation: To keep themselves from being Disbanded, or engaged in War.
It Is the wish of the Parliament to continue themselves in absolute Power, by the
specious name of a Popular Government; to new model and divide, and at last
take down the Army: and under pretense of a Council of State to set up an
Oligarchy resembling the Thirty Tyrants of Athens: That it is and always will
be their interest to pull down the Army: That the primary end of the
Parliament, is to destroy and overthrow, the very Constitution of Parliaments:
That the mutual ruin of the Parliament and Army must needs be necessary for
the support of either. That the Anabaptists designs are, to ruin all other
Professions of Religion: to destroy Property, founding it in Grace and
Saintship. That the late Protector was of no worth nor credit, of whom only
this comparative commendation can be given, That he is not so very a brute as
his Brother Lieut. Genesis Fleetwood.
. That the pretentions of his interest are low, odious, and ridiculous; that
they have been false to one another, and their best friends. That from under
Presbytery have grown up such, as utterly oppose all government in the Church,
the being and support of the Ministerial Function, and that the rigid yoke of
the Presbyterians is such, as this Nation will not endure; which his late
Majesty was well aware of, when he conceded for setting it up for three years,
being fully satisfied how effectual an argument the experience of that short
time would be to persuade the Nation, to endure that galling and heavy yoke no
longer. The premises considered, it is not hard to conclude how these Parties
stand in his esteem; (yea it being manifestly his interest at this time, to
conceal his malignity, and dissemble a good will toward them, and yet in spire
of his guts his malice gets out) I say there is little doubt, but this moderate
Gentleman himself (as most of his party) account them Beasts of Prey, and not
of Game, such as should have no Law given them, or kept with them; but any one
may knock on the head, and destroy by any method: and what ever terms are
offered to draw them in, serve only as Traps baited with Chickens, to catch
Weesels and Polcats: That killing them is no Murder; that they ought to be
driven out of their houses and Synagogues, and whosoever kills them does God
good service. It Is easy to see into the mystery of this Pamphleter, under the
specious pretext of a Moderator, to render all parties that ever opposed his
Master, as odious as possible to the Nation, and to one another; and thereby
involve them into as good an esteem of one another, as he has of them, viz.
into a mortal hatred of one another, and so oblige them to do that for the
Cavaliers, which himself confesses impossible they should do for themselves;
which wrought with a powder of late, and had dispatched his business, but that a
desperate or violent remedy was timely applied, which spoiled the sport: But I
shall take a more particular account of this Reconciler (though not so largely
as I had prepared it, finding my self prevented by another pen, knowing men
care but little to read the same thing twice over) and shall observe whether he
deserve to be so well received as he pretends, that there should need no
Rhetorical inducements to it; which I should not think much worth my labor,
but that men, yea very honest men, are too too apt to be surprised with every
Overture for settling this distracted State, and I fear many have unwarily
sucked in the poison of this Pamphlet (the Press having gone twice upon it) who
of late years were no very ill willers to the Parliaments cause; who had they
certain knowledge (as it is unhappily presumed) that Mercurius Aulicus the old
Oxford Gazetteer was the Father of this Brat; would go near upon second
thoughts, as much to suspect his expedient of a Cheat, as formerly they were
confirmed of the falsehood of his Intelligence; and a little patience will give
you as good assurance of the one, as your experiance has given you certainty
of the other. But his old friend M. Politicus is fallen upon his jacket though
under a disguise, I shall spare him therefore many a knock, that I had lifted
up my hand to reach unto him. He begins with telling what he esteems the
designs of all parties pretending: The Roman Catholics design, says he, is to
introduce the Papacy, and utterly to eradicate all he calls Heresy -- Very
good. That it is the Royalists desire to bring in the King a Conqueror, to
recover their losses in the late War, and to have the former Government of the
Church -- (as if this man were no Royalist) we make no doubt of what he says,
it were strange they should belie themselves. He goes on, and tells the desire
of the Presbyterian, Baptized Churches, Army, and Parliament, is to set up
themselves, and to exclude all others: It seems then they are all alike
peccant; and no marvel, for without peradventure they are much at one dear and
precious to him; for if any of them are more then other the objects of his
fury, it is because they stand more in his way. After he has told us what he
thinks to be the interest of the Nation, he goes on and affirms, That the
designs of the Papists are not feazible: That the Royallists aim is not
attainable; and the like he says, one after another, of all the rest: so
raising up to himself a man of Clouts, he knocks him down in the same breath;
when stating their Interests and Designs, as he has done (wherein he has only
dealt fairly with the two foremost) it is mine, as no doubt it is every honest
man's Prayer, as well as this good man's Prophecy, that they may be without
effect: but we believe not the more, what he says, because he says it, of
those that he most malignes: He resolves at length, That the pretentions of no
party now on foot are attainable, ('it is strange there should want pretenders of
his own kidney) or if attained are consistent with the good of the Nation, or
of other parties, and that the ruin of the Public is inevitable, there being
no door of hope open (but that to which he is turn-key) no method visible to
unite so distant and incompatible ends: and presently through this great crowd
of Pretenders, with no little circumstance, he makes room for a contrivance
that shall do the work; against which but one Objection in all the World can be
raised, and that as easily razed; and this he introduces as if himself were
the Father of those that handle this Harp and Organ, as if all the
forementioned interests had never dreamt on it: to which I think some that are
mentioned before, may claim a right by virtue of first discovery, but he thinks
fit to forget it in their Character, not meaning to advance their merit above
the rest, which I must needs say is not fair dealing that he should spoil them
of that, he himself produces as the only infallible means of Settlement (when
it is apparent as the Sun at noon whose was the invention) and give them nothing
in their description but what himself impresseth the marks of Folly and Tyranny
upon. His Proposition he makes no doubt to pronounce in these plain terms, --
The calling in the King is the certain and only means for the preservation of
the Kingdom, and also of the Rights and Interests of all single persons in it.
I hope the Reader will expect this be well proved: To drive this Nail to the
head; having before used his best wits, to persuade of the indispensible
necessity of this expedient, by rendering any other endeavors for a Settlement
fruitless, and so unavoidable ruin consequent: and having stated the
pretentions of all parties, so as might most render them at his mercy, he makes
no bones as occasion serves to calumniate and traduce, say and unsay, fawn and
dissemble; one while he tells you of the gallantry of the Army, and their
excellent discipline; that they have still owned a Public Spirit; that every
Common Soldier knows how to direct as well as to obey, to judge no less then
execute. Elsewhere, That it is their design to Govern the Nation themselves, to
keep from being disbanded, etc. One while, That the differences between the
Episcopal and Presbyterian, are easily atoned t and in the same breath, That
from under them have grown up those tha utterly oppose all Government in the
Church, etc. And elsewhere, That Presbytery is intolerable, a galling and heavy
yoke, etc. Now he tells us, That the Parliament designs to set up an Oligarchy,
resembling the Thirty Tyrants of Athens. And by and by tells us, That the
Petition of Julii the 6. was penned by themselves, and after by themselves
addressed to themselves, for which they themselves give themselves hearty
thanks. And yet this Petition in express Terms as directly contrary to an
Oligarchy, or the continuance of any men in Power, as it is possible to be
Worded: surely the man is wondrous forgetful, or very malicious: But a Liar had
need have a good memory. I doubt a little, Whether we are under such necessity
as he pretends, since he uses such Artifices to reduce us to other
extremities? It is not for nothing that he turns Mutineer, and would create
jealosies between the Parliament and Army; not doubting if he could effect
that, he might bring in his King upon what terms he pleased: it is therefore
that they must believe that the security of the one, is founded in the ruin of
the other. It Is for no other reason that he tells the Army, They have been ill
requited for their good services, by being stopped in Pay, defeated of their
Arrears, in danger of Disbanding, not suffered to communicate Councels, or meet
at a General Randezvous. That their recompense for their greatest merits, have
been only exposing to new, and greater dangers: That their certainest pay has
been suspicion, affronts, and injuries. Let any sober and impartial man judge
at the drift of this Gentleman; especially let not the Army misunderstand him,
who while he is persuading might and main for an agreement, does what in him
lies to break us to pieces, and render us incapable of defending our lives.
Having then dispatched a great part of his work, viz. Shown our undone
condition, which he has Prophesied, not Proved, and ushered in his expedient
as you have seen, his next work is to apply his Plaster to the Wounds he had
made: He begins with the common National interest, and pretends to accommodate
his expedient to all its distempers, wherein he thinks a bare assertion, to be
sufficient Demonstration; goes on like an Emperick, or States Mountebanck,
telling this it is good for, that it is good for, wherein if I should follow
him, I should lose my self and my Reader too; but I shall give him a turn by
and by: however this is very observable, that he lays much stresse upon the
merits of his King, being it seems the best reason in his Budget to commend him
to the Nation; but Needham has galled him so severely on this wing, that I
shall make no stay here, but put on full speed to the main Battle, taking only
a slight view of some inconsiderable forces that way-lay me, which I shall soon
break thorough.

First he tells, It is the interest of the Roman Catholic to bring in the King;
for, says he, by this means the heavy payments now on their Estates, with
other burdens, will be taken off; and as to the pressures of Penal Laws, they
cannot but remember how far from grievous they were in the late Kings time, the
Catholics living here notwithstanding them, in more flowrishing condition then
they of Italy, France or Spain, under their respective Princes; and would do
infinitely more under their natural King, then if any forainer should acquire
the power by conquest: Besides having generally adhered to the late King in his
Wars, have no reason to distrust, finding favorable treatment from his Son, and
to share that indulgence, he is ready to afford even his greatest enemies. And
yet these are the men, that our Author tells us before would restore the Pope
his ancient Revenue and Jurisdiction in England; and to the Church all that was
alienated in Hen. 8. time, and would utterly eradicate all he calls Heresy: so
far you are right; we doubt not they will get better terms then the poor
Presbyters.

Secondly, It is the Interest of the Royalists, etc. Yea it is so, although he
have no reparation for his losses: I cannot pass this without a smile, our
Author tells us before, That it is the design of the Royalist to bring in the
King a Conqueror, and to recover his losses in the late War; and in the very
next leaf he tells us, That he is confident the Cavaliers expect no satisfaction
at all: It seems then it is their interest though they have no satisfaction, I
leave them this as a bone to pick; in the mean time I want an Interpreter of
this mystery, The design of the Royalist is to recover his losses in the late
War, -- I am confident the Cavaliers expect no satisfaction at all -- Very well
bowled in good earnest, they will and they will not, Anglice-good skill why, all
the craft is in catching.

Thirdly, The Presbyterians are concerned also. As how? for example, to leap
out of the Fryingpan into the fire; for fear of those lesser parties, to
prostrate themselves unto the revenge of a Pontifical zeal: what courtesy is
to be expected at their Graces hands, Mr. Pryn is yet a memorable example of,
but the Presbyterians do not consult him as their Oracle (for all your have) he
having borne his witness with sufficient bitterness against them, enough almost
to unchristian any man but himself.

Fourthly, It is the interest of the Baptized Churches -- as also to acquiesce
in a Moderate Episcopacy, enjoying the liberty of their consciences. I wonder
how this shall become practicable, or sort with the honor of Episcopacy (which
he throws in the dish of Presbytery) to suffer those lesser parties (as he calls
them) to grow up with it, who utterly oppose all government in the Church, and
being of the Ministry. No doubt your knowledge of the practices of the
Anabaptists in Germany, their cruelty and all manner of disorder, their taking
away all property of Estates, founding it in Grace and Saintship; with the hard
treatment the Papists in Ireland have found from them (these are his own words)
will instruct you into some pretenses, why you ought to be more partial in your
affections toward them, and your better Sons of the Church, then why a Father
should be fond of one Son, and discourage another, upon pretense of their
diverse hairs or complexions, which our Author would willingly skrew into their
belief; but it will not be.

Fifthly, It is (says he) the interest of the Army. Under this head he grows
out of measure copious; but the wonder is not so much, since here lies his
work, to bring the Army into disorder: It Is their concernment to be under a
single person, and consequently to be under his King: he proves it thus,
Because there is scarce a Common Soldier who is not sensible of it: Verily this
is notable Demonstration; the whole Army is sensible that they are concerned to
be under a Single Person, therefore not long since they restored our
Commonwealth, and declared unanimously against a Single person, without so
much as any muttering among the Common Soldiers to the contrary; and since all
their Commanders have given up their old Commissions, and received new from the
Parliament. Our Author is in very deed a notable Sophister, he goes on and
tells, By this means (the Army putting themselves under the Standard of his
King) they shall be out of danger of being Disbanded, and without fear of Wars:
Very good arguments to Soldiers to be afraid of enemies; but better to
Christians, that when the danger is over, they should refuse to disband: shall
we know our friends from our foes Gentlemen? What are they who kill our honors
and good names, while they court our friendship? But in the progress take
notice, how much the calling in his King will answer the expectations of some,
while he promises to keep the Army up, notwithstanding the dangers will be
over; and for this end the King is the only person to raise Taxes and
Contributions; they are his own words. He goes on to tell, this only can secure
their Pay, and satisfy their Arrears; very good Sir, but I hope you will make
no scruple to pay us in our own coin. He proceeds -- No body else dare trust
you as a standing body; and endeavors to exasperate the Army from the treatment
they received from the old Protector -- but I conceive he was a single person:
Ay but his King being supported by his just title, has no such grounds of
suspicion, but may repose himself upon the loyalty of his people, which
Usurpers dare not do. How now Sir? this is strange forgetfulness, remember the
late King, I hope you deem him no Usurper; and would you persuade that the Son
would repose himself upon that Army that has opposed him and his Father unto
blood; when the Father put so little confidence in his Parliament? methinks his
King should con him little thanks, for this unhappy distinction between a
Prince with a just title, and a Usurper. More yet, -- His King has a
particular respect for the Army, yea in spite of all their Rebellions. A strong
argument in good sooth. Oh strange! that they should not envy any other the
honor of being commanded by such a Prince; who is the only expedient upon
earth, to render them and their posterity happy; I shall end this by inverting
the force of his own conclusion, and turning its point upon himself: Were this
directed to the Spanish or French infantry, those Venal souls that understand
nothing but pay and plunder; these arguments of Pay, and keeping themselves
from being disbanded, would pass their Pikes and be well received; but the
English Army that have still owned a Public Spirit, where every common man
knows how to judge as well as execute, will not fail to steer themselves as
prudence shall instruct: who ever has conversed with my Author will find I
observe his own phrases, and I assure you I am not a little delighted in his
style.

Lastly, It is the interest of the Protectors party and the Parliament to call
in his King. He is in great have I see, his wildefire being nigh spent, else he
would still have maintained the distance he had been fomenting between these
two before, which he had twice treated of distinctly, and not have joined them
together at last, but he cannot part them; I will leave them (as he has
brought them) together, to think whether they are so nearly concerned to jump
in this Gentleman's judgment as he would have them imagine.

I have been forced to mispend some time in picquering with small Forces that
were ambushed to intercept me, but have moved with as much speed as I could,
securing such passes as might seem of any advantage to the enemy, that I might
not be surprised in the rear: I shall burn no more day light, but fall in with
him pell mell, and as plainly deny what he has as peremptorily asserted, and
do say,

That the calling in the late Kings Son, is neither a certain, nor yet probable
means, much less the only means, for preservation of the Nation, and the
Rights and Interests thereof.

I shall think I have well acquitted my self of this undertaking, when I have
done two things.

First, Evidenced it, That the calling in the late Kings Son is directly
against the common National interest, in several particulars, whereby it will
also appear to be against the Rights und Interests of most single persons in it.

Secondly, When I have exhibited another expedient that shall do the work.

For the first, The common National Interests (for I own no particular interest
at variance herewith) that I shall mention are such as these.

First, Liberty of conscience. It is the common interest of the Nation to be
secure, that they may without disturbance, worship God according to their
consciences, while they destroy not the Doctrines or life of Christianity, and
live peaceably in the State: this our Author concedes with a greater latitude
then I propound it, whether in jest, or in earnest, or between both, matters
not much; saying, So all agree in Loyalty, though they differ in other matters;
There is no reason why they should not all be alike dear unto their Prince,
their differences being of no more consideration, then the complexion of
Children to their Father. The Episcopal party claim this as their right, and
think it hard usage if at any time they are forbidden public assemblies upon
Christmas day, and other good times; or are forbidden to read the Common Prayer
book in their Churches; and really if no body were wiser then I, they should
have no cause given them to be angry at it, so they would neither directly, nor
indirectly promote Sedition against the Government. The Presbyterians would cry
out of Oppression, if they should be bound to Surplesses and such like
Crotchets; to read Common Prayer, or be Lorded over by Metropolitan Bishops; to
do reverence to Altars, or bow at the name of Jesus; to observe Saints
Holy Days, to keep Lent; in a word, to have any thing imposed on their
consciences. The Independent must not be confined to his Parish Church, or be
determined by the judgments of neighbor Churches; nor have the liberty of
expounding Scripture by a Lay-brother be denied. These, and some others (every
one for themselves) claim this privilege of a Freeborn man, accounting it
slavish to be imposed upon in matters of Religion; and if I would be indulged
my self, and hold it my right as a man, and a Christian, to be at liberty to
serve God, according to what I know of his Will in his Word; Why should we set
at naught our Brother? Why should we grudge that to him, that we claim for our
selves? That every one claims this as his right and interest is out of doubt;
yea that they who would deny it to others, think themselves wronged to be
without it themselves, and would dispute it with the hazard of their lives,
rather then this Liberty should be infringed, is evident to every man's
experience. That hence it is become (though no other reason could be assigned
for it) the common interest of the Nation, without which no quietness can be
thought of, that so many as fear God, and are sound in the substantials of
Christianity, howsoever they may differ in those things that the Scriptures are
not so express and clear in, and in modes and forms of Worship and Discipline;
that such should be suffered without any discountenance or disturbance, is as
little to be had in question. Whether the calling in the late Kings Son be a
probable means for the salving this difficulty, is not hard to resolve; that
his affection, if not his interest, is so linked with the Episcopal and Romish
party, as to give small encouragement to any other of Tolleration, is so much
to be presumed, that few words are wanting to assure it: It Is not the Solemn
League and Covenant, nor all the marks of Conversion, which he manifested to
his Subjects of the Blew bonnet, that can wash him clean. Pray who are his
Chaplains and Confessors now? Who are they that have assisted his Father and
him, that have blown their Trumpets for him, prayed, preached, plotted, been
undone for him? Who are they that have lost Bishoprics, Deanaries, and half a
dozen fat Parsonages for him? who scorn to backslide, but continue fast friends
and eager zealots for him, who told his Father formerly what it would come to;
these whining Puritans will undo all; these he must needs consult as his
Oracle, and be governed by their counsel in all affairs: is it probable he
should settle any other Government in the Church but Episcopacy, or suffer any
Nonconformists but the Papists; yes, but the Presbyterians have expiated their
sin, they shall have what they please indulged to them, it may be some may be
so good natured men as to believe this, but I know many of that judgment that
differ from this persuasion. Who doubts but Episcopacy and Presbytery will
agree better together when there happens a Settlement, and Episcopacy returns
unto its former glory; it is well conjectured, they that can hardly give one
another a good word now, will be honorably treated by each other, when either
shall get the Chair: and no doubt the Royalist did lately hope well for the
return, of the Lawn sleeves; which when it shall happen, if an honest Presbyter
dare deny the body and blood of Christ to any one that would be counted a
Christian, he may in requital deny him his Tithes; ask Mr. Pryn if this be not
Law. Yes, but his King being supported by so good a title, need not Cajol and
fool any one Faction. Oh rare! pray who have been the favorites all along? No
Bishop, no King; good reason it seems to curry favor with them. Yes, but his
Majesty knows it to be his interest to grant Liberty of Conscience: Well, be it
so, by this means the greatest sinners will escape best; such a Liberty as was
formerly connived at, when a Pelagian, or an Antisabatarian, might get to the
top of preferment, and be able to confront a poor Puritan. To say the truth of
them, if a man could do as they did, he might believe what he pleased: It was
not so much an error in the Fundamentals of Religion, as a scrupulousness about
the Mint and Cummin of their Traditions that dubbed a man an Heretic. Yea, but
to kill all at a blow, His Majesty will settle Presbytery, and reserve liberty
for the rest, and there is very good assurance of it. This is more indeed then
my Author promises, who yet offers more then he can ever make good: but can he
do this with honor, and without regret, leave his old friends to be glad of
being pitiful poor Parsons or Country Vicars, when every one of them have
deserved at least a Bishopric; can any body suspect his affections of so great
abatement toward Episcopacy, as to put their necks under the feet of
Presbytery; this were an ill requital of their Loyalty, who deserve to be head
and not the tail. Yea, but suppose all that can be supposed, which we may choose
whether we will believe or not, that the Episcopal should so much deny
themselves, as to take up this Cross to follow his Majesty's interest, and be
content to be any thing or nothing, so he may come to Rule whose right it is,
as some have ill applied it, and his Majesty should so far forget himself as to
suffer it to be so for a while, yet I know what I know; hark what says our
Author, and then guess at the security: Besides that, Presbytery must be the
overthrow of all other parties (which is as true of Episcopacy, saving always
the interest of the Papist) which are more considerable in the Nation then
themselves, that rigid Government no ways complyes with the genius of this
Nation, or the frame of our Municipal Laws, which the late King was well aware
of, when he conceded to the setting it up for three years, being fully
satisfied how effectual an argument the experience of that short time would be,
to persuade the Nation to endure that galling and heavy yoke no longer. The
application is easy. Three years would finish the course of Presbytery, and
for those lesser parties that have grown up under it, the rise of Presbytery
must needs overthrow them. And so much for Liberty of Conscience.

Secondly, It Is the common National interest to discountenance, and if possible
to extirpate Popery. Whether my Antagonist ownes this as a National interest,
is clear in the Negative, however, most of us, especially those that adhered to
the Parliament, have miserably forgot our selves if we renounce it. It Is almost
in every mouth, the Papist, the Jesuit undo us; these cannot claim the benefit
of toleration, being the bane of any Protestant Nation; the Vipers that gnaw
out the guts of their dam; that requite their protection, with endeavoring the
destruction of their Benefactors: of these that saying is most true, Save a
Thief from the Gallows, and he will cut your throat; and no wonder, since their
Religion teaches them, they that kill an Heretic do God good service: To this
purpose they use all artifices immaginable to distract and disquiet a Nation,
when they cannot cope with it by force, and dare not break out into Rebellion,
or attempt a general Massacre, which they make no more bones of, then cutting
off a dogs head; witness the miserable Protestants of Ireland, which our Author
has so much forgot, that he laments the hard treatment the Papists in Ireland
have found. A restless generation they are, and will be always endeavoring to
introduce their Religion, and subject us to the bishop of Rome, and utterly to
extirpate all that they call Horesie. This design is going now amongst us (as
in other Nations) by creating and fomenting differences among all that are
called Protestant, hoping still to engage us one against another, till they
rise upon our ruins: To them Episcopacy, Presbytery, and Independency, etc.
are one and the same thing; between whom they believe not so dreadful a
difference, as we are made to think among our selves: we may be wiser one day.
It is then become our National interest to suppress, and if possible to
extirpate Popery, thereby to secure the Nation from threatened and impending
ruin: Whether the calling in the late Kings Son be a probable redress of this
grievance, deserves to be so little a matter of discourse, that I shall resolve
it in the very words of my Author, It is the interest of the Roman Catholic to
call in the King; for by that means the heavy payments now on their Estates,
with other burdens, will be taken off; and as to the pressures of Penal Laws,
they cannot but remember how far from grievous they were in the late Kings
time, the Catholics living here notwithstanding them, in more flourishing
condition then they of Italy, France or Spain, under their respective Princes;
and would do infinitely more under their natural King, then if any forainer
should acquire the power by conquest: Besides having generally adhered to the
late King in his Wars, have no reason to distrust, the finding favorable
treatment from his Son, and to share in that indulgence, he is ready to afford
even his greatest enemies -- i. e. such are Presbyterians and Independents --
this is Authentic: Yea and besides all this, who can tell he has not sucked
in some of his Mothers milk.

Thirdly, The defense of Property is the common interest of the Nation. I will
not mispend a word to prove this, least I should reproach my Countrymen of so
much easiness, as ignorance of such a foundamentall in reason as this, Whether
Properly be in danger of being invaded by the calling in the late Kings Son, is
more worthy of our enquiry: How many purchasors are there, of Bishops Lands,
Dean and Chapters Lands, Delinquents Lands, and Crown Lands, whose Fee-simple
would be no very wise title, but much worse then Tenure in Villenage; let any
man of reason imagine: this will not only concern Roundheads, but many who in
other matters are at no great distance with Episcopacy have their hands full of
them, they being bought and sold over and over, many to whose hands this will
come, will no doubt be sufficiently sensible hereof: that these are alienated
upon as good (if no better) reason, then were the Abbey Lands, etc. in Hen. 8.
time, none that were the first buyers had I believe any jealousy to the
contrary, nor has any man any thing material to object against it: King and
Delinquents Lands were justly forfeited for raising and levying War upon the
Parliament: the Bishops Lands, because those men involved us into those
Distractions, and abetted and adhered unto that party, and drove the Chariot of
the Church so furiously, that they were like to overthrow all, wherefore the
State found it good prudence to take down their mettle, by making better use of
their Lands to satisfy public debts, and so to leave them disabled for the
future to disturb our peace, which if their Lands had been reserved, they
would have been always attempting to recover, and therewith the Government of
Church and State too: the other Church lands went in company to help pay debts,
being exposed to forfeiture by the general malignancy of the incumbents,
besides were of no other signification then to maintain a company of lazy
Lubbers: the Nation is hereby generally concerned to secure them their
purchases, as those were secured and untouched in Hen. 8. time: that Qeen Mary
could do the Pope no courtesy in the former, my Author denies not, that if any
should go about to attempt the latter it would cost him hot water, I do most
willingly believe; however as the one was attempted, so most certainly would
the other, and with much more violence, the temptation being now far greater,
since he must be a sorry King that has lost his Estate, Queen Mary was not
altogether so nearly concerned: Is it imaginable when he shall return King of
these Nations, he will endure to see the Crown Lands fallen into the fingers of
John an Oaks, and John a Styles, himself King of England and not a foot of
Land, could he say, soul take thine ease, while those Loyal hearts that
followed him through thick and thin, in peril at Land, in peril at Sea, remain
fleeced of thousands, and some it may be of ten thousands per annum, all the
Church Lands gone, and nothing left to oblige those props of Prerogative, would
this give his Majesty a competent satisfaction to sit down and let it rest
thus? I trow not: How can he look upon himself as other then a burden to his
Country, if he must live upon the Charity of well disposed people, such too
would be the case of his Sequestered adherents, and could this comport with the
honor of his Majesty? could he see his Bishops, Deans and Chapters thus
brought to desolation, so far from having their k^ngdom in this world, that
they should have scarce a hole to put their head in, and would not this be a
hard Chapter? Could he look upon himself under the first consideration, and
believe he were The high and mighty Prince CHARLES King of England, Scotland,
etc. or under the second, and not think he had lost the Crown of his Crown:
could he believe himself Defender of the Faith. It is come to this issue,
Either Purchasers must be robbed of their Estates, for which some of them have
paid dear enough, and ready money: or, he must live upon a general
Contribution: which latter I have so honorable thoughts of him, as to believe
he would not endure: the former would be dishonest, the latter ignoble: the
former would be an oppression, the ruin of many; the latter an intolerable
burden upon all. How well then they will befriend him, that shall put him upon
this Dilemma, let our adversaries themselves be the judges. Besides no body
knows how many new Delinquents must be made; it would be no easy matter to
persuade every man that has adhered to the Parliament, that their Estates
should be so much their own, as at the pleasure of Prerogative; yea, should the
strongest obligations immaginable be fastened on him, to bind up his hands from
doing these Roundheads, and Puritans harm; yet would they hardly bind Him and
his Heirs for ever. Whence must come those rewards that our Author promises
they shall be sure to find that have served him in any kind, especially they
that are instrumental in his restitution. Certainly want of money, which he
must needs be reduced unto, to gratify them, being abundance, almost
innumerable swarms of crawling, croaking, creeping things that helped to undo
his Father and him in the late Wars, will make invincible necessity good reason
of State for some arbitrary proceedings; and then this decayed threedbare
Courtier will beg that Roundheaded dog for a Ward, and that beggarly Cavalier
will beg this Puritan, that Presbyterian, the other Independent, or Anabaptist
for a fool; and verily I would have them beg us all for fools when we have no
more wit. And however he may be engaged to forgive us, yet can hardly be
obliged to forget us, we shall be as bad as bound to our good behavior: it
must needs be enough (being added to our former transgression) to entitle us to
beggary, if not to the Gallows to piss against a Church wall. The Cavaliers
that cannot contain themselves from looking us through and through, and cursing
us to our faces, while they are scarce yet in so good condition as to call it a
State Militant, will make no great trouble of it when they arrive at their
State Triumphant, to pick a hole in our Coats, that they may pick our pockets,
and it is wonderful if they do not pick out our eyes. We should soon be reduced
to no better condition then that of Shimei, Go dwell in yonder place, and stir
not thence, and if it shall be told, saying, He is gone to bring back a
runaway servant, or to seek an Ox or an Ass that was gone astray (yea it may
be though it were but a say so, yet) his blood must be upon his head, and it
would be rounded in our ears, Thou know all the wickedness thy heart is
privy to, that thou did to my Father; therefore the Lord does return thy
wickedness upon thine own head.

Fourthly, It Is the common interest of the Nation to be eased of Taxes. To this
I think no body will say nay. That the bringing in the late Kings Son is a
hopeful remedy for the disburdening us of that heavy load of Taxes that have
almost bowed us together, is demonstrable from the deep arrear he is in to the
Commanders and Soldiers of his and his Fathers Armies, every body knows how
pitifully they were paid from time to time, whereby they were necessitated to
make Plunder their help at a dead lift; and if where it cannot be had, the King
must loose his right, so must his Servants too, he could pay no farther then it
would go; and a poor pittance it was he could raise, and much of that borrowed
of his creatures, for which he remains their debtor; this would go but a little
way, to stop so many mouths as he retained in his service: the Parliament
having the purse of England at their girdle let it then be considered, what a
vast charge the pay of his Army amounts unto, during those many years they were
engaged against us, if our Arithmetic will reach it, and then let it be
thought upon how little money they have fingered, and by the affairs of the
Parliaments party, who notwithstanding Crown Lands, Delinquents Lands, Bishops,
Dean and Chapters Lands, are most sold to satisfy the Arrears of our Armies,
who were yet three to one better paid then the Kings, through the help of
Excise, and Contributions to a far greater value then the King could possibly
command; notwithstanding which, many of the Parliaments old Soldiers cannot
much brag of being overpaid to this day, and thereby it may be shrewdly
guessed, Whether it be not likely to prove a very notable expedient to ease us
of our Taxes to pay these old scores, which though we should think fit to
dispute, I doubt we should not know how to refuse, when they shall bring in
their King, who must pay them their Arrears if he will keep them his friends,
whom in all appearance he should not do well to disoblige, being more trusty to
his interest then to be laid aside upon easy terms; and verily he must be
guilty of an implicit faith (for all the confidence of my Gentleman) that dare
believe the Cavaliers will remit his Majesty, and the Nation their debts, if
ever they shall have opportunity to put their Debenters or Royal says bills in
suit: neither do I know, how the Master has more right to the Government, then
his Servants to their wages, and they that are so conscientious of the one,
will in reason find as little scruple for the other, unless there be some
pretty fine distinctions that every one is not aware of. Besides what has been
said, it must not be forgotten, how long he has been upon the ramble, at mere
expense in Holland, France, Flanders, and Germany, and mistake if you can, who
are like to pay the reckoning.

Fifthly, Advance of Trade is the common interest of the Nation. But most
probably it is not so obvious to every understanding, how Trade should suffer a
discouragement by the return of our old Monarchy; that it should be taken for
granted upon a bare Proposition; and I the rather suspect it, because the
calling him in would not find so many Advocates and Votaries but upon a
mistaken belief, that Trade would thereby lift up its head: however, some there
are very conversant in Trade, and most studious for its promotion, who are not
in doubt to conclude, That it must needs be a great disturbance to Trade for a
while, because there must necessarily attend it a general expectation and
silence, till the issue of such an adventure, which ever makes Trade as st^ll
as the times; yea and when this cloud shall be blown over, which cannot be in
have, yet shall Trade receive no benefit thereby; for besides, that the same
oppressions, that are the now destroyers of Trade, must of necessity be
continued (notwithstanding there should be peace) for the raising of moneys to
supply the necessities that would occur. I say, besides this, Trade would ^e a
sufferer by the return of our Monarchy: What have the best of all their
Majesty's that ever Reigned in England done for the encouragement of Trade? If
they had done any thing Material, England had been more bound to thank them
then it is. Something it may be has been done for the benefit of particular
Trades, but Trade in general has been little befriended. Trade and Tradesmen
all along have been the very scorn and envy of the Court: not fit to keep a
Gentleman company, but at his distance, though ten times better then himself in
estate; must be looked upon as sorry Mechannick fellows, notwithstanding in
other Nations or Commonwealths, their best Gentry, Lords, Earls, Dukes hold it
no disparagement to Trade: Hereby Trade became of so good esteem, that a
Gentleman's Son should be bread up for the Gallows rather then be dishonored by
a Trade: Hence a man might play the good husband, Cart, Plow, buy and sell
Hogs, Sheep, Horses, Cowes, Oxen, Hens, Geese, and yet be a tolerable Country
Squire, but a Tradesman, no by no means, the time was when these were not fit
to be numbered with the dogs of their flock: It was a noble knack to encourage
Trade and Tradesmen, that care must be had least they should be too fine, and
be mistaken for Gentry, and by all means their wives must be dressed according
to Court directions, least they should vye gallantry with the Madams of
Prerogative; by all means they must know themselves, and it is pity some course
is not taken now, that we may know a Trades man from his betters; and however
this may rather provoke some to laughter, then a serious thought about it, yet
^t is not of so light consideration; for whosoever is concerned to keep Trade
under, he has two things to do that will effect it. One is, Set Trade into a
condition of contempt, and this will keep a people of high Spirits (where the
Gentry are highly honored) it will keep them off from Trades, and make them
seek their fortunes some other way, and if this prevail, then some reasonable
boones may be granted to those few that maintain the Trade; for some Trade does
well under the greatest Tyranny; but if men will be content to be any thing or
nothing, to be base, and dishonorable, to get rich s in a way of Trade, and so
begin to overstock a Monarchy, with Traders and Trade, then follows all manner
of Gabels and Impositions, that if they will be doing, they shall be sure to
have no more then their labor for their pains: How much the flourishing of
this City has been envyed, some do yet very well remember; and how it was
feared London should grow too big for England. It has always been a maxim
with Monarkes to keep the unruly Plebeans from being over pursey, least their
wits should increase with their wealth, and they should begin to contend for
their Priveledges; and therefore to make the Conquest complete, those
Projectors and Pattentees, were encouraged with their Monopolies, to eat out
the heart of Trade, and keep the Merchant as bare as my nail: which (with some
other grievances) was the very beginning and ground of our late Quarrel: when
although some did arrive to vast Estates, by reason of the paucity of
Tradesmen, scarcely any minding a Trade but such as had very low fortunes to
begin, and these living in times of Peace, and Court jollity. Yet was not this
so general a good for the reasons beforementioned, but so little encouragement
was given, that if any Gentleman of a considerable Reputation had engaged any
of his younger children in a Trade, he should be looked upon to have debased
his family for ever, and marred the generosity of his child; being only in a
capacity to be put in Couples with a Hat and a Coif; a convenient match for a
pair of Spatterdashes, and Leather Breeches; for such were generally those
(saving only some few more serious then the rest) that occupied any Trade when
they first began their employment. How well the Citizens of London would be
rewarded (by calling in the Scottish King) for not being like the men of
Izachar, crouching under their loads in the late Kings time, let those
threatening letters of his late Majesty to this City inform those who are so
sollicitous for the return of Monarchy. Who ever would have Trade to flourish
in England, must dis-franchise two parts in three of those that have served
Apprentiships since 1640. or must think of some better expedient then our old
Monarchy for its advancement; it being abundantly manifest there are too too
many Tradesmen, and well willers to Trade, to thrive under that Monarchy, and
receive that benefit by it they expect, who if there were such reasonable
encouragement as might be given, would go near to be every second man in the
Nation. Trade is now grown, and growing into so good esteem, which can never
sort with the interest and continuance of Monarchy, nor Monarchy with it.

Sixthly, It Is the common interest of the Nation, that the Sovereign powers and
authority of Parliament be vindicated and maintained, and their freedom and
privileges secured. This is indeed Salus populi, all that we have to show for
the securing of whatsoever we can call ours: Let Parliaments be rendered useless
and unable to serve us, and all is cancelled that we hold by, we must become
the most perfect slaves and villains that can be How well our Parliaments have
been treated by our Monarkes, our Histories are not silent, having ever been
looked upon with an evil eye, as the bane of their Prerogative, and therefore
were sure never to be Summoned but upon most important and urgent occasions for
money, when all other artifices and contrivances failed: And if they durst be
so bold as to meddle with the general Grievances of the Nation, and were so
sturdy as vigorously to prosecute their Redress, should not fail to be turned
out of service. What ever boones they procured for the people, were wrung like
drops of blood from the noses of their most exc^llent Majesty's; and seldom or
never, without venturing at least, or pouring out their own blood in the
purchase. All the possibility they had to do us good, was disputed by inches,
and got now a little, and then a a little out of the very fire, and at a hard
push at last came to signify just nothing; Parliaments being utterly dissolved
and broken up by mere Will and Pleasure, whenever they sinned against the
good liking of their Driver. A happy condition no doubt, and well agreeing with
the Liberty of the Subject. We need look no further back then the late King
Charles (though whole Volums could not contain what might be written) and we
shall find more then enough to our purpose: all the Parliaments that ever he
called in his life till his last, being quickly broken to pieces by his
arbitrary will, and not suffered to do the Nation any service: This is so
notorious, that no man will have the face to deny it; and therefore this
Parliament finding that by no other way they could be made useful to the
Nation, made terms for themselves, not to be dissolved but by their own
Consent and Act. Mr. Pryn in his Narrative asserts this self same thing; The
King being hard put to it for Money, and sorely vexed by the irresistible
clamours of the people, was forced to make a virtue of necessity, and to strike
a bargain with them. Having tied up his hands that he could not dissolve them,
he must needs be pecking at them one by one; but finding himself prevented, not
more by the Act he had passed for their continuance, and the privileges they
claimed for their Five Members, then by the honesty of the City, who would not
suffer him to do them harm: He soon discovered how much security his Act for
continuance should have yielded them; for departing the City, he sets up his
Standard, and declares them Rebels, and what not, again and again, and fights
them to his own ruin. Yea, after he was beat out of the field, and could bear
up against them no longer, he runs in disguise to the Scots, hoping thereby to
set us together by the ears, which after fell out to their very little honor.
Wherein had he prevailed upon the Parliament, either by his Forces or his last
reserve of Policy, in turning himself over to the Scots; the most mischievous
and malicious design could be put in practice, and worse in mine opinion then
any of the rest, having been the ground of all our mischief since; and verily
they must press the Covenant lustily, that after all this can persuade us we
were bound to preserve his Person, and Honor, and Authority, and his Heirs for
ever: I say, had he prevailed upon the Parliament, we had been the most
absolute Vassals of Europe, we should have had amends made us for dissolving
former Parliaments, and the ruin of this, by never seeing another: But no
question the Son is otherwise enlightened, and seeing the Rock upon which his
Father split, will be sure to avoid it, and will think it his happiness and
honor to be governed by his Parliaments; and therefore is willing to agree to
us what our most wanton wishes can ask, as our Author thinks fit to abuse us;
but we are not so easily moved to believe against sense, nor can be persuaded,
that the honesty of his person, and the sameness of his Interest with the
Nation (which last proves a little disputable it should seem by this discourse)
of both which my Author makes so great brags, would be good security to
embolden us to entrust him with dispensing to us these unvaluable blessings
that God has givey us by the mediation of our Swords; since we are of full
age, and know how to manage them our selves to our better advantage: but should
we distrust our selves to be such infants, as must call in a Guardian; it would
be no great wisdom to make a bargain, and sale in Trust, and put the price of
our all into his hands in his name, to be kept for us, who believes himself
Heir to his Fathers Prerogatives, and would make no bones to cry all his own,
possession being eleven points of the Law, it is something to say, he is
Fathers one Son, and must take his revenge upon Parliaments, for the good turns
they have done his Father and him: and the old Charles being in rod letters in
the Cavaliers Callender as the best of Kings, we should wrong his memory to
hope better of the Child then the Parent; who has to an hair trod in his
Fathers track, where ever he could set his shoe, and discovered his good
affection to our Parliaments, both in his Fathers time, and since he pretended
to be Charles the Second; being as perfectly fitted to rise up in his Fathers
stead, as if he had been spit out of his mouth: and they who so vigorously
advise, for a treaty with him, hoping to kill him with kindness, to overcome
evil with good; to court him into this Throne by such smooth language as those
1 King. 12.4. Thy Father made our yoke grievous: now therefore, make thou the
grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us,
lighter, and we will serve thee; will find, although he ask counsel of the Old
men that stood before his Father in his life time, who will advise him as verse.
7. If thou will be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them,
and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants,
for ever: Yet notwithstanding after three days (a short times) breathing,
after consulting with his Young men, he will most certainly do, though it may
be beforehand will not so plainly deal with us, as did Rehoboam with the men of
Israel, verse. 13. And the King answered the people roughly, and forsook the Old
men's counsel that they gave him: and spoke to them after the counsel of the
Young men, saying, My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your
yoke; my Father also chastised you with Whips, but I will chastise you with
Scorpions. Whosoever thinks it their benefit to quit the Privileges of
Parliament, for the Prerogatives of an Hereditary Monarchy, shall do well to
believe it their interest to call him in. Yea routing of Parliaments is found
so absolute a requisite to Prerogative, and so really the interest and
concernment of a Single Person, that the Old Lord Protector (who swore so
solemnly to preserve the Laws of the Land) made no stick, but broke those
Parliaments in pieces which he called to serve his turn, if they could not say
the Lesson which was taken out for them: and thus it will be to the end of the
Chapter, if care be not had; and they say prevention is the best physic.

Seventhly, Settlement is the common interest of the Nation. This is that every
ones wishes zealously pretend unto, but few take the right course to procure;
and therefore many being wearied out with expectation, fear we shall never see
a Settlement, that no way can be found out, to give a rational content to all
parties among us, that can be brought into practice, and therefore have doomed
England to destruction, because a house, or Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand: because we have been so many years laboring under distraction,
and emptied from Vessel to Vessel, they fear it will never be otherwise: but
these are their fears, not their desires. Every one whose business is not to
fish in troubled waters, heartily wishing a Settlement in these Nations; which
would be so much the more welcome to us, as the want of it so long has made us
lament after it: It would be a great rejoicing to know where we should rest,
that we might sit under our own Vines and Fig Trees, without being alarumed
with this Insurrection, and that Change of Government, this Oath, and the other
contrary Engagement, enough to make a wife man mad: but how this may be
accommodated will fall in afterward, it shall suffice here to note how
unreasonable it is to hope for a Settlement by calling in the late Kings Son:
For where seeds of Disturbance and Discontents are universally sown (which
though now more hidden and underground, yet will soon appear after a little
expectation) there no settlement can be hoped for. This then is made good by
consequence, it having been manifest, how he must needs trample upon the
consciences of Religious people, which can but little oblige them; give
encouragement to Papists, who will be continually plotting to disturb our
peace: Entrench upon Property, which will create him not a few enemies:
Increase Taxes, which are the great make bate at this day: Discourage Trade,
which will prepare men to raise their fortunes upon the ruins of the public:
and that his Prerogative will clash with the Privileges of Parliament, which
if ever he grant us another Parliament, would most probably beget us another 20
years Distraction. If this then produce a Settlement of these Nations, it must
be acknowledged a wonder is wrought for us: being a means not only very
unlikely, but most contrary to its end; which only the hand of Omnipotency can
overruled. So that in all appearance, should he acquire the Government of these
Nations, it would be too hot to hold, and we should be farther off from
Settlement then now we are. From the whole I conclude,

That the Interest before mentioned under Seven Heads are Indispensible.

That the bringing in the late Kings Son is imcompatible therewith.

Both which are sufficiently cleared from any doubt; therefore it is by no
means advisable to call him in. What should I instance in Reformation of
Religion: Establishing the good and wholesome Laws of the Land, which concern
the Community: or Indempnifying irregular actions: Neither of which do require
the application of such a desperate experiment; although some merciless. State
Quacksalvers make this prescription, and thereby keep our wounds still
bleeding, and distort us limb from limb, to practice their skill upon us, and
make a trial upon their miserable patients, till we swoon away and die under
their clutches: when some Kitchen physic, something more natural to the body
of the Nation, would with much more reason, in less time, and with less
hazard, restore the pale faced Religion of England, and confirm the good Laws
of the Nation, which necessity has something weakened of later years, and
procure a sound indemnity which some think to be in a languishing condition;
neither of which, for ought I perceive yet, are in such extremity as to be
under necessity of drinking in these Asses milk. I have done what I first
promised, and made it clear, That the calling in the late Kings Son, is neither
a certain, nor yet probable means, for preservation of the Nation, and the
Rights and Interests thereof. My next business is to produce an Expedient that
may do what the other only did pretend; which trouble I give my self and my
Reader, not to prescribe to men in Authority, referring it to their judgments,
what form of popular Government will make this Nation most happy, whereunto my
opinion shall submit, though it should not consent; but because our Author put
in those terms [The Only means of Preservation] thereby insinuating as if
ruin were unavoidable, if his King could not save us, we must needs perish. I
think my self thereby fairly provoked, not by my silence to consent, that the
Nation is left in an undone condition; having rendered his only preservative
fruitless and frustrate, but to persuade my Countrymen to cease from the
Speeches and Actions of such as are desperate, and devoted to ruin, by
offering a safe and facile way of recovery, to a better condition and temper of
State, then our Nation has enjoyed in the memory of Man, toward which the
pulse of the Nation is felt to beat pretty kindly. Wherein I shall not be so
much an Innovator, as some others, seeing I do not much magnify such
Propositions as have been made for new modelling foundations and
superstructures, till it grows up to a Fabric not unfitly resembling a
Windmill, which turns round, while it stands fast: while an English way of a
Commonwealth is no farther to seek, I should mislike it more then I do, if I
took a voyage to Venice, of any other part of the world, to bring in a new
pattern; since if my chothes did sit as well to my back, they would please me
no less, then if they were alla mode a France. I say then,

That the Supreme Authority of the Nation, being fully vested in Parliaments of
England successively, and frequently Chosen by the Good People thereof, being
free and without check upon them; this is an Infallible means (under God) of
preservation of the Nation, and the Rights and Interest thereof.

By the Supreme Authority, I mean, the whole Legislative Power, and whatever
Powers of right belonged formerly to Kings, Lords, and Commons jointly. I add,
that this be fully vested in them; thereby I understand, that they have the
sole power of the Militia: which was claimed by the King, and by the
Parliament; but whoever could get fastest hold would not let go, but would be
sure to have and to hold from that day forward; without this they would only be
complemented, The Supreme Authority of the Nation; as in courtesy we bespeak
Sir John and Sir Thomas Knights of the Lord Protector, but no such matter -- In
Parliaments of England chosen, I intend Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses. By
the good people of the Nation, I mean, such as have not declared themselves for
the King against the Parliament in the beginning of the Wars, or been
discovered in Arms, or Plots, upon the same account as disturbers of the peace
since; being such as by Law are capable thereof. Successively and frequently, I
design, that the people loose not their benefit of Elections after once
choosing, by Parliaments sitting time out of mind, but that all Parliaments be
chosen, and often chosen by the people, at least once in two years. Being free,
and without check upon them; I would have, that they be not overpowred by
force, nor controuled by a Negative voice of Single person or Peers. Thus
explained I will stand to my tackling,

That such a Parliament is an Infallible means (under God) for preservation of
the Nation, and the Rights and Interests thereof.

I shall take the less pains to clear the equity of my Proposition, since the
Malcontents of the Nation that have made so great a noise lately, seem to make
this their only wish; and profess to acquiesce in the resolutions of A Free
Parliament, whose Supremacy they make so little doubt to acknowledge, that
they, or some body for them profess they will be content to be accounted
Traitors if they dispute. I shall only say this, That the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses are those, and only those in whom we repose our trust, as those
from whom we expect our benefits; they are as it were the Covenant Servants of
the Nation, are a part, and the best part of our selves too, if we be not
overruled in our choice; such who if they should harm us must wrong themselves,
being obliged in every thing they impose upon us, our interests being common
and inseparable: but that of King and Lords distinct, yea contrary to our
Liberties, and so selvish, and self-seekers, and most unlike to be our
Saviors. The other are embarked in the same bottom with us, and so are
concerned to make the best advantage for us they can: When these are bound to
maintain their Honors and prerogatives, though upon our ruin: who are usually
never the less Pursey, and powerful, as we are the more flavish and indigent.
Therefore it concerns us, that the Supreme Authority be vested as I said. I
propose them the Militia, because it would be poor Providence to betrust them
with consulting for our welfare, if they have not power to see their
resolutions put in effectual execution: give a Parliament power of declaring
Laws, and some other person or persons power to dispute those Laws, or to
subvert them, and then you may save the labor of the first, since the latter
shall render the Supremacy of the former Subordinate. I know there can be no
Supreme Authority without the Militia; it is the same thing, but this (ad
homines) to men that would unwillingly part with the Sword, yet seem very free
the Parliament should be the Supreme Authority. We remember who disputed the
Militia with the late King, I would they had it now without dispute.

I propose that they be successively and frequently chosen, because it is most
unreasonable that Parliaments, or what ever we call that we shall choose, should
continue as long as they please; this would make way for corruption, as it is
commonly suggested against some in this Parliament, whose blame is very
improvidently laid upon all the rest, for certainly there is no greater
temptation upon a Parliament then Continuance, and I would not they should be
lead into this temptation; this would make Parliaments ten thousand times worse
then Monarchy.

I would have them frequently chosen, because it is better for us, that they be
often chosen, then that they do not always continue; that they be quickly in a
condition, or in possibility of being in a condition of subjection is more for
our security, and more likely that they should provide for us, and themselves,
then if they should continue long in rule.

I would have them chosen by the good people of the Nation, as before
explained; for it seems to me unreasonable that those who in the first quarrel
took part with the King should be admitted as yet to elect or be elected; who
having waved the Umpirage of Parliament, and referred themselves to the
arbitration of the Sword, cannot expect that after a direct judgment given
against them in the case; they should have recourse thither from whence their
cause had been before Superseded; and for the others they are or might be more
sensible of their miscarriages then to expect equal benefit with the more
trusty and upright in the Nation; neither of which can with safty presently he
admitted to choose or be chosen, least their choice and counsels should lead to
involve again the Nation in blood.

I add, that they be not controuled by King, Single Person, nor Peers, or
forced by Power: for if they should be under the Law of the former, or under
the force of the latter; as good never a whit, as never the better: there would
be a Law in those Members, would war against the law in their minds; and they
could not do the things they would; so that though to will were present, yet
how to perform, they might truly say, they knew not; they could find no
ability.

In a word, Two things very much commend the nature of my Proposition, It takes
in all interests, and it does it by choice.

First, The whole interest of the Nation is taken in to constitute this Supreme
power, every County, City, and considerable Borough, send or should send in
competent Numbers to secure and assert their interests, no sort of men but have
an interest going here, the Clergy not excepted, who though they do not sit
here, least it should hinder their studies, yet strike a great stroke in
Elections, and never loose themselves by a Parliament. The Nobility, if they be
not too high in the instep, and think it below them to serve their Country,
may serve themselves too in this Counsel; being as like to be chosen as any
other if they please. A Parliament always takes in, or is taking in all
Interests, every body has his stock going here, which can be said of no other
Power; therefore most rationally may we expect it should give satisfaction to
all, since it takes care of the interests of all.

Secondly, It is performed by choice, which gives the most absolute and
undoubted right, and is that under which we are infinitely obliged to sit down
satisfied: a Woman cannot dispute the right, nor scruple to sit down content
under the shadow of her husband, especially if he be not obtrud d upon her
consent, since he is the fruit of her own choice; she might have taken another
if she would: but she could not so well content her self under the right and
rule of a Master unto whom she was betrayed against her will; though since she
cannot help it, she complies to make her slavery the more tolerable: but now
the Woman that has chosen her husband, though he prove worse then she
expected, her choice has obliged her as long as he lives. How undoubted then
is their right of Supremacy, and with how abundant content and satisfaction may
we give up our selves under their rule whom we choose our selves, unto whom we
plight our troth for so little time; unto whom we do not say, Be our servants
to day, and we will be yours for ever after (though I would say this to
Parliaments in general, yet not to particulars) but have a power in our selves
after a little pause to mend our Masters, and put them into the same state of
subjection with our selves, which is not found in other constitutions; by the
late. Other House we may take a survey and estimate of the beginning and
original of the House of Peers.

Those that desire full satisfaction of the Peoples right to choose their own
Government, and Governors, I refer them to Mr. Harringtons Oceana, where they
shall not lose their labor, if they do not shut their eyes.

I pass on to commend my expedient, by its necessary effects, which will most
certainly preserve the Nation, and the Rights and Interests thereof. Let us try
it then upon those common Interests of the Nation mentioned before, and see how
we shall succeed, which I shall refer to be judged fit to be received or
rejected, as it abides the trial.

First then, for Liberty of Conscience. What, in the world, can be imagined to
secure this better then a Parliament; they are obliged to no one particular
party so as to humor them, to the opression or suppressing of the rest, having
experiance both of the affection and valor of the Presbyterians, Independents,
and Baptized, toward the recovery of their just Supremacy; besides are too
vast and too noble a body, to be agitated by so low, so narrow, and such a
contracted soul, as should strait lace them so close, that they should be
inexorable, and stiff to all dissenters, from the more generally received faith
I do not mean Fundamentals.
of the Nation, so as they should not be able to breath the blessing of their
protection upon them. It Is true Monarchy has this Maxim, No Bishop no King: I
know no such Maxim of a Free State, of whom only this is true, their title is
so good, they need fool no party to prop up themselves; yea, it is their direct
interest, to indulge to every man, what liberty he can claim as a Man or a
Christian, which is not repugnant to Reason or Scripture. It Is a sense of our
just rights and our claim of them, that bear up the Pillars of a Parliament, it
was this that not long since brought them out of Egypt, and it is this that makes
them the delight of our eyes, and the joy of our hearts; it must need then be
their interest, to gratify us herein. Let us loose the sense of our just
rights, or retaining the sense of them, loose the courage of heart to demand
them, and our Free State will soon degenerate into slavery, and become a prey
to some Nimrod, some mighty Hunter: a Commonwealth can never sit fast upon
Blind Bayard. Besides, that it is their interest to do every man right, there
can be no party which can pretend to Liberty of Conscience, that can want their
Advocates in this Assembly, every party may tell their tale here, and if they
want not reason on their side, need not fear of succeeding to their content;
can it be thought to sort with the Wisdom or Interest of the Parliament, to
carry it on in a way of Faction as some dream, and thereby to disoblige any
considerable number of their Members and Friends, when they shall urge nothing
but what may be with safety conceded? Can they so little understand themselves,
as to forget, that to cement; and unite is their interest, which cannot be
otherwise performed then by gratifying all Religious pretenders, so far as
Reason and Religion will allow, divide and impera may not be written among
their Politics. Yea, the Episcopal party, who are not easy to be persuaded,
that the Supremacy of Parliaments can signify any good to them, cannot fail to
receive an equal benefit with the rest in matters of Religion, if they will not
leave us without hope of their compliance with the Government, since they
cannot be without many wel-willers to their way of Worship in that Council.

The Presbyterians too, must needs find friends there to bear his head above
water, notwithstanding that mighty deluge of Quakers and others, having taken
so deep rooting in the minds of many, that those winds and waves, may do their
worst against this House, and not find its fo^ndation in the sand. So that it
is evident a sufficient liberty must be had by a Parliament, to content any but
such as will be satisfied with nothing less then being absolute Lords over
Gods heritage, and having absolute dominion over our Faith. There are some in
the world that think it good discretion to indent for Liberty of Conscience, as
not thinking it fit to trust our Representatives herein, fearing they should
take up a little, and not throw the reigns upon the neck of every opinion as it
is this day: But for mine own part I am free to trust my all with a Parliament,
as not fearing them in the least; and for my Religion, I should not think it
much, if it would not engage me freely to obey, or patiently to suffer, in case
I must needs run counter to the unanimous resolutions of the Supreme Authority,
thinking it expedient that one man should die for the people; better I should
suffer in my single concernment, then they should disturb the Public
Tranquillity. But put the worst, think as hardly as can be thought of
Parliaments, here is a sufficient course to be taken with them, if we do indent
with them at Elections about Liberty of Conscience; they cannot meddle in what
they are not betrusted with. Those that are so tender for security in this
point, cannot devise any way to hold if this will not, if they can let us know,
which project we will allow in a due latitude rather then loose our business,
but we shall not else need it: however this is neither Episcopal nor
Presbyterian policy, which makes me wonder that either of these should be so
much estranged from the Supremacy of Parliaments: and makes me often lament the
hard fate of Parliaments, that one sort of men dare not trust them for a
sufficient tolleration; and the other sort of men are unwilling to credit them,
for an uniformity of worship; laying both together, makes me conclude, They are
most like to be our Saviors, being disposed for middle persons, to salve those
extremes amongst us, which are not to be reconciled, but by the interposition
of such, as will not espouse the pretensions of either, but endeavor to make
both yield as much as may be to the satisfaction of all; and if Parliaments
were more a party with either, they would be move unlike to atone the
differences among us, but being a mixed body, and necessarily made up of all
parties, must needs receive such an allay thereby, as shall dispose them to so
great an indifferency, as may give every man reason enough to abide their award
and judgment, unless we will reserve to our selves a liberty of making
Exceptions (as we may against some Jurymen) without showing the least reason
in the world for so doing: I conclude with Mr. Harrington, Either liberty of
Conscience can have no security at all, or under a Popular Government must have
the greatest security.

Secondly, Extirpation of Popery. Here now I cannot choose but run sous against
Portland, and fall foul upon Mr. Prin; how I shall get off, no body knows:
Ipse dixit: He tells us in his True and perfect Narrative, as he calls it, that
it was a Plott laid long agone by the Jesuits, to reduce us to a
Commonwealth: That Richelieu bequeathed it as a Legacy of his Politics to
Mazarin, to root out our Royal Family, and to persuade us into a Popular
Government: And that a Confessor of the Queens waved his Hat at the Decollation
of the King, in great triumph; as who should say, The day was their own. And
much more to the same purpose, to enforce his Allegation, That the Government
of a Commonwealth is Popish and Jesuitical, and tends to the advance, and
increase of Popery. I shall make no doubt, so far to agree with Mr. Pryn,
That the Papists and Jesuits great design is, and all along has been, and
will be, To dash us in pieces one against another: And it might be no
insignificant Artifice to put us upon laying aside Kingship; hoping thereby
eternally to engage us in Parties and Factions, that might in the end be the
ruin of each other: And who can tell whether Mr. Pryn has not been an unhappy
instrument in promoting their service. It is not to be doubted but the Jesuits
were well enough pleased, with the first Differences between the Parliament and
King, and yet I hope the Parliament were not Jesuited: I dare say it did not
trouble the Jesuits that Mr. Pryn was brought into London from his house of
bondage with so much triumph; for he must needs make a good Incendiary: And he
tells us, The plot was laid long before; no doubt it pleased them as well that
the Scots and English were engaged one against another; a hopeful way to
settle our Commonwealth: Did it go to their hearts, does Mr. Pryn think, that
old Cromwell thrust this Parliament out of dotes; that he made himself
Protector, that he broke up so many Conventions at his discretion; that the
Protectorship was laid by? and are they not more then ordinarily concerned now
to rout this Parliament, before they can lay the foundations of our Free State?
Does not Mr. Pryn think they would cry, Aha, aha, so we would have it, if they
could by any means set the Parliament and Army at variance? And were not th^s a
blessed project for settlement of a Free State: I will not say Mr. Pryn is a
Jesuit, but this I must say, He has done more then one man's share to distract
us, and to lay the foundation of this last Sedition; which smells more of the
Jesuit then any of the rest, being more cunningly designed, more secretly
managed, and universally spread, then any that has been on foot to this day:
And yet Mr. Pryn will not say this was a design for a Free State. It Is the
Papists design out of doubt, to disturb and destroy us; to unsettle us all they
can, that they may ruin us. And therefore it was not unlike the Disciples of
Machiavell, to drive us from a settlement, hoping to crumble us to dust, before
we could arrive to a better constitution: If it were their plot, as I know no
great ground to believe, (and Mr. Rogers has well answered) more then to
distract us; I suppose they meant us no good by it, but they are fallen into
the pit they dug for us; the Lord is known by the Judgments he executes,
the wicked are snared in the work of their of their own hands: Higgaion Selah.
We are now in a hopeful way of settling a Commonwealth, and we shall quickly
understand what advantage such a settlement would yield to the Papist: It is
not at all to be disputed but another Queen Mary would do their business as
well as a Commonwealth; who would hardly be persuaded to join our Nation to
Saint Peter's Patrimony. I appeal to all the World, whether their designs be not
more easily wrought out of a private interest, then a public: Whether it
should be harder to make one person for them, or the whole Nation? We are no
strangers to the genius of our Native Country. If the single person should
deny to pleasure them, it were no hard matter to take their revenge there; by
Poison, Poniard, or Pistol: They could quickly remove out of their way an
Edward the Sixth, or a Prince Henry, if they were like to spoil their designs;
Were they not more likely to advantage themselves by matches of our Kings with
Popish Women? Does not Mr. Pryn acknowledge the Jesuits had a great number of
Colleges in England, in his forecited Book? Do we not all know, the Papists
had as much countenance as they can imagine under our Free State? Remember what
my Author says, which I mentioned before. Yea, have not our Parliaments been
their greatest Enemies? I appeal to Mr. Pryn, If the House of Commons have been
any of their best friends since our Nation has been Protestant? He tells us
himself, How angry the Papists were at the Propositions of the Isle of Wight,
which the King consented to against the Papists: We all know whose was the
contrivance. Yea, all the Papists of England appeared for the King in his
wars against the Parliament; you will judge then whether they be for a
Commonwealth against Monarchy; or whether they mean us a settlement of our
Commonwealth; especially since Monarchy is now cried up hotter then ever, by
that party, and their Agents; or any thing rather then we should settle in the
way of an equal Commonwealth: which certainly if ever they put us in pursuit
of, they never meant we should reach, or overtake.

But let my Expedient be put in practice, the Nation settled upon the
Foundations of Parliaments, and my life for it, the Papists shall receive their
deadly wound, which shall not be healed; nor shall they have power to vex our
Nations any more, for they have been the mortal enemies of Parliaments,
engaged in wars against them all along: and always practicing sedition against
them. Instances are familiar here, and in Ireland: whereby they have engaged
the Parliaments their everlasting foes; so that those of the Parliament that
would have restored the King, showed their good will unto the Papists, by
causing the King to agree to their persecution: Yea Parliaments ever since
Queen Mary especially, have shown their teeth at them, and bitten too as often
as they have been able to reach them; till they have been rated off by their
Masters: And it cannot be but their sins must come in remembrance before our
Parliaments: And then falling into their hands whom they have obliged not to
befriend them, they may expect what will follow, even the wages of their
iniquities, which I see by their bustling they are well aware of: their
Religion is an enemy to our Peace. They have done nothing to merit the
Parliaments favor; nor can find any advocates in that Assembly, that dare
speak out for them; no Cottington, no Digby: There shall be Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, and Baptized, all vying their zeal against them, who
shall most fervently express his anger at them. Yea, and he shall think he has
sufficiently purged himself from all Damnable Errors, that shall wou^d the
Hairy Scalp of the Scarlet Whore: The Papist will have good luck, if they do
not receive at their hand double for all their villanyes; being more like to
give them blood to drink, who have drunk blood in abundance, then to give them
any encouragement or toleration among us: Yea the very Fifth Monarchy-men, who
of late years have been mentioned with as much detestation and indignation, as
if they maintained some damnable Opinions, or Doctrines of Devils, are as
forward as any to show their zeal in this particular.

Thirdly, Defense of Property: This Parliaments must necessarily make good for
their own credits. It Is irrational to fear that Property in general should be
endangered by a Parliament; but those Estates which have been sold by former
Parliaments, must be made good by following Parliaments, else they crack their
reputation, and undo their credit: They who have been faithful to the
Parliament, need not fear, no nor the Cavaliers, for having compounded, there
will remain no more sacrifice for their sin, if they live peaceably in the
Land. Besides for Crown Lands and Church Lands, they can have no temptation to
alienate them from the Purchasors, since it cannor be, but they will have a
Stock going in them themselves; and Kings, Bishops, Deans and Chapters being
outed the Nation, there will be no occasion of those Lands to maintain their
Grandeur: And for Delinquents Estates that are sold, there can be no thought of
their restitution, for care will be had that their Provender do not prick them
to sedition against the State. However, if any of their Estates have been sold
without due proof of their Delinquency (as it is pretended of some) God forbid
but their estates be restored them, the Purchasors receiving their Money from
the State, or satisfaction some other way: So that without peradventure, Every
man shall enjoy the purchase of his Penny, under the Supremacy of Parliaments:
And yet would there be no cause of Contest, but it would be a matter of
general content and applause, if the Parliament should be so highly just as to
enquire in good earnest into the frauds of the Commonwealth; and make them pay
the full value of their Purchases, who have played the Knaves, and cheated both
the Soldier and the State; and then they too, may enjoy their Purchases, when
they have paid the same rate for them with other men, who were forced to pay to
such a value, or go without them.

Fourthly, Easing of Taxes. This is so absolute a benefit that we have had by
the House of Commons formerly so called, that our Kings looked upon them only
as our Pursers. And our last Lord Protector in his Speech to the other House,
and the Commons assembled in the late Lords House, directed himself to the
Commons, as if so be they had signified nothing in the world but to look to the
peoples Cash, and to see which way their Money went before they parted with it.
And the truth is, they have been always very frugal for us, till the late
unhappy differences; which have necessitated so many Charges, as has forced
them to a strange kind of Prodigality, such as has almost made the Nation
Bankrupt: Which certainly had been repaired long before this time, had not that
unparalleled Usurpation been practiced upon our Government, that has put us
many hundred thousand pounds in debt, which must be paid; and may justly excuse
the Parliament for having lately made bold with us, to pay a little before
hand, and must leave them without blame, though they punish us a little more
then ordinarily, till the Nation be in some measure our of debt: No man in his
right senses but must willingly contribute thereunto as he is able, having no
reason to expect it can yet be otherwise. But the Debts of the Nation being
brought into a narrower room, which a little time may compass, we may expect,
and shall find, our Taxes will be brought as low as possible: for it is the
concernment of themselves to do us what good they can herein; they paying
equal Taxes with other men, according to the value of their Estates: Besides
being not of long continuance, and so not likely to advantage themselves by
Offices, must needs be willing to go off with applause; every Parliament
striving who shall leave least burden upon the people: There being no greater
service they can do, to commend themselves, to the general good liking of the
Nation: And therefore the Lord Protector after once he brought the Tax to
Thirty five thousand pounds per mensem, with all his Rhetoric, could never
persuade any of his Parliaments to raise it a penny, being unwilling to draw
the envy of the people upon themselves: And it may be hoped, That the
Parliament now sitting, will do something toward our relief herein; although
perhaps at present they cannot avoid a greater Tax then has been upon us these
Four or Five years, for reasons mentioned before, yet may we not hope in vain,
to have amends made us, one way or other: It being a shrewd temptation to gain
a general applause; that when they have finished their course, and done their
work, they may have the Nations Euge, Well done good and faithful servants.
Something of this nature they have already under consideration; I wish it may
succeed according to their desires: For I am very sure they are industriously
studious to render us some such services, as may signalize the care they have
of our welfare: In the mean while (pardon my homely Proverb.) It is not wisdom
to lose a Hog for half a penniworth of Tar: But when they can, let them
give us as much ease as possible; succeeding Parliaments will be sure to take
off what they may, but will hardly be persuaded to lay on more load, as you may
well imagine: And every succeeding Parliament will have advantage of the other,
to do us a pleasure, as we shall grow better quieted, and less disposed to
sedition and disturbance; which fruit we must needs reap by a Parliaments
Supremacy, which cannot but give content to all Parties.

Fifthly, Advance of Trade. Here I dare say, I shall little need to bespeak
attention; every one greedily listening after this advantage. Trade is the very
life and spirits of a Commonwealth; it makes the complexion of a people
lively, and pleasant: When it flourishes, you may observe a general Jubilee.
Break the Neck of Trade, and you break the Heart of a Commonwealth, and make
it fit to be ridden by every Tyrant and Usurper. When people have more then
enough to do to get their Bread, they will have little leisure or heart to
contend for their Rights and Privileges: It Is when Riches abound, that men are
in a condition to bear up their Privileges; when Trade flourishes, then
Riches flow in, and then no cost will be spared to preserve our Rights: Every
body knows the general benefit of Trade; I need say no more to that. But this
observe, Wheresoever you take notice of Rulers giving all possible
encouragement to Trade, you may be confident that people are already arrived
under a just Government; or that it is really designed for them: And whoever
they be, that Curtail Trade, whether single persons, or others, and think it
not fit to give it its just Privileges; (although they may do some common
Courtesies for it, to pick thanks) never doubt but they intend to make us their
Slaves; let their pretensions be bever so specious for liberty. The more
refined any Government is, the more exactly squared to the line and Plumet of
Reason; still the more of their countenance will be bestowed on Trade; knowing,
the more wealthy we grow, the more we shall contend for them: It is not to be
doubted, that Government which is most rational, and gives best satisfaction
to the people; that shall be sure to thrive best, where the people thrive most;
they grow up together to the greatest height; that Government encourages
Trade, and that Trade supporteth the Government: But Usurpations, and
Prerogatives being against common reason, are best born up upon the ruins of
Trade: The more Beggars the more Soldiers for your Money: And therefore some
have said, If his late Majesty could have kept this City from getting to such a
head, he had sat fast in his Throne. And our old Protector played this game
pretty well, by getting the Customs and Excise raised much higher then ever;
and exposing them to Farmers, to squeeze the Trader to some purpose: which has
caused many a man to take Sanctuary in the Upper Bench; and made many others
forbear Trading to keep what they have; not knowing which way to get more;
which brought Trade to such a pass, that certainly if he had lived Protector
Six years more, he had beggered half the Tradesmen in the Nation. And whoever
he be that shall snatch away the power, out of the hands of our Parliaments, be
he one man, or a few men, the best of men, what you please to term them; this
be sure, they will have such a witness in their consciences that their cause
is not just; that they will find it prudence, to keep the Tradesmen low
enough; being those that set all the wheels of the Commonwealth a going, and
bring in the wealth of the Nation; and are sturdy fellows themselves, against
Oppressors: And therefore the design of this Parliament, to take off Customs
and Excise, as it is generally reported; which has been had in deliberation
among them, and which they are very desirous the project propounded may answer
expectation, of which they were informing themselves by an enquiry throughout
the Nation; and therefore have continued the Customs and Excise but for three
months longer, to see what may possibly be done in it: I say, this is with me a
very important sign, that they did indeed intend us an equal Government:
Wherein I heartily wished them good success. It will be a good day in England
indeed when Excise is taken off, better if both Customs and Excise could be
taken off; but if the Excise were laid by, and the Customs halved, brought as
low as any other Nation, or but half the Rates imposed that now are paid; ^^
would be a great ease and benefit; and give infinite content unto the Merchant;
and should nevertheless bring more Sacks to the Mill, be a greater Revenue
thou now it is, as is easy to demonstrate. Well, had this Parliament given us
one lift, and I dare warrant, the next shall not be behind hand; for still as
Parliaments come to be of shorter continuance, and can have no design upon us;
they will work while it is called their day; that they may give all
encouragement to Trade; which must, and will be unto them instead of Walls and
Bulwarks: And shall for ever secure them, against King, or House of Lords. So
that their Interest considered, there will need in the Parliaments no Advocates
for Trade; it will be so generally the Interest of the whole; but to make the
security good beyond possibility of miscarriage; a considerable number of
Tradesmen cannot fail for Cities, and Boroughs, to make voices for the
advantage of Trade: Yea, few Gentlemen of the Parliament, but must have younger
children, younger Brothers, or very near Relations that are engaged in Trades;
who will not be wanting to do them a pleasure; That a more then common
advantage to Trade is hoped for from the Supremacy of Parliaments; I have this
to add, viz. The extraordinary abounding of Tradesmen, since this Parliament
first began to scuffle with the King for the privileges of the people: It is
not to be dissembled, how little encouragement has been given to Trade these
many years; through the extraordinary Impositions that have been upon it; and
yet it is no more to be conceated, how Tradesmen have multiplied in London; so
that if restraints had not been laid upon Buildings, it would not have been
far from London to Brainford. This is that which has made Rents so
unreasonably high in London; a strange kind of wilfulness there has been,
that every body will be Tradesmen; when all the Trade that has been going in
the Nation these two years and upwards, has been too little to afford one
third part of them a comfortable livelihood: It Is certainly a providence they
have for future Benefit that must necessarily accrue after our Hurliburlies are
over, and we arrive at a settlement, under an equal Commonwealth. And it is,
no doubt* a good piece of discretion not to be beaten off from engaging in
Trade by present discouragements, when the long run promises the greatest
advantages that men of but competent Fortunes can hope for: Neither does the
multitude of Traders, when Trade is open, and free, at all hinder Trade, but
the more the m^rryer, and the better cheer too: Though when Trade is shut up,
and spoiled, every one stands in the others way. I have wondered many times the
reason why most of our Gentry have of late affected, to place their sons
Apprentic^s, and will give any money, rather then fail to dispose of them in
Trades: I durst never think them all, to be fools and their money soon parted;
yea, the best Gentry of England, are very desirous, and do daily match their
Daughters into the City, and give three times the portions that twenty years
since would have been given to a Citizen; when money was much more plentiful
then now; so that men are concerned to see it the better laid out. And yet
Trade, so miserably bad as it has been of late; I know not how to resolve it
otherwise, then a presage of future good days unto the Trader, grounded upon
the alterations that have befallen us; and if Tradesmen have so much increased
under so many opressions, when fed upon stones, and getting what they have out
of a flint, living most upon hopes; what may we expect, when under a constant
Succession of Parliaments, enjoying our peace, trade shall receive all possible
furtherance by Authority, but that we shall grow to an immense wealth, that
shall make us with Gods blessing, a wall of brass, and a terror to our
Neighbors round about us. Yea, if Trade already be so well esteemed, that
Tradesmen to a great number, are acknowledged to be men of very good ingenuity,
and of commendable behavior, so as many of them are hardly distinguished from
the best bred men of the Nation, and are received as companions for them: to
how much greater Reputation will they arrive when the incombrances of Trade
being removed, men of the best literature shall think some of their time well
bestowed in canvassing a Trade; and such courtesies yea such justice must needs
proceed to Traders from a Parliamen^s Supremacy. Some there are, more nice then
wise, the Gallants of the times, who are very jealous if the Tradesman have
much countenance, he will go cheek by jole with them, and not give them the
respect belongs to them, a mere fancy -- Say they, who does the Tradesman live
by, but the Gentry: Very good, and so long as they receive a benefit by you,
never fear, be not too long in their books, and you will not want their
congees; but I tell these Gentlemen they will reap a benefit hereby, for Trade
getting reputation, you will be eased of those retainers in a great measure,
those bloudsuckers that leave you not a penny in your purses by Quarter day.
Younger Brothers, and Unkles, and Cozens, that stick as close to you as your
shirts to your backs, who scorn a Trade so much, that they do as it were rather
beg their bread in a Gentile fashion. These then will be engaged in Trades, and
be able to live by their own ingenuity, besides less portions will serve turn
to set them up bravely, then now they draw away from their elder Brothers,
which pincheth hard sometimes, and yet after a little roaring spend all, and
are turned upon their good Brothers keeping at the last, who cannot be so
little a Gentleman as to shut his doors upon them, and if he leave them open,
they will be sure to come in, without crying, by your leave Sir, thinking it
high injustice he should have so much when all theirs is gone.

Sixthly, Soverain powers and privileges of Parliament, asserted and
vindicated. This is so well cared for by this expedient; as if every thing else
were of no comparative consideration with it; so that those who are our
Trustees in Parliament, whom every part of the Nation chooses to act for them;
those that the great Patrons of Prerogative will tell you, were never known any
otherwise then as Peti^ioners to their Majesty's, they are stated in the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, without King or Lords to controal them; so
that they may then command what formerly they might beg, and go without: that
thing which we so much complained of, and was indeed a real grievance, that our
Commons in Parliament were without power to do us good, by reason of the
Negative Voices over them, is hereby sufficiently redressed, and we may expect
the benefit of it, if we will be so true to our selves, as to choose the best
deserving Patriots, and most public spirited men to act for us. I shall
instance in three Particulars more that are the common concernments of the
Nation, which were only named before, not insisted on, and hasten an end.

Seventhly, It Is the common interest of the Nation that Religion be reformed
according to the Word of God, and the examples of the best reformed Churches. I
do not dispute whether this be State Policy, but sure I am it is good Christian
prudence. This comes to be our interest, not only as we have lift up our hands
to the most high so to do, (which upon no account that I know can be dispensed)
but as we expect God to bless us, so it becomes our interest to glorify him
by bearing our witness to the truth; without which it is most high presumption to
expect his blessing, especially since we profess our selves Christians, it is
surely our duty to glorify God by a public profession of our Religion,
attested unto by the Supreme Authority, such as the public vote of the Nation
shall judge to be most of Divine Authority: it would be hard measure, that the
minor part of the Nation, by claiming the benefit and right of serving God
according to their consciences, as tender spirited men, should deprive the
ma^or part of that tenderness, their consciences must needs oblige them to
express to Religion; for if the minor part claiming liberty of Conscience,
shall debar the major part from a public profession of Religion; then the
major part is bereaved of their liberty of conscience by the minor, which is
most unequal, as Mr. Harrington has excellently well observed. It is strange
to me, how any man should resolve, that a public profession, and a Christian
toleration are inconsistent and unpracticable: unless this be inseparable from
a public profession, that all dissenters must be persecuted, which can by no
means be admitted; yea, I am bold to justify Mr. Harrington in his 45
Aphorism, That there may be Liberty of Conscience, there must be a National
Religion: it will then be the interest of the Nation, that a public Ministry
be encouraged and maintained: I have Mr. Harrington my friend in this too,
Aphorism^ 46. That there may be a National Religion, there must be an endowed
Clergy; and verily he has many things to this purpose of much concernment and
unanswerable. I will repeat some few.

Aphorism 42. Where the major part is deprived of the Liberty of Conscience by
the minor, there they will deprive the minor of that liberty of Conscience,
which they might otherwise enjoy.

Apoh. 43. In Israel there was an endowed Clergy, or Priesthood, and a National
Religion under inspection of the Magistrates; whence the Chistians in
Apostolic times, defraying their own Ministry, could have Liberty of
Conscience; whereas if the Christians by going about to take away tithes, and
abolish the National Religion, had endeavored to violate the Consciences of the
unconverted Jews, these being far greater in number, must needs have taken away
the Liberty of Conscience from the Christians.

Aphor. 44. Paul in Athens could freely, and undisturbedly convert Dionysius
and others, therefore in Athens there was liberty of Conscience; but if Paul
and his Converts, had gone about to drive hirelings, or an endowed Priesthood,
or Clergy out of that Church, who sees not that the Athenians would have
driven Paul and his Converts out of Athens? I do not forget my self, there must
be a pu^lique Ministry maintained, without which our public, yea and our
private Christian profession will be lost; to which the Parliament by their
late memorable Votes, as also by their very kind receiving of the
Lecestershire. Petition, have given their public testimony, Gods blessing on
their hearts for it. However some in the world taking advantage of the rash
actings of some few, who ought to have been better disciplined, yet were
overruled by the blind zeal of their private spirits, have thrust sore at the
Ministry of the Nation, These are they who receive your Tithes, you see now
how much beholding you are to the Ministry; what shall they have Tithes still?
when will you know your friends from your foes? but these men know not what
spirit they are of; and it appears, that you have not so learned Christ: that
for the inconsiderate actings, of some fiery zealots, you should call for fire
to consume them, and starve all the rest: A Ministry so learned, so pious, so
spiritual, as no Nation, no age of the world has enjoyed, in so great plenty.
Yea, those very men, against whom many cannot find words bad enough to
express their malice. The Presbyterian Ministers, of whom I may truly say,
they come behind in nothing of the chiefest Apostles (those that pretend more
immediate converse with the Spirit) having their witness in the souls and
consciences of very many, the seal of whose Ministry many are in the Lord, who
are their crown, and glory, and rejoicing; of whom thousands will say, though
they had ten thousand instructors, yet these were their Fathers, for in Christ
Jesus they have begotten them, through the Gospel: and a thousand pitties it
were, they should be exposed to the rage of unreasonable men, who would starve
them out of the Pulpit, unless God should send them Ravens with food. In this
digression I have only betrayed my affection, not at all my suspicion, of this
or future Parliaments neglecting the Ministry; for I believe it will be owned
for a National interest, that a godly and able Ministry be encouraged, that so
the Ordinances may be purely dispensed amongst us, without this there can be no
Reformation of Religion. Care too must be had concerning Heresy and Blasphemy,
or there can be no public Christian Religion. (I am f^in to huddle things
together) Shall that Nation be called Heathen or Christian, that suffers men to
Preach and Print, that Jesus Christ is not God; that he is not Man? that the
holy Spirit is not God: that the Scriptures are not the rule of Faith, and
life: that the Sabbath day is no more to be taken notice of then every other
day? and many other abominable opinions? I am sorry to mention it, but some
care must be had in it: there must also be Reformation of life, this is our
conce^nment no less then the former, and must be as necessarily and carefully
inspected, else there can be no real Reformation: Swearers, Drunkards, Unclean
persons, Sabbath breakers must be punished, or there can be no real
Reformation, otherwise Reformation is a mere gingle: there are good Laws for
these already, let them be put in practice, but I am too prolix. That
Parliaments will take care of this, is most certain, he is strangly
unacquainted with the temper of the Nation, that fears it in the least, yea
some there are, that are so sensible of it, that fearing their Reformation
should take cognizance of their unwarrantable behavior, use their best wits,
to argue the Supremacy of Parliaments to be dangerous to the welfare of
England; of whom I will not speak in the very words of the Apostle, They have
reigned (yet this I am bold to say, they would reign) as Kings without us; and
I would to God they did reign (over their own disorderly and carnal affections)
that we also might reign together with them.

Eighthly, It Is the Common interest of the Nation, That our good Laws be
preserved, and the Liberty of the Subject duly regarded. This must be taken
for granted, I think it is no more to be questioned, but our Representatives in
Parliament must be the best security can be taken for performance of these
conditions, especially since they are so nearly concerned. For example, The
Adventurers for Ireland have some things of very great concernment to be done
for them, would they not think themselves highly befriended, and the best
provided for that could be, if they might choose so many of their own number as
were convenient, to settle their affairs for them; could they doubt of having
their dues, since the Trustees were themselves Adventurers, and would be sure
to consult their own benefit, which they could not carry on without including
the generality of Adventurers. It Is the very case in hand, as to matter of
benefit, their case and ours as much the same, as one Adventurers with another;
but it holds not as to matter of right, for they are but a party, and might do
themselves kindnesses right or wrong.

Ninthly, Indepnity, and a general amnesty, and Oblivion, is the common
interest of the Nation. And what can be conceived more complete, then that this
be performed, and granted, by those that represent every County, City, and
considerable Borough of England, and consequently every individual man. What
can be more honorable? What can be more safe? shall we not think our selves
secure, unless we obtain their forgiveness, who would have scorned to have
crept to us if we had been beaten. I wonder at the degenerate and sordid Spirit
of some people; surely after a general Indemnity, Amnesty, and Oblivion
granted by a full representative, every man will be out of the Laws gunshot,
for what is past: which we have no more reason to doubt of obtaining from the
next that sits then of enjoying our lives and estats under them, it will be
their interest and wisdom to be friends with all they can, that they may have
no enemies if it be possible.

Finally, Settlement. When the Supreme Power is fallen into such hands wherein
the whole interest of the Nation is combined, such as are the fruit of our own
choice, whose interest it must needs be to do us all imaginable good; to allow
us a Christian Liberty of conscience, To root out Popery: To defend our
Property: To ease us of Taxes: To advance our Trade: To make good the powers
and privileges of the Parliaments: To reform Religion: To secure the good
Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject: To grant a complete Indemnity,
Amnesty, and Oblivion, and when if it could be imagined one Parliament would
wrong us, we are sure it cannot be long lived, having its period, and bounds
that it cannot pass; what should all us but we should rest satisfied, what
likelihood remains there of disturbance? I am sure cause there will remain none
at all. Upon the whole I am certain I have made it evident:

That the Supreme Authority being fully vested in Parliaments of England
successively, and frequently chosen by the good People thereof, being free, and
without check upon them, is an infallible means (under God) of preservation of
the Nation and the Rights and Interests thereof.

-- I marry Sir, this would do well; but you write merrily, when the sky falls,
we shall catch Larkes.

It is Objected, as our Author has it: whom I had now almost forgot, That the
PARLIAMENT intended nothing otherwise then utterly to subvert Parliaments.
Others there be of the same mind, That we should never see Parliaments more in
England: but that our Parliament lately sitting meant always to be the Supreme
Power.

I Answer, You might possibly have been mistaken, be not overhasty to conclude,
you know whose bolt is soon shot, and you may peradventure be found peccant of
speaking evil of the Rulers of the People; I cannot prophecy what they would
do, but can easily foretell what would come on it, if they should have done as
you say; but I must take leave to differ from you, if this be your judgment,
upon better grounds I believe then any you have for your conceit, and a little
time would have told the truth of the matter: I take them to know their
business better then so; and however some are never satisfied of speaking evil
enough of them, malice has never yet had the impudence to brand them with the
imputation of folly: and would it not well advance the wisdom of those Sages,
utterly to deprive us of, and totally to subvert the very constitutions of
Parliaments; when but the interrupting, forcing, or imposing upon Parliaments,
has been of so dire and fatal consequence to the late King, and some body
else: what could they expect but the general murmurs, seditions and revolts of
the people, of worse consequence then any yet have been to them, who if they
should be driven from Westminster; though they drew the Ark after them; should
be persuaded with never so Golden and glorious pretenses of Religion and
Toleration; yet would not be gotten on; but as they should prick them forward,
and would nevertheless be continually lowing, and looking backward.

Parliaments are the Darling of the people, whosoever touches them, touches the
apple of their eye; and wherever you see any shy of Parliaments, it is certainly
in relation to Faction; or such things as they know well enough cannot hold
water: Ye^, I wonder at my Author, but that it is no wonder to take him
tripping; who tells us, That it is the Interest of the Arm^ to break the
Parliament to pieces; that he should think them guilty of so little foresight,
as to give the Army such advantage against them, greater then ever old Oliver
could show to do what he did. If it were the Interest of the Army to break the
Parliament to pieces, (which no man under the degree of Bedlam can fancy) could
they contrive a better pretense, then what my Author says, will certainly be
matter of fact, that this Parliament had overthrown the very Foundations of
Parliaments; certainly if this were true, we should all throw up our Caps, and
hollow at this second rout: But you might have expected this at latter Lammas.
The Parliament seeming resolutely bent for the good of the Nation; which every
day appeared more and more, since this Paper has been under my Pen. I make no
question but they have made this observation, that Honesty is the best Policy.
These have been and yet are sifting times, such as few Ages have been
acquainted with; so as those that have studied the most prudentiall
proceedings; have been Non-plus'd in their resolutions how to steer themselves;
and have not been able to ride it out, in those storms and fluctuations that
have betided our State: and I mistake my self wonderfully, if the most
downright honest men of the Nation, do not appear ere long to be accounted the
wisest; these who have scorned to speak or do any thing against their
consciences; and yet too did not altogether hold their peace; and therefore
many of them were brow-beaten, and others as faithful men as any in the world
neglected, and disregarded; but let them lift up their heads, for their
Redemption draws nigh; they will be the men whom God shall delight to honor
in the sight of the Nations; when those that have been as the waves of the Sea,
carried to and fro with every wind or breath of pretenses; those Weather-cocks
that have stood right with the wind from any point of the Compass, though
enough against their own Consciences; merely as Time-servers, to save their own
slakes, and get in other men's too into their fingers; would be glad to shiffle
in among the Company: But their disguise is by this time so notoriously known,
that they will not be hid under their Sheeps-clothing. The Parliament could not
but foresee this, and certainly nothing has appeared but that they really
intended to do honest things for us, which one would have thought had been
good security for them against the course usage they have met with a second
time; so this objection, and the Parliament are out of doors together. But it
is further objected, that this is variable; though it should be so settled, yet
it may not long hold here, we shall be liable to continual alterations. I
answer, After it is thus settled, if it be altered, it must be either by force,
or by free consent: And there is no Government but is liable to both these, as
much as this: It may be forced away, by a greater power; or given away by free
consent; this is true of any Government: And there is no Government can pretend
to unchangeablenesse in this world: But this let me say, No people are in like
difence against Invasion, as those that are under Popular Governments; I will
not instance, I am sure I need not: As for intestine disturbances from the
generality of a people, that is less to be feared then under Monarchy; for as
has been proved, it must needs give best satisfaction. All the difficulty then
will be as to matter of force in this Commonwealth, (as of any other in our
case) whether the Army will not be more then Quartermaster: This is that that
our Air has rung the Echo of, i will warrant you the Army will turn out the
Parliament before long, and then where is your Commonwealth you bragged so
much of, and those glorious days of liberty you so much exulted in the
foresight of. Verily, it troubled me to hear this language; but I meant not to
break my heart with that which I hoped should never otherwise ^fflict me, then
as a Reproach: I should not know well what to think, if our Army were, as
generally Armies are, mad upon Rapine and ruin; but should hope we should be
so much Englishmen, as to sell out Lives in company with our Liberties, at so
dear a rate, that if they were Conquerors, they should have little cause to
twit our Survivours of their Conquest; if we could not carry on our cause in
despite of their resistance. But our Army have professed a good will to our
Liberties and Privileges; and did not long since bewail their Apostasy in
subverting them; and did therefore restore this Parliament, besides whom there
is no visible nor seeming face of Authority in England, to settle the Nation
upon their just Rights, and freedom; surely we will not believe our own eyes.
It can never be thought that this Army should return again to their vomit;
without some Witchcraft or strong operation and Enchantment of the Jesuit, to
undertake the Government again; under which they so pitifully miscarried a
while since; although the Northern Brigade gave very scurvy symptoms, of being
Busybodies, and troublers of our Israel; supposing themselves wiser then the
Parliament, who I am sure are as far engaged as the best He of them all, to
consult both the security of themselves, the Army, and the Nation, against the
Interest of the Norman Race; and to preserve the Interest of all the Godly, and
liberty of Conscience; but I hope the best part of the Army will not be fooled;
but if they will make us their Slaves, we must endure till we find a remedy;
but I am sure any Government is liable to this inconvenience; if they cannot
master their Army, if their Army be Knaves, they will master them: As for
giving away the powers of Parliaments, by Parliaments themselves, as their own
Act and Deed; is beyond that little forecast that remains with me to fancy: Is
it probable that a Beggar being put into the condition of a Gentleman, whereby
he may command his full satisfaction; should of his own choice be reduced into
his former condition, it were certainly a sordid spirit where it should so
happen: But if this could be supposed; yet how little does it pretend to
likelihood that the Representatives of England; men of noble and ingenuous
souls; who have not formerly been known under any other notion, then that of
Petitioners; as says Mr. Pryn, and others, who could never get a Dole for
themselves, and us, but in a way of begging; and most commonly too when they
got any thing, sent away with a bit and a knock: Having now got their Supremacy
vindicated by the dint of Sword, and set upon the Pinnacle of Government;
whereby they may oblige as their Servants, by the good turns they may do us; it
b^ing more blessed to give then to receive: I say, does it come within the
compass of Suspicion, that they should swap away their Supremacy, that they
may be returned into their former capacity of being poor Knights of
Westminster? I trow not: Nay I conjecture, That if the affairs of the Nation
were ordered under the peculiar inspection of our Representatives in
Parliament, so that they may do us those kindnesses, and that justice we may
expect from them; that in one seven years, it would be impossible to choose such
a Parliament in the most free way of Elect on imaginable; that should betray
their power into the hands of any Monarch whatsoever; they would find so many
advantages and so much sweet accruing by this way of a Parliaments Supremacy:
But it is farther objected, That a single Council is not so well consulted; it
were better, and more to be relied on, that we had a Senate, and a great
Assembly; or two Houses of Parliament: I answer in general, This age is very
pregnant of projects; every body ha^h a fling at the State: and set their wits
aworking to hammer out a Government for England: They say, Every body that
comes into Westminster Hall, has his Model in his Pocket, what Government he
thinks fittest for the Commonwealth. Whether this be true or false is no great
matter; this I am sure is not unknown, that every Booksellers Basket, and
Shop, has some new thing to show for a Popular Governm nt: Among the rest, a
few days since I cast mine eye upon a Paper, that had for its Bush, this title:
A Model of a Democraticall Government. A trusty Trojan he is no doubt, and an
excellent Democracy he propounds; no less then two Counsels will serve his
turn; that he may be sure to be one of the wiser sort: A Senate and an, etc.
the Senate to consist of the Parliament men lately sitting; who should choose
to themselves so many as shall complete their number three hundred: Every year
one hundred to go off, and themselves to choose an hundred to fill up the three
hunddred: And these to have the sole power, of debating, and propounding Laws:
-- Rare invention upon my word, and a gallant exchange, for Monarchical
Slavery; and very well worth the blood and treasure that has been so
prodigally expended: I should not much grudge at a little expense of time, so I
did thereby a little ken this well-instructed Scribe; that I might know him
another time from a Black Sheep. However, I hold his Model not worth the
whistleing after, but deserves to be hissed out of countenance, and the
Ingenuity of the Author to be rewarded after the Desert of a Libell: And let me
add this as a piece of my mind, Those endeavors that make the greatest
noise, and most specious pretenses for liberty, and freedom; and promise the
greatest Refinings, and Reformation of Government; which yet in themselves tend
directly to enslave and oppress us; those are to be had in the greatest
detestation and abhorrence, and ought more severely to be censured, then those
others that deal more plainly with us; and oblige us by their Sovereign
Unction, to be their Vassals: For while they promise us Liberty, they
themselves are the Bondslaves of Corruption, and would entangle us again in the
yoke of bondage: But if nothing less then a Senate, and a great Counsel can
serve the turn, (which I will believe when any body gives me good reason for) I
shall immediately join my Forces with those public spirited men, in their
Petition of July 6. transcribed from Mr. Harringtons Oceana; a Work which I
greatly esteem, and a Person I very much honor for his Labors about
Government: And really I am sometimes almost angry with my self, that I am
forced to dissent from his opinion of a Senate: I think I have hunted his works
over and over, to find out the utmost of his reason for a Senate, which is not
so swaying with me as to overruled me in this matter; but I know it is no new
thing to Mr. Harrington to meet with Dissenters from his Judgment; and I doubt
not he will pardon me; since I will assure him I shall be willing to learn of
him, and shall think my self honored to be his Scholar; for in very deed if I
err, it is through ignorance, not wilfulness; that I differ from him, is of
constraint, not of choice; for I am so well informed of my self, that I should
not seek occasion of difference with him whom I very well know to be more then
my match: With Leviathan then if that be it at which Mr. Harrington so much
wonders, I must acknowledge my opinion to be firm for a Single Assembly, as it
has ever been, notwitstanding, what I have seen in Mr. Harrington, o^ any
other to the contrary: The greatest matter I have observed in Mr. Harrington
for a Senate, is that of dividing and choosing; and that of Faction in a Single
Assembly. Which for ought that I perceive (though it be the most that can be
said) avails little to the business. Let me state the Commonwealth into 20
persons with Mr. Harrington; why should the Cake be divided between 14. and 6.
in two parcels, and not among the 20 into twenty parcels? Why should the six
have so much share as the fourteen? is this an equal Commonwealth? Our work
would be done by halves, and there would be strange dividing in the end I fear:
But this must not run upon all four, there is a mystery in the business, I cry
you mercy: And as to faction and scrambling, I do not foresee it, unless this
be faction, A general agreement about the Cake, how it shall be divided, and
parcelled out among the people; else it is a Paradox to me how twenty persons
should disagree together, and yet have perfect harmony, by an intercourse of
spirits, when the intercourse of their persons in counsel fails by dividing 6
from the 14. would they agree better apart then together about dividing this
Cake? I strange at the mystery of this scrambling; here is neither King nor
House of Peers to scramble with; if there were a King there might be some
reason for halving, and the Popular Assembly might be given to scramble for the
other half that was kept from them: But what reason of scrambling, when the
whole is in the single Assembly? unless for failing they must scramble among
themselves; the major of the 20 with the minor of the 20. so by the same rule
may the major of the 14 with the minor of the 14. and the major of the 6 with
the minor of the 6. and the 14 and 6 scramble with one another: It is frivolous
to think that the 14 in England, like little Babies, would be pleased with this
Rattle, of Choosing; when it is evident it must be Hobsons choice, this or
none; and as I have been cheated my self when a Boy, and thought it privilege
enough to choose, the Wags have cu^ the greatest piece of an Apple, and offered
me the Remainder, and bid me take that or choose; which proved an Apple of
Contention; and presently down goes our Apple, and we fall to Boxing to end the
quarrel: Which is most like to fall out here, when the Prerogative Tribe do
not like what the Senate proposes; how shall they help themselves? The Senate
must go to dividing again, which it may be, shall please no more then before;
which if it end without Boxing will do very well. But let us consider again,
the whole 20 are chosen by the people, these together would scramble and be
factious; carry on a Party, or share places of Profit and Honor. Well, what
benefit accrues by the Division, (unless because of the division, the 14 will
be against the 6. right or wrong, as is something probable) if 4 of the 6. be
for something to be proposed as to Faction, or Scrambling, 8 or 9 of the 14
will not fail to ballot for them; if they be corrupt, they will be corrupt
still; if they be filthy, they will be filthy still; it is not two Houses that
will hinder Faction, or scrambling if they incline to it: it is not the praying
6 of the 14 to go apart, that will make them either the honester or wiser; or
will make them ever a jot less mind themselves and their private interest,
and more the public, or be more mannerly at the public Table, and give the
best from themselves to decency, and common interest: But put case that the 6
be over reasoned by 1 or 2 of their own number for something that before they
thought not to be the common interest of the Nation, yet the Major part of the
14 (supposed by Mr. Harrington to be the least wise of the 20) are like to
persist in the more common and first received opinion; being stripped of the
benefit of hearing matters fully debated among themselves pro and con, which in
a single assembly they receive the benefit of; where hearing what any man can
say, their judgments are fully informed, and they find cause many times to
alter a prepossessed opinion, for who so speaks the best reason may expect to
be followed with the greatest resentments; who (as Mr. Harrington has it I
think against himself) will be sure to lead the herd, as Stags of the largest
heads; for while the 6 discoursing and arguing one with another, show the
eminency of their parts; the 14 discover things they never thought on, and are
cleared in diverse truths which formerly perplexed them; but this I hope is not
so well performed, while the 14 are shut out of their debates and conferences;
or should not these 6 better inform those 14 if they were but one single
assembly. But again, the 6 shall Debate, but not Resolve; the 14 shall Resolve,
but not Debate: if the 14 meddle with the business of the six, ruin is
consequent, so says Mr. Harrington, the 14 of Athens debating was their ruin:
so Rome, the 14 debating caused her storms; though it seems it fares not so
ill with Venice, whose 6 sometimes make bold to Resolve: and Carthage is
reprehended by Aristotle because her 6 Propounded and sometimes Resolv d too,
her 14 sometimes Resolved and debated too: We do not want examples out of Mr.
Harrington, of the enterfering of the 6 with the 14, and the 14 with the 6;
both which are of such dismal consequence; neither could there be wanting sad
examples of the like nature in England, if ever the Senate take place here: I
doubt we should follow the fate of Athens and Rome. Would our Grand Counsel
endure to loose the benefit of debating among themselves, that all their
communication should be yea yea, nay nay, and that too only in d^mb shows; the
genius and natural d^sposition of England would never away which it, a Nation
that cannot endure to be tongue tied, her meanest Assemblies not sparing, but
delighting to exercise their speeches; and certainly the temper and
constitution of a people are very considerable to Governments, which are to be
made for men, and not men for them.

If these silent items of the mind be passable with some stupid heavy mouthed
people, yet will they not take at all, with such a prompt and ready people as
the English, upon whom I never desire to see them obtruded; yea, but should it
be forced upon them by some sole Legislator; would it not debase the Spirits of
the Nation, Parliament men should be bold as Lions, to speak freely their
minds, and to enter their Protestations if need be of dissent and dislike; and
not be obliged to sneak their minds into a box, as if they were afraid or
ashamed to speak out. This would be of very ill importance in the Grand
Counsel, and yet all this the benefit of two Houses: It was counted a great
oppression that the King and Lords had a Negative Voice, and could hinder the
Commons (which answered to the Prerogative tribe, as that was the Interest of
the people) from what good they would do for the Nation, and yet the Commons
were as free to propose and debate, as their Lordships; and I mistake
exceedingly if those that propound, have not the better half of the Cake, if
the other can only dissent, and are bound up from debating, or giving their
reasons of dissent. Nay, how unreasonable it is that 1050 men should give their
suffrages, without so much as the benefit of a Jury, going together to consult
and debate about it among themselves, after only a mere Oration in praise of
the matters propounded; when Mr. Harrington supposes them to be none of the
wisest, and therefore deserve to be better informed, before they proceed; and
to what purpose such a goodly number should come together, to play, at
blindmans buff I cannot imagine, I shall never expect the interest of England
to be made good, though ten thousand and fifty should come to be of our
prerogative Tribe, if they shall be like that great multitude, that the most
part of them knew not wherefore they were come together; for so they must needs
be, if all must keep silence: Neither will the Printing and publishing of the
Resolves of the Senate before it comes to the Ballot, mend the matter much, but
mar it rather in my sorry judgment; every body has the benefit of reading
that which is Printed, and may by that reason be as well informed as
themselves: but it is a sorry information that we can make to our selves by our
own insight, and the advantage of occasional meetings, in comparison of that
clearness of reason that convinces in so grave an Assembly; but I did not mean
to contend, only to ob^ect. I hasten, We have hitherto considered the
Commonwealth to the number of 20 chiefly, they will differ something it may be
under a multiplication.

Says Mr. Harrington, Aph. 70. The popular assem^ly in a Commonwealth, may
consist of too few, but can never consist of too many.

72. If a popular Assembly consist of so few, and so eminet persons, as are
capable of any orderly debate, it is good for nothing but to destroy the
Commonwealth.

73. If the popular assembly consist of so many, and so mean persons for the
greater part as are not capable of debate, then this defect must he helped by a
Senate.

74. The reason of a Senate is, that a popular assembly rightly const^^uted, is
not capable of any prudent debate.

76. A popular Assembly without a Senate cannot be wise.

109. As the soul of man can never be in the body of a Beast, unless God make
a new creation; so neither the soul and freedom natural to democracy in any
other form whatsoever, then that only of a Senate and a popular Assembly.

Verily this last is smart, but wounds not much; the great matter is, That the
popular Assembly being the interest of mankind, cannot be sufficiently
secured, but by such a num^er, as are incapable of any orderly debate.

To which I return, That such a number as cannot understand, that cannot make
out to one another the benefit of mankind, are too many to make good the
interest of mankind in away of reason, and if in any particular they hit upon
it, it is more by hap then any good cunning. Therefore I believe, that so many
and no more, as may among themselves, be well informed of their own and the
peoples in crest (being universally the same) are the only men, and number of
men, to preserve the interest of mankind. When a fire breaks out, it is the
interest of the whole neighborhood to quench it, but they may be too many to
be useful, therefore the supernumeraries had better be at home, that they be no
hinderance: That may be the interest of the whole Nation, that does not call
for so great numbers to keep it on foot, therefore those that may be well
enough spared let them keep at home, too many are troublesome, and stand in one
another light. Why 1050, and no less, to look to the interest of England,
besides 300 to be the light of England? Or, why the light of mankind, must be
separated from the interest of mankind, is very dark to me. If the one body be
all eye, where is its tasting and its feeling, if the other be all lasting and
feeling, where is its seeing this is not altogether so good contrivance, as
where two half-blind Coachhorses are so placed, that this may see on the one
side, and that on the other, though, they can scarce see each other, their
blind sides being next together.

The people, says Mr. Harrington, can feel, but they cannot see: well then,
the light of this Body is the eye, that is, the Senate; if then the Eye be at
Westminster, and the Body be at St. Paul's Church, for a little place cannot
hold 1050 men; I persuade my self this body must be full of darkness. Why 1050
pray? a less number was formerly thought enough to assert the interest of
mankind, against the light of mankind, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
the Judges to boot, which was the interest of some men besides; when yet the
Commons were thought to have, and were found to have the light of mankind in
them too, yea and have so well asserted and made good the interest of mankind,
against those lights and private interests, that leaves no man great cause to
except against their number. Why 500 or thereabouts being equally distributed
for elections according to the interest of every part of England, should not as
well preserve the interest of mankind, as 1050, especially when hereby the
Body has its eyes in its head, has in it self the light of mankind and the
interest of makind, can see and feel both, I know not? And unless we should
put out our eyes, because some say, they that see best, here worst sometimes,
and they that hear worst, seebest often times; the loss of one sense being the
increase of another: and so because the Great Counsel is blind, it should feel
the better; or the Senate, because it does not feel so much, must see the
better; unless this be good reason, I am bound to think best of A single
Assembly.

But stay, The Senate is the light, reason or learning of mankind: and how
easy it is for, reason and learning to delude sense, let any one imagine. It
is true, there are some things so sensibly certain, that they are not to be
over ruled by any show of reason, but reason seldom busieth its self about
these; nor are these the things that so frequently occur unto the consideration
of our Representatives, if these were the things, there would be the less
necessity for the light of mankind; the reason of a Senate being to debate
hard matters, things that are not so liable to sense: This difficulty will yet
remain, Whether, since Mr. Harrington says a Senate alone will not be honest,
it be like to be ever the honester hereby, while by their light of reason and
learning, it will be no hard matter, in many things, to dazzle the weak sight of
that vast Animal, if both parties do at all agree; whereby the benefit to
result, will be this only, that iniquity be established by a Law, by a more
seeming or pretended reason and interest: Sense does not much foresee the
benefit of a Law to be made, though it feels the good of a Law that has been
sometime in force; therefore it will be no hard matter for seeming reason to
seduce common sense: This great Counsel wherein it may be some may be found to
have scarce common sense, had need to be well instructed, better then a Senate
can inform them by an Oration or Preachment, where every ones tale is good,
till another is told, or else they are like enough to do they know not what;
for I doubt me every man has not a light within him, to a certain knowledge of
good or evil, the interest or prejudice of the State, that without any more
ado, we should be left to do as God shall direct us: let me put a case, 1050
are chosen for the Great Council, and 300 for the Senate according to Mr.
Harringtons free way of Election for fear of fixing any in opposition. The 300
propose, That CHARLES STUART be made King of England; I may suppose this, for
Mr. Harrington says in effect, The Senate will not be honest if they can
choose, and a King might not do much amiss with these two Counsels; well what
will the sense and interest of the 1050 say to this; supposing there must be no
debating this business there, but every one must put their minds in a box,
without telling tales; there be some in the world that would lay two to one
their sense would soon inform them that it is their interest to make him King:
I leave the Reader to a free judgment -- once more: the 300 would seem wiser
and in their grave judgments propound to the 1050 to settle some Sectary as we
call them, Lord Archon, and Sole Legislator of England, and signify to them,
that it is the National interest so to do, without debating the matter, but
away presently to the Balloting box. I conceive their sense would hardly
convince them, that either the one or the other were their interest: the sense
of people in many things is a kind of prepossession; they must be soundly
convinced here if they believe any thing but what they thought before; be it
true or false: but in other things they are more facile and ductile, and not so
hard to be imposed on.

If they are prepossessed with an error, then the work is done to hand; it is
but proposing, and it is presently resolved. If they are prepossess^d with their
true Interest, if the contrary be not of necessity to the design of the Senate,
it may lie still till better leisure; but if it be of absolute necessity, I
hope it will be held fit that this be introduced at once, and not committed to
chance, to be wrought out by little and little, according to the sense of the
people* The Senate may easily overreach them, in an error wherein they are
prepared for them, this might be remedyed by a full and free debate, if it be
capable of remedy; if they be prepossessed of their right, which is not with
the pleasure of the Senate to suffer, though its contrary be not of absolute
necessity; they can overreach them here, by delay, and not proposing it; or it
may be circumvent them some way unseen: What is of absolute necessity for the
Senates turn, is cared for before by the sole Legislator, so that we shall not
stir their humors about that; and how many other things will fall under the
consideration of the Senate, and under the Ballot of the popular Assembly,
wherein they shall be so far from being prepossessed, that it may be the
major part of the great Assembly shall be wholly strangers to them; and how
easily to be overreached in these, by following those Stags of the largest
heads, I cannot but muse now and then. And this I observe, That men generally
are more apt to mistake the common Interest, then to understand it rightly; and
are commonly more stiff and inflexible in their errors that they suck in by
Tradition; then assured and confident of some Truths they hold, which yet are
of easy demonstration; and will yield no small advantage against them. All
which are cogent reasons with me, that the Counsel wherein the Interest of the
Commonwealth consists, ought not to be without debate. Upon which
considerations, if it be possible to constitute such a Counsel as may enough
make good the Interest of the people, and yet preserve its own eyesight; (not
knowing why one, and the greatest Counsel should wink, while the other takes
aim;) I say, if there can be such an one, as may preserve the benefit of
debating, and arguing among themselves in a way of prudence, and preserve the
Peoples Interest too; hereby those inconveniences will be taken off, that must
needs arise from two distinct Bodies: If then the House of Commons were
sufficient for the light of Mankind, and the Interest of Mankind; when there
was the light and Interest of a particular party uppermost, to grapple with;
when yet by the swarms of petty Burgesses the Interest of that House was made
as much as possible for the Court; and if they would have betrayed the people,
or could have been separate from the Interest of the people, they might have
had what recompense they could hope for; have yet made good the Interest of the
people with advantage against all opposition. What reason is there then, when
the stream that drove so hard to turn their Mill, but could not, is diverted;
that when there remain no temptations at all upon them, to desert the Common
Interest, that any one should fancy they would turn Cat in the Pan? Why should
any think they would make good our Interest, when as things went then, one
would rather have thought they durst not do what they did: And yet now when
they shall hardly dare to do otherwise then make good our Interest; and
nothing in the way to terrify them for doing it, and it shall be their own
Interest so to do, and when they shall be so equally distributed, as to take in
the whole Interest of the Nation alike; that now they should desert the Common
Interest, and must now be an inconsiderable number, and not sufficient to
maintain it; is to me such a fond imagination, as I have hardly patience to
repeat it.

Well, notwithstanding Mr. Harrington voucheth these two Councils of
Legislators, and warrants them sound wind and limb, I dare not take them upon
his word, for I expect a halt; that the great Council would fall to debating;
and then, says he, ruin is consequent; and if the Prerogative Tribe be
sullen, and will not jog on, the Senate must not only Propound but Resolve too,
with Carthage and Venice: And then as Mr. Harrington says, If she that divides
must choose too, it had been little worse for the other, in case she had not
divided at all, but kept the whole Cake to her self, in regard that being to
choose, she divided accordingly. Wherefore if the Senate have any more power
then to divide, the Commonwealth can never be equal. The Reader will observe
what has been said, even against Mr. Harringtons Senate, the most rational
that has been proposed: If any other that I have met withal, should be
examined, they would appear an hundred fold worse then this, admitting such
absurdities, and Slavery as would make one mad to think of them: I have done.
But must give my suffrage for a single Council, that thing called in England
formerly the House of Commons; it is that our Nation is well acquainted with,
and extremely jealous least it should be robbed of; and is without exception
the best Government in the World, being disburthened of the King and Lords; and
does not want a way to help it self, in any thing wherein a Senate is of good
use, making choice of Committees for this purpose, who The Parliament.
can with more judgment find out those men that are the light of Mankind,
then the rude Multitude, whose choice I conceit would put little difference
between the wisdom of the Senators, and many of those they returned for the
Great Council; which Committees (for all what my Lord Archon has said to the
contrary) are capable of such Reformations, as shall render them every manner
of way as useful as a Senate; and yet not be obnoxious to its Exceptions. And
as to matter of Faction it holds no water; or if it do, the remedy is worse
then the disease; and would increase the Malady. Wherefore upon the whole there
remains but one important Objection, which I confess I cannot obviate; and my
Lord Archon has Knocked the nail on the head;

That a single Assembly is like a Game at Football:

And truly it is not fit we should all be fellows: And therefore some who
think themselves, more Honorable, more Wise, or more Religious then the rest;
I wonder not, they think much to stand ^n the crowd; else I think few know why
they promote it, unless to show their Reading, or others, as Mr. Rogers
conceives, That the Nation may be put into the fitter method for a Single
Person. Such an Assembly as I have spoken o^, being frequently chosen, I
suppose will with most reason do the Nation right: wherein I think it may
suffice that the people preserve their Right of frequent election; without any
necessity that all of the former Parliament, be debarred of sitting in the next
following. For if any man or men, have so well deserved of his Country as to
be more then ordinarily serviceable for their good, I do not know why they
should be disabled to show their thankfulness, by choosing them again if they
think fit. In this I agree with Mr. Rogers, though I understand not what
Oligarchy he would have; wherein he is as dark, as if he were all Hebrew; at
which one might venture diverse Interpretations. Mr. Harrington rules me, where
he says, Give us good Laws, good Orders, and they shall make us good men:
Good Orders are the very foundation of Government; and then good us as good men
as you can with respect bad to those Laws and Orders: As good men as you can,
but by no means break Orders to pick and choose. They that would set up a
Scripture Government, or the Kingdom of Christ in England, by overthrowing our
natural Birthrights, are mightily to be pitied, but little to be trusted: It Is
dangerous trusting good men too far, they may seem good to day, and prove bad
to morrow: We have seen sad instances of trusting good men. Who would have
thought old Oliver had not had the spirit of the cause, and that he would not
have carried on the Refined Interest: But alas! alas! how shall we know the men
that will continue faithful. And if any think or say with Peter to Christ,
Though all forsake thee, yet will not we: they know not how soon their faith
may fall them, and may do well to remember, that High Places are slippery
places, and do endanger Backsliding; who unless they have given over to pray
-- lead us not into temptation, would (be very fearful of falling into this
snare. The best men prove bad Legislators, if trusted with, and continued in
Arbitrary power: And this is one evil I have seen under the Sun; we call that
good which is most like us, of our own party, or faction, and humor: but who
ever are truly good will be best pleased to be prescribed by Rules, which may
keep them within compass, if they should fall into an hour of temptation, that
though their Grace should fail, yet our Faith should not fail, while we know,
that though they would, yet they cannot hurt us.

I have done what I designed, only have transgressed my intended bounds and
limits; I hold it no good manners to venture too far, to offer my thoughts
about government, knowing very well those whom it concerns to Settle us,
understand their business better then I can teach them; and verily if some had
not been overbusie in Print, I had kept all this in my breast, and nor
disturbed the public with it; let this provocation plead my excuse. Only by
the way, I do a little wonder at some who are so purely popular, that they are
angry at a Council of State, for fear of Usurpation, but it is like they fear
where no fear is.

I had made it my request to the Parliament (which I believe they would have
well received) to state us such qualifications for Members to be chosen into
the next Representative, as we might have ventured our all with them; wherein I
had delivered my opinion against admitting any of the late Kings party, without
fearing to fix them in opposition against us, being already fixed in such
bitter opposition against a Commonwealth, that they would not believe the
benefit of it, though they did a little feel it, much less would they believe
it at the first; but should all manner of men be promiscuously admitted into
the next Parliament, many would be brought in, who when they were there would
undoubtedly conclude, we had wonderfully beguiled them, and had put out their
eyes that they should grind in our mill, and would be confident, we called
them in only to make sport: wherefore they would not fail to lay their hands
upon the pillars of the Commonwealth, and bow themselves with all their might,
if possible, to pull the House upon our heads, though they themselves were
ruined by the fall.

Some other things I had humbly proposed to them in reference to the next
Representative, tending to the security of the Government, of the good Cause we
have been contending for, and Liberty of Conscience: all which I doubt not, but
they would have put in practice, or have taken better care for all: and then
when this Representative had found the want of a Senate, I should have
submitted my judgment to theirs, who I doubt not would have had every jot as
much foresight as the People of Venice, and if they had found the want, would
have called for the remedy, without the help of a LORD SOLE LEGISLATOR.

I have done, and was indeed since this unluckie change, resolved wholly to
omit this Argument of a Senate, which was sent to the Press a week since, the
whole being intended for the Parliament, who are since perfidiously forced,
judging it little boot to plead for this or that way of a Commonwealth, when
we are like to go without this or that either, and be ruled by mere will and
pleasure; but observing some endeavors for this Senate, and Popular assembly,
by HOOK or by CROOK who think that LAMBERT shall deserve 20000 l. per annum
during his life to settle it: I am overruled to publish my Exceptions against
it, and submit them to censure: however, expect not what I propound should be
Settled by such Juglers, who but yesterday cried Hosana to the Supreme
Authority, the Parliament, and now nothing will serve but, away with them, away
with them, let them be crucified.

I had prepared (besides my Address to the Parliament) to close my Discourse
with Addresses to the Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Baptized,
Protectorians, Army, and the whole body of the Nation; quieting them toward a
submission to the Supremacy of Parliaments, chiding them heartily, and
severally, as I saw occasion. But now the Army becoming the sole Masters of
Reason, I dare make no Addresses but to themselves, wherein yet I shall hardly
flatter them, as most of themselves did the Late Protector, and betrayed him
with a kiss.

TO THE ARMY THE Supreme Authority OF ENGLAND:
High and Mighty Masters,
IT has been in every bodies mouth, The Parliament were your drudges, that you
were twice or thrice about to discard them since they sat last: No doubt, they
spoke it most of them as they would have it. Well, you have broken this
Parliament, yea, you have broken your selves and us too, yea have turned all
topsie ^urvie. It Is true of you, These are they that have turned the World
upside down: you have made England, Scotland, Ireland a Chaos, without form
and void, and I doubt your Omnipotency will never speak the word for such a
creation, as any honest man shall say when he has looked upon it, that it is
very good: You may pardon me since you have put all out of Order, if you have
disordered my thoughts, so that I observe no method, when all is without any
method among us. I tell you, this action is the most faithless, senseless,
bootless, ruinous action that ever appeared upon the Stage of the world: the
most false hearted and traitorous: the most ridiculous and insignificant: the
most rash and fruitless: the most dangerous and destructive adventure that
ever men took in hand. Oh my soul enter not thou into their secrets! nor let
any honest man say a confederacy with them; let them associate themselves, they
shall be broken to pieces, God will find them out in due time. I beseech you
what do you mean, are ye Christians and yet will not be men? to pass by all
former Obligations: did you not the other day bewail your Apostasy, that you
had wandered from your GOOD OLD CAUSE? did you not tell us, You took shame to
your selves, and remembered from whence you were fallen, and repented, and would
do your first works; and therefore finding that God blessed you all along till
you forced the Long Parliament, but after that, made you labor as in the fire,
and no good came of all your after actions; therefore you assured them, that
now they should sit freely, and you would strengthen their hands and be their
servants. Is not all this truth in these very words, or to this effect, and
much more if I had leisure to repeat; but it is fresh in every bodies mouths
and minds, though you have forgot it: and are you not past shame now: must we
bewail your Apostasy now, as fearing since you are fallen away after being
enlightened, it will be hard to restore you again by repentance; especially
since ye have tasted of the powers of this world.

But besides this, did you not every Mothers child of you Officers, did you
not take your Commissions from the Parliament, and one by one promise your
obedience: Yes, that most faithful and gifted Brother Colonel Packer, promised
when he received his Commission at Mr. Speakers hands, That he would not only
promise them to be faithful and obedient, but they should see by his actions
that he would be a true servant to them and the Commonwealth. Yea Lambert
himself was the greatest stickler for the Parliament (God forgive him, for what
ends I know not) and yet these men. Act like as they had given the Parliament
Commissions, and turn them out, whom they just now promised so seriously to
obey: a Tu^k, a Heathen would have scorned this falsehood, and baseness: What
not be faithful to our trust! O faithless and perverse generation!

Add to this, that flattering and insinuating Petition and Representation but
the other day, wherein they so sadly bemoan themselves that the Parliament
should so sharply rebuke their humble servants, their faithful servants, that
meant nothing but to Petition in a peaceable manner; where they artificially
conceal their int^ntions for a General, only desire that Fleetwoods Commission
may be renewed: other things they Petition for (we understand what your
Petitioning signifies) some to insinuate into the favor of the Militia; others
to secure the Government of the Nation in the hands of the Officers of the
Army; it is so in the effect; and then most Saint-like, promise all to be
well-meaning men, to be Servants to the Parliament; and the most sweet
expressions imaginable. But we have tried them that say, they are Saints, they
are the faithful Servants of the Commonwealth, but are not; and have found
them Liars. Who, Lambert put the Northern Brigade to petition for a General?
no such matter, he persuaded them (good man) all he could against it; yes, I Will
warrant you: And yet the Fifth Monarchy-men, (the Mad ones of them) think now
Christ's Kingdom goes on amain, and flock down in Shoals to Wallingford-house,
to make way for Christ's coming, who may be coming for ought that I know, as he
says, -- When the Son of Man comes shall he find faith upon the earth? Upon
my word, these were fit to live and reign with Christ a thousand years, who
cannot keep Faith an hundred days. Let me say with the Psalmist, Help Lord,
for the Godly man cease, for the faithful fail among the Children of men;
they speak vanity every one with his neighbor; with flattering lips, and with
a double heart do they speak.

It Is a most senseless, ridiculous, and insignificant action; you pleasure
your Enemies, and make your selves and us, the whole Nation, a scorn, a
derision, and a Proverb in the earth. In the beginning of this book I have been
dealing with a Malignant Impostor, whose whole busin^sse was nothing else but
to make you break the Parliament to serve his designs; for I tell you, they
fear their Wisdom, more then your power. Are the Cavaliers your friends? are
ye bewitched to believe them, and to slight your old true friends; I thought I
had not needed to say much in the beginning of the Book to answer that
treacherous Cavalier; I thought it was enough to tell you whose was the plot,
to persuade you to break the Parliament; But before I could bring my Book to
light, ye are cheated into a belief of his Imposture. Ah me! are ye not proud
of your wisdom? Whose is this Invention? who put you upon this exploit? Oh
sad! Will you please your enemies, and grieve your friends. Know him or them
that put you upon this gross piece of folly, and avoid them. We that put you
upon calling back this Parliament, and encouraged you in the day of your
straights, and told every body we met, how honest the Army would be, now they
understood themselves; that they would standby the Parliament, while they did
settle the Nation upon the foundations of righteousness and truth: We, even
we, are laughed to scord; and I must speak to you in the words of Joab: Ye have
shamed this day the faces of all your servants, that have saved your lives,
(that have saved your credits, which should be as dear as life, and that have
appeared for you in the day of your distress) in that you love your Enemies,
and hate your friends; for you have declared this day, that you regard neither
Princes nor Servants; for this day I perceive that it pleases you well, though
all we dye, so Absalom live. We know not how to look any body in the face;
though we thought we had done well when we appeared for you, against your
enemies. But every one of us get away by stealth, as people that are ashamed
steal away when they flee in Battle; -- Not only so, but you have made your
selves the most absolute Changelings in the world; It is a Proverb beyond Seas,
to express any Uncertainty thus, -- As certain as England.

Our Agent Lockhart is laughed at, when he comes to treat with the Spanish
Favorite: What a peace with you! who are your Masters? you have as many
Masters at Moons: Go make peace among your selves, and then talk of peace with
us.

Ambassadors here in England know not who to make their Addresses to; and have
said, What shall we treat? we know not who to trust to: You will have new
Masters within this Six Weeks, and then we must begin again. This is greatly
for your honor; it is your interposing has begot all these changes; still as
we have been settling you have broken us to pieces, this is all your wit, you
mend the matters wisely; if we will have any Government to hold, better heads
then yours must consult it. I am loath to think it is your design to unsettle us;
if it be, God help your heads, you will feel the smart of it in time, as well
as we; you are good Soldiers, but bad Statesmen, professing your selves wise
ye are become fools: Be not wise overmuch, nor take too much upon you; ye have
miscarryed over and over; will you be doing again? I dread the consequence of
this hair-brained Action; and there are such fools in the World, though they
should be brayed in a Mortar, yet their folly will not depart.

Well, but the Parliament must out; why, what evil have they done? for which
of all their good works do you stone them? Have they not gone through good
report and evil report for the good of the Nation? Was not their hand in all
that was done for the asserting the Nations Birthrights? and were they not
carefully providing for us when you first turned them out; it was an abuse put
upon them by those that turned them out, to say, They intended to perpetuate
themselves, that so they Cromwell and his Creatures.
might Color their Usurpation and Tyranny. Out of your own mouths I judge you,
you evil servants; remember your Declaration, wherein you bewailed your
Apostasy. Did they not return to their duties again, to serve the public if
possible, and forget all your former abuses? And did they not set themselves
seriously to work for the Nations welfare? and did they not do as much a men
could do, that found things in so much distraction, to reduce us to better
Orders? Yea verily, they did as much as mortal men could do. Yea, did they
not discountenance some men more then there was absolute necessity of, to give
you content? yea, did they not get you a whole Years Tax to be paid in Three
Months, and a Three Months Tax more to be paid in Three Weeks, and all to
keep fair with you, and to pay you your due? Did they not prepare an Act for
one hundred thousand pounds per mensem to be immediately levied for you; and
Ordered to sell every thing almost to pay you your Arrears? and thereby drew an
odium upon themselves, more then ever any other Parliament would do since you
first turned them out: And yet though men grumbled at these Charges, yet
generally hoped the Parliament would make them amends by doing good things for
them. Yea, did not the Parliament give them new Commissions, whom the Protector
had cashiered, without respect of persons, if they were judged Faithful; as
Lambert his own self, though a worthy Member of Parliament gave good reason to
the contray; all without respect to their opinions; dealing their respects
without partiality, hoping hereby to oblige their affections? yea did they not
encourage all that did the Nation service, and share their Rewards without
distinction to all that deserved it; to Duckenfield and Creed, who deserve a
thousand times more the reward of a Rope for their late Treason, then a Chain
of Gold for their Cheshiere Service: Oh ungrateful unthankful Monsters of
Mankind! could it be believed, so much disingenuity should be harbored in
English breasts? Nay, I pray heartily, had you any reason to mistrust the
Parliament? no more then I have to mistrust my own heart: Have they not been
enbarqued all along in the same common cause with us? is it not as much their
Interest as yours to consult the security of the Nation, and all that have been
the Parliaments Friends? Yea, is not their life bound up in your life? They
could not design to ruin the Army, but they must ruin themselves: You were
and are as necessary by your Forces to defend us, as their Counsel to give
forth such Orders as may make us happy being so defended; and enable us to
maintain you as our Guards: When as through want of good advice, if the
Commonwealth sink, (as undoubtedly it must without better Counselors) ye may
go and defend Jamaica; here will be no use of you. Certainly the Parliament
cannot be without you, he is besides himself that thinks they can; they could
no more settle a Commonwealth without your Arms, then you can without their
Heads; neither could they secure themselves, but they must secu^e you; nor make
any Laws that should be bad for you, but they must be bad for themselves;
which every body thinks they would be as careful in as they could, and no body
doubts but they could consult it as well as any company of men that ever were
in England: Yea, and say, I said so. You must call them back again if ever you
make any work of it against the Norman Race.

Go your way then, think upon it: What have you done? certainly, the most
barbarous, savage, and inhumane action that ever was done; it seems, you
neither fear God, nor reverence man; the most brutish, childish, wilful,
headlong, giddy Undertaking that ever was put in practice. And Woe, aye woe
indeed to the Nation whose Prince is a Child: And no less woe to that
Commonwealth whose Rulers are Children. Yet more, it is the most bootles^, rash
and fruitless Enterprise that ever was introduced by men that ^^^ld pretend to
a design: Good now, What benefit did you propound ^^ your selves, or the State?
Do you Propound no end of your actions? do you not think before hand, what you
shall speak or do? But do you in that very same hour whatever is upon your
Spirits? I doubt, if you have not thought of it before hand, it will hardly be
given you so suddenly how to answer me aright; What, do you overturn, overturn,
overturn; and take no care for the Nation, nor your selves; what we shall eat,
or whether we shall drink; or whether we shall have any clothes to our backs?
Is this Heathenish? Sure our Lord never taught you this Lesson, to understand
him after this rate: Do you say to us, Be filled, be warmed, be clothed? Will
this do the work? Do you design the benefit of the Nation, by disturbing our
Settlement, by obstructing our Trade, by beggering the Nation, by undoing every
thing as fast as it is done, by breaking our Parliaments, by setting the Sword
above our ancient Birthrights? is this your Providence for us? Gramercy Horse.

But stay, what did you get by breaking this Parliament before? but subject
your selves to the pleasure of your General, who turned -- out all he pleased,
that would not be his Janisaries: And after Six years were forced to call them
back again with shame enough. And now you have broken them again, what will you
be gainers? Whoever gets the power, and not by right, will make us Slaves, and
you too; insinuations and fair pretenses must be used to Trepan you at first;
but they that are faithful among you will be known, and weeded out, as soon as
the business is effected; honest men may be isntrumental to set up a Tyrant,
but are not fit instruments to keep them up; nay, honest men shall be so sure
to be rooted out, that it is among their Politics, to remove all that have
been the Instruments of their Advancement, least they should presume that their
good Services had for ever obliged their Master, or Masters, and so should not
be so wholly at their devotion as others that they should gratify with their
places; who were more bound to deserve that, which they received without any
merit. Are the pretenses fairer now then before? No, there is not half that
pretense that was on old Olivers side. Can you not see through them; No single
Person, no by no means; we abominate the thoughts of that: What then? No body
knows, unless something that is a thousand times worse, Three, Ten, Thirty,
or it may be Seventy Tyrants for a while, till some one can get above the rest.
The Second General Officer is an unlucky place; it was Lieutenant General
Cromwell once, and then he was a Saint, a precious Saint, could preach, and
pray, and promise strange matters; then it was -- Is thy servant a dog, that he
should do so and so: what be Protector, be King, rule by my mere will, no by
Gods grace I will never do it.

Put case Fleetwood will not act as General, nor grant Commissions to them that
have none, them the Parliament Voted out, and those that shall be brought into
the place of those honest Commanders that did their part for the Parliament,
the salt of the Army, who being put out (as certainly that will be their fate,
if the weather clear toward the North) the Army will stinck in the noses of
all Europe. I say, if Fleetwood will not, I hope somebody else will; what is
next then, why not a King? one King, or another King, and then what is the
benefit, Richard Lord Protector is laid aside, and King JOHN the Second comes
up in his place: At first it may be a Senate, but then something for the honor
of England, a Duke of Venice Elective; Election will do the work to get into
the Throne, but when once up, it must be theirs and their heirs for ever, if it
be not made hereditary, I Will warrant you they know whom to nominate their
Successor, for it will not be prudence to leave that matter undetermined and go
out of the world, least these Disciples should fall together by the ears about
this question, Who should be greatest. If you will not believe your own
experience, who can help it; I hope by this time your Commander in chief may
make bold to put in and pull out who he please; out with an Overton, a Rich, a
Harrison, and in with my Son Falconbridge, my Cozen Lockhurt, and the rest of
his well affected kindred: and I shall not pity you a jot.

But if it should hap to Lamberts chance to be Dominus fac totum, I hope those
thorough paced Protectorians who laughed so heartily when his Lordship was
turned out of service by the Old Protector, some of whom told me, when I
complained of my Lord Protectors carriage to him, that it was no matter, never
was any man less pityed, or lamented after, he was all for himself, he hoped
to be next Protector, and because nominating the Successor was agreed of,
therefore he was discontented. I say certainly these men will now be contented
to yield their places to men that were better affected, and are the more
endeared friends of his Lordship: hitherto then, you have notably well
projected for your selves, ye are shrewd Politicians. What then shall you
Govern the Nation your selves, a great purchase, a burden to any honest man,
more then a benefit: how many of you are like to share in this if that were
true? two or three of your Grandces, and there is your design; no you hate the
thought of this, we mistake the matter, and do you a great deal of wrong to
suspect this. What then? you shall be better paid: that is well guessed in good
sooth, how will you have it? why one way or other, any how rather then fail, we
will have it by foul means, if it will not come fairly: no no, you abuse us,
nothing shall be gathered, but what is levied by the people in Parliaments; so
far you are right, and if ever you see a Parliament in England that will take
so much care of you as this Parliament has taken, and was a taking for you,
that will raise you 120000 l. per mensem, or 100000 l. per mensem, as they have
done for you, if you could have kept your selves honest: then spit in my face,
and tell me I lie. No, it is this Parliament that must hazard their Reputations
to pay your Arrears, and the Debts of the Nation, and then future Parliaments
may be more easily persuaded to grant such a Tax as may keep us always out of
your Debt. What then, has the Parliament Voted 9 of your Commanders out of
their places: does this anger you, and is this the bottom of the business, and
is this all your design to be avenged of them, and the Nation for it? goodly
great ones! What are these men trow, that their particular concernments to be
kept in Pay and Command, should stand in campetition with the Ruin of Three
Nations, a huge reach indeed: But pray, was it without good reason? could the
Parliament do less? had not some of them promoted a General being of the
Northern Brigade; notwithstanding after the Parliaments dislike of it, and
after the Petition and Representation of the Army was presented and debated in
the House, which though it did not expressly require a GENERAL, yet did strongly
imply it, and reqiured some things of worse consequence.

I say, after this, these 9 Grandees combined together in a Letter signed by
them all, to engage the subscriptions of a Regiment thereunto, which was
produced in Parliament, and could have no other construction, but if the
Parliament would not grant their commands, they should be made to do it: which
deserved a greater severity then being put out of their places. The like
practice they also set on foot in diverse other Regiments.

If this became faithful servants, I wonder who are Masters; but for the
honesty of the matter, they thus combined to effect, to instance only in one
particular, No Officer must be displaced but by a Council of Officers. What is
the mystery of this iniquity? why all must turn out that will be faithful to
the interest of the Nation, and the trust reposed in them, they would pack
their Officers to their own minds: shuffle and cut both: verily then, if they
should Petition in a peaceable way (as they call it) a priveledge not to be
debarred the meanest Englishmen; I wonder what Supreme Authority durst say them
Nay: this is a thousand times worse providence, then to grant them a General,
and to give him power to place and displace at pleasure; worse providence for
the Nation I am sure: we might possibly find one honest man in England whom we
might trust, if it could not otherwise be avoided, but how to make a whole
Council of Officers honest; most of whom have sprouted up from no very generous
principles, this is next of kin to an impossibility. What a Corporation of the
Army! what the Army the Representative of England? Must your General (as of
late) be the Archon, or Sole Legislator; your Council of Officers our Senate,
and your small Officers the people of England; out upon it, this is too bad in
all conscience: why not a Corporation of the Navy too? as much reason every
jot. What, the Supreme Authority of England, that pay you your wages, that can
put in and out at their pleasure (and it is reason they should) the Lords
Keepers of the Great Seal: the Judges of the Land: the greatest Officers of
State: yea and besides whom none can give you Commissions: but they are Rogues,
and Robbers, as bad as any High-way-men, and worse, who take upon them to act
and have no Commission from them; it is the case of some among you.

It Is a Combination and a Conspiracy among you to make a GENERAL, and give him
Commission, and then he to give you Commissions, or to set up any number of men
as Supreme: (but such as the good people of the Land choose) and then to take
Commissions from them; this is Idolatry, to fall down and worship the work of
your own hands, and to cry aha! we are warmed, aha! we are warmed. What not the
Supreme Authority be able to remove a Lieutenant, an Ensign, a Sergeant, a
Cororal! But by your leave most Omnipotent Council of Officers, it is true, it
is dangerous trusting a General with this Power, he may turn all to his own
Interest, which most commonly accords but little with that of the Nation, you
have had wonderful experience of this already; but the Parliament, whose
interest is the interest of the Nation, and can be no other; that their noses
should come under the girdle of an Army, Oh sad contrivance!

What was it the Good Old Cause that the Parliament must have the Militia, and
not the King; was it then reason they should command the Sword, who carried the
Purse, and carried the Interest of the Nation among them? and poor King must he
suffer death for standing upon his terms with them: And now when the Parliament
is by Your selves declared The Supreme Authority of England, now they must
touch none of your anointed; now they must not so much as remove one single
Officer of your Army, but through the mediation of your grace and favor: could
the Parliament say Amen to this part of your Petition and Representation, and
not betray the Nation and their trust, and make themselves the scorn and
hatred of the Nation, and future Parliaments? Yea, could they understand this
private Combination, to force this unreasonable desire, and proceed with less
tokens of their displeasure, and not give the Nation a jealousy that they
would betray them; And is this the reason why you hug these 9.
Powder-plotters, to effect this most horrid, hellish mischief. I can imagine
nothing so like the truth of the Design, if there be any design in it as this;
well should this be effected for you, that you should give Law to England, pray
what will be the design of it? to what end I pray? to bewray your deep insight
into the affairs of State? To gain your selves Honor and Renown for your rare
Conduct of the State; no I fear shame would be your promotion; you would have
little better success then you have had; you may joult your Jobernouls
together long enough, before you can hammer out a Settlement for us; no body
thinks that saying true of you, I am wiser then all my Teachers: Where will be
the Design, if when you have run your selves out of Wind, and out of your Wits
too, you shall be reduced to the like exigency as of late, and be forced to
bewayl your Blindness and Apostasy again; I say, what is become of the
Design then?

And it is not in reason to foresee how you can manage the Chariot of the State
long, but all must run into disorder; your Sin, yea and your Undertaking will
be a burden, a punishment greater then you can bear: Very considerate men think
you can hardly carry it a Moon. Oh shallow, oh incogitant, oh pitiful, oh
foolish Army! who has bewitched you? you did run well, who hindered you? will
you now altogether run in vain? will you lose the things you have wrought? will
you sell the righteous for naught? Our Laws, Liberties, our Good Old Cause for
less then a pair of Shoes? Will you harm us, and do your selves no good? Oh
peevish! oh wilful! Are ye Children? are ye Fools? are ye mad? Do you discover
your Gallantry by grapling with Impossibilities? For shame men, for shame give
over. Oh but you mistake us all this while, our Design is, To carry on the
Refined Interest, the Spirit of the Cause.

Good! good! is this the business? what is this new thing nothing, you now
make sport withal, a Refined Interest; the spirit of the cause; hard words,
what is the English on it: I wonder, whether Sir Henry Vane has opened these
abstruse terms to your understanding; you apprehend things more nimbly then it
seems, then honest old English-spirited Sir Arthur Haslerigge, that most highly
deserving Patriot; I think it will be hard to understand the thing you drive
at, by the terms you dress it in; you will teach us to speak English after a
new cut; certainly such an Interest, was never till now phrased a Refined one.
The Refined Interest, says Mr. Harrington is that which carries so much reason
in it, and so much the Interest of the Nation, that it being once understood,
and we in possession of it; needs not a Mercenary Army to keep it up: Is your
Interest refined in this notion you so much bless your selves in? what course
will you take for the carrying on the spirit of the cause, the Refined
Interest? what will you preserve our choice inviolable? shall that power rule
us, and you, that we choose so to do? No, this would hazard the Refined
Interest I Will warrant you. What then, shall all the old Friends of the
Parliament, that are no more Turn-coals then your selves; and have served the
State as well as your selves, shall these in every County, City, and
considerable Borough, choose their Trustees for the Supreme Authority? No,
there has been a great Apostasy and Backsliding; honest men shall be chosen,
who are true to the Cause; who are fit to be Kings and Priests, and to reign
for ever and ever; such as have the Spirit, and these will know what Israel
ought to do; and will make good Laws and Statutes, and execute judgment in
the Gate; these will hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with fire: Is this the
Refined Interest? what such another Gimcrack, as that little Mungrell thing
that Voted it self a Parliament; any thing in the world that will keep our
Faction in heart; that will carry on our design, this is the Refined Interest;
whether it be honest, or whether it be just, it matters not: many men extol
that Junto to this day, though the very Constitution of it stinketh in the
Nostrils of every considerate man; as tending utterly to cheat us of our Choice.

And what do not men magnify now adays, that will but say as they say?
Beshrew that Christian Policy that would ride over our Rights and Privileges,
under Pretense of a Refined Interest. Those that will forget to be Men, will
not long remember to be Christians.

They that will dash the Second Table of the Law to pieces, will hardly keep
the first Table as they ought.

Will you rob us of our Rights, and kill us by Famine and decay of Trade?
Surely we must all be Soldiers ere long, and then we shall get a Vote among
you.

Will ye kill? will you steal, and say, Ye are delivered to work all these
Abominations? No, you are out all this while: We will be honester then you
think for; we will have Parliaments still, chosen by the people: But it cannot
be safe for the Godly, unless we choose a Select number of faithful men;
Faithful to the GOOD OLD CAUSE, that shall be a Check to the Parliament, an
Influencing Senate, as Mr. Stubs has it; who has written a Book on purpose to
prove Sir Henry Vane no Jesuit.

Sure Mr. Stubs did not find this in Mr. Harringtons Model, which he admires
as if it were a pattern out of the Mount. No certainly Mr. Harrington has more
Wisdom and more Honesty: His Senate is only to give light; he does not
propound a Senate to be the Interest of the Common wealth; to secure the Honest
party; nor yet an Influencing Senate to be chosen by a few men, that call
themselves the Godly party: But to be chosen by the People as the other House.
These two Senates are as contrary as White to Black.

And if Mr. Harringtons Model came out of the Mount, I wonder from whence,
from what Manuscript this Library-keepers Noddle did bring one his. If there
must be a Senate, surely none better, certainly none can be honest, and just,
but that which the People choose, as Mr. Harrington says. Pray why should the
Army choose? Are there not as Honest men as themselves in every part of the
Nation? What, I Will warrant, the major part is the worse part, therefore they
must not be trusted; But the Council of Officers.

I wonder indeed, how the major part of the Council of Officers, can take
themselves to be honest; who first Declared against.

A Single Person: Then routed the Parliament: Then set up a Mock-Parliament;
then pulled it down: Then made their General Protector for life; then made him
to beget a Protector: Then broke this Government: Then suffered the Parliament
to sit again: Now have broke them again. What comes next? That which they will
break again ere long. One can hardly give a worse Character of Men: Meddle not
with them that are given to Change.

And must these choose us an Influencing Senate? It is like to be well done;
Well, and when all is done, carry on your Refined Interest as well as you can,
your Mock-Parliament, or Seventy Elders would never agree, some would see
further into Milstones then others, and had a more Glorious Cause to carry on
then the rest; and then this would be the Refined Interest; there would be no
end, till we fall all to Errant Popery: Yea, your Senate and your Parliament
would agree like Cats and Dogs, they would never unite; where then is your
Design?

Have you no Guts in your Brains? Why do you rage, and imagine a vain thing? As
sure as you live, nothing but honest and righteous things will be a Foundation
for us to bottom upon, if we mean to stand against the Winds and Waves that
are like to beat against our House.

He is no Designer now, that will not be Honest: Nothing but Honesty, and a
public heart can carry us with credit and safety through these Discriminating
times. Never were such days of Trial in England: They may go to School again
that have Machiavil by heart; there h^th been and is another Game going in
England, then these Gamesters are aware of. He must have been purely honest,
and not much pre-possessed, that has not gravelled himself in these last
twenty years. Ye have many Flatterers, but few real Friends.

Glad my heart, and do Righteous things, you that are Honest: Ye cannot wipe
your mouth, and say, What evil have we done now? Ye cannot have such a Face of
Brass; such a Whores Forehead: Repent, repent: Deny us not our just Rights;
let Righteousness take place: So shall you repair the Breach you have made
upon us; so shall we be established; for God establishes the Just. And let us
by no means talk deceitfully for God.

To say no more, It is the most ruinous, the most dangerous and destructive
action that ever was taken to task. Parliament broken, the Nation unsettled,
Friends discontented, no body but blames you, Laws and Liberties, all a going;
the Sword Rampant, the Nation undone, your Enemies more numerous and mighty;
the Common Interest of the Nation in jeopardy; your GOOD OLD CAUSE at stake;
nay, your own Throats ready to be cut; as if you were going like an Ox to the
Slaughter, or a Fool to the correction of the Stocks; like a Bird snared in an
evil Net, like a Bird that hastes to the net, and knows not that it is for
his life: What say Friends and Foes;

The Army would not refer the Nation unto the care of this Parliament, that
were, as one should say, Flesh of their Flesh, and Bone of their Bone; surely
no Parliament will ever do good upon them since this could not: If any other
Parliament cross them, then they must turn out for Malignants: With this word
in their ears, What shall we be Governed by them we conquered but the other
day? are there no English spirits in the Nation.

What can you exp^ct, but a general Revolt of the People? and that all the
Nation should be in Blood: Surely it is as good for us to die as to live the
Slaves of our Servants, most of whom our purses have raised from the dunghill.

Sir George Booth is an inconsiderable Traitor now; you may be ashamed to
Sequester his Estate, who did but endeavor to do what you have done; and had
more to say for himself ten to one then you.

Every thing looks black about us at home, and abroad; Neighbors at home ready
to cut our throats and yours too; at this very instant you have disobliged your
friends, and yet forain Nations threaten us hard: It is in every bodies mouth,
and I doubt it is too true, Ambassadors are coming to offer us CHARLES STUART
upon Terms, if we will not, then they will bring him in by Force; if this be
so, Lord have mercy upon us: here are thousands in England would rather the
Turk should come in, then things should be as they are: and you have broken
the hearts of your best friends, who will have small courage to assist you in
keeping out our COMMON ENEMY, since when it is done, we might be sure to return
to our former slavery.

France and Spain look at us untowardly, others besides would put to their
helping hand to Ruin us; for all whom we should not have cared Three skips of
a Louse, if you had not disturbed our SETTLEMENT, we should have been
formidable to all EUROPE, yea, to the WORLD, as the Author of that Book,

-- France no friend to England --

has put his Christian Majesty in mind of.

This is the kindeness you have done for your selves and us, whereby you have
made us careless of our own and of your safety; wherefore let me speak to you
in the words of Joab,

-- Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortable words to your
Servants; for I swear by the Lord, if you go not forth, there will not tarry
with thee one this night (when this night of trouble comes upon you, which
hastens apace, our Sun being almost set) and this will be worse unto you then
all the evil has befallen you until now.

I am not humoursome, nor have I so much interest going in this Parliament as
some of your selves, ten of them do not know me I am certain; if you could call
another Parliament fairly, whom you could and would refer your selves unto, I
should be silent, and glad that the salvation of the Nation might come that
way; and so I dare say would most of that Parliament you have now shut out.

But I doubt, yea I am confident this will not be, can there be a Parliament
fairly chosen, that shall so much be concerned to secure what we have been
contending for hitherto, They cut off the Kings head: they Voted down Monarchy,
and the House of Lords: they set up the Commonwealth; they are concerned to
venture their credits to get you money: do you think they are not most
concerned to keep up what they have set up: another Parliament would strain at
a Gnat, and think it a Camel if they should swallow an Act for 40000 l. per
mensem; these men as far as I can see, must do the drudgery, and make way for
another Parliament, by putting all out of debt, and putting things into a
Method for a new Election, and then things may go on hansomely; else I fear it
much, we shall see no Settlement.

All things look with a sad face, the clouds threaten us from every quarter of
Heaven; the Ship of the Commonwealth is now launched out into the Ocean of
Confusion, and it is greatly to be feared, the Voyage will be with hurt, and
much damage not only of the Lading and Ship, but also of our lives, however the
Masters of our ship have persuaded us that the Haven wherein we were was not
convenient to Winter in, and have hoised sail intending to run a desperate
course, and the wind now blowing softly they suppose they have obtained their
purpose: but I doubt me it will not be long, ere there arise against it a
tempestuous wind, an Euroclidon, which will catch the Ship, that they cannot
bear up in the Wind, but must let her drive, when if they can come by the
Boat, and use helps for undergirding the Ship, it is well, they may strike sale,
and be driven for fear of the quicksands, and to day light the Ship of the
Goods, and to morrow cast overboord the Tackling of the Ship with their own
hands.

Verily now there is no small tempest to lies on us, and neither Sun nor Moon
has appeared for these many days, but all hopes that we shall be saved is
well nigh taken away: we sounded Wednesday, and found it twenty fathoms,
Thursday, and found it fifteen fathoms, and in great fears we are of falling
upon the Rocks, though but the other day we deemed that we drew nigh to some
Country, to some Settlement; however our Ship-men discovering a certain Creek,
that they knew not what Country it is, minded to thrust in the Ship, but are
fallen where two Seas meet, and the Ship is run aground, that it sticks fast;
and great fears! there are all will be broken to pieces and all lost: those
Ma^riners that but now managed the Ship are almost gone, but call them back by
all means; you might indeed have hearkened to your friends, and not have loo^ed
from Creet (from Westminster) and so have gained this harm and loss; but put
all again into their hands that are your best Guardians, they will by the
blessing of God bring off the Ship safely; I dare warrant there shall be no
loss of the Ship, nor of any man's life among you; Howbeit, as Paul said to the
Centurian, and to the Soldiers, I am confident I may say so, -- Except these
men abide in the Ship (for a while) ye cannot be saved.

FINIS.

