A great and terrible Fight AT SEA Near the Coast of HOLLAND, between the
English Fleet commanded by General DEAN, General MONK, And Vice Admiral PEN,
And the Dutch Fleet commanded by Admiral VAN TRUMP, Admiral DE-WIT, Admiral
RUTTIER, And Vice Admiral EVARSON,


With the number of ships burnt, sunk, and taken, the loss on both sides, and
the manner of this great and lamentable Engagement. Together with a humble
Representation to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell, and the Officers of the
Army.

Published according to Order. May 9

London, Printed for Robert Eeles, 1653.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General CROMWELL;
MY LORD,
YOur just dealing with your Adversaries, is matter of real Honor to your
Person, your Enemies themselves being Judges; your instructing the ignorant,
your rebuking the obstinate; your remitting the Penitent; your remitting the
Innocent; your keeping Covenant and condition of Articles with all men, have
manifested your proceedings both of War and Peace, to be truly Honorable to
them, but especially to Us, who have heard how Judah-like you have ruled with
God, and have bin faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. last. Your silence before
the Lord, when a Cloud was upon the Camp) had great confidence, when the Lord
went before you like a Pillar of Fire by night, shining upon your ways, and
telling you, that you should be to your Enemies, as threshing Instruments with
teeth; And this your confidence in God, what boldness wrought it before the
Battle? and what humbleness of mind after the Victory? refusing honor of men,
when God had put glory upon you, in sight of all the world. It may be said,
Before honor goes humility. Prove. 15.22. That may be an humbleness, as of
necessity; but that humbleness which follows honor, is ever matter of
lasting praise; for, Honor upholdeth the humble in spirit, and victory over a
man's self is the greatest conquest: Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima
vincit Maena. Yea, this your confidence uttered did put life into your
Counsels, courage into your Resolutions, and made your Forces more forcible and
active, so as they did the work of the Lord effective, both at Dunbar, and
Worcester, For there fell down many slain, because the War was of God, 1 Chro.
5.22. God is the Judge himself to whom both Parties at Dunbar made their
appeals, God has pleaded the Cause of his People, and since these appeals
has given sentence for you now twice. The issue must no longer pass under the
vain titles of mere events and chances of War. It has been the wonder of all
Lands to hear of England, how the meek of the earth here, have formerly born
all manner of yoaks and oppressions under Royal and Episcopal Rulers, and how
they have lately risen like Giants and men of might, for recovering their
Liberties, to defend their just Rights and to bring wrong-doers to condign
punishment. As if the judgment (against Moab) written, had been sealed upon
their hearts, Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, and
cursed is he that withholdeth his sword from blood, Ier, 48.10. Neither
regarding Nature nor Nations, that they might execute God had said, Distress
not Moab, Deuteronomy. 2.9. till Moab had thus sinned. But after Moab had committed
Idolatry (a sin against the Nation of Israel) he shall bear his curse, that
spares Moab: any former command of God to the contrary notwithstanding. Sinful
men's changes justify God and good men, in these changes of Times. Now England
is delivered from her Enemies, and the people dwell safely through the mercy of
God under your hand, We humbly desire this, that after all public expeditions
against open enemies, you may (now) keep your selves from foes of your own
Household, from friends of your own Council; for Christ himself was betrayed
with a kiss, wounded in the house of his friend: Gallant Judas was
treacherously flain by Demetrius: And good Jonathan captivated by Triphon
pretending kindness to him. Cura teipsum, cautus esto, ne fidas. Set the Lord
God always before you, wait for his counsel; let impartial justice be your
greatest design and be not perverted by envy or flattery of men; So run that
you may obtain, in due time you shall reap, if you faint not. Courageously
follow the Captain of your Salvation, patiently carry the cross after him, and
let us pray for the peace of the Commonwealth of England,

AMEN.

To the valiant Commanders, and watchful Soldiers.
GENTLEMEN,
IT was an old question of one Hetruscus, Whether a Christian may in any case
go to war? Its answered, he may; for to do justice and judgment, is more
acceptable then sacrifice, Prove. 24.3. And its answered by Osorius de Nobilit.
Christian. lib. 3.Respublica non poss it stabiliri, nisi armorum presidio, qui
millitem tollit, Rempublicam funditus evertit: Christus politeias non eripuit,
sed in melius instruit. The Commonwealth cannot be stablished, unless it be
guarded with arms. Take away the Soldier, and ye overturn the Commonwealth.
Christ would not abolish Civil Governments, but form them for the better: he
neither took the Axe from the Judges; nor did Paul deny the Sword to the
Magistrates; nor did John Baptist disarm the Soldiers, but prescribed them
Laws of Innocence and moderation, Do violence to no man, and be content with
your wages, Luke 3.13. yea, Paul calls the Magistrate a Minister of God to thee
for good, thou doing well; and says, he bears the Sword to execute wrath upon
them that do evil. Indeed, it were to be wished by every Christian, that all
men may contain themselves from doing evil, that there were not this occasion
given for punishment, and for war; The boldness of Vice must be reproved by the
couragiousness of Virtue. Our Fathers of old were led by the Spirit for the
rebuking Malefactors; and we know that vengeance in a private matter becomes
valor in the case of a Commonwealth. Patience in personal injuries, does in
National wrongs assume a magnanimity invincible, as Joshua did; and it was a
fruit of their peace with God, when our Fathers undertook Sanctissima Bella
contra sceleratos, most holy wars against notorious offenders; for what peace?
so long as Jezabels whoredoms, and her witchcrafts are so many? The end of War
upon the wicked, should be the quietness and peace of those that are godly and
honest. Humbly acquaint your selves with God, and be at peace among your
selves. Courageously follow the Captain of your Salvation, patiently carry his
Cross after him, faithfully commit the safe keeping of your souls in well-doing
to him, and let us pray also for the peace of Englands Commonwealth, Amen.

To the free People of England.
Dear Contrymen,
THe best way to settle the Commonwealth in a firm and lasting peace, is to
look back to Rules of Equity and Justice, to principles of Nature, and
Right-Reason, to Gods Law, and good Conscience; and every one of you must
contribute your utmost hereunto: That power lies in you; and there is now
recovered your right to use i^. Your Liberties have been redeemed to you at a
dear rate, and with great expense of blood and Treasure; maintain it then as
freemen, and use your Liberty, not against your selves, but for your selves;
Cease mourning for Saul, the King and his Trains, the Body is not destroyed by
removing bad humors: Let your hearts be toward the present Governors of
England, who have willingly offered themselves among the people, and to their
servants, who have jeoparded their lives for your sakes; I mean, to the
Officers and their Army, who have not designed you for their own worldly
advantage, but have scoped at your welfare, who by no sensible fears have
suffered themselves to be perverted from impartial justice, but have bound up
your safety and theirs in one.

On Saturday last came Intelligence, of a great fight between the English and
Dutch upon the Coast of Holland; and that after a sharp Dispute, the English
became Victors, and pursued the Enemy to their Ports and Harbors. In which
Conflict they took seven stately ships, five hundred prisoners, burnt two, and
sunk five; but not without some loss: Into the truth whereof, I shall make some
further enquiry; and refer you to the Moderate Occurrences for just and ample
satisfaction therein.

FJNJS.

