A GREAT AND BLOODY FIGHT AT SEA: Between five Men of War belonging to the
Parliament of England, and a Squadron of the Irish Fleet; wherein is contained,
the full particulars, and manner of the said Fight; the number of ships that
were sunk and taken, together with diverse prisoners, great store of Match and
Bullet, and 40 pieces of Ordnance, and the rest of the Fleet quite dispersed
and scattered. Also, the Resolution of the Welsh-men, and the Parliaments
Declaration to the Kingdom.

Likewise, the Act and Proclamation of the Kingdom of Scotland, touching the
crowning of the Prince of Wales.

Imprimatur,

Theodore Jennings.
feb: 10th 1648


depiction of the sea battle between the English Men of War and the Irish fleet

A great and BLOODY FIGHT AT SEA, Between five Men of War belonging to the
Parliament of England, and a great part of the Princes FLEET.
SIR,
ON Wednesday last, being the 7. of this instant there happened a great and
bloody Fight at Sea between the English and the Irish, near the Coast of
Ireland, the manner thus: Capt. Peacocke (a man of known and faithful
integrity to the Parliament) sailing toward the Irish Seas with five Men of
War, for clearing the channel about Dublin of Pirates and Robbers, discovered
a Fleet of ships about three leagues distant, who immediately made toward them,
and coming within Canon-shot, hayled them in, to know what they were, and
whence they was bound; who replied, that they belonged to the Parliament of
England, and were bound for the relief of Dublin; but sailing near to each
other, Captain Peacock discovered them to be Enemies, who presently gave them a
broad side; whereupon the Enemies Rear-Admirall answered them with another
Volley, insomuch that a hot dispute began, continuing for the space of an hour,
and although the Enemy was two for one, yet (by divine providence, and the
assistance of the Almighty) by the gallantry of the said Captain Peacock, and
his Seamen, he became victorious, and after a bloody Conflict, sunk two of the
Enemies ships, and near upon 70. men, and boarded the Rear-Admirall; the rest
escaped having a fair Gale of Wind to separate them from their Engagement, and
the raging Billows forcing them to the Ocean for sanctuary.

This Fleet consisted of ten Sail, five whereof belonging to the Princes Fleet,
the rest Irish, who were designed against Dublin.

The ship which was boarded, was called the Patrick, being Rear-admirall to the
Fleet, wherein was forty piece of Ordnance, six Tun of Match, twenty Barrels of
powder, and about two hundred Seamen.

In this Conflict diverse were slain on both sides, Captain Peacock lost near
upon twenty men, and his own ship (called the Dragon) was in great danger of
being sunk, who leaked exceedingly betwixt Wind and Water; but by the great
ingenuity and vigilance of the carpenters she was preserved: the Enemies loss
is very great, and does far exceed the other: and many of the prisoners now in
custody exceedingly wounded. This happy news was communicated unto us by a
Fisherman, who with his Bark struck into this Harbor, being chased from Sea by
the dispersed Fleet.

Upon proclaiming of the late Act of parliament, and fixing it upon posts, the
adverse party seemed to be much grieved thereat, and when the dark Curtains of
the most high Canopy were drawn, they caused the said Act to be pulled down,
and in stead thereof, caused a most treasonable paper to be set up, wherein
they declared their inveterate malignancy, to sacrifice their lives and
fortunes. in the defense and preservation of Monarchical Government, etc.

But all diligent care is taken for discovery of the chief abetters and
Fomenters of the said treasonable paper; which they perceiving, begin now to be
very silent.

There are great discontents appearing in several parts throughout North and
South Wales; but their design is (as yet) of small maturity, and its conceived
will not be of any consequence, unless Laughornes Brother, and others from
Ireland prove isntrumental for the delivery of this great Machavilian Monster
into the World; but we hope it will now be frustrated, by reason of the late
blow given to the Enemy at Sea.

Bristol 9. Feb. 1659.

Other Letters from the West make mention, That diverse of the well-affected in
the Counties adjacent, upon a meeting near Warham, on the 3. of this instant,
declared their Resolutions, and entered into protestation, to sacrifice lives
and fortunes in the defense of Parliament and Army, for the obtaining of
Justice, Liberty, and Freedom, together with the common Rights of the people of
England.

And do desire, that impartial Justice may (without detraction of time) be
forthwith executed upon all Offendeas wdo have been ayding and assisting in
this tyrannical, and bloody war, and promoted the Designs of the adverse
party, against the well-affected of this Kingdom.

Since which Declaratory Expressions from the said well-affected party, the
spirits of malignancy have been much abated in these parts: But in some parts
of Hereford, and Somertsetshire, the Coals of Enmity are kindling, and ready to
break forth into new flames of Discord and Contention, the Clergy stirring up
the people in their pulpits, and using all means possible to incite them to an
Engagement against the Parliament and Army.

Worcester 9. Feb. 1648.
Edinburgh Feb. 7. The Assembly of the Kirk have published their Declaration
and Testimony; wherein they utterly detest against toleration, your new
Agreement of the parliament and Army, their breach of Covenant, and their
proceedings about the King; and it is said they are drawing up a Message to be
sent to His Highness the prince of Wales, together with several proposals to
be tendered to His Highness, for the obtaining of His Royal assent, to their
Uniformity of Worship, and to subscribe unto their Rules and Discipline of the
Kirk, as it now stands confirmed and established within this Nation, and if
His Highness subscribes, and declares for presbytery, here is few but will
embrace him, and cast a smiling countenance on him, which that He may, here are
many prayers, and good wishes, the Earls of Lanericke and Lautherdale are gone
to the Prince, and the Marquis of Montrosse is gone for Ireland; and its
believed, many wits will be employed against the Spring.

The Declaration and Resolution of the Parliament of England, concerning the
Government of this Kingdom.


The Parliament of England now assembled does declare, that they are fully
resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the
fundamental Laws of this Nation for and concerning the preservation of the
lives, properties and lirerties of the people, with all things incident
thereunto; with the alteration touching King and House of Lords, already
resolved in this present Parliament, for the good of the people; and what shall
be further necessary for perfecting thereof, And do require and expect, That
all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and all Officers and Ministers of Justices for
the time being do administer Justice, and do proceed in their respective place
accordingly. And it is hereby ordered and appointed, That this Declaration
shall be forthwith proclaimed in Westminster Hall, and the Sheriffs in their
several Counties are to cause this Declaration to be likewise published.

SIR,
The death of his Majesty was conveyed to us by an express the 6 of this
instant; much lamentation was here for the loss of their Native Sovereign,
both by the Royal and presbyterian party, with much threatening for revenge of
his blood, which they will doubtless put into a speedy way of execution against
the next Spring, and to show a testimony of their dis-satisfaction herein, some
disaffected persons have this day proclaimed Charles Stuart, eldest Son to
Charles Stuart the first, late King of Great Britain, King of Scotland, and to
the end that none may plead ignorance therein, have ordered that the same be
proclaimed at the Market-crosse throughout every Burgh in the Kingdom of
Scotland, which is not contradicted or gainsayed by the parliament, or rather
Kirk of this Nation; a foundation of another war is laid herein, but what
proceedings thereupon, a short time will discover: Yet diverse of the Estates
conveened in parl. have declared, That before He be admitted to his Royal
power, He shall give an assurance for the security of Religion, and the liberty
and safety of the people, according to the solemn League and Covenant between
both Kingdoms.

Edinburgh, 8 Febr. 1649.

FINIS.

