A GREAT FIGHT At Newarke: Where the Lord Sinclares Regiment beat 1000. Foot
and 400. Horse, and drove them into NEWARK.

Where Lieu. Genesis David Lesley, Major General Poyntz, and Colonel Rossiter,
and all their chief Officers, and all the Quarters in the Isle were surprised:
With the particulars of Captains and others killed and hurt on both sides.

The Governors Treaty with the Commissioners, and his motion of Surrender of
Newarke, if they will not accommodate him better.

Also the manner of taking the City of LICHFIELD By Sir William Brereton, and
how he has driven Bagot and 1000 Horse and Foot into the Close, with the
particulars, and how many slain on both sides.

Certified by a Letter from Colonel Rossiter, and an other from one of the
Commissioners, and the third from Sir William Breretons Quarters in Lichfield:
Commanded to be printed and published according to Order.

London, printed for Matthew Walbancke, 10 March 1645.

The Copy of a Letter from one of of the Parliaments Commissioners at LINCOLN.
Worthy Sir:
THis enclosed will show you what the Newarkers lately attempted with a great
deal of resolution, coming up to the Works even unto push of Pike; and if
the Scots had not been stout and resolute Foot (they who knew them say, They
are the best men in the Army, and the oldest Soldiers, being the Lord
Sinclares Regiment) if it had fortuned any other Regiment to have been there in
their stead, it is feared that they would scarce have done so well. They were
extremely overpowred with numbers.

Now all men may see (that which some have not heretofore believed) that
Newarke is a considerable Garrison to the King, seeing that they can spare such
a number for a salley, and be able to keep the Town, and Works beside.

The truth is, it happened very fortunately, that the success proved so well,
having no greater strength, we had not half so many men as they had, and yet
most of the Scots Commanders; also Poyntz and with him diverse of his chief
Officers, and Colonel Rossiter, and many of his chiefest Officers were at the
same time in the Isle, into which none could go in to them, nor they pass out
from thence, but by Boats, and that way there could not pass above ten or
twelve at a time; so that if those Forces the Newarkers would have surprised
had been routed, our men (amongst whom were so many great Officers) would have
been in a Pinfold; yet the Enemy had not so much courage as to take or try
their opportunity to the uttermost, but through a pannick fear apprehended our
men to be in number greater then really they were; their terror being the
greater in seeing our men come over, and still increase so fast as they could
by that weak means, so that they conceived that the whole body of the Scots
Army was coming upon them.

Colonel Gray was there with Colonel Rossiter, who says, That he did never
see them do better service; their High-land Foot charged with the Scots Horse,
and gave fire, and wheeled amongst our Horse very nimbly and actively, and so
gaulled the Enemy exceedingly; the 274. l. we have received, and desire it may
be repaid.

The Line is now begun, and all our materials are now in readiness for a
siege, and the next week we shall lay it. The associated Forces are so ill
paid, both their Horse and Foot, that unless some speedy course be taken to
send them moneys, we shall not be able to keep them together, for where the
Army lies those parts cannot furnish them without ready Moneys, and if they
pay for what they take, all Provisions will be brought unto their Quarters,
both from Boston, and this Town, but if they should grow unruly, and take them
away by force, they will be starved, or forced to rise, which we have
endeavored all that we can possibly to prevent; but now the two thousand pound
we brought down with us, being disbursed, if present pay come not, I may fear
what the event may prove: one two months pay would I doubt not, free both them
and all these parts from that oppressing tyrannical Garrison.

There has lately been in Newarke a great contestation betwixt Bellassis the
Governor, and the Kings Commissioners there, and the Officers and Soldiers,
for Pay and Provisions. The Governor told the Commissioners, that his
Soldiers wanted Moneys, but they professed there was none for them to be had,
but they told him, that for Provisions, he might dispose unto them what
quantities he pleased. Bellassis replied, that Soldiers must and should have
moneys, whilst any of them had a farthing, and that for the Provisions in the
Magazine, he told the Commissioners, that the greatest part thereof was such as
no dog would eat, and therefore charged them to bring forth better, or else
he and his Soldiers would rifle their Houses, and take their Provisions they
had stored up for themselves, and leave them the rotten stuff in the Magazine
to feed upon: And he further told them, that they were not to expect, that he
and his Soldiers would fight to preserve them and their Town, without those
things should presently be remedied: And that for his part, he said, that he
did know well how to make honorable and good Conditions, for himself, his
Officers and Soldiers, and would leave them and the Townsmen to shift for
themselves, if they took not care for them. And so they brake up in a great
heat and discontent, which I presume will be of no ill consequence unto us, but
of this and the rest, you shall hear more hereafter.

Colonel Rossiter is chosen Burgess for Grimsly; Therere was three votes for
Colonel King. Sir I am

Your Servant.
Lincoln, the 7. of March. 1645.

A Copy of Colonel Rossiters Letter to the Lords and Commons, Commissioners
at Lincoln.
Right Honorable;
IN obedience to your Lordships commands, I went this morning to the Generals
quarters, and from thence to Lievtenant-Gen. Lesleyes, to wait upon them in
viewing Newarke on this side, which they intended, but whilst we were at
Lievtenant-Gen. Leslyes quarters, the enemy sallied forth of Newark with all
their horse and foot they could possibly make, being about 1000. foot and 400.
horse, and fell upon the Scots guard in the Island with an intention to take
from them a work which the Scots were making to keep them from grazing any
cattle in the Island, Muscomb bridge being down the Scots could not get any
relief over to their men, but veil slowly in boats, so that the enemy
over-powred their horse, being but four small Troops, and made them retreat
toward Muscomb bridge with some loss, though not much; then the enemy
attempted the work, but were beat off with some loss. As Soon as the
Lievtenant-Generall received the Alarm, he and the rest of the Company with
him, hasted with all speed over the river, where he commanded the horse to
Rally, and led them himself to the work, and took out some foot thence, and
some other foot which came over the river, and marched up to the enemy, who
retreated after some small skirmishing into the town, what loss we had, I
cannot certainly learn, but as near as I can judge we had one Captain, and two
Lievtenants, and about eight soldiers slain, and fifteen or twenty soldiers
wounded; the enemy left some dead on the place, and we hear they had one
Captain, and diverse others slain and wounded; I do verily believe the enemy
were full double in number to the Scots both horse and foot. This advantage is
got by it, that it is resolved forthwith to make a bridge from Winthrop side,
at the very point of the Island to Muscomb, which will not only serve for a
correspondency betwixt the Scots and the Col. Gray, but also to serve for an
inlet to both sides into the Island. Lievt. Genesis Lesly will guard one end of
the Bridge, and Col. Gray the other; the Lievtenant-Generall and the rest are
very desirous that all possible means may be used ^or the reducing the enemy
and express their forwardness by approaches or other ways to do their parts,
if your Lordships please to hasten down the Pinnace it may be of good use, for
whilst the bridge is making, I shall upon all occasions desire to express my
self, Right honorable,

Your Lordships humble servant, Edw. Rossiter.
Balderton March 5. 1645.

SIR;
WE are now in the City of Lichfield, Sir William Brereton entered this night,
with the loss of three men slain and some wounded; killed six of the enemies,
and beat the rest into the Close, whither Col. Baggot the Governor fled with
1000. horse and foot, we have secured our quarters with the foot in the Town,
and the horse as near as with convenience we may, the Enemy have made many
shot against us with their great Guns, and also small she two several bullets
fell near Sir William, but God be thanked did no hurt, we have now set up
blinds before them, so that we can walk the more securely in the street, part
of our foot are not yet come up, but we hope if the Oxford horse or some other
with them disturb us not, to give a good account of this place in a convenient
time; and in the mean time to keep them in so close that there may be a free
passage in the Country from being disturbed by them. Chirk Castle is for
certain quit, and some other holds in North Wales are falling, but being in
have I rest, the next opportunity you shall hear from me at large.

Lichfield, March 5. 1645.

FINIS.

