A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED By His Highness the Prince of Wales near the Downs,
against a Squadron of the Rebels Shipping, on Monday last: with the particulars
of the Fight, 200. killed, 500. taken prisoners, two of their Ships sunk, five
boarded, 40. piece of Ordnance taken, and all their Arms and Ammunition, And
the Princes Resolution touching the Earl of Warwick.

Likewise, the executing of Sir Charles Lucas on Monday night last, and the
sentence of the Council of War against him to be shot to death. Also, a bloody
Fight between the English and Scottish Forces, commanded by Lieu. Genesis Cromwell
and Genesis Monro, Aug. 27. the particulars thereof, and number kiled.



August 31. Printed for R. VV. Anno Dom. 1648.

Another FIGHT IN The North, between the two Armies of England and Scotland,
commanded by Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Major General Monro.
Upon Sunday last, being the 27. of this instant Month of August, 1648.
Honored Sir,
IN my last, bearing date Aug. 19. I acquainted you of the defearing of the
Scottish Army, by Lieut. Genesis Cromwell and his Forces; since which time, our
Intelligencer says, he has had another great Fight with the rest of their.
Forces in the North, command^d by Major General Monro, and the Earl of
Calendar, the manner thus. Major General Monro, and the Earl of Calendar being
joined, whose sudden conjunction inviteth many of the scattered Forces, and
others, to their assistance, and having a very considerable Body, advances from
the Frontier parts, as far as Kendall in Westmerland, where they met with some
opposition, a party of Lieutenant General Cromwels horse charging the Scots
forlorn of Horse, commanded by Colonel Monro, the Major Generals kinsman,
whose deportment and gallantry in the Fight (to give the Devil his due) were
exceeding great, displaying the Banners of Mars, and charging quite through our
Body of Horse, his men likewise fought resolutely, disputing the place with
great courage, and maintained their passes without the loss of the least
ground. Our men likewise fought resolutely, strove for victory, and defended
themselves like renowned Heroes, but being overpowred, made an honorable
retreat with little loss, the enemy were so galled, that they durst not
maintain the pursuit.

This action happened on Sunday morning last about 8 of the clock in the morning,
the loss being equal; on our part were slain 13. and nine wounded, and as
many of the Scots.

We expect a sudden engagement between the two Armies, both being resolved to
sight, the Scots Army is said to be about 6000. Monro commanding in chief,
being resolved to fight, and says, That he will show Cromwell School play.

Indeed he has four thousand resolute old soldiers, which he brought out of
Ireland with him, who has been a long time exercized and trained in the
Discipline of War.

But notwithstanding all which, our men fears them not, as appears by the
foregoing action, who disputed the ground at great odds and disadvantage, and
made good their retreat with little loss.

The Lieutenant Generals Army consists of about five thousand, all armed, and
well disciplined, the country rising for him wheresoever he comes, and
assisting him with all necessaries whatsoever.

But General Monro to gain the affections of the Country People, has made
Proclamation at the head of each Regiment, and set forth a Declaration to the
Inhabitants, intimating,

That any soldier whatsoever that shall use any violence or injury to any of
the Inhabitants, or plunder, or take away any goods whatsoever, to the value of
two pence under any pretense, shall immediately be tried by Marshal Law, and die
for it.

We hear that Monro has sent a message to the kingdom of Scotland, desiring,
That some additionall forces may be forthwith raised and sent unto him, and
that care be taken for provisions and other necessaries for maintenance of the
Army.

The two Castles of Scarbrough and Pontefract holds out still, and are very
resolute and obstinate, slighting the Lieutenant Generals Summons, which is all
at present, from.

York 28. August, 1648. Your most assured friend, P. MITCHEL.

A great Victory obtained at Sea, by his Highness the Prince of Wales, against
the Rebellious Shipping.
Noble Sir,
YEsterday we received intelligence from the Princes Navy, that upon the
discovery of diverse Ships at Sea, Captain Batten received Commission from his
Highness, to fight with them, and upon Sunday morning last, weighed anchor,
hoysted sail, and made toward them with a gallant Squadron of ships, viz. the
Swallow, the Constant Warwick, the Roe-Buck, the Pelican, the Blackmo^e Lady,
and some others, who upon sight thereof, the Rebels ships held off, and were
loath to engage, Captain ctatten perceiving this, commanded forth the Swallow
the Warwick, and the Roe-Buck, who after three leagues sail, came within shot
of them, gave them a broad side, and engaged, insomuch that there happened a very
fierce and tedious fight continuing for the space of 7 hours, and with great
gallantry and resolution; but after an hours dispute, the rest of the shipping
came up, and gave the Rebels several broad sides, sinking two of them, and
boarded the rest, disputing the Conquest above Decks, killing many, casting
them into the Sea, the rest cried for quarter, and submitted to mercy.

In this fight it is reported, that the Prince lost not many men, the enemies
were great, above 200. slain, and neeer upon 500. taken prisoners, three ships
sunk, and four boarded, and secured, above 50. piece of Ordnance, and great
store of Arms and Ammunition, and other rich Booty, which they had taken from
diverse English Merchants, and others, being all of them Irish Pirates and
robbers at Sea.

It is reported here, that the Earl of Warwick intends to put to Sea very
suddenly, and that the Prince is resolved to fight with him, and has sent
several ships to attend his motion.

Here is great joy for the Conquest in the North, by defeating of the Scottish
Army, and totally routing the whole Infantry; for it is said, there actions
were most barbarous and inhumane, and that the Burdens and Oppressions of the
people were so insufferable, that no Tongue or Pen is able to express them.

O monstrous and inhumane Creatures! who make Religion their Cloak of knavery,
and in stead of executing Justice and mercy, prosecuteth nothing but
Bloud-thirstinesse and cruelty.

They have diverse Agents in these parts, who have been very active to withdraw
the hearts of the People from the obedience of Parliament, and questionless,
might have been very prevalent and powerful, had not God appeared even in the
nick and height of their design, who having blasted their stratagems, and Hell
bred devices, they are vanished like smoke, etc.

Dover. 29. August, 1648.
Guild Hall Aug. 31. 1648.
This day came news of the surrendering of the City of Colchester, and of the
Parliaments forces possessing themselves thereof on Tuesday last, together with
all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, the inferior Officers and Soldiers to
go home, the great Ones to submit to mercy, who upon their delivery up to the
Lord Fairfax, it is said, that a Council of War were called, and after some
debate touching the proceedings and engagement of Sir Charles Lucas, the
sentence passed, and he was adjudged to be shot to death, which (as is
reported) was accordingly executed upon Tuesday last.

FINIS.

