A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED At SEA, and the full particulars of a bloody Fight on
Tuesday last, between the Princes ships, and the Parliaments, four leagues from
Jersey, with the number killed, sunk, and taken, and 14 Sail of ships seized
on, and carried to Dunkirk. Also, a great Fleet setting forth from thence for
Prince Charles, commanded by Capt. Whittington, Admiral for his Highness, and
their resolution to fall down into the River of Thames to seize on the
Parliaments shipping, and to burn, kill and destroy, all that do oppose them.
With the great Emperors Proclamation, prohibiting all English Merchants from
trading within his Territories unless in Prince Charles his Name, or by his
Letter-Pattents.

ship in full sail

London, Printed for G. Wharton, MDCXLIX.

A GREAT VICTORY Obtained at SEA AND The Particulars of a bloody fight between
the Princes ships and the Parliaments, the number killed, sunk, and taken
prisoners. And Capt. Whittingtons Design to fall into the River of Thames with
15 sail for the Prince, to burn and destroy all that will not come in unto him.
SIR,
PRince Charles has given out several Warants and Commissions to the
respective Captains in their several Commands and Duties, for their putting
forth to Sea, together with certain Instructions for the well ordering and
carrying on of the present design with the greatest advantage; and to the end
that the work may prove more easy and facile, the extent of his mercy contains
in latitude, the burning, killing and sinking of all that make opposition
against him. But upon putting the same into execution, great was their
opposition; for upon Capt. Wlison, Cap. Nigh, and Capt. Colemans lancking into
the Deep, they discovered two Merchants ships, floting upon the Neptune, and
making toward them, gave them a broad side, but the Merchants choosing rather
to dispute action, then yield to submission, answered them again with round
shot insomuch, that each man prepared for a conflict, the Deeks were well
manned, and Port holes opened, the Trumpets sounded, and Canons ratled, and
great was the gallantry of the Mariners on both sides; until Fortune seemed to
frown on Capt. Noye, who soon received a shot in the keel, which caused the
ship immediately to sink, notwithstanding all possible means used for preventing
thereof; but the Capt. and many others, saved themselves by leaping into the
Longboat, and got safe to capt. Wilsons ship with the loss of 7 men, the
other two seeing this, soon began to decline engagment, and being too swift of
sail, for the Merchants, got safe to Jersey, the Merchants steering and hoysted
sail toward the Eastern Point, whose victory was great, for they had not
sailed many leagues but they were again set upon by the Irish Pirates, who after
a sharp conflict boarded one, killed 20, took 30 prisoners, and forced the rest
to the mercy of the Waves, with the loss of 9 men.

We hear that a great Fleet is preparing for the Prince at Dunkirk and Ostend,
consisting of 16 sail, each ship carrying about ten pieces; they are said to be
commanded by one capt. Whittington, an excellent Navigator, he has received
commission from the Prince, and has had the sole ordering, disposing, and
manning of the Fleet; they are very gallant Frights for sail, and dangerous to
our English Creets, whose design (its said) is to come into the River of
Thames, to seize vessels, and to burn, sink and destroy all that shall oppose
them; The Governor of Dunkirk is to have the tenth part of their prizes, and
Prince Charles the fifth part. Captain Rocks is said to be Vice Admiral to
the said Navy, with many other skillful Pylots.

The Governor of Dunkirk has lent them a great Colliers ship to make a prison
of for the Englishmen she lies near the Fort Madrick.

Diverse of the Ostend Pirates have lately taken 14. Sail of English and Dutch,
laden with Corn, Coals, and other Commodities, they carried them to Dunkirk,
where they have made prize of all that was therein, and forced the Masters to
buy their own ships.

But the Parliaments Bonaventure has met with some of them, and boarded a new
Ostender, taking ten pieces of Ordnance, and 30 men, she is now in the Downs,
and many others are hastening thither.

Southampton 19. September. 1649.
SIR,
Upon the Lord Governor Cromwels near approach with his Army, to the frontier
and impregnable Garrison of Tredah, his Lordship has sent a Summons to the
Governor Colonel Ashton, for the surrender thereof to the power and obedience
of the Parliament of England, but the Governor returned a very resolute and
peremptory Answer, intimating, That he abhord with his soul the brand of
perfidiousnesse, that he was resolved to display the banner of loyalty, and to
stand is in the defense and preservation of the trust reposed in him to the
last man, etc. Whereupon, the Lord Governor immediately called a Council of
Officers, for the well-ordering of the Army, to the end the work might appear
more facile and easy, and indeed so excellent were the debates and
consultations thereof, that their Design was looked upon with great admiration.

And upon Saturday morning being the 8. of this instant September. twelve
thousand Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, marched up in battell-array, with Trumpets
sounding, and Drums beating against the Town, where they soon encamped
themselves, cutting off diverse passes, and using the rarest stratagems of war,
for streightning the enemies quarters.

About 7 at night, the Army advanced somewhat nearer, and diverse strong Guards
both of Horse and Foot were placed within twice musket shot of the walls, where
the Foot entrenched themselves. And about 5 in the morning, the besieged
discovered us, who drawing nearer to each other, said, they would give us a
dinner to welcome us into Ireland; and indeed they were very circumspect in
keeping of their word, for between 11 and 12 they gave us a visit, sallying
forth with a considerable party of Horse, and lining the obscure places with
many hundreds of foot, but failed in their promise; for upon their first charg
against one of our horse-guards, they were so gallantly received, that they
soon quitted the place, our horse pursued them within musket shot of their
works, receiving a great volley from their Ambuscado, in which we lost 4 men,
and 7 horse; of the enemy killed and taken 13. The next morning being Monday they
attempted another sally, but not daring to put it in execution, retreated in
again without action, remaining all day very silent, till the Curtain of the
most high Canopy began to expel and darken the splendour of Sols beauty, who
even at the close of the day upon the relieving our guards, gave us a volley
both with great and round shot, which grazed and did no execution.

On Wednesday being the 12. instant, Lieu. col. Ashton (a great Papist, and
Nephew to the Governor) about two of the clock in the morning made a very
desperate salley upon two of our foot-guards, with 500. Irish, which by reason
of the sudden surprizall of our Perdews, and Sentinels, caused great
difficulties to intervene, yet notwithstanding, the Wings of providence seeming
as a great Bulwark to preserve and defend us, our men received their furious
onset, but being overpowred, the Vau-guard retreated to the next, and bodying,
advanced to the other engaged, fell upon the Irish killed 40, took 20
prisoners, and forced the rest to a dishonorable retreat, with the loss of ten;
besides those in the former engagements, prisoners exchanged were equal, about
50. above 100 killed and wounded, whereof on our part 30.

Form the Siege at Tredah Sept. 16. 1649.
Letters from Hamborough intimate, That General Montrosse lies with his Army
there, and in the parts adjacent, they swear desperately they will be in
England before Christmas, ( but that's uncertain) and boast themselves to be
twelve thousand ( but not half so many) they want money exceedingly, and
Charity seems cold, which is ill rescented by the Soldiery; but their
General is going to the King of Denmark, to negotiate with his Majesty (in the
Name of his Sovereign) for moneys, and other accommodation, etc. but the Plume
being fallen, the design seems dubious.

They further write, That the Emperor of Muscovia has set forth proclamation,
prohibiting all the Englishs Merchants to depart his Territories, and not to
trade any further, upon pain of confilcating all their Merchandise, unless
they hrve Commission from the KING, either by Letters Pattents, or otherwise.
This causes a smile from the Royal party, who say, all Christian Princes will
do the like, etc.

Septembr. 21. 1649. T. J.

FINIS.

