Great NEWS from the French FLEET, With an Account of The Instructions Which
was lately sent by The French King, To Monsieur Tourville, his Admiral.
Licensed according to Order.



THE French-Fleet, according to the Computation of our murmuring Jacobites,
(notwithstanding their loss of nigh twenty Capital Ships, besides Frigates of
Forty, and Fifty, and more Guns, last Year,) is, by a Romish sort of Miracle,
grown this Summer more Potent and Numerous than last, and it is confidently
given out, by an odd sort of People among us, That they are both more able, and
more resolved to Fight us this Year, than they were before: It Is true, (it is
agreed on all hands,) that the French King, since his fatal Defeat at Sea, has
been very Industrious; and, as his Majesty was pleased to tell his Parliament,
very diligent in his applications to repair the remainder of his shattered
Fleet; but at the same time we never could have any Account of any new Ships of
War he has added this Year, and the Thoulon Squadron was never computed above
Fifteen Sail, which, as they were absent last Year, by all Accounts, is
concluded to be on the Coasts of Spain now; so that we may believe them now to
be near Fifty Sail, whereas our Grand Fleet now consists of near Eighty Sail of
Capital Men of War in the Line of Battle, and, praised be God, with a Fair
Wind, are Sailed to the Coast of France, resolving to Face this so much
boasted, formidable Fleet of the French; for, by the Accounts from Paris, we
are informed they are to rendezvous at Bell-Isle, and the French King has sent
his Orders to Monsieur Tourville, his Admiral, to continue upon their own
Coasts, and that if the English seemed to be forward to press a Battle there,
not to decline it.

Our Fleet above Three Days ago were seen past Plymouth, and we are in daily
Expectation of hearing of some Gallant Action from them, though it is generally
believed, that this pretended Bravery of the French, is but a mere Bravado, a
sweetning Sugar-Plumb to encourage and keep up the sinking Spirits of his
fainting Janasaries here; for is it reasonable to believe that he will
willingly expose the Remainder of his Naval Strength to such Disadvantage now,
when less than an equal Number last Year Scoured, Drove, and Burned them from
Port to Port* No, no, without all doubt he would think himself happy, could he
but secure himself in his Harbors from our Insults; and therefore it is not
improbably believed that he has ordered his grand Fleet to keep close in their
Fortified Ports, while the Thoulon Squadron attacks some place in the Spanish
Territories, thereby to amuse or divert us from our intended Descent; but a
very little time will clear our Doubts in this Matter, and our Admirals are
Persons of that known Conduct and Resolution, that we have all the reason in
the World to expect, (by God's Blessing) in a short time, to have a very fair
Account of them.

LONDON, Printed by W. D. 1693.


