The Gallant Rights, Christian Privileges, Solemn Institutions of the
SEAGREEN ORDER; OR The Martial Colors of the Three Grand Machabean Nobles,
Viz. 1. Captain- Honesty, of the Lineage of David. II. Captain- Justice, of the
Lineage of Solomon. III. Captain- Freedom, of the Lineage of Nehemiah.
Being all up now in Arms contra Gentes, for a good People and a good
Parliament, according to this their present DECLARATION.
The first Institution.
TO all true cordial English Souls inhabitant or dispersed through Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America; To Jew and Gentile, Freeborn and Slave: Be it by
these presents made known, published and declared, That we, the legitimate
Princes of the Earth, Justice, Freedom, and Honesty, having for a time, times,
and half a time, by the Tyranny of unjust Monarchs and Arbitrary Lords, been
forcibly exiled, and from our Native Rights debarred; are now, at the time of
the end, come down into the World to chastise Injustice, to settle Peace, and
to reassume the Scepter in our own hands, as our proper due, against Emperors,
Kings, Armies, Councels, maugre Men and Devils; Commanding all other Princes to
lay down their Scepters at our feet, and Greatness to come under the command of
Goodness; for this is the first Fundamental Right of the Seagreen Order.

Secondly, Be it next declared, That we intend to advance our Royal Standard,
first in England, this present year of King Jesus 1648. and this by Commission
from God our King, and the Parliament of Heaven, unalterably, uncontroulably;
and have for that purpose made choice of the deep Seagreen for our Flag and
Colors, and do hereby ordain and authorize it to be worn as the lively badg of
Constancy, Sufferance and Valor in grain, the cognizance of Justice and the
mark of Freedom and Deliverance.

Thirdly, Be it by us ordered, That whatsoever noble heart shall abhor the yoke
of Prerogative pleasure, the Chains of Slavery, and Tyranny by Princes, the
Agents and cruel Instruments of Princes: Whosoever shall detest the Arbitrary
Power and Voice Negative: Whosoever shall abominate the self willed Pomp and
Dominion of Lords temporal and spiritual, the juggling of bribed Judges, the
devilish inextriable snares of the Law-Courts, and their petty fogging sitting
Dogs, (Pleaders, Officers of Court, Attorneys, Solicitors, perjured Sergeants,
Bailiffs, Undersheriffs,) with all their Quirks, Demurs, and Quillets:
Whosoever is seeing and sensible of the late bloody plots, and still raging
designs, of Antichristian Christians: Whosoever groans under the present
Extortions, unequal Taxes, unjust Levies, inevitable Monopolies, new Charters,
Plunders and Avarice of Committees, bondage of Prison under inhumane Gaolors,
Oppression of Landlords, all Wardships, all Hardships; Let them, upon sight
hereof, take up the Cross, and follow Christ their King; take up our Colors;
and follow us their Leaders; and in so doing the Seagreen shall be the badg of
their warrant and protection.

Fourthly, Be it hereby instituted, That every one so wearing our Colors in
hatband, cuff, garment, hilt, bridle, mayn, or sail, in relation to Equity,
Freedom and Honesty, shall from henceforth, according to our Noble Order, be
entitled the Free born Assistant of Justice, (but according to the Order of
King Charles, Levellers,) his is new, ours is old.

Fifthly, Be it further instituted, That every Champion of the Seagreen Order
shall vow a sacred vow, in all his prayers and endeavors, to level first the
mountain of his own heart, pride, ambition, avarice, self hopes, self ends,
self revenge, for this is the true level of the internal Antichrist.

Sixthly, It is decreed, That every such Assistant of Justice shall fearlesly
resolve, promise and assent to his utmost power, to level to the earth all the
unequal knobbiness, -- and uneven risings -- of injustice pomp, tyranny and
oppression, as the very causes of this War and things abominated in the eyes of
an angry God, Saints and Angels; be it in Prince, Peer, Prelate, Judge,
Magistrate, and that without difference or exception of Persons, Parties,
Religions, Relations, Titles, Dignities, indifferently and indistinctly; for
this is the Level of the external Antichrist: So help him Christ, and the three
Machabean Princes.

Next, it is hereby concluded, that Honesty among the Levellers shall be counted
for the best Policy, and Simplicity shall bear up the Buckler against a whole
Junto of Machavil, and Politics Woodbee.

Be it also hereby known to all the gallant common Soldiers, serving under the
excellent Fairfax, and faithful Crumwel, that however their Grandee Masters
have ill repayed their labors, yet we their Captains have from time to time
carefully enrolled their valor, sufferings, scorns, nakedness and losses in the
Register of Equity, man by man; and do by these presents engage our honors for
a full requital, far above Indemnity with money, bays, and thanks, according
to the degrees of each man's desert in War; provided that the said Soldier go
on as he has begun, stand to our Colors, and appear at our Summons, according
to the Rights of the SEAGREEN ORDER.

Lastly, Be it enacted and declared, That whosoever shall jeer, baffle, or
vilify our Colors, or reproach the Wearer -- shall be censured an
Anti-Leveller, a Malignant Revolter, Grandee Creature, or Dammee Varlet, and to
be registered by the SEAGREEN Scout in the Roll of Justice and Revenge; but
whoever shall constantly and habitually affect us, and our Colors, shall be
admitted into our favor, whether gallant Cavalier, or valiant Reformadoe.

Ordered that this be read in the two Houses twice a week, as also once a week
in the Army, and every Parish Church for a month. Signed by Captain Mordecay.
Love Right, Secretary General to the three Machabean Princes, and the noble
State of Levellers


