ADVISE TO A FRIEND DISCONTENTED AT Some proceedings in His MAJESTY'S ROYAL
COURT.

BY F. G.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creake. 1660.

Dear Friend,
YOurs I received, and am sorry to find in it, that any want of power in his
Majesty, should put you into a discontent; and at this time for you to, deplore
the dissatisfaction of your own interest, more then the condition so Royal a
friend is in, to give your merit a recompense to encourage it, as well as a due
Character to set it off. I confess a narrowness of fortune may excuse the
generousest spirit from mirth, but let us consider how narrow and small a
compass of Air our Sovereign has had yet to breath in, and we may the readier
acquiesce in our own limits. When our party ventured for the King, we esteemed
the establishing of his Happiness a sure foundation of our own. We have
brought our desires to a hopeful issue, and may make our selves rich in the
favor of Divine Providence, let but a sober and solid progress in our cure
hinder the making our best mediator for that Providence miserable. I mean the
King, whom God has given us for our goods, and he having the best Sacrifices of
our Loyalty, will form a recompense for us with the best endeavors of his
friendship. Nor are his sufferings less to see us want happiness, then ours to
find it, as yet not in his power to make us happy. It Is no small benefit for
us to live in Peace as we are, and to know that what we have is by his coming
confirmed our own. And Heaven has a great hand in this, that if we have any
subsistency by endeavors or estate, we may quietly and to our comfort employ
the one and enjoy the other. Justice and the balanced principles of the Law
shall guard the innocent, nor shall Tyranny any more Usurp the Regal Throne,
nor oppression burden us by an Imperial pretense of power. Now we have the
best of Governments, and worthiest of Governors to protect us. This can no way
bedenyed or disputed in the birthright, and our affectionate embracing of so
good a Prince, enthroning him in our loves as well as obedience. I believe you
so candid an interpreter of my actions, as not to think me an undeserving
labourer in his Majesty's affairs: and I should be loath to conclude so
ungratefully, as to want patience till he is as well able as willing to make me
live by some fruitful acknowledgement of what I have done for him. Plunder and
Sequestration have rased the Crown and sheepcoate alike, nor can so great a
goodness as his rise and be fixed in any splendour, and an honest merit live poor
and forgotten. He has yet little else but his title King, and we are as well
settled in our condition by being styled his friends. He adores the God of
goodness, therefore loves our being so good to him. He honors true Religion
most, therefore cannot love us least, who are his partners in suffering for,
and professing that Religion he accounts the truest. From all this, Reason
concluds, that we have his heart to love us, and cannot want his hand, when it
is strong enough, to reward us and cherish us. We have enough of him, if we
know how to manage it to our own good without doing him hurt. The best way to
make him all ours, is to let him find a certainty of his being wholly his own.
That cannot so well be done by acknowledging and gratefully rewarding any one
particular service only, as by promulgating his good and gracious acceptance of
any one who desires to be true, loyal, and serviceable to him: By this he will
multiply his friends, in giving a larger compass to his friendship. Suppose the
smiles of prosperity upon sin in former times made some, most, nay all these,
his, and our enemies; Charity cannot but frame a better construction in us,
then to judge that all have their conversion to what is good, because, and
only because fear of punishment keeps them from being ill. Virtue has a
brightness in her to dispell ignorance, but not always an inherent power to
conquer iniquity. Her own nature enobles her with the first, and ingenuous
dispositions procure her an Army for the last. Nor is it the divine will that
she should force her way into men's hearts by cruelty, but convert men's hearts
from being cruel by her excellency. Our conjectures will have the better stamp
given them by our enemies, when they find us to credit a possibillity of their
growing our friends. The surest way of bringing ill men to goodness is to show
the convenientest inlets, and not to bar them out by assurance of
non-admissiion. This way, and the best of ways has the best of Kings, our
Great and Gracious Charles, taken: To let them know that so far as they can be
good, he can welcome their goodness, and not only for their conversion pardon
their worst of ills, but also accept with a due resentment their best of
actions. And this civility of his to them, will cause no small reflection of
his favors upon us: When he considers upon that turgency of merit naturally
flowing in his old friends, what and how much it overpoises those small
stillititious droppings io his new ones. This he will make worthy, both of his
ponder and affection. His power is made yet but of slender Cion's, and it may
perish for want of sappage, if the increase as well as goodness of his friends
be denied to nourish it. When he is strong enough then he will venture at the
choice of his friends, and placing of his friendship. We have had patience to
loose all with him, let us not now incur the repute of such poor spirits, as
to have less in our desires to get by him, then we had in our hazard for him.
We shall scarce be thought men, when that virtue is rather forced upon us, then
loved by us. I have known those whom we call the worst of people, namely the
Papists, when the Laws of our land have taken away two parts of their Estates
for their Religion, they have willingly endangered the third part, and their
lives out of their zeal to loyalty. What can our judgments call that eminency
of cuurage in them but good, since they are such true friends to their
principles, in God Almightie's service, and most willing to establish Gods
anointed servant. I wish our principles and their zeal, had a nearer
relation. For let us consider them all along in their sufferings and
allegiance, and we shall find them to wave their own considerations in any
government, so that they might live and be acknowledged serviceable in
enthroning a true and lawful governor. I have heard a proposition urged very
high in arguments, which you please to make a hint at. viz. hat the pillars of
the Church, are the best support of King and people: and our slacknesse in
establishing authority in divine truth, must needs weaken supremacy in popular
affection. I suppose you find an answer to this in his Majesty's Royal
character; that tender consciences ought to be allured by gentleness and
fraternall kindness, and not tortered to believe by any predominative coercion.
I dare affirm that his Majesty knows the love of a subject is most sincere to
him, when that subject is a most fervent servant in his principles toward God.
And consequence will instruct us that what power Eclesiastick has the Kings
Closet and Cappell to spread its Juster in, it will gain more hearts to it, by
a due performance of Piety, then it can by any rigor or strictness in its
jurisdiction abroad. But our prayers and best wishes ought to be the greatest
sticklers in these matters. Let not our censures prove us busy in superior
actions, nor conclude them ill in themselves, because they do not readily
square with ourgood: Steares of ships will not endure a passengers correction.
And that most Illustrious pilot of our Kingdoms will rather be slow in
prosecuteing his own interest, then want industry to remunerate his friends
affection. God preserve him in peace and plenty, and the least sufferer with
him shall neither find trouble nor penury.

Your true Friend, F. G.


