A great VICTORY Obtained by the KING OF FRANCE AGAINST The Prince of Conde
near the City of Estamps, upon the Duke of Lorrains advance for raising the
siege: with the particulars thereof, and the manner how the said D. drew up his
men in Batalia, and afterward by the mediation of the D. of York, for 100000
Crowns, revolted from the Prince of Conde to the King.

ALSO The great Engagement of the said Duke of York, with the Duke of Beaufort,
who commanded the Van of the Army; and the manner how Beaufort was routed, and
beaten out of the field: with the advance of the Kings Army toward Paris, and
the resolution of the Citizens thereupon, and declaring for the King.

A Bloody Fight in Ireland, between the Parliaments forces commanded by Major
General Waller, and the Irish commanded by the Earl of Clenrickard: with the
manner how the Rebels fell upon the English Garrisons, and a perfect Narrative
thereof.

SEnt in a Letter to the Right Honorable William Lenthal, Esquire, Speaker to
the Parliament of England.

LONDON: Printed for G: HORTON. 1652.

A great and BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND Between The Parliaments forces, commanded
by Major Genesis Waller, and the Lord Broghil; and the Irish Army commanded by the
Earl of Clenrickard; sent to the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire,
Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
BY our last of the 13 of May, from Kilkenny, sent by Capt. Vernon, we gave you
an account of the Treaty then newly concluded on with the Earl of Westmeath,
and the Lemster officers of the enemies party. Since that we understanding that
the L. of Muskery, and his party in Kerry, that are very considerable did not
accept thereof, but did expect some better terms. The Major Genesis and the L.
Broghil, drew to Drumagh, the only considerable Castle the enemy held in the
County of Cork, and was indeed a strong and a secure hold for them, but by the
blessing and help of the Lord that was rendered to you, of which the Lievt. Genesis
gave you former account from Youghal, and find that party of yours that reduced
that place not to be sufficient for reducing Rosse, where the strength of the
enemy lay.

Upon debate and conference with Sir Hardress Waller and diverse of your
officers at Cork, it was resolved to draw out what forces could best be spared
from these parts to march into Kerry, and having gotten what supplies were
necessary, and could be had, they marched hence to Mallow, and did expect to be
at Ross in Kery on Sunday the 4 instant. Since their departure from us, we do
hear there was some destruction among the enemy at Ross, so as the Clergy
party, and such as adhered to that interest, crew out of Ross, but my Lord of
Muskerry, and such as stood to him, do keep in Ross, what may be the issue is
not known. The greatest body of the enemy is gathered together about
Balleshanon in Ulster, under Clenrickard. And by letters of the 30 of May, from
Commissiary Genesis Reynolds from Athlone, and by others we do understand that the
enemy has besieged Balleshanon, a house of the L. Eliots, and with 2 guns have
made batteries against it, and have been 2 or 3 times repulsed, at last have
gained it, and burnt it, before Sir Charles Coot could come to relieve it. And
they have also taken the Castle of Dongale, and all the enemies forces at
Ulster, and Conaught are there enjoined. But Sir Charles Coot with his own
party, and part of Commis. Genesis Reynolds party, are in pursuit of them on one
side, and Col. Venables and his party on the other side; and Commis. Gen
Reynolds with 100 horse from Col. Sankey is also marched up, and orders sent to
Col. Hewson to draw down that way also; so it is hoped (through the help of our
Lord) they shall be enabled to find out that enemy, and to engage with him What
horse and foot of the Lemster enemy do come in, we cannot give you any account
as yet, having not received our selves any account of the same, only Grace his
party which did infest your quarters in Lemster, most of his horse are come in,
and submitted, and himself with 12 horse, and about 70 that marched before, are
gone to Clenrickard, and his foot being in all about 1000 are at present
dispersed, but do lie scattered in the Woods and Bogs, and your forces in these
parts do daily hunt and attend them. This is the present posture of your forces
here and in all parts their hands are full, and we hope you will not be
unmindfull to continue your care in providing for them, the plentiful and good
provisions you have formerly ordered to be sent hither, are for the most part
all come hither, which is a great comfort to the poor soldiery, and we do wish
we had more of the intended recruits such of them as are come already being
very able, and fit for your service, and were the residue that are appointed to
come over (here before the summer be too far spent) it would much advantage
your affairs as now they stand.

Your humble servant, Miles Corbet, Io. Ioxes.
Cork June, 5, 1652.
A Letter from Col. Venab^es from Charlemount, directed to the Governor of
Dublin, dated 30 May 1652.
SIR,
THe Conaught and Ultaugh being joined, took Ballishannan by surrender, but the
same day my Lord President of Conaught on the other side the water, and we
arrived at the Gragh, without any intelligence that they had of the march, as
by their intercepted letters appears, upon which, fearing to be disclosed run
away, leaving a a Regiment in Balishannon, who next day yielded the same, and
guns, we are now following them: I only writ before to give you notice, for if
they get not victuals, they must disband, fight, submit, or starve, only one
Troop of ours scared them, they go over unaccessable bogs, where we cannot
follow them, some have sent to my Lord President of Conaught, to get
protections. The Regiment that yielded Ballishanon have taken protection and
capitulated for others now in their army to come in, 8000 Cows that were
following them into Ulster, were met with by Sir Charles Coot, and they have
take protection in secure quarters, they were to have fed the Conaught forces
in Ulster, and now these being gone they must feed with the Ultaughs or starve.
They have in this last action, lost credit, courage Officers, guns, and have
only 8 barrels of powder remaining. They have prevailed by their lies, telling
that at Ballishannon they had beat us, pray give notice to all parts not to
believe such reports, the protected Irish in these parts had designed once more
to rise, the enemy are so heartless they would not see us, nor stay that we
might look upon them. I hear they intend to join with Grace in Lemster. The
enemy were 5000 at least, they lost 30 Commis. officers at Ballishanon, and
about 300 slain and wounded. Above 1200 more are since come into them. I
subscribe my self,

Your humble servant, Robert Venables.
Charlemount 30 May, 1652.
Several Expresses are come from Paris, dated June 15. An abstract whereof take
as follows. The Parliament of Bourdeaux being sat, the Prince of Condi did
motion, that it was fit to send Commissioners to that of Paris, together with a
Copy of some late transactions, which the Parliament disliked, and immediately
arose without giving any answer, the next day the Prince being come again
thinking to get an answer; the Parliament knowing of it did adjourn for three
days. The next day the Assembly of Lormeir met again, where there was an order
made for the banishing of all suspected persons, and upon pain of life not to
return into the City, this was made known the same day, to 14 Members of the
Parliament, amongst them the President Pychon, The chief man of that Assembly
finding that their Officers were fearful to deliver that message, went in his
own person, and withal threatened them sore, That if after the next day they
were found in the City they should all be stabbed: and the better to know who
is well affected or not, therefore they will compel the rest of the Parliament
to sign certain Articles, which they call Articles of Union, and suspect all
those who make any difficulty or refuse it. The Duke of Lorrain upon the 11th
instant, sent an Express to the Duke of Orleans to tell him, That seeing he had
no real satisfaction upon his demands but delays, therefore he intended to
march back again with his army into Flanders, which made the Duke of Orleans
forthwith go to him, being accompanied by the Prince of Conde, and several
other Lords, and being come into the Camp there was very great conference with
the Duke of Lorrain, which ended to the great satisfaction of both parties,
which appeared immediately by the great rejoycings made on both sides, and
chiefly at the great Feast which was made them by the Count Ligneville, being
returned hither, we hear they have made an offensive and defensive league to
force the Court to conclude a peace with Spain, and thereupon the Prince of
Conde has sent an express Order to his Lievt. Genesis at Estamps, to advance on
this side and come to join with the Lorrain army. The Commons of this City,
have met this week several times in the Town Hall, where many complaints were
made of the many disorders and wrongs daily done by the Lorrain forces in the
County of Brio, and it was ordered, that some in the name of the Assembly
should repair to the Duke of Orleans, and desire some speedy remedy all those
evils; being come thither he heard them, and for their satisfaction told them,
That he had not the command of that army to which the Court had appointed their
Quarters all along their march, that he had been forced to call in those
Foreign forces, by reason that he found them not so resolute and constant as he
was in the design wherein they all stood engaged, for the expelling the
Cardinal of Mazirine out of France, who was so bold as to have brought with him
good store of foreign soldiers, although there was several Declarations of the
Kings confirmed by Parliaments for prohibiting the same, many fine smooth words
to that purpose, having but little influence. The next day the same complaints
were made to the Parl. and the matter being put in debate, it was resolved by
the major part to oppose those Lorrainers by force of arms, and in case they
went on in their wicked proceedings, that it should be lawful to any Commoner
to slay and destroy them to the utmost, but there rising some differences, it
was finally agreed that the Princes should be acquainted therewith, and
entreated to find some speedy remedy to all their grievances.

From France they write, that the titular Duke of York is exceeding active for
the Kings Majesty; and has so far prevailed with the Duke of Lorrain, in his
mediation for his Higness, for a revolt from the Prince of Conde, that the said
Duke is resolved to quit that Kingdom, as appears by the ensuing abstract;
though notwithstanding he had agreed with the Prince of Conde to fight against
his Majesty, and in pursance thereof, drew his forces into the field, joined
with the D. of Beaufort, and placed his men in Battalia to receive the Kings
party; but upon the approach of Genesis Turein, and Col. James Stuart, with their
forces, instead of fighting them at Ville Hease St. George, he very peaceably
drew off without striking one stroke, and left the P. of Condies men commanded
by the D. of Beaufort, to the mercy of a conquering enemy; yet so gallantly did
he dispute the field, that he made an honorable retreat but not without some
loss; since which time, the Kings forces have taken Brie; and its conceived
intends for Paris if possible, by reason that the Citizens seem to decline
their resolutions for the D. of Orleans, and begin to cry up the Kings
interest. This is both a round turn, and sudden change; and is chiefly
occasioned by the Duke of Lorrains revolt, who has made an agreement for one
hundred thousand Crowns, to stand as a Neuter, and fight for neither parties.

FINIS.

