Great News from Poland: BEING An Impartial Account of the Election OF A New
KING, In the Room of ANTHONY, By the Grace of GOD lately Deceased.
THe Polonians had no sooner received the surprising News of the departure of
their late King, but they paid the Tears which were due to His Memory, wiped
their eyes, blew their Noses, and considered of a person fit to succeed. The
Candidates who appeared were numerous; Prince Prettyman Perkinoski appeared in
the Van, but they soon voted him non compos mentis: because, though he was
satisfied himself he was unlawfully begotten, yet he plied next Oars for an
Hereditary Crown. Capellanoff le grand made a considerable Interest in the
Diet, out he was thrown out too, because, whilst but a Viceroy, he had
miss-imploy'd and imbez'l'd the Revenues that came near his hands; besides, he
had taken upon him the employ of being the Mouth of the People of England, and
their Clark too, to draw up their unmannerly Petitions. Johannes
Sheffieldislaus acquainted the Diet, that as soon as he was dressed, he would
visit them, to assure them, that he was not so supercilious as to despise the
Government of Poland; And that, being disappointed of the First he aspired to,
he was resolved to take the Next was proffered him. [But you are to understand
by the way, that the Nobility of Poland are very familiar with their King; and
having smoked the haughtiness of this Spark's heart, his business was
dispatched.]

To reckon up all the Pretenders would be too tedious; therefore, in short, the
choice fell upon Arthur E. of A -- y, adjudg'd by the most prudent part of the
Diet the fittest Person to succeed Anthony; and that, for his Religion, his
Principles of Honor and Honesty, his Natural Aversion to a Lineal Descent, for
proof of his Religion, there needed no more, than that there have been
entertained Men of all persuasions at this King Arthur 's Round-Table, (for we
must no longer call him plain Arthur.) Such a temper as this is chiefly
requisite in a Polish King: It being said of Poland, That he that has lost his
Religion, may easily find it there. There shall thou glut thy self, O King
Arthur! Thou admired Patron of Toleration; There you may pay the respects you
owe to the Romanists, to the Lutherans, to the Calvinists, to the Arrians,
Anabaptists, Anti-Trinitarians, etc. and thy Royal Consort Queen Bess, may, to
her hearts desire, sit in state in a Conventicle every day.

His Principles of Honor and Honesty appeared by his underhand dealings with
Toney of cursed memory; His aversion to the Succession was such, that the
greatest ties of gratitude could not reconcile him to it.

Thus did King Arthur carry it from all the Pretenders; but what teemed most of
his side, was, his Old Age, and Decrepidness; for the Electors of Poland love
to shift their Kings as fast as they can; and long as much for election of a
King, as any bawling Forty-shilling-Free-holder does in England for a new
Knight of the Shire.

His Majesty (we hear) has made some alterations of the great Officers of
State, as well as those about his gouty Person: having resolved to prefer none
but such as merit his gracious Favor, whose Names are as follow: Boreaski
Whad-d'ye-call-himski, Lord High-Chancellor of Poland. Microcosmus Audbryjus,
Generalissimo of his Forces, upon condition he do greater Martial Feats than
those of Ireland. * Note, That it is thought King Arthur will be his own
Privy Seal. Humpbackgundi Escrickski, Archbishop of Cracovia, Lord Almoner, and
Dean of the (happel, for cheapness-sake: having a way of re^renching the
Sacrament, by administering with Lambs-wool. Capellanoff le grand, Lord
High-Treasurer. Mons. Acutus Bloomsburiensis, Ambassador Extraordinary upon all
accounts: having the faculty of betraying the secrets of any Embassy to the
Diet. Lord Chamberlain continued. Seignior Tho. Strongarmski, By her Majesty's
intercession, first Gentleman of the Bedchamber: provided he never more
converse with Botelia. Bloodowndsby Howardski, Grooms of the Bedchamber, in
case they tell every thing they hear. Moroso Progero, Grooms of the
Bedchamber, in case they tell every thing they hear. Finicalki Babercelaus,
Esquires of the Body. Pimpanello Forbesius, Groom of the Stool, and
Policy-reader to them that cannot read about Court. Gilbertus
Groaningboardellus, Confessor to her Majesty, provided they will not gueld him
when he goes over. Monsieur Papillionski, Sheriffs of Cracovia, without any
opposition. Monsieur Duboienski, Sheriffs of Cracovia, without any opposition.


Her Majesty has only as yet made choice (being wholly devoted to Religion) of
Her Chaplains, and is now only taken up in repenting (if possible) the
God-nepping Act in Poland: being in Her Royal Opinion as destructive to
Presbytery as the 35th. of Her Name in England.

GOD Save the QUEEN.
London: Printed for the Assigns of F. S. 1683.


