A GREAT FIGHT Near Pendennis Castle in CORNWALL BETWEEN The Lord Hopton, and
the Parliaments Forces, upon the landing of his men for the fetching in of
provision; with the number killed and wounded on both sides. ALSO, Another
bloody Fight at Sea, between a Squadron of the Princes Fleet, and 18. Merchants
ships which were coming for London; with the particulars thereof, the number
that were slain, two of the Enemies ships sunk, and the rest chased to the Isle
of Scilley. TOGETHER With several Propositions made by the General Council of
the Army; and their Resolutions touching the Navy at Sea, and the Army in
Ireland.

Imprinted at London for R. W. 2. April, 1649.

A Bloody FIGHT IN CORNWALL Between the Princes Forces commanded by the Lord
Hopton, and the Parliaments Forces, near Pendennis Castle, and a great Victory
obtained at Sea.
SIR,
THe Lord Hopton with 20 Sail of ships, lies floting up and down the British
Coast; insomuch that no ships can pass nor escape his fury; For, on Tuesday
last a Fleet of Merchants sailing toward the Lands-End, were set upon by the
Hoptonians, who coming within shot of them gave them a broad side; but were
answered with the like volley from them again; insomuch, that they came to a
hot dispute, the fight continuing many hours, and after the exchange of
several tokens from the Sons of Mars, the L. Hopton held off, refusing to
fight any longer, and steered toward the Isle of Scilley; the famous ship
called the Culpepper, and about 6 more chased them about 2 leagues, sunk three
of them, the rest escaped: in this fight many were slain and wounded on both
sides, and one of the Merchants ships sunk also, above 100 Mariners sacrificing
their lives in this engagement. The fight being ended, the Merchants Fleet
hoysted sail, and steerd toward the Lands-End; which being done, the Lord
Hopton put to Sea again, and (being thirsty of revenge) after few hours sail,
he espied a prey, who with fury and rage made toward them, gave them a broad
side, surrounded them (although 8 in number) insomuch that three of them were
close beset, and several times ready to board; but by their undanted courage
and gallantry repulsed them, disputed the Onset, and were in a good way to have
got safe from them, but a supply of more shipping coming afterward from
Scilley, joined with the first Squadron, who by their great potency and
strength overpowred them boarded the ships, seized on all the goods and
merchandise, tying every man back to back, shutting them under Decks, and
carried them prisoners to the Isle of Scilley, where they now remain under the
barbarous restraint of Sir George Carteret, the Governor; God in his due time
restore them to liberty, and grant them patiense, in this their time of
affliction.

If speedy and timely supplies of shipping be not hastened forth, it is to be
feared, they will become sole masters of the British Seas. Since their taking
of the late prize, they have met with another Bristoll ship, richly laden with
cloth, which the Lord Hopton has distributed amongst the seamen and
soldiers. He is now sailed toward Milford Haven, but by the way, he struck
in at a Creek near Pendennis, where he landed many of his men for the fetching
in of provision, and other accommodation; but before they could faciliate and
accomplish their Design, the Parliaments Forces at Pendennis having notice
thereof, a considerable party of Horse and Foot were forthwith commanded out,
who hastened to welcome their coming in, and endeavored to get between them and
the water, for the intercepting of their passage; but through the malignity of
the Cornish-men their design was almost frustrated; for after few hours march
they were discovered, and the Enemy in a posture to receive them, who upon
their near approach saluted each other with the tokens of Mars, and after a hot
conflict the Hoptonians retreated within command of their Ships, our men
pursued, kiled 19. wounded many, and made good their retreat with the loss of
7 men. Their Ordnance did much retard our pursuit, by which means most of them
got safe aboard having many Boats in readiness to receive them; otherwise few
of them had escaped: some of the Land soldiers deserted them at their coming
ashore, who say, That the Lord Hopton is commander in chief of that Squadron,
and of all the Land forces thereunto belonging, and that his Colors (or
Ensigns) are yelow, with black bulers in the midst, and on the top thereof,
this Motto written in Characters of Gold, For Charles the second.

SIR,
We hear that the Prince of Wales is come to Helver sluice, accompanied by the
prince of Orange, and many other Gentlemen of eminency, and after some
conference between them, his Highness took his leave, and took shipping for
Jersey, (as it is reported) who going aboard the Convertine, lanched forth into
the Ocean with a pleasant Gatle, the great Guns bidding Vale to his departure;
there are gone with him the Marquess of Newcastle, the Lord Culpepper, the
Lord Wilmot, Major Genesis Massey, and many others; and from Jersey its said they
are resolved for Ireland, where the Prince intends to set up his Standard
against the parliament of England, evil Council prevail much: the ships who
transported them from hence were all Men of war, being 8 in number, His
Highness is very potent, and numerous in shipping, who seize and take several
prizes at Sea, which does much propagate their design; insomuch, that many
English Factors, have solicited Him, desiring that speedy care may be taken for
prevention thereof, and after some consultation with his Council in reference
to the same, He declared, and promsied, That if the Merchants of the City of
London would gather and advance the sum of 40000. l. for the maintenance of his
Navy at Sea, the like should be prevented for the future; and to the end there
might be free trading and commerce at Sea, He was resolved to send a message,
to acquaint them with these his desires, etc. The Clergy are exceedingly
enraged at the transactions in England, and do incite the people to desperate
engagements for revenge of the Royal blood, and investing Charles the second
in his Throne: But the States at a general council resolved, That proclamation
should be made through out the United Provinces, That such Ministers as should
hereafter preach either publicly or privately, any thing concerning State
affairs, either in relation to the differences of England, Scotland, France, or
elsewhere, or should hold any private correspondency from England, or
elsewhere, as to that purpose should be forthwith banished. This Proclamation
was proclaimed by Order from the States.

Rotterdam 27 Martii, 1649.

On the 26 of this instant we received intelligence that 21 English ships are
lately seized on at Sea, by Pr. Rupert and his Associats; some of whom were of
great value: the custom thereof, and the two the French took in the straits
amounting to above 20000. l. Diverse other ships have been also seized on near
Rye, Hastings, and other places.

On the 28. a great storm arose in the hearts of many throughout the Cities of
London and West minster, occasioned by the apprehending of Lteut. col. Joh.
Lilburn, Mr. Overton, and others, upon suspicion of being authors or dispersers
of a book. entitled The second part of Englands new Chains, lately printed and
dispersed by those called Levellers: the House after many hours debate
thereupon, voted the said Book treasonable, pernicious and of dangerous
consequence.

Upon the apprehending of the aforesaid persons many jealousies arose in
relation to a rising within the city for the rescuing of them from the power of
the Soldiers; but their Guardiants conducted them safe to White Hall, and upon
Thursday last the said Lieu. Col. Lilburn was brought before the Council of
State sitting at Derby house, and upon his examination, declared, That he was a
true and cordial lover of England's peace and freedom, that he would sacrifice
his life for the preservation of the rights and liberties thereof, and that he
would rather suffer a thousand tortures, then betray his trust, or desert his
first principles and engagement. Some other of the Citizens were also examined,
who gave very strange Answers, etc.

The Parliament have debated the business of Ireland, and voted Lieu. Genesis
Crumwell, Captain General of all the Forces which are to be expedited over for
the reducement of that kingdom, and bringing of it to the obedience of Parl. He
has declared to the House his willingness and acceptance for this present
expedion; and in order thereunto, several propositions were proposed and
debated, a copy whereof follows. 1 That such Reg. as go may have all their
arrears audited, stated, and Debenters given. 2 That visible security be given
for so much as shall appear due, and to be paid to any Trustee or friend with
whom the Debenter shall be left. 3 That such of the army as undertake shall have
their Arrears from the year 1645. first paid. 4 That ou^ of the six score
thousand l. per mensem, appointed for England and Ireland three months pay be
carried over with those that go. 5 The private Soldier and non commission
Officer to have two months pay of Arrears, and all Officers under Captains one
months pay. 6 That Bristol, Chester. Leverpool, Beumorris castle, the Isle of
Anglesea, and Milford in South wales, be as Magazines for the Irish service. 7
That a sufficient number of ships be employed on the Irish Coast. 8. That a
Court of Admiralty may be erected at Dublin to prevent their frequent coming
into England to dispose of prizes. 9 The pay of the Officers and Soldiers to
be according to the Ieish establishment. 10. Provision to be made for maimed
soldiers, and the widows and orphans of those slain. 11. The Parl. forces in
Ireland and those now going over to be under one establishmen. 12 That 5000
Quarters of Bread and 200. tun of salt and 200 tun of chees be transported with
those that shall go over, etc.

Imprimatur T. JENNINGS

FINIS.

