THE PRINTERS Advertisement.
WHEREAS there is Prefixed unto a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Gospel Order
Revived, Printed at New York, An Advertisement, which runs in these words, viz
The Reader is desired to take Notice, that the Press in Boston is so much under
the aw of the Reverend Author, whom we answer, and his Friends, that we could
not obtain of the Printer there to Print the following Sheets, which is the
only true Reason why we have sent the Copy so far for its Impression, and where
it is printed with some Difficulty. I count my self bound in Justice unto all
Persons aspersed by that Advertisement, to Declare and Publish to the World the
Truth of the matter, which briefly is this: Certain Persons bringing to the
Press, the Pamphlet above mentioned; after some Discourse concerning the number
of Copies and Price, I Consented to its being Published: But when they insisted
upon doing it with Secresy. I considered that for ought I knew, Good men in the
Country might be Offended at it: Therefore I only proposed this Reasonable
thing, That before I proceeded, I might mention to His Honor the Lieutenant
Governor, what was offered to the Press; This they denied me: But when they
angrily went away, some of my last words to them were, That I did not refuse to
Print it. And neither the Reverend Praesident of the College, nor any of his
Friends, ever spoke one word unto me to Discourage my Printing of it.

Boston, December 21st. 1700 Bartholomew Green.

THE PRINTER having by this Advertisement Vindicated those that were unworthily
reflected on in the Advertisement Prefixed to the above men ioned Libellous
Pampblet, (which no man is as yet so Hardy as to own himself to be the Author
of) the world may Judge of other things contained therein by this. It will in
due Time appear, that besides the Profane Scoffs and Scurrilities, (not only on
particular persons, who never deserved such Treatments; but also on the Holy
Churches of the Lord, and on the most Sacred Actions performed in them, which
is the Spirit of their whole Pamphlet; as if they had designed to have that
Scripture fulfilled upon them, 2 Timothy 3. 9 They shall proceed no further, for
their folly shall be manifest to all men. Besides all this, (it will appear)
that there are other more Impudent Falsehoods than that in their Advertisement,
which the Printer in Boston, has (as become an Honest and Just man) made a
discovery of.

Dated in Boston, December 24th. 1700.
THE Depositions OF THOMAS BRATTLE, Gent. AND ZECHARIAH TUTHILL, Merchant.
THESE Deponents say, That on Saturday, the 13th. of July last, they went to
Bartholomew Green's to Treat with him about Printing an Answer to Old Mr.
Mathers Book, called, The Order of the Gospel: Who, after he had taken said
Answer into his hands, and seen both what it was, and how much there was of it,
told them he reckoned Three Sheets of Paper might contain it, and seven Ream of
Paper Print about a Thousand of them; for which they agreed with him for Twenty
Shillings the Sheet. He made not any Objection to them against Printing said
Answer; only said, he could not go about it, till he had Printed off the Laws,
which would not be till the Tuesday following. They further say, There was
never any other person that brought said Answer to the Press, but the
Deponents; and they never brought it, but at this time. But neither did the
said Green propose to them the mentioning to his Honor the Lieutenant
Governor, what was offered to the Press, nor did they deny it him; nor did
they go away in any Anger from him, nor did they hear him say any such words:
(That he did not refuse to Print it,) all which the said Green in his late
Advertisement of the 21th Instant most unfairly Declares, That certain persons
bringing to the Press the Answer above mentioned, did.

Boston, December 27. 1700. Tho. Brattle.
Zech. Tuthill.
The Subscribers offering to make Oath to what is above written, the same being
several times distinctby read over in the hearing of Bartholomew Green, he
owned the same to be what passed between him and them.

Coram Isaac Addington, Nathaniel Byfield. Justices of the Peace.



THE Depositions OF John Mico, and Zechariah Tuthill, Merchants.
THESE Deponents say, That on or about the 16th of July last, they went to
Bartholomew Green's to see if he were ready to Print the Answer to Old Mr
Mather's Gospel Order, but he was then unwilling to Print it, because (as he
said) it would displease some of his Friends; and to the best of their
remembrance, he mentioned particularly the Mathers. They told him it was
strange he would Print any thing for the said Mathers, and particularly the
said Gospel Order, and nothing in Answer to it or them, by which means the
World might think those Principles to be approved by all, which were abhorted
by sundry Worthy Ministers in the Land. The unfairness of which practice they
labored to convince him of, yet he still declined to Print it; but at length
said, if they would admit the Lieutenant Governor to be asked, to give his
Approbation to it, he would Print it; which they were unwilling to for this
reason: Because they conceived it a new Method, not practiced heretofore, and
which the said Green would not have required of them now; but to put off the
Printing of this Book which answered the Mathers, whom he seemed loath to
displease. These Deponents hereupon asked said Printer, whether he had his
Honors leave to Print the Gospel Order? he said, he had not. They then asked
him if he would Print this, if Young Mr. Mather would be Imprimatur to it? he
readily said he would. Then they told him, it was a shame so Worthy a Minister
as Mr. Stoddard must send so far as England to have his Book printed, when
young Mr. Mather had the Press at his pleasure? To which he replied, he hoped
Mr. Mather was another guess man than Mr. Stoddard. At length they told him, if
he would not Print it, they would have it Printed elsewhere; but did not hear
him say those words in his Advertisement of the 21 st Instant, namely, That he
did not refuse to print it.

Boston, December 27. 1700. John Mico
Zech. Tuthill.
Sworn by the two persons Subscribing, Bartholomew Green being present, and
excepting against those words in the Evidence; particularly the Mathers, and
that he would Print it, if Young Mr. Mather would be Imprimatur to it: Also
affirming he said these word^, He did not refuse to Print it, and nothing
surther.

Coram Isaac Addington Nathaniel Byfield. Justices of the Peace.



MR. Green the Printer, being by these Depositions Convicted of sundry Mistakes
in his late Advertisement, so that his Folly and theirs who set him on work is
manifest unto all men; there is just reason to suspect the truth of what he
says in the Fag-end of his Advertisement, that neither the Reverend
Praesident, nor any of his Friends ever spoke a word to him to discourage his
Printing the Answer to the Order of the Gospel. But whether that be true or
false, concerns not the Advertisement prefixed to said Answer, which says
nothing of any ones, speaking to the Printer, to discourage him; but only that
his Press was so much under the aw of the Reverend Author and his Friends, that
we could not obtain of him to Print it; Than which nothing can be more evident
from these Depositions, which say, The said Printer after he had positively
agreed for the Printing said Answer, fell off from his Bargain, and declined to
Print it, because it would displease some of his Friends, and particularly the
Mathers, who are known by all to have been his particular Friends and
Imployers. So that the Reverend Author of that Libellous Scribble, at the tai^
of said Green's Advertisement (to which the Reverend Author was not yet so
Hardy as to set his Name) had no reason to Reflect as he did on the
Advertisement prefixed to said Answer, or to Boast of the Printer's
Vindication, but might be ashamed of both. As for the profane Scoffs and
Scurrilities not only on particular persons, but on the Holy Churches of the
Lord, and the most Sacred Actions therein performed (by which are meant O
HORRIBLE: his two dear and precious Creatures, RELATIONS and the CHURCH
COVENANT;) which that infamous Scribble says, is the Spirit of the whole
Answer, and those other Falsehoods it is threatened shall appear therein; they
are but Bruta Fulmin^ to fright and scare the poor deluded, bigoted people
withal, which is the very Spirit and Quintessence of the Reverend Scribler. But
all these little Artifices and Cavils were plainly foreseen, and so fully
provided against by the Ingenious Authors of said Answer, that there is no need
of taking any further notice of them here.

I shall therefore at present say no more, but that the World may Judge what
base and injurious treatment that Answer must expect from its Enraged
Adversaries, by what is contained in that one little, Canting, Scandalous
Libel, wherein there are far more profane Scoffs, Scurrilities, and Impudent
Falsehoods, than are in all that GREAT and NOBLE and EXCELLENT ANSWER.

Boston, December 27. 1700. Tho. Brattle.

FINIS.
Boston, Printed by John Allen. 1700.


