Great NEWS from the KING's Camp at Namurre, etc.
YEsternight when we opened the Trenches, we began to fire from one of our
Batteries, and the rest will be ready this Week to Play upon the Place with 200
Cannon and 60 Mortars, some of them throwing Bombs of 700 Weight. We design to
attack none of their Works, till the breaches be so great as the Defendants may
have but little advantage of the Assailants. The Circumvallation of the Camp is
about seven Leagues in Circumference, and so ordered as that the French cannot
hinder the Siege, though they had an Army able to attempt it. The King views the
Enemies Works every day, and as he viewed one of their Works yesterday, they
fired hard upon him, and one Bullet came very near him. Deserters come by 30
and 40 in a day from their Outworks, and tell us that the Garrison are very
busy fortifying themselves. And it is thought by some that Boufflers who is
still in the place with some Ingineers and a great number of Volunteers, and
the 1000 Dragoons that he brought with him, will quickly tire the Soldiers
out, by the too great fatigue which he puts them too.

Our heavy Cannon, etc. is arrived from Mastrich though the French did all they
could to prevent it, particularly by withholding the Water by one of their
Sluices at Dinant. Boufflers has granted a Passport for the Count de Guiscard
the Governor, to go and see his Lady, ready to Lie in. The Garrison is now
said to consist of 15 Battallions Regular Troops, 7 of Country Militia, and 5
Regiments of Dragoons. The Pallisado's which they had in store in their
Fortifications, were burnt on the 7th at night, but how we know not.

The French made a Sally upon the Brandenburgers on Sunday night, but were
repulsed with the loss of 1000 Men as we are informed, and at the same time we
became Masters of a small Out-work. The Prince de Vaudemont with the Allies,
and Villeroy with the French, keep still in their old Posts. Some Incendiaries
pretending to be Deserters, set fire to the Soldiers Hutts, and burnt a
considerable number of them in the Prince's Camp, thinking the fire should have
reached the Magazine, but were disappointed in that.

Pignerol. July 3. The Allies opened the Trenches before Casal on the 27th, and
are already far advanced. We hear that the Garrison made a successful Sally,
and killed abundance of men in the Trenches.

Paris. 11. It Is said that the King or Dauphin will attempt the relief of
Namurre being much surprised with that Siege. That 14000 men are ordered
thitherward from Germany, and 12000 from the Seacoasts. Castle-Follet is at the
utmost extremity for want of Provisions. Vauban has raised a new Battery of 60
Guns at Breast.

Turin, July 2. The Allies have advanced 250 Paces nearer Casal with their
approaches, and fire on it from their Batteries. The D. of Savoy missed little
of being killed by a Cannon Ball, some Officers falling by his side; whereupon
we have entreated him not to hazard his Person any more.

Hailbron, 9. Prince Lewis is marched with the Army to Sintsheim to join the
Munsterians, Hessians, etc. and will be near 50000 strong.

The French are now within an hour of Phillipsbourg, and de Lorge being better,
prepares to repass the Rhine, and hold on the defensive; and it is not doubted
but the Prince will follow him, his Army being weakened by detachment to the
Netherlands, and Piedmont.

The Allies are now within 2 hours of the French, but they are posted
advantagiously.

Vienna, July 2. Our Army is still assembling at Baya. Letters from Poland to
day say, that the Muscovites have Besieged Asoff, taken the two Forts at the
Mouth of the Boristhenes, and that two Cosack Generals are marched to Invade the
Crimee.

Toulon, June 26. Yesterday Admiral Russel appeared in sight of this place, and
made as if he would have Landed some men, but is this day put to Sea again. And
one of our Fishers who was carried on board, says, that many of their men are
Sick, that they are in some want of Provisions, and had met with a great Storm
on the 24th.

London, Printed for J. Salusbury at the Rising-Sun in Cornhill, 1695.


