THE Great Victory Obtained by His MAJESTY'S ARMY, Under the Command of his
Grace THE Duke of Monmouth, Against the REBELS IN THE West of Scotland, On
Sunday and Monday, being the 21 and 22 instant.
SIR,
I Could not omit giving you an Account of what happened lately between the
Kings Army and the Rebels, knowing you to be a person of great and exemplary
Piety and untainted Loyalty, to whom such News will be altogether grateful.

Upon Sunday last, being the 22th of this instant, his Grace the Duke of
Monmouth marched with the Army under his command, from Blackwood toward the
Rebels; and being upon his March, he received a Message by a Trumpet to this
effect, viz.

That if his Grace was pleased to confirm and agree to those Terms they had
already made in their last Declaration, they would lay down their Arms; but
upon no other Account.

His Grace contemning to agree to their Terms, or to indulge Rebellion at such
a rate, contrary to the established Laws of that Kingdom, drew up his Forces
toward them; the Rebels had secured Bottle-bridge, having strongly barrocaded
it, having a very considerable party of Horse there, and had planted their Army
on the other side the River; but notwithstanding that, his Grace made an Attack
upon them with a like party of Horse, which behaved themselves with that
Gallantry and Courage, as soon caused the Rebels to quit their Posts with very
considerable loss.

His Grace having thus successfully gained the Bridge, presently marched them
over and drew up his main Body; and after having put them in Battalia, and
giving necessary Orders to his Officers, his Grace engaged their main Body; and
after a sharp Dispute, gave them a final Rout, destroying most of their Horse,
and so much disordering their Foot, that few of them escaped, save a small
number which fled into the Woods about Hambleton.

Sir, It is incredible to express in what great numbers the Gentry came in to
join the Kings Forces, and are daily comeing in, to the great satisfaction of
all Loyal and Faithful Subjects, and to the great hopes of speedily putting an
end to these Rebellious Insurrections. Many thousands are upon their March from
the North of Scotland, cheerfully to join His Majesty's Forces, (which is
believed) will be stopped upon the account of this happy Victory; and had not the
Engagement begun so soon, till such time as these Assistants had joined the
Army, without all doubt, the Rebels would never been able to have made the
least escape.

His Majesty's Privy Council here, have been indefatigably careful and
industrious in supplying the Kings Army with all things necessary and
convenient, acting as with one Head and Heart, or rather striving to out do
each other in their Fidelity and Loyalty.

And whereas the Rebels made use of these words, in the latter part of their
Declaration, (viz.) That they requested their Countrymen, now the standing
Forces of this Kingdom, some of them being their Friends and Relations, not to
fight against them, least in so doing, they should be found fighting against
the Lord, whose cause and quarrel they are sure he would own, and signally
countenance, seeing they fought under his Banner who is the Lord of Hosts.

Those whom they thus called their Friends and Kinsmen, were so ready and
vigorous in fighting against them, and the happy Victory which they obtained
over them, seems rather to represent to every Loyal Subject, and impartial
mind, that it is not the Lords cause or quarrel, which thus they pretend to
maintain, but rather a fighting against God, in rebelling against their lawful
and undoubted Sovereign and His Government, and bringing upon themselves a
Curse instead of a Blessing. The Apostle declaring, That he which resists shall
receive damnation. Sir, this Account I have thought good to give you, and by
the next expect the particulars; not doubting but you will accept of it as from
him, who is

Edinburgh, 22 June, 1679. SIR, Your most humble Servant, etc.


