The Great Work of Redemption: Delivered in Five SERMONS At St. Paul's, and at
the Spittle, April, 1641.

I. On the Passion of our Savior: By Dr. Soames Vicar of Staynes. II. On our
Saviors Resurrection: By Dr. Morton Bishop of Durham. III. An Appeal to Gods
Mercy: By Dr. Potter Bishop of Carlisle. IV. The Expectation of a Christian: By
Dr. Westfield Bishop of Bristol. V. The Imperfection of a Christian in this
Life: By W. Price B. D.
London, Printed for J. Playford and are sold at his Shop in the Temple near
the Church door. 1660.

The Texts of the following Sermons.
First, a Sermon on the Passion, Job chap. 7. verse. 20. I have sinned, What
shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men. Second, a Sermon on the
Resurrection, St. Matt. chap. 28. verse. 6. He is not here, for he is risen.
Third Sermon, An Appeal to Gods mercy, Psalm. 130. verse. 4. But there is mercy
with thee, that thou may be feared. Fourth Sermon, The Expectation of a
Christian, Philip. chap. 3. verse. 20, 21. But our conversation is in heaven,
from whence we look for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who shall change,
etc. Fifth Sermon, The Imperfect state of a Christian here, 1 Cor. chap. 13.
verse. 9. For we know but in part, and we prophecy but in part.
To the READER.
Christian Reader,
ALthough we should love the Ministers for the word, yet sometimes, yea very
often, men are occasioned to love the Word by the Worth of the Ministers that
Deliver it; a cracked Bell is not good to Call men together, nor Ministers of
cracked and blemished Reputations fit Instruments to persuade others to
Holiness, and therefore it is that the Names of these Reverend and Eminent
Divines, who spoke and wrote these following Sermons are prefixed in the Title
Page, that the Honor and unblemished Reputation, they have in the Churches of
Christ, and amongst all sincere and pious Christians, may the more commend them
to thee. Thou have (Good Reader) here unfolded and opened the Great and
Glorious Mysteries of thy Salvation, then which there is nothing more pleasant
and comfortable, more animating and enabling, more ravishing and soul
contenting to a true Christian, then the frequent and most serious Meditation.
Thou have here the Passion, Resurrection, and the Glorious Expectation of a
Christian enlightened to thee, by Stars in the Right hand of Christ of the First
Magnitude. Oh! that the Light held forth in the Ignominious and painful
Sufferings of thy Savior, may give thee a true sight and sense of thy sins,
and the greatness of them, which nothing could expiate, but the Precious Blood
of the Immaculate Lamb of God, and that with a Broken and Contrite heart, thou
may cry out with Holy Job, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
Preserver of men! Oh! that the Light also held forth in the Glorious
Resurrection of Christ, which is Arrham Resurrectionis nostrae, which is the
Earnest of our Resurrection, may sustain and support thy spirits in these evil
and last days, knowing that this Body of thine, now chiefly subject to many
miseries and calamities through the Iniquity of the Times it may be to be cast
into some loathsome Prison, or put to a shameful death; yet this same Body of
thine shall Rise, and that by a lively faith, thou may say with Job, Job
19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that though worms destroy this Body
of mine, yet in this Flesh I shall see God with these mine Eyes, and not other,
though my Reins be consumed within me; yea thy hope and expectation shall not
be cut off, but all those afflictions which it pleases thy good God to permit
Satan or his Instruments to exercise thee with, shall not be like idle
Indifferents, which do neither good nor harm, but they shall all (...), work
together for the Glory of God, and the Dear Salvation of thy precious Soul; be
persuaded therefore seriously to peruse these Sermons, and the God of all Grace
and Consolation sanctify the Reading them to thee.

The Introduction made by Master Price before his Rehearsal of the Subsequent
Sermons in Saint Paul's Church, May 2. 1641.
IT was a Constitution of those admired sons of Justice the Areopagi, that such
as pleaded before them should plead without Prefacing and without passion: But
I must crave your gracious pardon if at this time I transgress beyond those
bounds; For I made account to have been so happy, as to have been an Auditor,
but it falls out to be my unhappy lot now to be a Speaker; The Speaker appointed
for this days work being the prisoner of God upon his bed of sickness. His
place my great weakness is forced to undertake, and therefore rolling my self
upon the Almighty Providence of God, I must endeavor to go through this
difficult travel; more fit for an Angel, crowned and invested with eternity,
then a mortal man; and I am confident that my first summons to this work was
since the preaching of the Passion Sermon in this place; and therefore I hope
you will not expect from me that curiosity of Introduction, elegancy of
expression, volubility of tongue, or exquisiteness and readiness in delivery,
as otherwise you might.

A review of remarkable words or actions, it is as ancient as it is profitable:
When God had done with the first days work he repeats it the second day. What
is the Book of Deuteronomy, but the Law the second time repeated? What are the
Books of the Chronicles, but a recapitulation of the Books of the Kings? What
is the New Testament, but an open explication of that which is closely
comprehended in the Old?

It was the request of the Jews when they heard Saint Paul preach of the
Resurrection (and the Resurrection is the chiefest Argument of the Sermons I am
now to rehearse) that they might hear it again the next Lords day, Phil. 3.1.

Repetition is like unto the third and last concoction, that turns the meat
into wholesome and nourishing sustenance. In a word, Repetition is a
recollection, so that I am to make a recollection of these Sermons, whereof I
may say as it is recorded of the men of Gibeath, of Benjamin, that they were
such good Archers, that they could shoot at an hairs breadth: Such were these
men in their several transcendent expressions; though their Sermons were long,
I cannot say they were tedious: many are brief and tedious, but these were long
and not tedious. As Plinius secundus says of Cicero, his longest Orations were
accounted the best. They were not like Simon Magus, expert in Sorcery, but like
Simon Peter, faithful Shepherds. They delivered not any Socinian or Pelagian
doctrine in all their discourses; their Bells were like the Bells of Aaron, and
so they did sound in our ears; and for the manner of the setting forth of those
discourses, they were not affectatious of them, they studied rather for
Divinity then Rhetoric; for sanantia rather then sonantia verba, rather sound
then sounding words. They were not like false friends, to speak one word for
Christ, and two or three for themselves: They would transform a brazen Soul,
into a lump of Clay; They would inspire into a stony heart, a soft and melting
heart. The memory of Cirus, that knew the names of all the Soldiers in his
Army; of Themistocles, that did bear the names of all the Citizens he had,
were not sufficient sufficiently to express the excellency of their
Discourses. Here was a Field full of Lillies, (...) Garden full of Roses, food
sent down from Heaven upon you; and first, that that was let down and fell upon
you in this place of the Lamb slain for our sins from the beginning of the
world, in that elegant feeling and melting discourse, whose Foundation was laid
in the 7th. Chapter of the Book of Job, and the 20th. verse. I have sinned, what
shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? Why have thou set me as a mark
against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self?

The Passion Sermon: OR, A Sermon Preached by Dr. Soames Vicar of Stanes, and
Prebend of Windsor in St Paul's Church on Good Friday, April 23. 1641.
JOB 7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee O thou preserver of men?
WHat these words are, and from what spirit they come, I shall not need to
declare unto you by a Preface: the very hearing of the Book named, and the
reading of the Text, speaking them sufficiently to be the words of that famous
mirror of Saints, that old Disciple of Christ, that same Evangelical Patriarch
in the Land of Uz, Job, an upright man, unadvisedly though he had sinned, and
many an unseeming passion had that occasion brought him unto by the afflicting
hand of God upon him. One while you might behold him passionately no less then
cursing his own birthday; quarrelling with the Sun, the Moon and the Stars,
with the womb that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck. Moreover, you
might have heard him challenge God, and to give himself the victory: Nay, more
then this, goes to lay violent hands upon himself, wishes he might dye an
untimely death too, and justifying himself, says, Is there any iniquity in my
tongue? therefore I will not hold my peace, nor be restrained.

In the midst of all these clouds comes this comfortable Sunshine, this
Equinoctial. He now lays down the Buckler before him against whom he had lift
it up, with a pensive and penitent breast, crying out, I have sinned, what
shall I do unthee O thou preserver of men?

The words considered particularly, the parts are three.

Here is first, a Confession of sin; I have sinned.

Secondly, a deploration of his own ignorance, following upon that sin; Quid
faciam, What shall I do? Or if you will, of distraction and consultation for
the means of atonement; What shall I do?

Thirdly, an imploration of him against whom he had sinned; O thou preserver of
men.

In the first, he calls to mind what he had done. Secondly, confults what he
should do. And Thirdly, finding no comfort in these, he addresses himself to
the last, the Preserver of men.

In the handling of these, I will first look upon the Text in general, as it
may serve for an every days Information. Secondly, as it may serve for a
Good Friday Meditation: For in the choice of my Text I did not forget the day,
which being to preserve and keep alive the greatest blessing that ever happened
to the sons of men, by him who is the Author and Finisher of our salvation, it
will be very acceptable not only to point our finger to this Preserver of
ours, but our belief, and to look up unto him, and to cry unto him, peccavi, I
have sinned; What better mixture or composition I say, in respect of the
qualification of the Comforter, of the Preservers mercy? If I speak not
seasonably to the day, the fault is mine, and not the Texts.

And first to begin with the first, Jobs peccavi, I have sinned; with reference
to the person that made it: First, Job cries peccavi; a circumstance I cannot
but pause upon, as having something of wonder in it. As Saul said, Is this thy
voice my son David? So may I say, Is this thy voice holy Job? Thou that ere
while spoke in so different a strain, that so justified himself before his
Maker, is it come to no better nor worse then a peccavi? Whence we may learn,
that he that pleads with God, be he whom he will, must come home at last with a
peccavi. I say, with God, and not with men; with men we must often plead for
our innocence: It was Samuels case, 1 Samuel 12.3. Whose Ox or Ass have I
taken? It was David's case, I am innocent. And so it was Jobs case here, If I
have rewarded evil, etc. he holds his integrity with both his hands; but when
he comes to plead with God, then he lets go his hold, then he cries peccavi.

Holy and righteous Job, a man so miraculous in the Book of God, set up as a
pattern of patience; a man in whom the Devil could not find an hole; it was the
flower in his Garden, for which he stands upon Record, his managing of this
very cause, says he, I am faulty; and as here, so he is elsewhere; and as with
him, so with all mankind: I have sinned here, says Job, and it is not to be
wondered at; and the reasons are.

First, in that all-ruling direction of God.

Secondly, in the exactness of that rule by which God does measure. I seem
sometimes, says Saint Austin, a straight man in mine own eyes, but when thou
come to lay me by the rule of thy Law, I find my self to be very crooked.

In a word, thirdly, it lies in the unavoidable infirmity that remains in our
best actions that ever we have done or can do: I say, the best of us all, take
it, and look to it, and consider how coldly, how sinisterly, how
disadvantageously to the glory of God, should he compare it with what we should
have done, or what we might have done, had our strength been answerable to his
design; and we may find reason, as holy Anselm, to say, Potest and non possit
placare; It may please God, and it may not please God. If he cannot say as
Calvin when he came to dye, Alas, that all my sickness has been so
unprofitable! Either of these had not so much favor as Hezekiah, yet he
confessed, and that with tears; what his imperfections wanted, he begged with
tears. So much for the occasion of the confession of his sin.

One word more in relation to the matter it self; what it was so troubled him,
and which caused that his heart smote him; was it that he had spoken words that
were unworthy of God, and thus irreverently spoken of God, and opened his mouth
impatiently against him? These are the words I am to speak of. Do thou speak
thus irreverently of God whoever thou be? they will prove sad breakings to thy
heart in the time of affliction, if thou openest thy mouth against him: As Job
here, I will lay my hand upon my mouth, I will hear what God will say; for
peccavi, I have sinned.

Whosoever is the sword or the rod, God is the Author: 'Twas the saying of old
Eli, It Is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his eyes; and what
unthankfulness it will be in us to God, if that having received so many good
things, and but one evil, we should repine at it? Should we not rather with
holy Job say, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not evil?

Fourthly, it is bootless to repine against God; like the bird in the net, the
more it stirs, the faster it is caught; or the fish on the hook, the more it
stirs, the more it hurts it self. If to be angry with my brother, does deserve
to be cast into Hell, to speak against God is to shoot an arrow upright, it
reflects upon thy own head; upon the head I say, of him that speaks against his
Maker. I will leave one word to the consideration of those men, that if all
things fall not out to their mind they exclaim against God.

Indeed we find the Heathens did it (when things fell out crosly) to their
Gods. We read of Sylla, that he cursed his gods, and the image of Apollo: of
Licinius, that he put away his gods: of Barbarossa, that he did revile his
gods. Oh there is a true God in Israel, let us not expostulate and rail against
him. But I could wish this humor had passed no farther; but is it not crept
amongst us Christians, and that upon slight occasions? We cannot be content
with Sylla or Barbarossa, to curse and revile our God, but with Licinius to put
him away; yea, we whip him by our blasphemies, we spit on him by our rash
speeches. If Jobs heart aches for a few distempered thoughts of God, what a deal
of repentance has the horrid and execrable blasphemer need of? If for a few
angry words Jobs heart was so pricked, what will become of the profane swearer
at the day of Judgment? Much better were it for them to come in this life
before God with a peccavi, as Job here in my Text, I have sinned. So much for
the deploration of his misery.

Secondly, I come to the consultation about the means of atonement with God,
Quid faciam, What shall I do? Which words are taken several ways in Scripture;
it is taken for the voice of a man perplexed with grief, that is, Vox clamantis.
Another while it is taken for Vox trementis, Act. 2. It is said of those that
were converted by Saint Peter, they were pricked to the heart, and cried, Men
and Brethren, what shall we do? and the Jailor being amazed at the Earthquake
comes trembling to Paul and Silas, Act. 16. saying, What shall I do? Sometimes
it is Vox inferentis, the voice of an Inquirer, one that looks after help and
succor, that is not resolved what to do: So the young man came to Christ,
asking, What he should do to be saved? Now these distinctions offer unto us
this consideration generally; That the effects that sin at the best works in a
man, are sorrow, fear and care: Or to draw three into two; His repentance and
turning unto God, till God be at peace with him. To confess is not enough, but
we must deplore; to deplore is not enough, but we must inquire; to inquire is
not enough unless we seek to him that can preserve us: What shall I do (...)
thee? And from hence I come to the next part, Oh thou Preserver of men! It is
not enough to confess our sins, but we must deplore them and bewail them; and
not only so, but when a man has committed a sin it runs him into a Labyrinth,
he knows not what to do, it fills a man's heart with tears and with grief, it
puts him upon such a confession that it makes him mourn. This is the nature of
sin, where it is truly seen in the breast of Saint Paul, in Peter, in Job, and
so in the rest of all those ancient Penitents concerning the necessity of this
Quid faciam? In the Primitive times, in Saint Austins and Tertullians times,
after any heinous sin committed, this kind of sorrow cast these ancient
Christians before the feet of their Bishops, and cost them no less then whole
weeks, whole months, and whole years in bewailing their scandalous crimes and
apostasies in sackcloth and ashes, beging prayers at the doors of their
Congregations, blurring their faces with tears, and their cheeks with mourning;
and those that had not the grace to do this were not admitted the Congregation.
It is memorable at this day to consider what Antiquity required, what their
Injunctions were toward notorious sinners, inhibiting them the use of all Gods
creatures but bread and water for many days, till they came with a Quid
faciam? debarred them a long time from coming to the Lords Table, and not only
to cry, peccavi Pater, but peccavi frater, I have sinned brother, by bringing a
scandal upon the whole Church of God. If you will ask the reason of this, they
thought they came as enemies to invade the Lords Table before thus reconciled;
and to let them do less then this was to use a terrible kind of judgment, and
to destroy them in a flattering way, as Saint Ambrose says. Harsh and tender
years, and cruel Age wherein we live, wherein we have fancied to our selves
such a repentance as knows nothing of tears, none of these tears, or if any,
they tarry but till the minstrels descend, the flagons of wine are filling,
their dainty Cates are providing; they wash down their sorrow in cups of wine;
they applaud themselves, saying, I thank God I am not in such a case as this
man; but no thoughts of their sins, no lamentation for their iniquity.

I might here show unto you that sorrow is never well bestowed but upon sin,
this sorrow will cure no other diseases; I lose my child, and mourn for it, but
sorrow will not revive it; I go backward in the world, I am sorry for it, but
it makes me never the richer. I am pursued by an enemy, sorrow will make no
resistance, but spent upon sin, it is well bestowed, here it cures. If a man
cast away his sorrow upon his wife, his closet, his shop, he had as good wash
his house with sweet water; but sorrow this way for sin, it will like Aarons
rod eat up all the rest of the rods. If a man forsakes his sin without an
hearty sorrow for it, it is no kindly departure.

In the next place I come unto those that think there is no need of a Quid
faciam? When thou sinnest, hither must thou come at last; though you out-swear
it, out-drink it, out-play it, yet it will come at last; Citius aut serius: If
not in the day of thy prosperity when thou washest it away, yet when thou go
down in the world it will find thee, and like Ahab it will say unto thee, Have
I found thee, O mine enemy! And as the Malus genius said to Caius, Thou shall
meet me at Philippi; which was the place where he should dye. If thou hear
not of sin by way of sorrow now, it will find thee at the day of thy death; if
not here, yet there is a place of weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, aut
penitentium lachrymas aut damnatorum; if thou hear not of it here, thou will
hear of it there; and who would not rather choose to take his part with Job
here in my Text, then to dye with sorrow? Who would not strive to turn the
current of his griefs this way, then to let them run till he come to
everlasting torments? In a word, in two things Jobs pattern is to be followed:
First, for sins immediately committed against God we must sorrow, I have sinned
against thee, what shall I do to thee? which is a point to be considered, God
will have it done to him. When you fast, says God, was it unto me? Against
thee only have I sinned, says David, Psalm 51. Why, Uriah was killed,
Bathsheba abused, Israel scandalized? No: But one God is worth a thousand
Uriahs, Bathsheba's, and Isreal's, and he was dishonored by it. Our sorrow for
sin must be directed to God, for he is the Preserver.

Now I come to the second point, (from the question propounded in an
inquisitive manner, which was the first) which is this; That turning to God is
not enough unless we confess, and confession is nothing unless we deplore,
and deploration will do us no good unless we inquire; Quid faciam? and not
only inquire, but we must put it in execution; careful as well as sorrowful,
practical as well as inquisitive, something to be done to get us friends with
God. Who can tell whether God will turn and repent? it held up the Ninevites
from sinking. When David's faith was like fire in the embers quite covered over,
and he crying out, Why art thou disquieted within me? yet he had hope in God.
This is that we must look for; but we cannot find this in the breast of most
wicked men, to bring them to practice as God prescribes them: For Christ when
he came to cure the blind man he had a question to ask him, Visue sanari? Will thou be made whole? There are many on the way side, that if you ask them if
they will be cured of their sore arms and legs, they will tell you no; for say
they, we can make more of them fore then whole: So there are many that will not
be made clean, nor sorrow for their sins, because of losing their joy.

To speak one word concerning this Quid faciam of Job: With the same breath
wherein he pronounces himself willing to do, he pronounces himself at a lost
estate, not knowing what to do, especially in the way of satisfaction to God,
as Hugo and others do understand it. And so they consider it as if Job had
said, O Lord, if I had to do with any but with thee, I could tell how to make
satisfaction; but to thee, qui bonis meis non eges, which stand in need of
nothing that I have, with thee between whom there is an infinite disproportion,
what can I do to thee? What are ten thousand rivers of oil, the seed of my body
for the sin of my soul? I can bemoan, I can consult, I can resolve upon what
thou will direct me, but more then this I cannot do, nor any satisfaction
worthy of thee: Giving us to understand, that whatsoever may be thought of
satisfaction to God, if we do propose an equivalence, it is a dream. However it
may be necessary to make satisfaction fraternal, if we have done him any hurt
or wrong, to restore to him; or material, to our Mother the Church, for giving
scandalous examples, that the scandal of the Church may be some way repaired:
but for the satisfaction to God, it is too great a thing to be done. Job knew
not what to do; he makes his query, he turns himself to God, and becomes an
humble suppliant for mercy, leaving all hopes of merits or satisfaction: What
shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? So that I come to the third
branch, his resolution. We have had Job confessing, bemoaning, bewailing and
inquiring, hear him now resolving what to do; he addresses himself to the
throne of the divine Majesty, What shall I do, etc.

These words are not only spoken consultively to God as to an Oracle for
advice, but resolutely; whence we have a good point: That in things concerning
God it is good to go to, to address our selves to God, especially in matters
of satisfaction; but that is not all, but to go to him as to a Sanctuary. Job
here flies to God as to a City of Refuge, to a Castle of defense, as the
Malefactors were wont to the horns of the Altar, so does Job after his sin to
the Preserver of men.

And here it is to be handled whom Job means by the Preserver; doubtless he
whom in most places he calls his Redeemer, and here was the object of his
faith, without all peradventure the same: It must needs be the same, for how
can they call upon him in whom they have not believed? and so here Job's prayer
is preferred to him in whom he had believed, the Preserver of men: And in
handling of this there are two things offered to your consideration.

First, how well this title of Preserver of men does agree with him to whom Job
prays.

Secondly, how well the meditation of a Preserver did fit Job in the case
wherein he was. First, I say, how well this title of Preserver does suit with
God, how well God had deserved it at Jobs hands to be known by the name of the
Preserver of men, and how well by the world in general, the whole frame, mass,
and pillar thereof; how well at the hands of that part of the world called men;
how well, I say, at men, such as Job was. It is admirable to consider how true
God is to the title of Preserver of men; he has not only ordained means to
supply the needs of every man, and the care of every man in preservation of
himself; also his Angels about us, he gives his Angels charge over us; also the
supply of every one to take care of another; and not only so, but the care of
our Ancestors to preserve our liberties, they pitched our Tents; not only his
care of great men to set them over less; he says to Magistrates and
Ministers, Keep this man safe, thy life shall go for his; he is thy preserver
every way, and has still reserved to himself the name of chief Preserver: He
is Archiepiscopus, the chief Bishop of our souls, he has taken upon him all
the names of salvation; he is our Father, and Mother, and Brother, and Husband,
and Keeper, to show how true he is to the title of Preserver: and sometimes
when God looks like a destroyer, when God comes to destroy us for our sins, he
stays and pauses, and strikes, with much lenity, to show to all the world that
he fights not with the person but the sin, his Commissions are against the
disease, not the patient; Christ's scourges were not to destroy the Temple, but
to clear it. We may compare them to David's battle against Absalom, where there
is a charge goes along, Do the young man no harm. God has given every
chastisement this warning, Do the man no harm. I will show one instance; When
Joab was sent to take Sheba the son of Bichri, when he came to destroy the City
whereto he fled, a wise woman desired to speak with him, and asked him why he
would destroy the City? who told her; whereupon she required the head of Sheba
to be cast over the wall to him: With the same errand God comes to us when he
looks upon us as if he would destroy us, he calls upon us to deliver up the son
of Bichri, the sins that are within us, deliver them up, and he will not
destroy you. Look upon all his afflictions whenever that it happens, so
that he cannot but he must punish; do but consider with what unwillingnesse God
comes, with what reluctance; when he holds up his hand to strike, he yet stays
to see if there be any to stand in the gap, or to hold him, Amos 11.16. How
shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee? how shall I make
thee as Admah or Zeboim? He does it as though it went against him, he draws and
brandishes; nay, when his sword is in his hand he looks about him to see if
there be any to hold his hand that he might not destroy; and yet when he does
punish, he does not suffer his mercy to be quite gone, and when he is cutting,
he still preserves. I should have told you how well God deserved the name of
Preserver at the hands of Job; in the fail of all Job's comforts, in the
failing of all other preservers. His wife that should have preserved him, she
counseled him to curse God and dye, and his friends that should have comforted
him, were miserable comforters. The Devil let loose upon him, his brethren
stood afar off, they stood at a distance, his servants they were no preservers,
he called, and they did not answer, the very children did mock and slight him:
Now God preserved him from his wife, his children, his friends, his servants,
from the Devil, yea, from his own self; he was going about to strangle himself,
to have laid violent hands on himself, and God preserved him from the Devil
that went about to destroy him; well might Job know God by that name the
Preserver of men; well might the meditation of the Preserver of men become Job
at this time, in such a condition, when his sins were in his thoughts, when he
was in his perplexed condition, in his affrighted condition, it was Jobs best
way at that time to stir up the meditation of Gods preserving him. What face
soever God set upon it, and whatsoever his usage was to him, yet certainly that
God with whom he was making his peace, to whom he made his confession, he was a
Preserver of all his creatures, of men, and amongst men sinners, Peccavi, I
have sinned, and what shall I do? I call this Job's meditation; these two must
depend together; the thoughts of a man's sin, and the thoughts of our Savior,
think of our sin and of our Savior; at this time it is true there are many that
think this Preserver does not so well agree with God, as when they ask me, how
I conceive of God that is a flaming fire to render vengeance, and that he must
so be remembered. I answer, we must so remember God, as not to forget that he is
a merciful God, neither to think so deeply of our sins, as to forget the
thoughts of our Savior; not as Judas, when he had betrayed Christ he confessed
he had betrayed innocent blood, and restores the pieces, but all ended in
strangulavit se; he hanged himself, he had forgotten the Preserver of men; it
is no more then needs to be to have our sins always before us. David labors
to aggravate his sin, it is to be understood not without the proposal of Gods
mercy; so we must look upon sin by the light of Gods Word, and not by Satan's
false glasses. Gods manner of revealing sin, and the Devils are contrary. God
cures us like a good Physician, that takes a man into a close room and applies
medicines; the Devil does not so, he carries him into the cold air, he goes
about to kill him: take heed of looking upon sin with the Devils glass,
unless you have your friends about you, the Gospel, and all the promises of
it, that if he offers to wrong you, you may call them in. And therefore the Use
shall be, that we look not upon sin with both our eyes, but cast one eye upon
sin, and another upon our Savior, not so as to look through him, or beyond
him, but with the faith of Abraham, he can see through a barren womb, and
through a killing sword his numerous posterity. A good Christian he can look
beyond them all, and see Christ at Gods right hand to bring him safely to
Heaven. This was Jobs prayer and case upon a dunghill, through the ill counsel
of his wife, through the discomforts of his friends, through the despisings of
his brethren, through the machination of the Devil, through the slightings of
his servants, and through the contemning of children, yea, through the evil
temptations of his own heart he can see God his Preserver; and this must be our
course, when our understandings will go along with the Devil, when our
scantling souls shall imagine that we hear God say unto us, Go you unprofitable
servants, and go you cursed; and when we can see nothing but death and Hell,
then remember to stand still and see the salvation of God, remember him that is
the Preserver of men; a duty that invites you to fix your thoughts upon this
Preserver of men. I am now come from the date of my Text, and am now to come to
the work of the day, and it does much concern you to fix your eyes and
intendments upon this Preserver of men, general contemplations of Gods
preserving; you have heard already how well God deserves from the world and the
hands of men in particular, the word of Preserver: And thus I have done with it
as it is an every days meditation; but I must not shake hands and take leave
of my Text so; you know how well this days work will agree with it, which has
long since invited me unto it, had I an heart or words answerable unto it: but
alas what words can be used, or what tongue can utter it: that which my heart
cannot reach to, how can my tongue utter or express: Si mihi sint centum
linguae, sint oraque centum^: F^rr^^ vox --
Which of you can tell me? Oh my God, says Saint Austin, Da mihi de
misericordia, etc. Give me of thy mercy that I may speak of thee, speak in me
that I may speak of thee. A work above any humane power to make any tolerable
demonstration of, had I as many tongues as there are stars. Were there a
Council called of all the Angels in Heaven to consult of it, and among them one
chosen to declare it, all their tongues, understandings, and imaginations
infused into him, had he all the learning and eloquence that ever was or can be
attained, were he to stand in my place at this time, how should I see him
gravelled, puzzell'd, and faulter'd, and foundered, and non-plust? how should I
hear him call for more tongues, for more eloquence? how should I hear him cry
with Esaias, Quis enarrabit? Who shall show his works? Should I not hear him cry
out with Moses, Ego sum puer, I am a child? with David, This knowledge is too
wonderful for me? Whether I look upon the work of this day, or upon God
positively in the contrivance of it, in the execution or subject, with
reference to the object, the parties that it may concern, or with reference to
the work it self, or with reference to the manner of working, the condition
from whence we were redeemed, and the condition to which we were brought; it is
beyond human invention to give any tolerable description of it. I think this
matter will do better in application then in amplification Ora mill fluentia
melle.
.

If we look upon it first of all comparatively, comparing it with other days,
and paralleling it with other preservers: What are they other preservers, and
other saviors? We know where to find them. Shall we piddle out the time with
the preventions of the sufferings of particular men? what need we make mention
of the children of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt? our own deliverance from
the Spanish Invasion in Eighty eight, or of the fifth of November. I charge
you, as the Prophet Zachary speaks on another occasion, not a word of them,
neither of Eighty eight, nor the fifth of November. We may parallel this days
deliverance with the work of the Creation, there Dixit and factum est, He did
but speak and it was done, here it cost many sweatings and drops of blood; this
was the masterpiece of Gods workmanship. There God gave me to my self, here
himself to me. There was the work of his finger, here of his arm, With a mighty
and outstretched arm has he gotten himself the victory. There he made me like
unto himself, here he makes himself like unto me. There he made me, but here he
remade me; this exceeds the whole Creation, take the whole Creation of the
world together either in the contrivance of it, or in the execution of it. In
the contrivance, had our Savior gone no farther this day then to have devised
the means how we might be restored, it had been mercy enough, but to call the
depths of his Counsels, to devise a way how to punish sin, and to save the
sinners, to bestow Hell upon the sin, and Heaven upon the sinner, how to
compound an infinite Justice and an infinite Mercy: Had our Savior gone no
farther but found out the way, and said, Sons of men, I see you are utterly
lost and undone, and I could wish that I could help you, but I counsel you to
do thus and thus, see what you can do to appease my Fathers justice, I should
be very glad to see you do well, and the like; could all the Angels in Heaven
have helped us? surely no: But himself to be both the contriver and executor,
not only to find out the means, but to be the means, to call the depth of his
Counsel together, to save the man, and damn the sin, to send one to Hell, and
the other to Heaven: Oh admirable Love!

Again, consider who is the Preserver, the subject that did it, who would ever
have looked to have him come down from Heaven? Who would have thought that he
would have clothed himself with the rags of our mortality, and have come down,
who was the delight of Angels, the darling of Heaven, the beloved of his
Father? It is a greater humiliation then for the greatest Emperor in the world
to become a worm, or a fly, or a grain of dust, and all this for a creature so
ill-deserving, in whom there was neither beauty, nor comeliness, or favor,
the things that make men favorable with Princes; nay more, when we were
enemies, and in the acts of hostility, dead in trespasses and sins, worms and
no men, yet he came to save us, even us men.

It was the ground of a worthy meditation of a reverend Father, concerning
Sampsons being brought to so much misery for Dalilah: Oh miserable Sampson,
(says he) what made thee to spend thy dearest blood for an harlot, for
Dalilah? How can I sufficiently wonder at this mercy, not for an harlot, but
for worse then an harlot, for such wretches as we are? and the keeping us from
such a state, and bringing us to such a state; from such an estate, an estate
of sin, when we lay not only in pulvere, but in sanguine, in the dust, yea in
our own blood, not only wounded, but wounded to death, yea dead; was that all?
no; pereuntes, perishing, Ezekiel. 16.6, 9. children of perdition, lost, and the
worst kind of lost too, perditi in Dei favore, lost in the favor of God,
perditi de benedictione Dei, lost the blessing of God, no hope of any thing,
but go you cursed was our next doom; nay, utterly lost, and yet recovered by
him out of that condition; and into what a condition from all this miserable
and lost condition we were recovered, to our inheritance, recovered from the
state of enemies to the state of friends, to the state of favorites, of heirs
of Heaven: all these together did thou do, Oh merciful Preserver!

In the next place I come to the means by which he did preserve us, and that by
the destruction of him that was the preserver, a preservation destructive to
the preserver himself, wherein there was a necessity for one to come from
Heaven, and he no less then the Son of God, to stand in the place of man, and
endure that which he should have suffered for his sin, and that such a
suffering, to speak one word of it, that the whole Gospel is little more then a
compendious Chronicle of the calamities that Christ endured in his life: Should
I but go along from his Cradle to his Cross, the time would fail me, in all
places; nor only upon the Cross, but in the Garden, yea in toto progressu,
etc. in the whole course of his life, in every action of it, at the hand of
every person he conversed withal, every part of his life from the womb, nay, in
the womb he was accounted by his supposed father to be but a bastard; in his
Cradle cruelly dealt withal, exiled, banished into Egypt, tumbled and tossed up
and down, tempted in the wilderness by the Devil. In all places, in the
Temple, in the Pharisees house, in the City, in the Country, in the
wilderness, within and without, abused by all sorts of men, the Scribes and
Pharisees, the high Priests and Rulers, and by the multitude of people; he did
suffer in every action: Did he preach, where had he his learning? Did he eat
and drink? a man gluttonous, and a winebibber. Did he keep company? a friend of
Publicans and sinners. Did he cast out Devils, 'twas censured to be by Beelzebub
the Prince of the Devils. In his life, in his death, in all things; and in his
sufferings two things are remarkable: First, that he suffered alone, he trod
the winepresse alone, he suffered solus. Secondly, he suffered totus, he
suffered for his Preaching, for his works of mercy, that for which he should
have been applauded. The Disciple that before hugged his Master, and lay in his
arms, now for haste left his shirt behind him, he ran so hard, that he left
his linen garment. Thomas that before would dye with Lazarus, he is now gone.
The sons of Zebedee that forsooth could drink of the cup that he drank of, they
were far enough off; not only his friends on earth, but his best friend in
Heaven; he suffered a terrible withdrawing of his countenance, he sees him not
as he was wont to be in his glorious Majesty, yet still he cries, Deus meus, My
God; his best friends on earth fled, and his best friend in Heaven hid his face
from him: he suffered totus; his head buffetted, his face spitted on, his hands
nailed, and his feet bored, his side pierced, his glorious temples crowned with
thorns, he led Captivity captive, to whom we pray, Lord enter not into
Captivity with thy servant; he to whom the Saints cry, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God of Hosts, he to whom the blessed Spirits sing Hallelujahs to him that sits
on the Throne, upon him they cried, All Hail King of the Jews; he that lashed
the Nations with a rod of Iron, to have his back beaten with a whip: he
suffered in all his outward senses; What tastes he? What sees he? What hears
he? What smells he? What feels he? In all his faculties and members, in his
understanding, the whole wrath of God; in his memory, what he was, and what he
had been; in his judgment, what struggling and irresolution, Let this Cup pass,
and let it not pass, he will have his will, and he will not have his will; he
was astonished, affrighted, perplexed, in. an agony, such an agony wherein he
sweat drops of blood; of the reproaches done to him, if we consider ubi, where,
He suffered at Jerusalem, the stage of the world, and where he did display all
his works of mercy. Quando, at what time, at the time of the Passover, at the
concourse of most people, that he might be a scorn to all; and cum quibus, with
two thieves, and between them both as the worst of the three; and per quos, by
whom this was done, by his own Countrymen, those for whom this was done, so
graceless not so much as thanking him for what he did, when he was at his last
gasp upon the Cross; beneath beneath him the Devil gaping for him; on the one
side a thief reviling him, on the other none but a thief; Hell wide open under
him, his friends flying from him: round about him what sees he? the earth
trembling and quaking, the rocks rending in pieces, the mountains leaping, the
air thundering, the clouds pouring down, the Heavens as it were burning with
lightning, the Sun hiding his face, as ashamed to see his Master so used at
their hands for whom he thus suffered. What hears he? those that did it,
crying, His blood be upon us and our children and if there be any evil in us,
not to save us but to damn us, when an Angel durst not show his head, or so
much as peep out of Heaven upon him.

A preservation wrought by such a Savior, to free us from such a condition,
and bring us to such a condition, by such a means he suffered both in body and
soul, I think I need not say more of it; does not this deserve to be prized as
a great mercy?

But because the keeping of a Good Friday does not consist so much by the
making of a Tragical relation of his sufferings, as it does in something else;
this is not all that is to be done. It Is true, our presenting him to your eyes
is no more then needs, but we must praise the Lord for his wondrous works. Can
we with the Israelites, look up to this Brazen Serpent that it may cure our
souls? Here is an object of love, of fear, of joy, of grief, of affection, and
what not? There is something of the solemnity lies in this, to consider what
God has done for our souls. I gave you a taste at the beginning, how that Job
after his sin comes home to the Preserver of men: So this points us to the duty
of the day, and that is to make use of Christ's sufferings, and considering that
Job in the midst of all his sufferings had his eye to the Preserver of men, he
deplored his sins, and cast his eyes upon him. I find the holy Ghost more then
once mentioning the duty of the day, they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced, Zach. 12. and looking to the Author and Finisher of their faith, Hebr.
12. looking with such eyes upon him, as the lame man in the Gospel upon Paul
and Barnabas, to have some good from him. Looking upon him as a Preserver, as
those Israelites did upon the Brazen Serpent to cure them, not to wink with our
eyes; let no man think the work of a Good Friday to see him with our bodily
eyes, as the Papists in the sight of the Crucifix, but the eyes we are to make
use of are the eyes of our souls, the beholding of Christ crucified in our
thoughts. Take him into your hearts and souls, and there preserve him, let him
challenge a mansion room in thee, thy whole heart; Christ is to be made the
sole object of this day, if you celebrate his crucifying aright. What kind of
object Christ ought to be I will deliver in few words: Our Savior does present
himself as an object of the eye, to behold him, as an object of the ear, as an
object of trouble, as an object of joy, as an object of hope; if upon our sin,
then he is an object of wonder, an object of fear.

The motive of Christ's sufferings, it was his love, the merit of Christ's
sufferings procures us pardon, and the end of Christ's sufferings was our
salvation. Give me leave to point my finger at each of these, and that in a
familiar way, without danger of puzling our selves.

He suffered on the Cross, to make good our comforts, he was bound, to
purchase our freedom. And here first of all, the work of the day does
challenge at our hands matter of admiration; it is a duty the Heavens are
called upon upon a less occasion: Hear O ye Heavens, and be astonished O
earth. Who is there that has any thing of Heaven in him, let him obstupescere,
he amazed and wonder, it is a wonder in all the particulars of it.

First, to wonder at the hainousness of that sin, the nature of which was such
that it could no otherwise be expiated but thus. That which threw Adam out of
Paradise, the Angels out of Heaven, Saul from his Kingdom, that at this day
pulls down Families, and Nations, and Kingdoms; that makes some Nations an
hissing and reproach to others; pray God it does not serve us so: That which
does tumble a Kingdom into the dust, pray God it do not serve us so. It made
the Son of God to bleed, and to cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Which of us in the strongest temptation to any sin, that is, remembering the
price of it, could choose but be entreated to hold his hand? Consider in the
strongest temptation to any sin, it was the price of my Saviors blood. And
secondly, this serves for matter of gratulation, to be thankful for Christ's
love, that he would thus suffer, and that we despair not though we find it not
in our Warehouses, in our Closets, in our Chambers, in our Chests, in our
Cupboards, or the like outward things. Potiphar looks upon Joseph, and sees all
things thrive under him, and therefore he loves him; and so Laban for the same
reason loves Jacob: But here is Gods love, that he gave himself for us; that is
the second.

A third Instruction is for admiration of that obligation God has cast upon
thee: He that could have gloryed in thy destruction, that he should glory in
thy salvation, what can thou do but rejoice? But to wonder is nothing, if we
go no farther: Therefore in the fourth place, here is matter of thanksgiving,
which is a duty for every Ordinance. Every ordinary blessing it calls for a
Trophee, a Pillar, an Altar, a Song, a Sacrifice, a Chronicle; so did David,
Moses, and other servants of God. What thanks does he expect for this days
deliverance?

If among the Heathen he that delivers his Country from any potent enemies,
had such applauses and acclamations, mill annos vivat, he that slew a thousand
of our enemies, may he live a thousand years, may his name be precious a
thousand years: How can we pour out our hearts before God, without giving
thanks for this days deliverance? Neither is admiration or gratulation
sufficient, unless we bless our selves in this day, in the apprehension of
him that was this Preserver, with reference to our sins; the blood of Christ
has a virtue to bind up the bleeding soul, and to make the bones that were
broken to rejoice. Is not this a matter of admiration, gratulation, and
consolation? therefore in the fear of God these are the thoughts that belong to
this day, let your contemplations be upon what he did; these contemplations
would preserve us from the sense of temporal calamities. When Jacob saw the
Ladders, and the Angels ascending and descending, he said, Haec est porta
coeli, this is the gate of Heaven. The gate of Heaven! It is well says one,
that Heaven has a gate; it is well for Gods children that there is a
Preserver, that their hopes are above with him whose care is to preserve things
perishing here below, among so many destructions from those that cry to our
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even to the ground. There is one above
who is the Preserver, who does never keep back his mercy; but when things look
most desperately upon earth, when the enemies hope to take them at a
disadvantage, and to fall upon them when there is none to deliver them, then if
we call upon him with David, saying, Remember the days of old, and thy great
mercies unto me; then it is for our comfort, that after a time God will have
mercy upon us. When the night is at the darkest, the day is nearest at hand.
When the throws of a woman in travel are the greatest, her deliverance is
nearest. When Moses saw the children of Israel in the greatest danger, Now
stand, says he, and see the glory of the Lord, the enemy that now threatens
you shall see him no more. The earth mourned, Lebanon was ashamed, Bashan and
Carmel have all lost their fruit, now will I exalt my self: As if he should
say, man's misery that is my opportunity. When things are at the worst with Gods
children and his Church, then will he show himself a Preserver. The comfort of
Christ's Cross that is comfort to a soul wounded with misery. Is there any of
you here this day that is at his Golgotha, with his strong cries to God in the
sight of his sins, and the terrors of Gods wrath, at the sight of Gods justice?
Are any such here? then behold consolation; that his blood this day shed, if
thou do but conceive it, if there be but a true apprehension in thee that
that blood was shed for thee, it is enough for thy salvation; that thy price is
paid for thee by his death on the Cross, when his arms were extended both
ways, as well to the thief that despised, as to the good thief; and in that
prayer he put up upon the Cross for the worst of his enemies, for them that
nailed him, the worst of men; Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do. Those that nail me, that crucify me, even for them I pray. It is very
probable that when the good thief saw Christ's mercy extend so far, to the worst
of men, he reasons thus with himself, What! is there mercy for these? why not
for me? Though a thief, yet not such a wretch as these are thus to crucify my
Savior; Lord, remember me when thou come into Paradise; and remember in that
prayer of Christ, there is forgiveness for thee, and in those arms stretched
out there is a receptacle for thee, in that blood that came out of his wounds,
there is cure for thee, rather then thou shall dye he will dye for thee.

But beloved, to enlarge the merits of Christ longer, you will think I spread
this plaster too far, in the mean time not knowing whether we have any part in
him or no. We must understand the Mystery of Christ as well as the History;
there is something to be done by way of examination, to examine what title we
have to this Savior. Look upon thy own sins, bleed for them as well as Christ
bled for thee. Christ does not actually save all: For the resolution of which,
I cannot give you a better answer then what I told you of the Israelites,
concerning the Brazen Serpent, that which gave them a cure, gives me a capacity
of this Preserver; that which gave them a cure, was first, because they were
stung. Secondly, that they did submit to that command that bid them look up to
the Serpent; the like is required of every one of them that hope to have the
Preserver of men to be their Savior.

First, a due sense of our sins: And secondly, a clear sight of our Savior.

First, a due sense of the sting; the sting of the old Serpent the Devil, the
sin that is in our hearts. The malice of those men that crucified our Savior,
was not the Author of it, but our sins; the Author is in thine own bosom. And
this is a consideration very requisite and necessary for us, for without a
sense of our sins, and a sorrow for them, we are not near to the knowledge of
Christ; true sorrow works repentance. It Is observed of Job that he would
confess his sins to the Preserver of men, because he had sinned, and not for
the evil of it in the general, in the gross, but concerning his own soul, Ego,
I have sinned. Every man does not know what belongs to Ego, to find sin in our
own bosoms. What need we complain of the evil of the times? it is quickly told
whence it comes, even from our sins. They think they are well, because they
have no leisure to see whether it be well or ill. Their eyes are so cast
abroad, so inquisitive abroad, that they know not how things go at home; if we
were true Zelots indeed we might easily see that the way to make the truth
known, does not lie in the aggravation of the sins of others, in the discovery
of the nakedness of our fathers, of our mothers, and of our brethren; no, but
we must strike impartially, we may not spare any sins, and we ought to rejoice
if we see the sword strike at both; and as it cuts Superstitious Papists on the
one side, so the Anabaptistical Sectaries on the other side; that we destroy
what concerns us, our sins, it is not in any invectives or libels, but the part
that belongs to thy share is to sweep before thy own door, the pulling of that
brand out of the fire, it lies within thee.

And then again secondly, as it was in the sting, so it was in following the
command, and looking on the Serpent, and so is this the commandment we must
follow, we must use the hand that touched the hem of Christ's garment, such a
faith as was in Peter, to bring him home to our selves; an assent to the truth
of God, and not only assentire, but applicare, to apply Christ to our selves,
and also adhaerere, to cleave to him, as old Simeon did, not think it enough to
see Christ in the arms of his Mother, but in his own arms, he would grasp him
there, and hug him there, as Isaac could not but bless his Jacob, till he
felt some love, some loyalty, some care; and kiss the son lest he be angry,
there must be a care to make good Gods image in us.

There are three or four Meditations I would gladly make use of concerning this
Preserver of men: As first, was our Savior the Preserver of men? then this is
in all temptations the most profitable balm; Shall I commit this sin, sin
against him that preserved me?

Secondly, is he the Preserver of med? then in all the inhumane and cruel
dealing between thee and thy neighbor, think upon it; how do thou resemble
the Preserver of men, and give thy self altogether to ruin and destruction?
What expectation can you have of preservation by this Preserver, if you be
destroyers of your poor Brethren?

In the third place, is he the Preserver of men? and has he done so much for
our preservation? This then deserves our thankfulness. Did Jesus Christ dye
for me, and for us all? then let us show our thankfulness by preserving Gods
children, Gods Profits, Gods saints, Gods Revenues; let us lend our helping
hand to preserve that, and not to think any thing we have too good for them;
thy work, thy life, thy labor, and all little enough for them.

And then lastly, whatsoever we do in thankfulness to God, suffer not his
blood, nor the price of it to be spilt in vain, take heed it be not spilt
besides us, take heed the Devil does not go away with it.

Saint Cyprian has a sad meditation and representation of this; he brings in
the Devil at the last day coming and triumphing against Christ, with his rabble
of wicked men, and but a few righteous on our Saviors side. The Devil speaks
thus: Savior of the world, do thou see what a number I have, and what
faithful servants they have been to me? Ego nunquam, etc. I was never whipped,
nor buffeted, nor scourged, nor nailed, nor despised, nor crucified for any of
these; I never shed a drop of blood for any of these, I never promised them a
Kingdom, or any other reward, yet they were very dutiful to me. I never had a
Paradise to premise them, though thou did show me such a number as here is.
Oh what a sad thing will this be! Oh therefore let every one think to do our
Savior this right, let not the Devil carry away this price from us; he
suffered enough then, Oh let not him now suffer any more, let him not suffer in
his Name, to be blasphemed; in his Revenue, as Sacrilegious persons would have
him; let him not suffer in his Worship, as Heretics would have him; let him
not suffer in his Prophets, as Saul did, slaying fourscore in a day, but give
unto the Lord the honor due unto his name. Oh let us give him this day the
honor that is due unto him, that since he has given us the blood of his Son
to preserve us, he may find us one day amongst the preserved; and consider
that he that is proud, crowns his head with thorns, he that scoffs at Religion,
spits in his face: and think upon these meditations;

First, in what a miserable condition thou art till thou have gotten some sign
that thou art preserved by him, and that thou have some part in his sufferings.
I wonder that the souls of many men go not out rending and tearing, go not out
stark mad, having no evidence of their salvation. There is no comfort without
an interest in Christ. What a miserable parting is there both of soul and body,
without an assurance that Jesus Christ is thy Redeemer? Whatsoever thou art, or
whatsoever thy estate is in this world, thou art a wretch, if thou have not a
part in thy Preserver. As Jacob said, when he saw the Chariots and Wagons that
Joseph sent for him, Now I shall see Joseph, let me dye, I desire to live no
longer, it is enough Joseph is alive: so should we be able to say, Howere the
world goes in other things, we know that our Preserver is alive; whatever
devises Satan has raised, whatsoever crimes thou have committed, though the
Devil say, nec pars, nec sors in hoc negotio, thou have neither part nor
portion in this Savior; Oh then bethink your selves that God is a Preserver.

The Rabbines tell us of a City of Refuge God had appointed in the time of the
old Law, that there should be a City of Refuge, and that the manslayer should
flee thither, and there was a care had that at every turning of the way there
stood an hand pointing out every particular passage to the City of Refuge, and
written at the end of the hand REFUGE, as if it should have said, Fly
manslayer for thy life, thou have the way before thee. What truth is in it I
know not, yet it is an excellent representation of every one that are sinners;
we are in the case of manslayers all of us, and God has appointed at every
turning of the way a finger, at every corner of the City there is a voice that
calls upon us, Refuge, Refuge, to save our selves; while the enemy is at our
back, the Devil follows us with might and main at the committing of every sin
that he may reach us before we get to the City. God has his voice and his
finger to point us thither, it must be our wisdom to go while the finger
points and the voice calls. We know not how long we shall hear the voice of God
in our Churches, let us bestir our selves as they that fly for their lives, let
us hear the voice of God, and gird up our loins: we see by every days example
the uncertainty of life, let us fly to him that is the refuge of sinners, he
that had his arms this day spread on the Cross to save all, will not refuse
thee; and that he may show us his mercy who is the Preserver of men, God of his
mercy grant us, for his Sons sake, for his mercy sake. Amen.

And thus this sweet Singer of our Israel, this ravishing Nightingale, or if
you will, this Dove, did groan forth unto you the Passion of his Lord; he like
a dexterous Physician did clap a plaster of warm blood to your souls, and I
hope it will prove like the blood of Goats, qualifying you, that you will
afford pliable hearts to God, and obedient hearts to him, and charitable hearts
to your brethren, seeing you have a share in this Preserver.

But there lies no comfort in the death of Christ, if we hear not of his
Resurrection. What is it to hear of a Savior dead, if he be not risen? What is
it to have our Surety to be in prison? but he is out. Hence breaks the day both
of his triumph and our comfort, that this Sampson has carried away the gates
of brass, this rod of Aaron has devoured all the other rods, this God though
he overcame not at the first, yet he overcomes at the last; this Jonah is now
cast on the shore; and this happy tidings an Angel of our Church brought from
another Angel, and his Text was in the Gospel according to Saint Matthew, chap.
28. verse 6.

A Sermon Preached by Dr Thomas Morton Lord Bishop of Durham at the Spittle on
Monday, April 26. 1641. before Sir Wright, Lord Major.
Right Honorable, Worshipful, and beloved in Jesus Christ, hearken I beseech
you with reverence to the Word of God; as it is written in the holy Evangelist
Saint Matthew, Chap. 28.6. He is not here, for he is risen.
THese are the words of the Angel of God unto two devout women that came to
visit the Sepulcher of our Savior, declaring unto them the Resurrection of
Christ from the dead: a Fundamental point of Christianity, and the argument of
these three days Festivity is the Resurrection of our Savior; and this Feast
has obtained from Gregory Nazianzen this acclamation, Oh Feast of all Feasts!
Oh Festivity of all Festivities! Oh Celebrity of all Celebrities! And therefore
beloved, we are so much the more bound to the discharge of our duties for a
solemn and deliberate commemoration of it, and you to a diligent, devout and
reverent attention unto those four points and parts which are deduceable out of
this Text; He is not here, for he is risen.

The parts are these: The first is Logical; the second Historical; the third
Analogical; and the fourth Moral. The Logical thus, from the word and particle
for, He is not here, for, etc. Secondly, Historical, in the words following, he
is risen, a declaration of the Resurrection it self. Analogical, from the
person he, in the relation that Christ has as Head unto all Christians that
shall be raised again unto everlasting life as the members of Christ. The
Moral, that depends upon the same words, he is risen, because it does
challenge of every Christian man a conformity of life, in rising unto newness
of life conformable to that Resurrection of Christ, as the Apostle will tell us
afterward.

I begin with the Logical, He is not here, for, etc. His assertion is Negative,
He is not here; the proof of it, for he is risen. This for is a causal term,
which if it be turned into an illative, it stands thus; He is risen, therefore
he is not here: As if a man should say, the stars they are not seen, for the
Sun is up. Verte, the Sun is up, therefore the stars are not seen. The
conclusion therefore of the Angel should be this, Christ cannot be in the grave
and out of the grave, not here and there, not in two places at once; and that
is our present Theme. This doctrine that I teach unto you, it was the
confession and profession of this our Protestant Church always, it was written
in Rubric in the blood of the Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary, both Bishops
and others, whenever they were called to that murderous rack of Interrogation
among the Papists, asking them this question, What say you to the bodily
presence of Christ in the Sacrament? They answered, he is not there bedily;
they proved it, for he is risen, he is ascended into Heaven; a reason, as you
see, Angelical, this being granted that the body of Christ is not in two places
at once, then is the foundation of all the Romish Mass utterly ruined,
dissolved into rubbish and dust; for then farewell the bodily presence, the
feigned and forged Transubstantiation, the gross oral and bodily receiving of
it, the sacrilegious sacrificing of it, and that which is the last and worst,
the idolatrous adoring of bread in stead of the person of the Son of God,
Christ himself.

Nevertheless we may not imagine that the Doctors of that Church make no
answer to this consequence of the Angel, He is not here, for he is risen: Their
answer is this, that he spoke not these words Doctrinally, but only Morally,
secundum modulum, according to the capacity of the women, who might think
peradventure that he was risen not out of the grave, but in the grave: a
transparent falsity, as will be proved now to the contrary: As this holy
Evangelist, He is not here, (could he walk in the grave to Galilee?) for he is
risen; look upon the next verse, He is risen, as he said. What said he? The
Evangelist Saint Luke, chap. 24. as he said to you women when you were in
Galilee. Then the saying must be taken as it was told them by Christ in
Galilee, before he was crucified. What was his saying? He said unto them, I
shall rise the third day. What meant Christ by rising? was it rising in the
grave, or out of the grave? Certainly out of the grave. Will you have our
witnesses? Two Angels, Luke 24.5. Say unto these women, Why seek you the living
among the dead? If he be living, he is not among the dead; therefore not in the
grave, but out of the grave: It is the conclusion of the very Angels
themselves. Come to the next words following here, Go quickly, tell his
Disciples that he is risen: Tell his Disciples; then the Angels instructed them
so, that they might have a faith that he was out of the grave, to the end they
might persuade the Disciples, being now a foundation of the Articles of the
Christian Faith: But above all you will see it, Luke 24.6. He renders the words
of Christ thus, He is not here, but he is risen. But, that is a particle
adversitive, always implying a contradiction from the former; as if he should
say, such a one is not dead, but alive; if therefore alive, not dead. Christ
says of his body, I am not spirit, but flesh; flesh therefore, not spirit.
Thus in all it is a contradiction in adjuncts: Therefore the truth is, this is
an impossibility that the body of Christ can be in two places at once, which is
the conclusion drawn from thence. Now beloved, I had not insisted so much upon
this, except it had been;

First, that it was so full in my way, that I could not pass by it.

Secondly, because of the jealousy of these times, wherein it is suspected
that diverse of the Ecclesiastics are infected with this leaven, or rather
leprosy of Popery, to think that the body of Christ can be in diverse places at
once: Therefore now I shall crave leave to enlarge my self, and the rather
because in thus saying, whosoever they be they destroy it.

I am therefore now beloved, to prove it unto you not by testimonies and
allegations only, but to deliver unto you the heads as I may say, the form and
the reasons summarily of true Antiquity in the Primitive Church, and that
shall confirm unto us this our doctrine to have been not only a Catholic
truth, but to have had the degree of a Catholic faith in the Church of God
for six hundred years together. Briefly then thus; those holy Fathers taught
first, that no creature can be in diverse places at once: why? for that this to
be in diverse places at once, is the Prerogative of God himself.

Secondly, they prove that the holy Ghost the third Person in the Trinity is
God. Why? for that it was in diverse Prophets at once: Jeremiah in Jewry, Daniel
when he was in Babylon, Ezekiel in Cabar; and also after that when he was in
diverse Apostles at once, they being dispersed into diverse Regions of the world.

Thirdly, they prove that the Angels are not Gods. Why? Because Angels cannot
be in diverse places at once.

Fourthly, they prove that no body, no bodily substance can be in diverse places
at once. Why? For that it is one body, and to be here and there in one instant,
were to divide it self from it self; that it were two and one, and not one, are
contradictions.

Lastly, that we may omit diverse others, they prove that the Humanity is thus
distinguished from the Divinity, because the Deity, the divinity nature that
being in Heaven is in Earth, and every where else; but the humane nature if it
be in Heaven, it is not on Earth, if on Earth it is not in Heaven. Thus these
holy Fathers: You have their doctrine of truth. Now that it may appear unto you
that this doctrine of truth was also a doctrine of faith, and that by two
reasons:

First, because by these for's which are answerable to this for of the Angel
here, they urged them against the Heretics of their times, such were the
Marcionites, the Manichees, the Neucomitans, and such like.

Secondly, because they did this to this end that they might confirm unto all
the world the doctrine of the Deity, to know that this is a Prerogative
belonging to God alone; and secondly, for the preservation of the true nature
of the manhood of Christ; for whereas the Manichees might say that the body of
Christ was in the Moon and the Deity together; fieri non potest, says Saint
Austin, it cannot be; for by this means you will not make it a true body of
Christ. I will conclude, and it shall be in the words of an holy Father that
lived six hundred years after Christ, Vigilius by name, who says thus,
Humanitas Christi si in terra tunc non in coelo, etc. The Humanity of Christ if
it be on Earth, then certainly it is not in Heaven, if in Heaven bodily, then
certainly not on earth. Was this his private opinion only? No; Haec est
Confessio Catholica quam, etc.

This is the Confession, a Catholic confession, says he, which the Apostles
have delivered, the Martyrs of Christ have confirmed, and now all the faithful
in Christ do preserve to this day. Beloved, this Vigilius was Bishop of Trent,
and he has delivered unto us a confession as contrary unto the last Council of
Trent, as yea and nay, truth and falsity, Antiquity and Novelty; so that if the
Primitive Church of Christ was the Catholic Church, certainly the now Romish
church it is a step-dame and degenerate. If the Primitive doctrine was a
Catholic faith, and a legitimate child, then the now doctrine of the Church
of Rome it is a bastard-brat.

Now then beloved, I have delivered unto you the points concerning the Logical
part, wherein if I have been too obscure, if that Logic part be too obscure
for some, I may make amends in the Historical, where I shall not make it so
plain to your brains, as to your senses. He is not here, for, etc.

This Historical part will offer unto you 3 observations concerning this
doctrine of Christ's Resurrection; the first is,

1. That it is a truth most evident.

2. It is a truth Omnipotent.

3. It is a truth Trimphant.

For Christ after his Resurrection manifested himself unto all men, all kinds
of men that heard him Preach: he manifested himself to two, to twelve, to five
hundred at once; to Saint Paul after his Ascension into Heaven, here is all the
eyesight: to other senses; he manifested himself to his Apostles by feeling
and handling his body; here are three senses. Now beloved, why should not this
be a foundation of truth to know and discern, to build our faith upon these
things? The Apostl^ ^aint John tells us that it ought to be so, for says he, 1
John 1.1. That which you have heard, that which you have seen, that which your
hands have handled, that we declare unto you, etc. He lays the faith of Christ
on this foundation, hearing, seeing, handling. Here again I am justly
occasioned to deal with the Church of Rome, by this light to dispel the
darkness thereof, that their great infatuation concerning the body of Christ;
they say he is in the Sacrament in these three opinions: First, he is here, say
they, and yet his body is invisible. Secondly, it is here impalpable: And
lastly, it is in Heaven both visible and palpable. It is here invisible,
impalpable, and yet it is in Heaven both visible and palpable; three monsters
which are now to be expulsed, not by the strength of my wit, but by the
authority of this Angel here speaking from Christ, here spoken of, from t^^
Church of Christ, their whole voice for a general union for this; the Angel in
the next words, even in this Text, this verse, he says unto the women, Come
and see, Come and see where they laid the Lord. I say he is not here, I will
prove it unto you, demonstrate it unto your sight, let your sight be Judge; the
arbitration of your sight shall satisfy you: Come and see, he is not here;
though they laid him here, he is not here; here is the argument of the Angel:
But here they will tell us he passed by men out of company to avoid danger, and
they saw him not. This is truth, but this is not all the truth; for the reason
why they saw him not, it was because their eyes were held that they could not
see. How many of you now see this Pulpit? and yet wink with your eyes, you
cannot see it. Is this Pulpit ere the less visible, because you do not see it?
When men's eyes are held, they cannot see, Christ's body notwithstanding was
visible still to be seen. And now to confirm this that I have said unto you,
St. John himself shall make it good. There was one of the Disciples (says he
John 20. and he speaks of himself) the other Disciple he looked into the
sepulcher, and he saw the linen clothes, he saw not Christ there present; and
what does he but resolve and believe that he was risen out of the grave? And
indeed it had been a mockery of these women, for the Angel, if their eyes being
held, to bid them to see without their sight. Therefore you have the first
point concerning this sense of Seeing sufficiently demonstrated unto you. Come
to our Savior Christ: As the Angel said to the woman, Come and see; so Christ
he said to his Disciples, Come and feel, feel, I am I, this body is mine, feel
my body, search the wounds, etc. So that now Christ makes this truth even
palpable unto them, that they may have their faith from the virtue of their own
fingers. This is the doctrine of Christ, the body of Christ is palpably to be
seen; Come unto our faith, the Council of Ephesus, one of the first Councels in
the Christian world, for the humane nature of Christ resolves thus; Corpus
Christi est and visibile and palpabile ubicunque fuerit. The body of Christ it
is visible and tractable wheresoever it is; therefore may we come now to our
resolution, and conclude, that the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Mass, you say it is invisible, I say then it is not the body of Christ: Do you
say it is impalpable? it is not the body of Christ. Do you say also it is both
visible and invisible? I return to the Fathers, and they say thus: This is, say
they, sottish. Why? you may as well say that the same body of Christ can be
finite and infinite, it can be created and not created at once, which the
distinction of places can never reconcile.

Oh, but say they unto us, this is natural reason, this is reasoning like
Ethnicks and Pagans. Nay, we have the Authority, which is the Authority of the
Catholic Church, we have the Authority Angelical, we have not only the
Authority Evangelical, but of Christ himself. He is not here, etc. Thus I have
shown that he is palpable wheresoever he be: Now the evidence being thus plain,
let us ascend a little higher, to know, that what if some should say, that
notwithstanding these evidences, I doubt whether this doctrine be true or no,
that Christ is risen? Our Apostle Saint Paul has answered this argument long
ago, when he said thus; If that Christ be not risen, we are false witnesses: As
if he should say, a thing most incredible, for they which were with our Lord
and Savior, and saw, and heard, and felt him, were always ready to lay down
their lives for Christ, and for this very Article, he is risen. There Saint
Paul speak for himself; If Christ be not risen, what should it advantage me
that I fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, to endanger my
life for this Article, Christ is risen? and this was that Paul that could say
of himself, 1 Cor. 10. That among all those many troubles and afflictions for
this profession, In carcere, etc. I was in death often, oftentimes left for
dead, stoned and persecuted, so manifold a Martyr was this one Saint Paul. He
speaks also of the rest of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 5. We are in jeopardy every
day, every day in jeopardy, even for this Article, and this truth that Christ
is risen he stands upon, in that 1 Cor. 15. Well then beloved, for the
establishing of our Christian faith in this one point, certainly these Apostles
of Christ had been most shameless, if they had published to all that which
they saw not; most faithless, if they had not believed that which they all
saw; most heartlesse, if they had not ventured their lives for the profession
of that, the resurrection of Christ from the dead, by virtue whereof their
bodies should also be reserved to eternal life; and most foolish also, if they
should have spent their blood for that they believed not, they having thus
seen, thus heard, thus believed, thus Preached, thus dying and suffering death,
they may be eyes, and have been to the Christian world, to see by their faith;
and so I persuade my self of you all that are here present, to give faith unto
this Article of the resurrection of Christ from death; and therefore I am
authorized to give unto you the benediction which Christ gave unto such as you,
saying, Blessed are they that see not, and yet believe; and so Blessed be you.

Now you have heard the evidence, this is an evident truth, we have not yet
heard the power of it, but that is in the next part, wherein I said that this
is a truth which is Omnipotent, an Omnipotent truth, look to our Text; I, but
says the Evangelist, He is risen; he does not say Agarthes, he is raised, but
he is risen, and because it was he that raised himself from the dead: It is he
that said, I have power to lay down my life, and to take it up again; lay down
my life by dying, to take it up again by rising: as easy to take it up as to
lay it down, to lay down my life as man, to take it up again as God. Even as he
said of the same body to the Jews, Destroy you this Temple, I will raise it up
in three days. Destroy it, then its destructive; but raise it up in three
days, there is his Godhead. Thus he spoke once, let us put them together, God
and Man, Man and God. How prove we it? The Apostle proves it, Heb. 1.1. of
Christ, thus, he was declared mightily to be the Son of God by his resurrection
from the dead. Whereupon Saint Austin, Oh miraculum miraculorum! This is a
miracle of miracles, the Sun of all Suns, never the like, that one dead should
raise himself from the dead; this could not be man, but God; it must needs be
as the Apostle to the Colossians, The Godhead dwelling in him bodily which
raised himself from the dead: now beloved, from hence it must follow, that it
was impossible for him to be detained in the grave; and S. Peter says, Acts 2.
it was impossible for Christ to be detained in the pangs of death; it is a word
taken from women travailing in child, when the throws and pangs are upon her
she cannot contain her burden, it must go out. Well said Chrysologus of this
burden, Concepit mortuum and peperit vivum: Here is a difference then between
this womb and all the rest of the world, conceiving dead, and bringing forth
alive; and indeed so it must needs be when Omnipotency is the Midwife, as it
was with Jonas, a type of Christ, swallowed up of the Whale, the stomach could
not digest it, it must be cast out. Of what use must this be to us? the same
power that raised him from death to life, the same power will give us
resurrection to life everlasting, even our bodies. So the Apostle, Phil. 3. He
will change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body. So much
for the second point, that I call it an Omnipotent truth.

The next is, that it is also a triumphant truth; there are two triumphings of
Christ that we read of in Scripture, and they are admirable; the one is of his
Passion, and the other not of his, but of the general Resurrection; the one is
an Introduction to the other; of his Passion thus, Col. 2. He having spoiled
principalities and powers, made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them
on the Cross. Here is his triumph, he becomes a conqueror over principalities
and powers; he made a show of them openly, he spoiled them, there is the
conquering; sold them openly, there is the preparation for the triumph of the
people, and to look upon all as a conqueror, there is his triumph; this triumph
thus spokes of it has allusion unto the triumphs of the world, and especially
that of the Roman State, wherein there was first presented a multitude of
Trumpeters, sounding out the victory, and resounding; then came in chariots of
spoils, spoils of armor, spoils of riches; the conqueror he sits in the midst
looking back unto those noble slaves that came behind, their wives, their
children, and all their hands bound about them. I will pass no farther in the
story, enough for application. Now I beseech you extend your mind as much as
you can that we may behold at least some glimpse of this great victory of our
Savior Christ and of his conquest. Here now, where was his sight of Majesty?
he was now giving up the ghost upon the Cross, and behold a triumph, why God
and Man the Deity never forsook the Manhood, no not in his death; the virtue of
his death was the crucifying of the Devil and all his powers: And now I come to
the slaves of this triumph, the principalities and powers, namely, the greatest
powers that can be conceived in creatures; and who should deal with them but he
that is above all power, Christ our Savior? What does he spoil them of? of all
their designs, be they never so mischievous; he spoils them of all their wiles,
and prevents them they can do nothing, never any thing to the prejudice of the
children of God regenerate, never any thing that shall work to his overthrow:
This is that spoil, and he leads them, as it is here in the other Text, open in
view, he goes not out of sight; So that this point is contemplative; here is no
Cherubims or Seraphims, Angels or Archangels, but whatsoever can be seen in the
world by the mortal eyes, that was visibly performed by Christ. Thus much for
that second triumph; and so it shall be in the general resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.
Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh Hell, or Grave, where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law; but thanks be to God
who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; Thanks be to God that
he has given us victory in Christ our Lord. Now mark I beseech you the
manifold circumstances of this victory in the day of the resurrection of the
holy Saints and Martyrs. What will become of the Law? the Law of God it shall
be cancelled; no more Law here, and the Law it is the strength of sin; for if
there were no law, there were no transgression, the law being taken away, there
is no more sin; and as for sins past, they are either pardoned or punished in
the day of the resurrection. Well then, but sin it is the sting of death, what
becomes of death? Death it is swallowed up in victory: Death's dead, no more
giving up of the ghost. Come to the Grave; Grave where is thy victory? When the
Trumpets sound, and the Angel gives his voice, arise ye dead, and come unto
Judgment, they come out of their Graves, the Graves are empty. But the great
enemies are Hell and the Devil: Hell where is thy victory? The conquest being
before, as you heard, concerning the passage of the souls of men, the gates of
Hell are shut up, no ingresse nor egresse, but all is shut, they are all
detained, as the Apostle says, in the chains of darkness and torments for
ever. And this is our victory; Thanks be to God that has given us victory in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen. Thus have I ended the Historical point, which
concerned us in the evidence of this truth, that you have heard that he is
risen, and of the power thereof: All this while we have not learned the causes
of this resurrection, that belongs to the third part which I said was
Analogical, and this has three considerations:

The first is this; Christ here in the Text is to be considered, in the first
place, as the general cause of the Resurrection of the world of men.

The second consideration is this, That he in this Text is the special cause of
the resurrection of all the souls everlastingly blessed.

The third consideration of him is, as he is risen as an example, That it is
possible there may be a resurrection from the death of the body. First, the
resurrection of Christ teaches us a certainty of resurrection, that he is the
special effectual cause of the resurrection to life everlasting unto the sons
of God that show the actions of the resurrection of Christ. Secondly, there is
a generality or universality of Resurrection. Thirdly, the possibility of the
bodies resurrection unto life. To begin with the universality, all must rise
again; by whom? by whose power? why? by Christ's, 1 Cor. 15.6. As by the sin of
the first Adam death came upon all men, so by Christ the Resurrection from the
dead: all men, all manner of men, all men dying, all men rising, all the sons
of men. We have an Apostle for it: All men, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. All
men must dye, all men must appear before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, and give
an account of all things they did in this life, be it good or bad. Here Is good
and bad, all men. This was believed by the Jews before Christ came; so the
Apostle Saint Peter, Acts 2. shows unto us, That they believed the resurrection
from the dead. They believed the Prophet Daniel, that they should rise, the
just and the unjust, Dan. 12. Here Is all that Prophets prophecy, some to
honor, and some to shame; here is either honor, or shame: A shame therefore it
will be unto us, beloved, if we do not believe that which they believed. That
we having before us not a prophecy which Saint Peter says is a dark light;
they believed in a dark light, in a light in a dark place, and we have the very
Sunshine of the Gospel to instruct us: But what instruction do we learn from
this universality? It commends unto us the general Justice of God, that as he
will be both vindicative and remunerative to the bodies of men, they must rise
again; vindicative, to punish wicked men, and remunerative, to reward the
godly, even in their bodies. Our reason; That as the body has been an
instrument unto the soul for acting either good or evil, so they should be
copartners together in weal or woe. We see the same shadowed in the Parable,
the finger of the poor man in Heaven, and the tongue of the rich man in Hell,
yet notwithstanding it must be the same body: and as Job said of his eyes, I
know that my Redeemer lives, and I shall see him with these eyes, and no
other. The same eyes; For beloved, how should it consist with the Justice of
God, that one body should glutton, gormandise and swell with excess, and
wallow in sensual pleasures, and there should be another body put upon him that
should cry out, I am tormented in these flames? Or for the godly, as for
example, Saint Stephen, whose name signifies a Crown, that he should suffer
Martyrdom for this truth we are now proving, the Resurrection, and afterward
another body be given unto him, which should be clothed with blessedness,
which is called the Crown of Righteousness? No, beloved, it is a certain and an
infallible truth, that it must be disposed according to the Justice of God.
There Is a statute for it, Heb. 1.9. Statutum est, etc. It is appointed and
statuted for all men to dye, and after death comes Judgment; all men first to
dye, and then comes Judgment, Judgment as sure as death. Here is matter of
horror, and matter of comfort; horror to the wicked, that when that great and
general Jail-delivery comes, it shall be as it is sometimes at the Assizes;
there are two men in prison, and one has either got his pardon, or else he is
innocent, that none can impeach him; and he says to his fellows, I am going
before the Judge for deliverance out of prison. Another he has Guilty branded
in his forehead, and he cries, I am going before the Judge, but it is to
receive my condemnation, and to be delivered over to execution: So shall it be
in the end of time, and in this general Resurrection; Then as it is in the
Apocalypse, the wicked that should appear before the Judge, shall cry to the
rocks to cover them, and the mountains to fall upon them, to deliver them from
the wrath of the Lamb, and yet to them he is a Tiger; looking upon their
guiltiness and desperation, they call and cry for impossibilities, rocks to
hide them from the Judge of all Judges, and hills to cover them from the God of
all Gods. But as for the godly, they come and say, Now is our Redemption at
hand; for that which concerns redemption and comfort it belongs to them. The
next consideration is the necessity of the resurrection. Now hear how necessary
this resurrection is. We read of many benefits in the Scripture of God
concerning all men by virtue of Christ's birth, his life, his merits, his
preaching, his passion, his dying. But what if there were no Resurrection? The
Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15. Then were our faith in vain. Our whole faith were
vain, if there were not a resurrection, we preach in vain: And indeed were
there no resurrection, though the birth of Christ were never so joyous, the
miracles that he wrought in the world never so miraculous, his promises for
everlasting life never so gracious, his work and price of Redemption never so
meritorious, yet if there were no resurrection, his birth, his life, his
miracles, his passion, yea, his death it self put together, the same stone that
covered his corpse, should cover all those singular infinite benefits. But now
he is risen, this work of the resurrection it is both the perfection and
complement of all the Articles that went before, so it is also the foundation
of all the Articles that come after, rising, communion, sitting at the right
hand of God in glory: See the necessity of this resurrection, and there is also
the like necessity laid upon us, seeing this resurrection is the virtue of our
resurrection: So the Apostle to the Colossians tells us, That Christ is the
Head of the Church, and the first begotten of the dead. He must have the
preeminence, he is the first begotten of the dead, for he ascended first into
Heaven, to take possession, there is his pre-eminence; Happy are we if we can
come after, as we may come, for he did not take possession for himself alone,
but as the head of the whole body, he is the first begotten among the dead. And
this for the comfort of all; Be that inseparable union between us and Christ
known unto you, I do not say in our souls alone, but in our bodies also; for so
the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. We are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Oh
beloved, when the holy Fathers of the Primitive Church fell upon this Text,
they were ravished with contemplations thereof; to think there was such an
individual union between Christ and them, even our bodies. And this union is
more then if there were a reality of corporation in body and body, by the
virtue whereof he our head is risen, that we may rise again; and sooner shall
Christ suffer his flesh to be torn from his body, then that any one regenerate
Christian man shall be separated from him in the resurrection to eternal glory.
Thus says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4. They shall be always with him. Now then
thus you see as in the resurrection of Christ himself, so in our resurrection,
although that all our joy in the birth of Christ, all our says in the promises
of Christ, and in the virtue of his death, and all our hope of glory to come,
it is risen from these words of my Text, by the virtue of this, He is risen.
This is the necessity, which is the second consideration I spoke of; and now
beloved, methinks I hear the voices of profane men that say, What do you tell
us of the resurrection, of the universality, the happiness or necessity of
Christ's resurrection, before you can show unto us the possibility thereof? This
is the next point which I am to handle unto you, That it is possible that all
shall rise again. I prove it from the Text, there is a possibility, and thus it
stands, He is risen; if one man be risen from the dead, its possible for
another that is dead to rise again. Here Is the argument, and yet behold there
are two adversaries against this argument. The one is imaginary, and denies
the consequence; the other is peremptory and pernicious, and denies the
antecedent. The consequence is this, ergo another man may rise again. The
imaginary man that reads that Text, Thou will not suffer thine holy One to see
corruption, reasons in his fancy not peremptorily, not certainly, why there is
difference betwixt Christ's rising and a Christian man's, for Christ he is that
holy One without sin; We sinners, for these reasons: His body felt no
corruption, our bodies even putrified unto corruption it self. He the holy One,
he could hallow his own grave, so cannot we, for we are corrupt. These are his
fancies; now peradventure you may think they deserve no answer; not much
indeed, and yet the answer whatsoever it shall be, I hope it shall be pertinent
and not unprofitable.

To the first therefore thus; He it is true had no sin, he was innocent, yea,
innocence it self. Now every one of us, whosoever they be that are in the
world, that will say they are no sinners, and have no sin, the Apostle Saint
John will give him the lie, 1 John 1. There is no truth is him. He has no part
in Christ's resurrection, no affinity with him, and by nature we are born aliens
from him: So to consider that he being crucified of men most wickedly,
desperately, cruelly, blasphemously handled of sinners, any natural man would
think now that he is risen, Theanthropos, God and man, He should abhor all men,
and loath the sight of all sinners, and become Misanthropos. But behold and
marvel, how he recollects himself in the behalf of sinners immediately after
his resurrection. Saint Mark chap. 16. tells us, That Christ appeared first to
Mary Magdalene. Note, as much as if he should have said, he appeared first of
all unto one that had been a most notorious sinner, she out of whom he had cast
seven Devils, this deserves a Marginal Note; and speaks unto her in a mild
compellation, Mary, that is for her. The Disciples of Christ they forsook him,
and turned apostates from Christ; but did Christ forsake them? No: In the tenth
verse of this Chapter he says unto them, Go and tell them; yea, they were more
then forsakers, for among the Disciples there was one Peter, he that had vowed
above all the rest not to deny Christ, yet he disclaimed and disavowed him;
what is become of him? This Messenger of Christ, this Angel says, Go and tell
the Disciples, and Peter by name, lest he might be mist. But what shall we say
for Thomas? message upon message comes unto him, We have seen him, he is risen:
Christ comes and gives his blessing to all his Disciples, saying, Peace be unto
you; cries, Thomas, Thomas, come and feel and believe. Beloved, behold here the
mirror of all mercifulness in our Savior Christ. Consider what Christ is: An
Angel tells us he was therefore called a Savior, because he should save his
people from their sins; this was in his Passion; he dyed for our sins, and rose
again for our justification: So in his Resurrection. But now he is above all
principalities and powers, after his conquest of these principalities and
powers, when he led Captivity Captive, and will he now vouchsafe pardon unto
sinners? It is his profession, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

The next Exception that was taken to the consequence, was this; That he was
the holy One that saw no corruption, but we are corrupt and putrified; the best
of us all with lying but four days in the grave, will be little better then
Lazarus, rotten and stinking. Yet notwithstanding remember that Lazarus being
dead, what Christ said to his Disciples, Our brother Lazarus is asleep, let us
go and wake him. So it is with all our corpses, though they be turned into
dust. Lend me your attentions; Let us all go to Golgotha, the place of dead
men's skuls; look upon them with the eye of faith, as those that will rise in
the resurrection among the just. But if there be any such here, that Saint
Peter speaks of, saying, In the last days there shall come scoffers, denying
the resurrection, we may deal with these faithless as Christ with the Fiddlers,
turn them out of our company, that we have no conversation with them: So that
Christ here being the holy One, and we his members, we shall in the end be holy
ones with Christ.

The last is the hallowing of our Graves; and the Apostle says, He is the
first fruits of them that sleep. Christ risen, and in Heaven, he is there but
the first fruits of the dead in behalf of us. The first fruits of them that
sleep: Alluding to that in the old Law, where the Priests were to take sheaves
out of the field before they were ripe, and to offer them up to God, and by
oblation of those sheaves all the field of Corn was sanctified to the people:
So it is here, Christ is the first fruits, wheresoever man's body be, be it in
the ditch, or on the dunghill, be it in the mawes of birds or beasts, all our
bodies through him are sanctified unto God. So having done with this, I come to
the Hereticallizer, who denies all possibility of resurrection, the Antecedent.
He will stand upon natural reason: Now there is two ways, if I were to deal
with a Jew I would easily confute him; If a Jew, I would stand upon the
principles of our Savior Christ, in his answer to the Sadduces; You err, not
knowing Scriptures, nor the power of God. The Scripture tells you you shall
rise, and where is the power that is in the Scriptures? Also there is Moses
leprous hand, and presently healed; there is Aarons rod, dry, yet presently
budded and blossomed; Sarah being barren, shortly after bears a child; Jonah
three days and three nights in the whales belly and yet rises again. Eze. 37.
There were dry bones, and yet bones creep unto bones, sinews creep unto those
bones, and knit them together, and flesh comes and knits those sinews, and then
God puts life, and then they become men. But we are to deal with the man that
is merely natural, and stands altogether upon his own reason, and therefore
thus: If he will take the pains to go into Arabia, there he may hear of the
Phoenix, that consumes it self in the fire, and another rises out of those
ashes. But that is too far: Come nearer hand, to the Bombyx, the Silkworm, he
dies, and out of his dust comes a Fly. These are yet remote; will you have them
domestical? in our own Land we shall find the like: In some places the Bees,
the Flies, the Wasps are produced out of the Hides of Beasts of diverse kinds:
But except I see a natural reason I will not believe it. Perhaps you will say
with Thomas, I will not believe, unless I see it and feel it. Well, seeing
these will not serve thy turn, what shall I do unto thee? Even as Solomon sent
the Sluggard to the Ant to labor, so must I thee. Saint Paul he sends a
Naturalist or natural Fool to learn of a little seed of Corn the resurrection
from the dead; Thou fool, when thou sowest, the seed lives not before it dies:
and yet you may see it live, you may see it dye, after it is turned to dust, it
lives again: And by this he foolifies all the generation of Philosophers and
Infidels; and as we say, Jannes and Jambres, which withstood Moses by false
miracles, were conquered by one true miracle of Lice; So all these are
confounded in this one seed; and even here is the finger of God, and as much in
this as ever it was in that, to the confusion of those that withstand it. Now
beloved, that you have heard all these points opened, there remains the fourth,
and that is the Moral point. About which I had studied not a little, but
foreseeing I should trespass upon your patience, I have contracted my self
into some few Instructions concerning the Moral part; and the first is this:

That the Resurrection of Christ requires of every Christian a conformity of
holiness of life; and the Apostle will make it good, for thus he says, Romans
6. That as Christ rose again, so should we walk in newness of life: So that
newness of life is a conformity to the Resurrection of Christ. I speak of this
newness of life the rather, because it is a resurrection in it self. So Saint
John, Apoc. 20. Those that are partakers of the first resurrection, says he,
shall never fall into the second death. By the first Resurrection, newness of
life, we are made partakers of the second resurrection; and from hence may
arise diverse instructions. The first shall be this; That all Christian virtues
they take their rising from the doctrine of the resurrection unto eternal life,
that comprehends all virtues that can be imagined, Coloss. 1. Saint Paul gives
a direction that we should live soberly, justly, holily in this present world.
Here Is a Triplicative virtue which contains all others; we must live soberly,
this requires temperance and sobriety, etc. justly, that extends to all
relation we have to Superiors or Governors; and the other is holiness, which
brings upon us all the obligations that we have concerning God and his worship
in this present world: What follows? looking for the hope of the mighty God,
and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Beloved, how should this ravish the hearts of men
to live soberly, justly and holily in this present world? When as the true
Christian regenerate may say with the holy Apostle, that he has an
expectation, an hope, a looking for the appearance, the blessed appearance, the
glorious appearance of God, a mighty God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Here you see that our salvation depends upon these triplicite virtues.
Again, Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 13. says thus, there are the three, Faith, Hope, and
Charity. What have these to do with the resurrection? Certainly the doctrine of
the resurrection is made sure by these: Therefore for Faith first, be it known
unto you, I speak of a living faith, not of a dead faith, void of repentance
and newness of life. This is a dead faith which he calls a Devilish faith;
but I speak of that faith which Saint Paul affirms to work by love: Of this
faith our Savior Christ says, He that believes in me, though he dye, yet
shall be live; Here is living of dying. This is a resurrection, and he that
believes this, does believe he shall rise. The next to Faith is Charity; of
this St. John speaks, We know we are translated from death to life, because we
love the brethren. Therefore love the brethren, because we shall be preserved
from death to life. Now come to open it, and that in the Old Testament, where
it is said, The people of God were tormented, racked, suffered all manner of
persecution, because they looked for a better resurrection, that is, the
resurrection of the body to be better then all the torments and afflictions the
world could lay upon them. Surely beloved, we can look for no better
resurrection then these holy men did that suffered for the resurrection; but we
may better look for it then they, they looked upon it with dim eyes, and they
believed, but we have open eyes, we may see it by most evident demonstrations;
they never saw Christ raised from the dead, reigning in Majesty, in Eternity
and Glory; this doctrine are we made sensible of. Now therefore says the
Apostle, If we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him. So much
for our Hope.

The second point is this: That our first resurrection requires that our
worship and service unto God in holiness be as well performed in body as in
soul. Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.6. Glorify God in your bodies and souls, you
are bought with a price; Glorify God with your bodies; and yet behold greater
then these: Let every man say unto himself, I am created by God both body and
soul, Ergo, I will glorify him in both: But since I have trespassed against my
God, and thereby lost both body and soul; Therefore, thirdly, there comes a
Redeemer unto me, and he suffers for me agonies and pangs both in body and
soul; therefore by this suffering he has freed me from everlasting death and
torments both of body and soul. This is not all, but besides this, the price
spoken of here which is the price of redemption, is also a price purchasing of
glory in the Heavens for my body and soul, and therefore let them that have
bodies and souls know that there is a duty lies upon them to glorify God in
their lives both in their bodies and souls. The next point is this; That the
sinful body has a dead soul; every sinful body wallowing in sin has a dead
soul: So we read, 1 Timothy 1.5. The woman living in pleasure, she was dead though
she lived. Again, the Bishop of Sardis, a wicked Bishop, but yet a Bishop, I am
sure a Bishop; Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead. Our
Savior Christ said unto the survivers of those that were dead, Survivers unto
them, and go and attend their Funeral and Hearse; Go, (says he) let the dead in
sins bury their dead: So you see that these wicked ones they have but the
carcass of Christians. And as nothing is more ugly and odious in the sight of
man then the carcass of man; so there is nothing more detestable in the sight
of God then a wicked, obstinate and impenitent sinner. Again, the mortified
body has a living soul; It is necessary that this be preached unto all the
world, because most of the world have forgot themselves. And the principal part
of Christianity consists in this mortification and sanctification. We all live
in sins, do thou live in actual sin, bodily sin? thou art dead, if thou be
not mortified in them. Give up your bodies a living sacrifice, that is,
mortification; let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. I will give you a
pattern of S. Paul himself, 1 Cor. 9. But I chastise my body, and bring it into
subjection; So then you see that this is a matter on which consists eternal
life. The Apostle tells us, If you mortify the lusts of the flesh, you shall
live, if not, you shall dye. Its a matter of life and death, which is to show
that those that are mortified men have a living soul. Again, we must take heed
of bodily and actual transgressions, for I must tell you that these acts of men
done in their bodies, shall have resurrection with them, even with their
bodies: This is a profitable point, for God sees all things before him, all
things that have been or can be, he sees them all in present, as it were in
present, that is the infiniteness of his Science. Now then what says the
Apostle? We all must appear before the Tribunal-Seat of Christ, and every one
shall give an account of those things that are done in his flesh; fleshly body:
So then whereas the Epicure sings his Ballad, and the burden of his Song is,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; yet death will come, and then
we must give an account of all our actions. So much for my Text.

Because I was told I should make some application concerning the present
occasion, I do therefore address my self and my speech unto you Right
Honorable, and to all your reverend Senate, and to all your Associate
Worthies: First, we must give an acknowledgment unto God, and bless his great
goodness, that has so sanctified the hearts of our Predecessors of former
times to leave such worthy and real Testimonies to the world of their piety and
godly devotion; devotion both for the Church and Houses of God, and charity
unto the poor; these have received their rewards, the full rewards of all their
labors on Earth, in the Heavens, where they shall remain for ever in the
highest Seat of Glory; they are now Canonized by God himself, and have left
themselves in their memories and examples for you and those that shall be able
to walk in their steps. The Roll that I have seen speaks of wonderful blessed
Foundations, of Hospitality for the relief of hundreds, and hundreds, and
thousands. It does not need so much to put them here in your Calendar and
Paper, for the comfort of men, but that their good examples might stir up
others to the like duties of piety and charity, in respect of those that are
the Founders, all their names are registered in the Book of Life for all
Eternity.

My Exhortation unto you must be, that you would enlarge your munificence both
ways, in duties of piety and charity, but especially of charity, because of
the objects before our eyes, the Orphans, that have sung joyfully and
comfortably unto God by way of Thanksgiving. I shall not stand to reason with
you, I shall only apply those things which are appliable unto the men of the
world, as they are worldly men, and apply the promises of God unto them, as
they are worldly, though the promises are all Heavenly, and ye with a
recommendation to men as worldly men; for you look to have habitation here in
the world, behold the poor, that you bestow your charity on, they shall bring
you (you know the place of Scripture, I do but name the words) into eternal
habitations. You labor for treasure, and the promise is, that you shall have
treasure in Heaven. Will you have bags for your treasures? the Gospel is, that
these Orphans, and such like, how mortal soever they may be, yet unto God they
are bags, those bags that will never wear out. Will you have a trade of life
for the best advantage? then without all comparison, it is charitable usury;
the promise is, You shall receive an hundred fold, be the poor what they will
of themselves; the gift is to God, and to Christ, not so much unto them, for be
they wanderers in the world, as we say rogues sometimes, charity is not always
suspicious without cause. What faith the Wise man to us, Cast thy bread upon
the waters, for after many days thou shall find it with advantage; that thou
give unto such a man, though unworthy: what says Job? his loins shall bless
thee; thou give mortal things, and he gives immortal blessings, his loins
shall bless thee. Whatsoever thou do to the poor, their loins, and their
back, and their belly shall bless thee, for it comes from God. But withal let
us know and remember why it is that the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior would set
down the tenure of salvation or damnation upon the giving or not giving unto
the poor, it is, because it is such a work if rightly done, that proceeds from
a true faith, and therefore God knows that it is a work that proceeds from true
charity; and those that do thus, and make conscience of it, as giving it for
Gods sake indeed, and Christ's sake indeed, certainly they are Christ's, and will
walk according to the Precepts of Faith. And now I conclude with prayer, etc.

And thus this Pillar, this reverend Father of the Church of God, this sound
Divine, as heretofore he has asserted the truth of our Religion by his
handwriting against grand Apostates, and against all the Chaos of Antichrists
devises, as then by his pen, so now by his tongue, did vindicate the
Resurrection, which is the Fundamental Article of our Religion; for Resurrectio
a mortuis est fides Christianorum, the resurrection from the dead is the faith
of Christians; and if you will know what fruit there is from Christ's rising
from the dead, the third Preacher will inform you, and I shall use no other
Introduction then his own. I will show you that it agrees well with the
resurrection from the dead (for the mercy of God flows from this resurrection
of our Savior, for he dyed for our sins, and rose that our souls might be
saved) in that melting Sermon of his which was anchored upon that place in the
Psalms

A Sermon Preached by Doctor Potter Bishop Carlisle, at the Spittle on Tuesday
in Easter week.
PSALM 130.4. But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared.
THE words are an Appeal of the Princely Prophet David from the Throne of
Justice to the Throne of Goodness; and are considerable in their Context and
in their Text. First, in their Context, and that three several ways: First,
they must be considered in way of consequence, as they follow the former verse:
First, he speaks of the Judgment of God; If thou O Lord, should enter into
Judgment, who could stand? And then he comes in with a discourse of Mercy. And
secondly, as in order, so he tempers Justice and Mercy together. Thirdly, as
they are a cry of perplexity, he cries in the first verse, complains in the
second verse, fears in the third, and here he resolves to set upon Mercy.

The first point from the first of these is, That we can neither sensibly nor
safely Preach mercy in forgiveness of sins, unless as we do acquaint you with
the Justice of God, as in the former place; so in the second place we must make
and contemper in our meditations the thoughts of mercy with the thoughts of
justice. Thirdly, though the action of sin may be short, yet the passion will
be long. A sin may be soon committed, but the pardon of sin is not so soon had.

First, That before we can sensibly or safely Preach the mercies of God in the
forgiveness of sins unto you, we must acquaint you with the justice of God, as
in the verse before my Text. If thou entrest into Judgment, who shall stand?
But there is mercy with thee, etc. that thou may be feared.

It was the method that was always used in the Old and New Testament. Our
first parents hiding themselves through terror of spirit among the bushes,
when God would Preach the Gospel unto them, he first arraigns them, and then
passes a promise of mercy, That the seed of the woman should break the Serpents
head. Thus it was in the Law, before a man could know God, he must come to
Mount Sinai, and the Law is a Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ. Thus it was
at the giving of the holy Ghost, there was a rushing of a mighty wind, and then
the holy Ghost came into their minds and hearts. This was the method of that
Preacher; then in the New Testament, first, men must be weary and heavy laden,
and then Christ comes to ease, Matthew. 11.8. I came not to call the righteous
(those that imagine themselves so) but sinners to repentance, those that are so
wise to see it, and so humble to say it. No expectation of healing from the
brazen Serpent, but only from those that were hurt and look up. First, see
your selves led into captivity by the Devil, and then you are fit to receive
infranchisement and deliverance from God; and this that good Father applied
unto our selves. First, let it be an Instruction for us to consider, though
Hell fire be flasht in our faces, God does it but as parents to their children,
they hold them over the fire to make them afraid of falling into the fire. The
Law is a Schoolmaster to Christ. First, Law and then Gospel. First, plow up the
Fallow-ground of our hearts, and then sow the word, Jer. 4.4. according to the
method of Gods appearing to Elijah; First, a blustering wind, then an
Earthquake, after that Fire, and last comes God in a still voice: First, look
for Earthquakes, Winds, and Fires in the soul, and after all for comfort. Thus
it is Gods most usual way. And then secondly, what shall we say to those carnal
Gospellers that are all for the calm doctrines of the times? those that
complain they cannot sit quiet in their seats for the threatenings of some
Ministers, they would have a Gospel of Gold, and Salvation of Silver, and
Testaments of precious stones, and go to Heaven upon featherbeds. But beloved,
I had rather speak a thousand words to comfort then one to discomfort, but it
is for the good of your souls, and for the glory of our Savior; we cannot,
dare not, must not do otherwise; we must come home to your consciences, come
home to them; so the Prophets, so the Apostles have done in all ages, they have
denounced the judgments of God against all their Auditors; and did you but hear
those yells that are now in Hell, those that cry out, I may thank that
flattering Preacher for these pains, if he had told me of this I had not come
hither. Think of it now, that you feel it not hereafter. In the next place, it
is good for us to temper the thoughts of mercy and justice together; not to
talk of justice only, but also of mercy. My Song shall be of Mercy and
Judgment, says David, Psalm 101.1. and Deuteronomy. 28. Half the Chapter speaks of
judgment, and half of mercy, Deuteronomy. 11. Blessings on one Mountain, and Cursings
upon another. Blessings upon Mount Gerizim, and cursings upon Mount Ebal: And
indeed there are two main rocks between which most men fall, Presumption and
Despair; we are between them like Susanna between the Judges; we are between
them as between Sylla and Charybdis. We may say of Desperation as of Saul, it
has slain his thousands, but of Presumption as of David, it has slain his ten
thousands; and therefore though we diet our selves with the mercies of God, we
must not glut with them; and this was applied by him unto the souls of Preacher
and people: First, to Preachers, we should take a lesson from hence, that when
we find that there is mors in olla, death in the pot, discomfort in the heart,
then we must take the herb of comfort and put it in. That hand is hewn out of
the hardest rock that will not administer comfort to the soul that needs it. We
must, like the good Samaritan, pour oil and wine into your sores; wine to open
them, and oil to supple them; speak not of judgment alone; God did never intend
this unto you, and do not deal all of mercy, but think of judgment also; for if
God had never so much mercy in store, there is none for you presumptuous
sinners. That was the second consideration. The third consideration was, That
though the action of sin be short, yet the passion is long; though a great sin
be soon committed, yet a small sin is not so soon remitted. Look upon David, he
committed two great sins, adultery and murder, the adultery he committed with
the look of an eye, the murder with the turn of an hand, it was but writing a
Letter to Joab; but though the story be never so short in Samuel, yet the
repentance is long in the 51. Psalm; there^ much ado: Cause the bones that thou
have broken to rejoice; Wash me, purge me, cleanse me, purify me with hyssop;
the sin of one night did cause the tears of many nights. Behold Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. he did pray and pray, and put up prayer upon prayer, and did
humble himself greatly, he prayed and he prayed; this was no vain repetition,
but prayer upon prayer, suit upon suit, and all little enough to obtain mercy
from God; God is quickly offended, but not so soon pleased; the wound is soon
taken, but not so soon cured; our sins are compared to debts in the Lords
Prayer, a man may run more into debt one day, then he can get out of many
days; God would have it so that his mercy might come sweeter unto us. See it
in Joab and David, Joab entreated of David that Absalom might come and see him,
David was content he should go to his house, but he must not see his face. Thou
that sinnest, God may suffer thee to come into thy house, nay, into the
Congregation, for the present, but there may be a Veil upon his face, he may
not suffer us to see his face for anger. Oh then woe be to those that presume
as though they had their pardon sealed. As one relates of an uproar among the
members, and the will would command the eye and the hand, you shall do this and
that; the old Beldam the flesh wondering to hear such an uproar, starts up and
asks the reason of it, saying, I have been quiet so long, and so I will be
still; you give way to sin, but you know not which way to get out of it again,
that is the main thing; the prodigal son after his going from his father, do you
think he could think of coming in a day, that was going but half a day? Is it
possible we should continue in sin forty, fifty, sixty years and then turn to
God presently? no beloved, there is more time goes to this, and therefore be not
presumptuous, take heed of trusting too much upon the mercy of God, not having
an eye upon the justice of God, and take heed of committing sin upon
presumption of an easy cure; we must not think to come to Heaven easier then
David did, he cries and he calls, he weeps and mourns like a Dove. Joseph and
Mary lost their son but a days journey, they were finding him two or three
days: And thus much for the consideration of the Text, in regard of the
context, as it reflects upon the words before. Now of the Text; There is mercy
with thee that thou may be feared; mercy, mercy with thee: There are several
kinds of mercy, the word is very large, mercies of prevention, and mercies of
assistance, mercies of subvention, and mercies of support; but certainly the
mercy of God is especially intended here, and therefore some Translations read
it, There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared; it is with thee,
it is always at home, God has it in his hand about him, close unto him, There
is mercy with thee that thou may be feared; and what kind of mercy? not
merely pardon of sin, as I pardon a debt or injury, and there is an end, but the
propitiation for sins. It is in some Translations, There is propitiation with
thee, etc. Thus there is mercy with thee: whence arises this Instruction, That
God is prompt and ready to have mercy upon and forgive a penitent sinner, when
he seeks to him. I say; God is prompt, etc. Though God be a just God, yet there
is mercy with him. Now this mercy of God it is to be considered three ways
that are very observable: First, consider the mercy of God comparatively.
Secondly, consider it absolutely. Thirdly, in the circumstances of it. First,
consider the mercy of God comparatively, in respect of his justice. I know if
you speak of the Attributes of God, they are all Essential alike, but if you
speak of the expression of them toward us, God may be said to be more merciful
then just. You see that God when he came to Adam, he came to judge him in the
cool of the evening, he staid long; but he sent laborers into his Harvest
betimes. We find that Ninev^^ had forty days given it before it should be
destroyed; but God made haste, he did run to meet the prodigal child, he made
haste. It is easy to pull down, but it is hard to build up, and God takes more
delight in building, then in pulling down: you see the mercy of God expressed
unto Adam, unto Sodom, unto the Prodigal; and we may make comparison of it unto
the Firmament, God made it in one day; but God would not destroy the City of
Nineveh under forty days, and many hundred years before he will destroy the
world. Again, the world was made in six days, but you see it is six thousand
years before he will destroy it; he is more prone unto mercy then unto justice;
nay, take it in the executing of justice, he showed justice in destroying
Sodom, but mercy in sparing Lot, he showed justice upon the old world, but
mercy in preserving Noah; God showed his justice on the Jews in casting of them
off, but mercy to the Gentiles in calling of them. There was his justice fell
upon our Savior, but by it his mercy upon us, that from his Cross there should
come cure to us. There was justice in sending an Angel to destroy Jerusalem,
but mercy in sending another Angel to mark those that mourned in Jerusalem.
Thus you see how God does mingle his justice and mercy together. So Exodus 3.4,
5, 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious, abundant in, etc.

Every word has its weight. Jehovah, thou have broke thy promise with him, but
he is Jehovah, and will not err, the Lord, mighty and powerful God; it is a
work of power to forgive many sins, but he is the Lord mighty to save and to
forgive; thou art sinful, but God is merciful; thou art graceless, but God is
gracious; thou have broken thy vows made unto him, but he is true of promise
unto thee. And though thy sins be great for quantity, and heinous for quality,
he forgives iniquities, transgressions and sins of all sorts. And therefore 2
Cor. 1. God is called the Father of mercy. The natural Be may make honey
naturally, but it does not sting naturally, that is, not without provocation.
See it also of God in his justice upon Sodom; when Abraham did put up a suit
for Sodom, that if there were but fifty persons found there, he would not
destroy it, and came down by degrees from fifty to forty, from forty to thirty,
from thirty to twenty, from twenty to ten; and it is observed that God did
never leave granting till Abraham did leave asking. It may be if he had come to
less, God would have spared them; he did so in another place; If there be but
one to stand in the gap I will spare them. Look upon Manasseh a most abominable
Idolater, who cut Esau in pieces with an iron saw, and made the streets of
Jerusalem to run with blood, yet when he prayed unto God, God did forgive him.
Mary Magdalene that had seven Devils, she washed our Saviors feet with the
hairs of her head, that had been nets to catch fools; bestowed that costly
ointment which she had used upon her self, upon Christ. Christ accepts of it,
he applauds it, he rewards it; he is prone unto mercy, and more prone unto
mercy then unto judgment. The Prodigal son when he returns home to his Father,
his Father runs and meets him when he was afar off, and he does not strike him
or chide him, but he falls upon his neck, puts his ring upon his finger. The
Shepherd when he finds his sheep that was lost, he does not beat it, but he
lays it upon his neck. Thirdly, consider the circumstances of this mercy.
Consider first, who it is that does forgive. Who? why the God of Heaven and
Earth, he that has Vials of wrath in his hand, and could pour them upon us, we
that are his inferiors and his enemies: we though we do bear with our
superiors, we will trample upon our inferiors; but God does not so.

Thirdly, Consider what God in mercy does forgive us, and that is sin. Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is pardoned. David does
not place his blessings in his Beauty, he was ruddy of complexion; nor in his
government, though he was a great King; nor in his preferment, he was taken
from the sheep to be head over Israel: But here is his happiness, Blessed is
he whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is pardoned. Nay, how often
does God do this? seven times? no, but as often as Christ commands us to
forgive our brethren, seventy seven times, as often as we forgive our brethren,
so we offend not out of malice, but return and repent, God will have mercy on
us. There went but one word to the making of the world, but there go many to
the saving of a soul, 1 Pet. 1.8. And now judge and examine if you can imagine
what a depth and height there is in this mercy of God. I come to the
Application in brief, and so to put an end to this Sermon. This may be an
Antidote, a Preservative against desperation unto poor dejected souls and
disconsolate sinners, that God is as merciful as just, and delights more in
mercy then in justice. What a precious balsome is this for a wounded sinner?
And consider first, that desperation it is most injurious unto our selves, a
wound that cannot possibly be healed by us. If a Surgeon lays on a
plaster, and we cast it away, what hope is there of cure for us? And if God
sends us the comforts of the Gospel, and if we sit down sullen and cast them
away, what comfort can we have? Desperation is compared to a beast with horns,
it pushes against mercy. What for a man to despair of mercy, is it but to spill
his blood upon the ground, or to throw it in the air, with Julian, or to hang
it on a Tree, with Judas? that God should drink to us in a cup of salvation,
and we to pledge him in a cup of damnation, that is derogatory from God: The
Devil comes to us, and says, Thy sins are too great, the mercies of God are
too precious for thee; shall we believe that liar, rather then he that says, I
have been wounded for you, I will take your sins upon me, and heal you? Will
you make God a liar, and the Devil true?

Secondly, look upon the steps of desperation, the several steps of it, he did
name diverse Ingratitude Infidelity.
steps, but insisted only upon this, to wit, Presumption. The wicked man begins
in presumption, but ends in despair. When their flatteries have touled them a
long time on, and persuaded them that their case is good, at last their souls
are stifled with the consideration of their sins by presumption: what more
contrary? and yet presumption it is the very rode way to desperation. If I am
abroad long, either in the Sun, or in the Snow, my eyes will be so dazeled I
shall hardly see. When I have been in the glorious Sunshine of the mercy of
God, in the Halcyon days of prosperity, I cannot taste any thing but of a
Savior. A presumptuous man is like unto one that is asleep upon a rock, and
dreaming of a rock of Pearl suddenly starts up and falls into the Sea. Take
heed the Devil do not find you upon this pinnacle, upon presumption, and so
cast you down to eternal destruction. Shall I be bold and presumptuous, because
God is merciful? Shall I cut and gash my self, because a good Surgeon lives
where I live? Shall I use spectacles to go over a Bridge to make the Bridge
seem better, and so perish? Look not upon the mercy as if it were greater then
it is; no, as God is merciful to penitent, so he is just to impenitent sinners.

And so this reverend Father of our Church who was in Heaven while he was on
Earth, preached against those two main enemies of our salvation, Desperation
and Presumption; His words were all excellent, of the justice and mercy of God,
and the merits of our Savior. But what will become of all this? what comfort
springs from the mercy of God, from the forgiveness of sins unto us, if our
hearts, our thoughts creep still on the ground, if we be taken up with Earthly
things, and prefer riches and honor before God? and therefore came to the
chance of our fourth and last Divine, to draw up our hearts, (sursum corda)
unto Heaven. If you look for mercy lift up your hearts where it is to be had;
wherefore should we look down, or kill flies any longer? our conversations must
be in Heaven, if our hearts be in Heaven. This was the bag out of which he did
fetch treasure new and old, precious treasure.

A Sermon Preached by Doctor Wesphale, at the Spittle on Wednesday in Easter
week.
PHILIPPIANS 3.20, 21. But our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look
for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who shall change our vise bodies that
they may be like unto his glorious body, according to that mighty word whereby
he is able to subdue all things.
THE words may be read two ways, either For our conversation is in Heaven: or,
But our conversation is in Heaven: If For our conversation is in Heaven, it is
an argument to enforce a duty set down in the seventeenth verse, That we should
not mind the things here below, for Saint Paul and the rest of the Saints have
their conversation in Heaven. If you will read it (but) then there is another
reference in the eighteenth and nineteenth verses. There were many false
Apostles whose glory was their shame, and minded earthly things; but there was
a distinction between true and false Apostles: But our conversation is in
Heaven, wherever the conversation of false Apostles is.

Take it which way you will, by way of a motive, or a distinction; it is not so
much for us to know what Saint Paul did, but what we ought to do, what we
should do. There are four things considerable in the Text: First, that the
Christians conversation it is in Heaven. Secondly, his expectation, he looks
for our Lord and Savior there. Thirdly, his happiness, who shall change our
vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body. Fourthly, the ground of
this hope and confidence, according to that mighty power whereby he is able to
subdue all things.

Having taken his rise from the first of these, the Christians conversation,
But our conversation is in Heaven. The word Conversation is in the Old
Testament every where up and down. For Conversation the word here used is
Politeuma, and it is a word that concerns those that live in Cities. So Greg.
Nazianzen, Beza and Tertullian, do interpret it. Tertullian says, But our
Burgessship is in Heaven; and so Beza, We are Burgesses or freemen of Heaven.
But Beza and the rest they have fallen short of this Politeuma: It signifies more
then a Burgessship or freedom, but they are Citizens; you make many free that
are far from you; you account them only Citizens that inhabit among you. Saint
Paul did excus^ himself from rods, by saying he was a Roman, but yet he was
born at Tarsus; he was free there, but yet he was not a true Citizen there: So
there is a medium between these two. So Anaxagoras when it was laid to his
charge, that he followed his study so much that he did not care for his
Country, no, says he, but I do, and pointing up his finger, said, that Heaven
was his Country, I care for that. So says David, I am a stranger; he was not
only a stranger when he was in Philistia, with the King of Gath, but in this
earth, as all my fathers were. When I am at home, I am not at home; though I am
in my Country, yet I am not in my own Country: For our conversation is in
Heaven. Heaven it is the Haven of the Saints, God has prepared Heaven for
them, and them for Heaven. There are two Cities whereof Saint Paul speaks, the
one he calls Heaven, the other Earth, the one Jerusalem, the other. Babylon;
Let every man consider to which City he belongs, for all of us belong either to
Babylon or Jerusalem, either above or below. Monicha the mother of Saint
Austin, when she saw her son converted, cries out, Nescio quid faciam, etc.
It Is true the time was that I desired some length of time to see thee become a
good Christian, but now I see that performed, what if I dye, if I dye, now I
see my son a true Orthodox Christian, and a right honest man? she cared for no
more. But if you will ask the Church of Rome, especially the more Ancient, or
some others before the Church of Rome came into the world, they will say an
Hermites life is that which is the most Heavenly. As Paul the Hermit prefers a
Monastical life, as if Saint Paul had said, In Cellis, and not In Celsis, in
Caves, and not in Heaven: But that life though it keeps them from a great deal
of evil, so it hinders them from doing a great deal of good: a contemplative
life it may be a blear-eyed life; A contemplative life were good, if God had no
other business for us in this world but to leave our parents and friends, our
professions and callings, and to run into Cells; this is not the right
conversation. We may use the world, but not love it, says Saint Paul; use the
world, but not abuse it, by riot, gluttony, surfets, excess, which is a
fighting with God with his own weapons; if you love the world, you do abuse the
world. But now let us consider our selves, what we are. There are many in the
world that have nothing to do in the world but to care for the world: They are
of the earth, earthly, as Saint Paul speaks, that think of the earth, talk of
the earth, and do nothing but trade in the earth: So that silver and gold may
flow in, they desire no more, they see nothing sufficient but that. To whom
shall I liken this generation? to Bees and to Ants. The Ants they are a Nation,
a wise Nation, as Solomon calls them, though not a strong, there is an
Aristocracy among them. But now there are the Bees, and they have a Monarchy,
and they are busy too. So also men are wise in their generation this way, they
remember that Summer will not always last, but that Winter will come; that
health will not last always, but sickness will come: But Oh who looks for
their souls? who provides that when Earth forsakes them, Heaven may find them?
I will give you the character of those whose conversations are in Heaven, to
characterise them: We use to say of a man that is dead, he is a man of another
world; and so true Christians they are men of another world. It Is true you
find them here, but they are here and not here; while they are below, they are
above. They do not slight the favors of God in the world, but they do not use
them as though they loved them. They do not hate the world, nor do they fear
the frown of the world. A good Christian takes care to shift himself out of the
world with faith and a good Conscience, with the peace of God. It Is true he is
imparted in worldly things, but he has an heavenly mind. He never ventures
upon any worldly business, but his thoughts and his heart are lifted up in the
midst of his worldly business, with many ejaculations and short prayers. When
things fall (...) according to his expectation, he sings Hallelujah's and
Hosanna's; when things fall out crosly, he looks for better days to come; he
has sorrow here, but joys hereafter: He will lighten himself in any storm, by
casting his estate away, one thing one way, and another thing another way, so
he may come safe to Heaven. His eyes are upon that Celestial place where the
Angels are, and the spirits of just men made perfect, and where the body is, to
which the Eagles do resort; and they look for our Savior Christ from thence:
and that leads me from the first part, which is the Christians conversation,
unto the second, the Christians expectation. From whence we look for our Lord,
etc. And herein there are three particulars considerable:

First, the person expected, our Lord and Savior. Secondly, the place from
whence he is expected, from Heaven: And thirdly, the act it self, Expectation.

First, the person expected, our Lord and Savior, Jesus and Christ, both
answer one another; the two latter are but explicable to the former; not to
hold you long upon these beginnings of Divinity, although they are profitable:
First, he is our Jesus, our Savior. Our Savior says Tully, what word's that?
reading it in an Inscription over a door in Syracuse: What mean the words? Non
possunt exprimi, it cannot be expressed with one word. Will you say it is
Servator, or Salvator? it is a made word. Tertullian in his African Language,
will call it Salutifica; but this comes from the former. Well, but says Saint
Austin, he is a Savior which is a Savior, and will be a Savior. He came at
the first to save our bodies from sin, he shall come to save our souls, and he
shall come from Heaven. This is the name by which we must look to be saved, and
there is no other name under Heaven. He is a Lord also as well as a Jesus: Lord
is a name of honor, and a name of power. A name of honor, and therefore given
unto Kings, unto Priests, unto Prophets, and unto great men. Unto Kings; My
Lord the King every where used. Unto Priests; so Hannah unto Eli. To the
Prophets; so to Elisha. To great men; so to Naaman the Syrian; My Lord, if the
Prophet, etc. And therefore Christ being a greater King then David, a greater
Priest then Eli, a greater Prophet then Elisha, does well deserve this title of
Lord. And secondly, in regard of power, there is in Christ a double power;
there is potestas innata, and potestas data, a power innate, and a power given.
And he is sometimes called the Lord, with addition, the Lord of the world, the
Lord of his Church; sometimes he is called the Lord, by way of Appropriation,
My Lord (...) my God, says Thomas: The Lord said unto my Lord, says David.
Sometimes in a way of Foundation, My Lord the King; but what is the Lord without
his honor? If Christ be a Lord, then in the first place let us honor him. If
I be a Lord, where is my fear? Secondly, let us obey him: To give him the name,
and to deny obedience, it were to mock him. Thirdly, submit to his Law in all
things whatsoever; It is the Lord, says Eli, let him do what seems good in
his own eyes. Fourthly, you must part with any thing for this God. They let
loose the Foal and the Ass, because the Lord has need of them. It is the
Lords, wherefore will thou keep it from him?

Fifthly, take heed of giving thy self over to any lust to be Lord; Pride would
be Lord, (as Tertullian says) Idleness would be my Lord, Vain-gl^^^ would be
my Lord, but thou only shall be my Lord.

Sixthly, we must not use our own means; we cannot say our tongues are our own,
our hands are our own, we have a Lord over them and us. You that are Lords on
earth, have a Lord in Heaven; You that are Kings on earth, have a King in
Heaven.

And lastly, we must expect this Lord, we must look for him. And so I come from
the first particular of this general, the person expected, to the second, the
place from whence he is expected, and that is from Heaven; But our conversation
is in the Heavens. Out of which Heavens we must expect our Savior; it is a
dissonant in the expression, and it is but a circumstance, but we must pause
upon it. Heaven is the place from whence we expect Christ. When Christ is in
Heaven, he cannot be on earth: Christ is not upon the earth bodily, as the
Papists would have him, but he is now in Heaven, and the Heavens must contain
him till the time of the restitution of all things. It Is true, Christ is here
by his protecting power, by his Word and by his Love, and by his Spirit he
walks amidst the golden Candlesticks. I am he, you know the Text says, but not
in a bodily way, he has not lost the essential property of his Godhead, he is
in all places in heavenly things, he has called us together to sit down with
him not only in hope; we are in Heaven even while we are on earth. Securi
estis, etc. says Tertullian: Oh my flesh and spirit be you secure, Christ is
gone to prepare Heaven for you; he is gone, he has left us the pledge of his
Spirit that he will come to us, and he has taken with him the pledge of our
flesh to assure us that we shall come to him. What would we have more? What
better rock can we rest upon then this, our Savior is in Heaven? There Is a
double expectation of our Savior Christ: First, his first coming was expected;
Oh that thou would rend the Heavens and come down! Esa. 66. He is called the
desire of the Nations. Heb. 2. The hope of the people of God. We see how Hannah
the Prophetess, and the rest, did wait for the coming of Christ; and there is
another expectation, and that is of the second coming of Christ: And thus we
must expect our Savior, but how? after what manner? There are many conditions
we must expect him in: We must first look for him with faith, and with
assurance that he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; he will come
in his own time, but we must wait for him. Secondly, we must wait for his
coming with the love of his coming. There are many accused as Malefactors, that
look for the Judge to come to absolve them, and to deliver them out of prison;
Others to condemn them: one looks with an hateful and an angry eye, the other
with a loving, expecting, and a longing eye: So the Saints of Christ, they wait
and long for his coming, they are sick of love, and desire to be united to him,
not with remiss affections, but with ardent love, intensively, and yet
patiently expecting him. To him that believes, he will make haste to come and
sup with him. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

And then lastly, we must look for this coming of our Savior with care and
with Conscience; 1 Pet. 3.11. We look for a new Heaven, and a new Earth,
according to his promise. Consider therefore what manner of persons we ought to
be, if we look for the Resurrection, for Christ's coming in all holiness. The
word in the Original is in all holinesses. There are many have forms of
godliness, but they deny the power of it. Oh the swearing, the lying, the
Sabbath-breaking, the murdering, the abuse and injuring one of another! does
this fit us for the coming of Christ? with what tongues can we say, Come Lord
Jesus, when we live so basely, and entertain such horrid crimes? we must be
careful as well as expecting Christians; we must live in heaven, and therefore
expect our Savior thence, that he may change our vile bodies to be like unto
his glorious body, when he shall come in glory. The very creatures groan for
the coming of Christ, the very creatures desire a dissolution, and much more
Christians. It is to put forth the horn and the head as a Watchman out of his
Tower, to see who draws near, or whether it be day or no: So we must long and
look for the coming of our Savior, and that we may enjoy happiness of him,
that he may change our vile bodies to be like unto his glorious body. And so I
come unto the third particular, the happiness of the Saints.

And first, here we may see what our bodies are; and secondly, what they shall
be: They are for the present vanity, they shall be glorious. First, what they
are for the present, vile, vile bodies; I may say, bodies of vileness. But you
will say, do not I derogate from my God, to call it a vile body? No, I may
honor my God, and dishonor my body. It is his glory that he has put such
treasure in earthen and vile vessels, that he should transform a vile into a
glorious body. This is his honor: Let me a little set a gloss upon the body,
before I call it vile. The body of man it is Gods Masterpiece, an Artificial
work. The other works of God may be called the works of his fingers, but the
body of man is called the work of Gods hands. I am curiously wrought, I am
wonderfully made: Look upon the embroidery of thy veins, upon thy sinews, how
entire, how interwoven and intertwisted; the countenance of man looks upwards,
when all beasts look downwards; and though there be many faces, yet all agree
in one visage, and yet they all differ in something: the eye of man it is the
watchman of the soul, it is a most goodly part, and a prime piece of
Architecture; and the hand it is an instrument of instruments, how easily and
quickly we can call it from one affair unto another! And yet though this body
be so glorious, you see what we have made it, a vile body; a vile body in three
respects:

First of all, in respect of the original of it, and that whereof it is
compounded. Secondly, in respect of the accidents unto which it is subject.
Thirdly, in respect of the close and conclusion of all, of that into which it
shall be once turned.

First, inspect of the original of our bodies: What are they but earth? The
name Adam will mind us of it, it signifies earth, earth comes of earth, nay,
it comes of clay, says Eliphaz in Job; nay, not so properly, our bodies are so
many disordered matters, not earth but dust; dust, the worst and most
contemptible; nay, not dust, rather out of the dust, if there be any thing
worse then dust in dust, of that was man made: You see from whence we come,
though that Absalom and Adonijah were never so proper, and tall, and beautiful,
yet for all that they come from the earth, they were but a piece of dust and
clay; though you be never so beautiful, or never so artificially adorn your
selves, though you do frizzle and circumcise your selves, you do but adorn a
piece of clay, a piece of earth: Suppose you do wear gold, and jewels, and
precious stones, yet you cannot make it otherwise then a vile body, a vile
piece of earth. Saint Paul gives it the right name, a piece of earth, a vile
body. Again, suppose the body were never so seemingly beautiful, or better
invested or clothed then others, yet all is earth; the Debtor and the Creditor,
the King and the subject, the Noble and the Peasant, all vile, all earth. We
have our fair China-dishes, yet we account them but earth, all earth as well as
other vessels. Put silver into an earthen vessel, it is still earthen: and this
is the nature of our bodies in respect of their original.

Again, in the second place, in regard of the several casualties to which our
bodies are obnoxious; you see how we are subject to hunger, and thirst, and
cold, these are natural, the body is invested and shrouded with these. But for
casualties; our bodies are subject to be burned, hanged, drowned: by which we
may see that man is but mere vanity; and though all things come by the
Providence of God, yet we may call them casualties. We are subject to many
infirmities: How many diseases are there in this body? Pliny faith in his time
there were three hundred diseases; and how many diseases are there in this old
and decrepit age? an hundred and twelve diseases of the eyes, in the breast, in
the head, in the heart. I cannot stand to instance in all: you see how we are
infested and troubled with all these, and for our cures of them trees and
berries, herbs, and members, and parts of beasts, and all little enough;
beholden to all things for every thing; to the Heart for the horn, to the Ox
for the gall; nay, that which we scorn to touch in our health, we are beholding
to in our sickness, as Doves dung, poison, and the like. Will you conclude now
that these bodies are vile? May I not say with Saint Bernard, that the body it
is a Magazine of misery, a sink and puddle of corruption?

Thirdly, it is vile also in respect of the conclusion, the end and close of
it, We are dust, and unto dust we must return, Eccles. 12.7. Sarah though she
were never so beautiful in the eyes of Abraham, yet he desires a piece of
ground of the Ekronites to bury his dead out of his sight, he could not endure
her in his sight. Many times our bodies are buried in the bellies of beasts, as
it was with Jezebel, (as your Preacher told you) in the bellies of Fishes, as
Pharaoh, and many in the mawes of birds, as many slain in battle. When we come
to the most honorable burial, the best is to go to the Earth, and what becomes
of us then? why then we are food for the worms; sometimes they lay hold upon us
before we come to the grave, so on Herod, Theocrates, and Sylla the Dictator,
and Maximinus, all eaten of worms. Take heed, there are worms creep out of a
man before he dies; There was an Heathen that had this disease, and desired
that the Christians might not hear of it. And a King within our memory, in
these Western parts, did call his son upon his deathbed, and showed him these
beasts upon his breast, which struck him to the heart that he died. Job was
troubled with the worms too, Job 7. full of worms; and God threatens to
Nebuchadnezzar, Esa. 14. That there should be worms beneath him, and worms
above him, worms should be his covering. Consider this, you that do pamper your
selves, as if you should never die, this is all you can do, you do but make the
more meat for worms, and the more flesh you have, the more meat you provide for
worms. Consider this, you that tumble over in your wardrobes, you do but clothe
and adorn that which is worms meat in time. You that boast so of your pedigree
and descent, and you will not take it as you have done, go to Job and David,
they will tell you what your kindred is; I have said unto a worm, thou art my
father, and unto rottenness, thou art my mother. Thus you see what we are, food
for worms; but let us take heed we meet not with another worm, and that is the
worm of Conscience, it is no matter though other worms eat us. Though I be meat
for worms, says Job, yet I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see
him with these eyes, etc. But the worm of Conscience shall never die, the fire
of Hell shall never go out. And if your bodies be vile of themselves, make them
not viler. The Drunkard he makes himself a swine, and the Glutton he makes it
an hoggeshead, the adulterer makes his body the member of an harlot; yet with a
good Conscience, though this be our misery, that they are vile bodies, yet this
shall be our happiness, that they shall be made like unto his glorious body.

And there are four special indowments or privileges of a glorious body,
Impassibility, Activity, Spirituality and Clarity: First Impassibility; we
shall be past suffering at the last day; sentire est pati, even to feel is to
suffer now, and in every action there is a passion; but it shall not be so
hereafter, when our bodies shall be changed, then there shall be no sorrow, no
fainting, no crying: Farewell Gout, and Stone, and Strangury, and all; if I
shall be brought to happiness, I shall be brought to safety.

Secondly, there is Activity; here our bodies are dull and slow, these Asses of
ours must be beaten, and spurred, and whipped to do any good; our spirit may be
willing, when our flesh is weak. It shall not be so hereafter, we shall be
vigorous, and active, and lively, and these our bodies which are now so dull,
shall be then lively, and go on with cheerfulness.

And thirdly, it is a spiritual body; corpus spirituale, a spiritual body, but
not a spirit; it shall be spiritual, but not a spirit.

Fourthly, it shall be a clear body, a clarified body, that is the fourth
prerogative of a glorified body, Daniel 12.1. The righteous shall shine like
the stars in the Firmament, and those that convert many to righteousness, like
the Sun for ever and ever; nay, more then this, our Savior goes farther, they
shall shine, sicut Sol in potestate, like the Sun in its strength; yet farther
here in the Text, our bodies shall be like unto his glorious body. What say
thou, Paul, faith Saint Chrysostom to Saint Paul here, Do thou know what
thou say? What like unto Christ's glorious body? That body that sits at Gods
right hand? that body that is worshipped by Angels? Yes, like unto his glorious
body. Let me then look for the saving of my soul: Let the world weep for what
they please, I will weep more for the loss of my body and soul. I wonder,
says Saint Chrysostom, That men should give away their souls, throw them away
upon trifles, to disrobe themselves of this transcendent glory, to lose such a
glory as this is, to be made like unto the glorious body of our Savior. Will thou cast away this soul? what a madness is it of thee? Many men do compare
the pain of loss with the pain of sense which the damned have in Hell, and do
think the pain of loss to be worse then the pain of sense. To lose the sight
of my Savior, to lose this glory that I should have arrived at, this sticks
more at me then all the pains of Hell could do, so I may enjoy my God. O Lord,
whatever thou take from me, take not from me this glory, this eternal glory:
Lord, here cut me, and slay me, do what thou will with me, only save my soul.
There are many losses in this world, of husbands, of children, of goods by
unfaithful servants, by fire, by irreligious and prodigal children; but these
are not to be named when we speak of the loss of Heaven. And therefore to
conclude this point, I lose my father, my mother, my husband, my wise, my
children; but from this, this loss, this eternal loss of the soul, good Lord
deliver us.

And thus much the fourth Preacher. He was also even in Heaven while he was on
earth, as his Text speaks, Our conversation is in Heaven; and if ever there
were a lively Commentary upon the Text, his Preaching was the Commentary it
self, he was an example next to the example of Saint Paul, while he preached he
spoke as if he had been in Heaven.

And thus have I run this race, done this task laid upon me, with my small
abilities: I hope you will not lay unto my charge the slips, the infirmities
which have passed from me.

The three last, they were old Disciples of Christ, they made among them two
hundred and thirty or two hundred and forty years; Christ does love old
Disciples, and he loves young ones; he loves old Disciples, because they hold
out so long, and he loves young Disciples, because they begin so soon. Juniores
Discipulos Christus diligit, etc. Christ loved his young Disciples best,
because they began early; he loves his old Disciples, because they cleave
closely unto him. But the Tyrant time requires another discourse of me; but I
must tell you before hand that it will be but as a dinner of herbs after a
Feast of fat things: Take it as it is.

You have heard of the death of our Savior, in the first; of the resurrection
of our Savior, and of his manner of rising, in the second; you have heard of
the mercy of God in the forgiveness of sin, propounded to all that serve him
in an heavenly conversation, in the third; and of our body by an heavenly
conversation transformed to be like unto his glorious body, in the fourth.
These are rare mysteries, and when we have said all we can, we must break off
with silence, with amazement and stupefaction. These are deep mysteries, we are
not able to sound them with our corrupt judgment; Great is the mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the flesh, seen of Angels, etc.

We are not able to conceive of him, we cannot express him; and therefore I
think it will cohere with the matter in hand to display before your eyes the
profoundnesse of these mysteries; which we may see in 1 Cor. 13.9.

A Sermon Preached by Master Price at S. Paul's Church, on Low-Sunday, May 2.
1641.
1 CORINTHIANS 13.9. For we know but in part, and we prophecy but in part.
AS the eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews may be called the
Triumph of Faith, so this Chapter may be well styled the Triumph of Love. Which
triumphant grace, besides that it is invested with admirable qualities, and
seconded by glorious effects; and besides that it bears away the bell from the
knowledge of the brain, from the prophecy of the tongue, the eloquence of that
little member, the munificence of the hand, and the Martyrdom of the whole
body. All which we find spoken of in this Chapter. Without love, what is faith
but fancy? what is prophecy but a dark mystery? what is eloquence but
untunable music? what is munificence but prodigality? what is martyrdom but a
rash and unadvised slaying a man's self? Without love they may all hang down in
their own weakness and infirmity; and therefore Saint Paul tells us, We know
but in part, and therefore prophecy but in part; We know but in part, that is
the first, and I fear the time will suffer me to go no farther. We know but in
part.

Take knowledge to be what you will, take it at the largest extent, the wisest
men on earth, those that have been in the uppermost chambers of Divinity, and
sounded the depths of all Learning, yea, that have gone round all humane
Learning, they know but in part. Some things there are that we know not, and
there are some things we know but in part; and what we know objectively, it may
be full, but subjectively, it is weak.

First, some things we know not, as the Essence of God, instant in things past
and to come, we cannot know it, it is not fit for our understanding. Who knows
what God did before the world? Who knows when the Angels were created? who
knows? we may collect and conjecture, but who can positively affirm it? who can
tell whether the Sun before the Stars were created, did rise and set, or no?
those are beyond our knowledge. We know not the end of the world, when all
things shall be out of date, when the tongue shall be tied up from prophesying
in this world, when faith shall be turned into feebleness, and hope into
quaking; and that when hope shall quake, love shall stand still when the rest
faint and vanish. This is confirmed in the words near the Text, and in the
words of my Text. The Argument stands thus; That which is but in part cannot
last; But knowledge is but in part, and faith is but in part; For we know but in
part, and we prophecy but in part: And beloved, if so be these Preachers you
have heard have fallen short in any particular in the prosecution of their Text;
and if I, (as I know I must) being weary of proceeding, and I undervalue my own
thoughts, neither will I be so in love with the brood of my own brain, as to
trouble you and my self long with it, but only in behalf of all the Ministers
that have preached, and of my self, that we know but in part, and prophecy but
in part. The head and tongue divide the Text; the head is like unto Heaven,
that does disperse abroad its light and influence by the tongue; and the tongue
it is a many-stringed instrument, whereby we do praise God. Here Is the
knowledge of the head, the tongue, but that this tongue may be tied up from
self-commendation, therefore we come to the ignorant terms of antipathy; as,
Why does the Lodestone draw Iron to it? what answer can we give, but that it
is the quality? as much as to say, I do not know: And so for the times to come,
it is not for us to know the times of God. Prophecies are best understood in
the fulfilling of them; there are many things God has left to his own
Cabinet-Councel, and we must not intrude into them; Secret things belong to
God, but revealed things to as and to our children.

And secondly, our knowledge is but imperfect, in respect of the object, We see
but through a glass darkly and imperfectly.

First, what can we say or know of God? Damasin says, he is not an essence or
substance, he is somewhat above; we do not know what to call him; bring in a
contribution of all kind of language, there is too much inability to express
the nature of Almighty God; our knowledge of God rises not by adding to it, but
as a statue rises, by cutting somewhat from it, and we know him by an imperfect
knowledge. We see the Sun in a dim kind of way; we see but the back-parts of
God, as we see a man that is past, we have but a glimpse of it. And so for the
Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God; it is a
mystery, that made Hillary cry out, and fall back, and go again, and say,
there is a stupidity in my understanding, I know not what to say: and therefore
the Nicene Fathers would not have the words of Essence used, they thought there
was more in God. And so for the Decree of God, how far is it beyond our
knowledge? How unsearchable are his Judgments? they are past finding out. And
if you cannot find out the reason of Gods decrees, see the reason of it, it is
well for you to be of his Court, though not of his Council. His decrees may
amaze a man to consider them; read but Saint Paul's discourse, how shall we
puzzle and gravel? what shall we say more then this I will not say: Do thou
reason the case how thou will, Ego credam, I will believe.

And then fourthly, for the Creation of the world; what a vast difference is
there between nothing and something? We may believe there is a Creation, but we
cannot grasp it in our understanding.

And then in the fifth place, the profanation of sin, That God should create
us so holy that the body should have no sin in it, and yet there should now be
sin in both body and soul; we know it. But how do we know it? Come to the
Person and Offices of Christ, that he that was the Ancient of days should dye;
that he that was the mouth of his Father, and the Word, should not speak, this
is a mystery, and great is the mystery. And then again, the mystery or our
bodies, that our bodies should be destroyed, that they should be turned to
ashes, or cut in pieces, and one piece many miles from another, and yet the
same body to arise gloriously. We may believe it, but we are not able to
conceive it. Now to the joys of Heaven, Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the joys that are
there. The eye can see far, and the ear can hear far, the one can see the
lightning afar off, and the other hear the thunder; yet eye and ear are both
dull and heavy, if you bring them to the consideration of this thing; here are
things unutterable, I was rapt up into the third Heaven, says Saint Paul, and
I saw things that were unutterable. And so for the Scriptures, though in all
things necessary to salvation, the Scriptures are plain and evident; but take
many places of the Scripture, how far remote are they from our understanding?
what great mysteries are there? One being asked what God was, took first a day,
then two, then three days, then four, and so the farther he went to search,
the more he was plunged; So in the Scriptures, some places are plain, a Lamb
may feed in them. In prophecies, we fix upon one man, he must be the deliverer;
we see him taken from the world, and the work left undone. The best Comment
upon prophecies is the fulfilling of them. Look upon some other Texts of
Scripture; What should they do that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise
not up again? Because of the Angels the women must be modest. Saint Austin did
not know it, and that is in regard of the Scripture, We know but in part.

Thirdly, in regard of the subject, what we know, we know after an imperfect
partial fashion; and therefore it is, Beloved, that Faith should be embraced by
us, because we believe that we cannot understand. Hence it is that we have but
an opinion of many things in the world: If there were certain knowledge, what
needed opinion?

Fourthly, because we do admire all things; there is no admiration but where
there wants understanding. Thus it is in the (...) displayed unto you; I might
proceed further in several kinds of knowledge among Heathens and Christians:
among Heathens, they do worship an unknown God; there was an Altar in Athens
dedicated, with this Inscription, To the unknown God, Acts 17. They do worship
they know not what, as our Savior speaks to the Samaritan woman: You worship
you know not what; and they do feel and grope after God, if perhaps they can
find him. There was one Antonius, that having read Platoes Works of the
Immortality of the soul, and having often read them used these words, Nescio,
etc. I know not how, but when I am reading I give assent, when I have laid
aside the Book all slips from me; so doting is our knowledge, for the earthly
man, the carnal man discerns not the things that are Gods, nay, for the best
they see but through a glass, they see but in part. Thus you see the points
laid open unto you, I will bring it home to your Consciences a little in the
application, and then I shall conclude. Some there are that do oppose this
truth, others that pervert it.

Some there are that oppose it, and those are our adversaries the Romanists:
First, in setting up the infallibility of the Pope; and secondly, in crying up
the Fathers and the Councels for our Faith. How can this be but false, if this
be true that we know but in part?

First, therefore for the infallibility of the Pope, who will sit like an
Emperor and take up any controversy; Beloved, we know controversies on foot
which he cannot decide, between the Franciscans and Dominicans, about the
Assumption of the Virgin Mary, and the like; either he cannot or dares not end
them for fear of losing either side; but we know but in part. Have not some of
their Popes been pronounced Heretics by General Councels? and yet these men
must know all things. One of them could not read Saint Matthews Gospel, and yet
these must be saved; they would pluck out their own eyes, and see by other
men's; and how can this be, if as Saint Paul says, we know but in part? And
then again, they will cry up the Fathers and Councels, but when all is done
they do but abuse us, and the Fathers will be found to err when all comes to
light. Were there not some of them that held dangerous and Heretical opinions?
But I am loath to uncover our forefathers nakedness: If I must, I will take you
off from adoring it, rising up to it, and too much reverencing it. Cyprian was
for rebaptization, Saint Austin was once of opinion that children should
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper as well as others of age; and Origin
was of opinion that Spirits had hands, and flesh, and eyes; and Justin Martyr:
but I rather cover them in silence, but that the Papists do incite us; the
Fathers were but a partial, no infallible rule.

Again, as some do oppose this point, so some do pervert it: So the Papists
they pervert it, and say, Because we know but in part, therefore we must have
Traditions, for we know but in part, as Saint Paul says. In this they do but
as we say, bring coals to New Castle, or light a candle to the Sun, by bringing
their Traditions to be proved by this Scripture.

Secondly, the Anabaptists, they pervert it, and conclude from hence, because
we know but in part, therefore we will look for revelation from above; and
thereupon they cast by the Book of God, and look for revelations from Heaven.
God forbid we should countenance any such spirits as these are, for what is
there to be known but what is fetched out of Gods Word.

Thirdly, others forsooth, that are lazy Christians, will say, If I turn over
the Book of God never so much, I shall know but in part, therefore I will know
nothing at all: Like little children, if you take away one of their trinkets,
they will throw all the rest away: Or, because one man gives me a box on the
ear, therefore I will sue him, and because I may not have five hundred pounds
damages, therefore I will have nothing at all. This is like the Hangman, that
first blindes the malefactors eyes, and then turns him off. This was it made
the Jews crucify the Lord of life, for had they known it they would not have
done it. The candle must be put out, or else put into the dark Lanthorn (say
the Papists) we must not see what mischiefs are toward. This ignorance must
needs be the way to Hell, to utter darkness.

If we know but in part, First, let us follow men but in part. Turn over
Antiquity, borrow authority from the Fathers, they will be good moral
persuasions and inductions to bring us to the truth, but bring all to the
Scripture, weigh it by the balance of the Sanctuary, whether it be good or no.
And where they speak that which is contradictory to the Word of God, let us
prefer Truth before the Fathers. Christ says not, I am Antiquity, or I am
Custom, but I am Truth.

Secondly, if we know but in part, let us add some cubits to our knowledge.
Knowledge is like unto Heaven, it is very glorious if we could see it; and we
must first know the will of our Father before we can do it. This is the first
step to know what God is, and to know what our selves are. First, begin with
knowledge, then go on with practice: First, know the truth, and then adhere to
it, and then defend it to the death.

Let us add knowledge unto our knowledge, but as we know but in part, let us be
wise also, take heed of entering roughly into the cabinets of God, we must not
gaze too high.

I do not say but that we should search the mysteries of the Word of God, and
study them freely; but what mysteries God has reserved unto himself, meddle
not with them, we know but in part.

And then again, make amends for thy want of knowledge by thy faith; believe, if
God has said it, set thy seal of faith unto it. He (says Luther) that will be
wise in Aristotle, is a fool in Christ. And a Pope did once say, that
Piscatores and not Philosophers were to be believed; they that say they know
much, know nothing, says Solomon and Saint Paul. The emptiest hogsheads sound
most, and the shallowest waters make the greatest noise, Non est, etc.

This is no true knowledge, but a swelling and excrescency.

In the sixth place, we must practice what we know; if we know but in part, let
us make amends for our partial knowledge in practicing what we know, and
whatsoever else you know, be sure to know those things that concern your
eternal salvation. What is it for men to be scrupulous in leaving out H in
Homo, and yet will take away a man. This is the only true Arithmetic, to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, that is the true
Astronomy. This is it indeed that we must discourse of. What is it then to
deserve our Supremacy in Logic, to be overcome in Arithmetic, to talk of
Generation, and have not Regeneration? It is not enough to know, but we must
practice. If you know these things, happy are you if you do them. Beloved, how
many Sermons have been lost in this place, and in diverse other places of this
Kingdom? what will you hear and devour all, and bring forth no fruit at all?
for shame make it up by your practice; he that practices what he knows, God
will make him to know more; some know to instruct others, that is charity; some
know to practice, and that is piety; some know for affectation, and that is
pride. Knowledge makes a man worse rather then better, unless he practice.
Knowledge like the Unicorns horn, does well in a man's hand, but ill in a beasts
head. A man that is ignorant, he carries Uriah's letters in his own bosom. They
that know and do not practice, shall be beaten with many stripes. What can
thou say in excuse of thy self? thou see the Sunshine of the Gospel, thou
art not in darkness as many are; if thou do not practice it, woe be unto
thee. We have had the light of the Gospel above these threescore years, and
what excuse can we make?

Lastly, let us hunger and long after that place where we shall see God face to
face, where there shall be no darkness without, nor darkness within, where the
walls are made of crystal, and the gates of pearl. There is no need of the
Sun, nor of the Moon, nor of the Stars, God is the Light, and the Lamb is the
Light; of it, and to that place God of his mercy bring us for his mercy sake,
for his Sons sake, and for our Savior Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

