A GREAT PLOT AGAINST THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND AND The ARMY under Command of
His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. Wherein is set forth, The manner of a most
bloody Engagement to destroy both Parliament and Army. With the names of the
Scottish Conspirators. And the proceedings of both Houses thereupon.

Discovered by Colonel Jones, and read in both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Die 24.
of September, 1647.

Imprinted at London for V. V. and are to be sold near St. Dunstans Church,
Anno Dom. 1647.

A GREAT PLOT DISCOVERED Against the Parliament of England, and their Army
under command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfar.
Die 23 September, 1647.
Upon Thursday being the 23. of this instant, we received information of a
great Plot and Conspiracy, against the Parliament of England, his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell, Commissary General Ireton,
and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers, under the power and command of the
said Geneaall, which plot, as it was intimated to both houses of, Parlirment,
were acting and contriving by some disaffected Scottish spirits, with a
resolution to combine and conspire against the Parliament of England, and to
work and use means for a sudden Engagement in another unnatural and most
horrid war, against the most worthy and renowned Heroes of these times; the
manner of this most great and machavilian Conspiracy, I shall here briefly
recite, for general satisfaction to all Freeborn English men, viz.

Major General Starling, a Scottish man, Commander in chief, under the Lord
Inchiqueen, of the Protestant Forces in Ireland, in the Province of Munster,
having a design against the Parliament of England, for an Engagement, both
against them, and their Army, which for the better effecting thereof,
dispatched feverall Letters to diverse eminent Commanders in that Kingdom, (but
intercepted) viz. the first to Sir Patrick Weimes, a Scotchman, but a most
faithful, and heroic soldier, having an excellent Regiment of Foot, and in
actual service with collonell Jones against the Rebels in Lemster: the second
to Mayor General Monroe, Major General of the Scottish Army in the Province
of Ulster: the third to the Kingdom of Scotland, with Letters to General
Leven, General of the Scottish Army, and others.

All which Letters were intercepted, and many things (in them) discovered of
very high nature, and concernment toward this Kingdom, the Design being to
engage all in a war against the Parliament and Army in England. But now it is
hoped their Designs will be frustrated, for col. Jones has discovered the
chief Actors therein, and has taken some of them, and committed them to safe
custody.

The Parliament having received information of these underhand workings, and
treacherous dealings, Ordered that a Letter be sent to the Lord Inchiqueen,
desiring him to send in safe custody the faid Colonel Starling to the
Parliame^^ of England,

The Resolution and Desires of the General and Soldiery, concerning theirs,
and the Kingdoms enemies.
WHereas the great neglect of diverse persons within the City of London, has
occasioned too many delays in raising Money for supply of the Army, and other
Forces of the Kingdom; His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
General-Councell of the Army, Does declare, That they take notice of the great
wants of the Soldiery, both of the Army, and other Forces, and Garrisons; as
also of the sufferings of the County, in respect of free quarter, which might
have been peevented, and a course taken for disbanding superfluous Forces, and
sending over of others for the relief of Ireland, and the supplying of those
that are there already, had it not been for neglect or delay of those on whom
the Parliament have depended in that particular, and they do especially take
notice of the delays made by the City in advancing of that sum, which the
Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Arreares so long since
due from the City to the Army; upon which they do declare, and propound to
this effect.

1. That they cannot but consider the notorious readiness of the Court of
Aldermen, to the advancing of far greater sums for the raising of a new war,
and prosecution of the late mischievous practices and designs against the
Parliament and Army; and that as their predipitate forwardness therein, was
the oceasion of the Armies coming into these parts, so their backwardness to
the raising or advancing of the money now required for the service of the
Parliament, and supply of the Army, has been and is the occasion of the armies
continuance heree: and therefore they cannot but offer it it, as what they
humbly conceive most just and reasonable.

That for what time their defauls or delays have occasioned, and shall further
occasion the Armies stay hereabouts, the charge thereof should some way be laid
upon them, and their adherents about the City.

That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the Delinquencie of
those that had a hand in the Tumult, Desine, and Engagement of a new War, and
that such Fines may be upon them for the same, as shall be agreeable to
justice.

Lastly, since it is most evident, that for the speedy bringing in of the money
required upon the arrears, there wants not in the said Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council, either authority to levy it, or ability to advance it by way
of Loan till it can be levied, and it ir therefore offered,

That in case the Money be not brought in by the time limited, the Parliament
would be pleased to give leave to the General (with the advice and directions
of the Committee for the Army) for the levying of the said Arreares

All which they rather desire from grounds of reason and evidence from the
speeches of many in the City, and designs and hopes of the Parliament and
Armies Enemies to raise the Army into distempers, and the Country about them
into confusion.

This Declaration was agreed upon at the Headquarters at Putney, upon Thursday
last, there being a General Council of the Army appointed to be held every
Thursday. The General Council met in the Church, the General, many General
Officers, Field-Officers, inferior Officers, and Agitators met. A great part
of the time was spent in consideration, and debate of the Proposals of the
Army, and some few things agreed upon to be altered, and explained in them,
which no doubt will give much satisfaction to the Kingdom.

After the aforesaid Declaration was finished, it was, by the appointment of
his Excellency, and the Council of War, sent to the Right Honorable the
Commissioners of Lords and Commons residing with the Army, to be presented from
them to both Houses of Parliament, which according, with a Letter from the
General and Army, to this effect, vix. That they earnestly desired, some
speedy course might be taken for their pay, that so they might be enabled to
pay their quarters, was presented to both Houses of Parliament upon Satturday
last, and after reading thereof, ordered to be communicated to the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.

FINIS.

