A Great VICTORY OBTAINED By his Excellency the Lord Gen: BLAKE, Commander in
chief of the Parliaments Navy at Sea; against the Lord Admiral Vantrump,
Lieutenant General for the States of Holland.

With the manner of their Engagement; the particulars of the Fight on Sunday
last upon the Dutch-Coast; the number of ships sunk, fired, and taken; the
beating of the Hollanders into their Harbors; and General Blakes Resolution to
fall in upon them with fire and sword.

Likewise, the Dutch-mens new Oath and Protestation, to fight it out to the
last man; the shipping of their Landforces; the double manning of their Navy;
a perfect List of the English Fleet; and the Royal Sovereign putting forth to
Sea for their assistance.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

Another bloody Fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch upon the Coast
of Holland: With the desperate assailing of Vantrump, by Genesis Blake; the
boarding of the Flemmins; the dispersing of the Navy; and the re-inforcing of
diverse gallant ships into their Harbors.
SIR,
ON Thursday being the 25 of this instant June, 1652. His Excellency General
Blake weighed anchor with sixty four Men of War; and having double manned each
ship, hoysted sail about eight of the clock in the forenoon, to find out
Vantrump; and (according to his Commission, and Instructions, to fight him: The
whole Fleet being upon their motion, his Excellency gave Orders to Captain
Holland, and Captain Mooton, to scout forth with their two Frigates, the Star
and Signet; but they had not sailed many leagues, before they made a discovery
of certain Hollanders; and bearing up to them, the rest of our Fleet being
about a league distance, Captain Holland gave them abroad side with ten Guns:
the Dutchmen answered him with the like salute: No sooner had they exchanged
four broad sides, but immediately came up the Star-Frigat, presenting them with
seven broad sides one after another: and coming to grapling, the musketeers on
both sides, maintained the Dispute with great gallantry and resolution; till at
last, the English Red-coats, consisting of Col. Ingoldsbys Regiment of Foot,
played so fast upon them with small shot and hand-granadoes, that they soon
cleared the Decks, fired the Misle and Main-sail; and afterward boarded two of
the Hollanders, killing 47, and surprised about one hundred and twenty: Many
there were that leapt out of the Port-holes into the Sea, and drowned
themselves, by reason that they bid defiance to the English, and chose rather
to sacrifice their lives in the merciless Ocean, then yield obedience unto
them. The rest of the Hollanders, being eleven in number, after a sharp
conflict, declined Engagement, and struck into their Harbors: This sudden Onset
has caused Vantrump to call in several Squadrons; to the end, that his Fleet
may be in an entire posture to receive the Enemy: Genesis Blake with his whole
Navy lies about Newport point, within three leagues of the Dutch; and on Sunday
last we hear that they fought; a List of the English ships that engaged I have
sent you here enclosed, viz.

A List of the Parliaments Fleet now upon the Coast of Holland, engaged with
Vantrump.
Resolution, J. Blake, General of the Navy, 68 pieces of Ordnance, and manned
with 800 Seamen and soldiers. James, Captain William Pen, Vice Admiral, 60
Guns, and 700 men. Andrew, Major Bourn, Rear-Admirall, 700 men, and 60 Guns.
Triumph, Capt. Blake, 68 Guns. Victory, Captain Man, 60 Guns. Rainbow, Sir G.
Ayscue 60 Guns Fairfax, Cap. Lawson, 62 Guns. Speaker, Capt. Coppin, 62 Guns
Garland, Capt. Osburn, 48 Guns. Diamond. 42 Guns. Rubey. 42 Guns. Worcester,
capt. Young, 42 Guns. Dragon, captain Stokes, 42 Guns. Tiger, captain Peacock,
40 Guns. Adventure, captain Ball, 40 Guns. Assurance, captain Sanders 40 Guns.
Sapphire, captain Moulton, 30 Guns. Nightingale, captain Reynolds, 26 guns
Maremaid, capt. Staynard, Convertine, 46 guns Convert, 24 guns Star, captain
Moulton, 24 guns. Signet, captain Holland, 24 guns. Old-Warwick, 28 guns.
Revenge, 36 guns. Thunder-Frigat 22 guns. Senturion, 40 guns. Primrose 14 guns.
WeymoutL 14 guns. Lilly 12 guns. Vanguard 46 guns. Portsmouth Frigate, 46 guns.
Nonsuch, 40 guns. Pelican, captain Jorden, 42 guns. Foresight. 42 guns. Lion
42 guns. The ten Whelps, thirty guns in each. Merchants ships. Hannibal, capt.
Tatum. 32 guns. Prosperous 40 guns. Hercules 34 guns Charles 32 guns Giles 32
guns Society 40 guns Elizabeth 40 guns London-Mary 40 guns


These have been deeply engaged in the Commonwealths service; and have deported
themselves with singular dexterity against Van-Trump, who, after a bloody and
great engagement, was enforced to decline, and get off, to the protection of
their Forts and Sconces; but not without great loss, for we have received
advertisements, that Genesis Blake has taken seven, sunk two, and fired three,
with the loss of one ship. Vantrump is preparing for another engagement and
shipping from several Ports and towns are coming to him: He has also double
manned his ships, both with Seamen and Land-men, who has taken an Oath and
Protestation to live and die together, and to fight it out to the last man.

The General has sent for six more fireships out of the Downs, and is resolved
to fire and destroy the Enemy in their Harbors, if they will not come out to
fight him at sea. We have a squadron of ships lies scouting up and down the
Channel in several places; and often way lay the Hollanders. The Royal
sovereign, alias the Commonwealth, is putting forth to sea, being new cork'd,
tallow'd, and rig'd: she is taken one deck lower; and has one hundred brass
Guns in her: she is an excellent swift sayler, notwithstanding the greatness of
her burden, and carries fourteen hundred men.

From Dover, June 30. 1652.
FINIS.

