GREAT NEWS FROM THE KING IN FLANDERS, GIVING A Full and True Account OF THE
PRESENT STATE OF THE Confederate and French Armies.
In a LETTER to a FRIEND.
SIR,
I Have very much longed to send you my Acknowledgments for good News, but
things have not Answered our Expectation; yet the French will not come to a
Battle, for they are as fearful of the King, as a Child is of a Rod; as soon as
ever the King comes nigh, still they go away.

On Friday Morning, about nine of the Clock, the King had notice that the
French Army Decamped from Florinness the Night before, and were on their March
toward Beaumont: At ten of the Clock ours had Orders to Decamp, and March, but
to leave our Baggage behind us; by Eleven the whole Army, Horse and Foot, were
actually on their March, and the King in the Van of them; between Two and Three
we came up to Beaumont, in the full sight of all the French Army, which lay
encamped on a Hill: and both sides very Steep and Rocky; at the bottom of it
was a deep Miry Ditch, not passable: The King and General Officers spent that
Afternoon in going from place to place to see it, and to find out the best
place from it, for our Army to pass at, and at two several places we pitched
our Bridges; but the French made Batteries there, and it was with Disadvantage;
but the Night coming on, the King could not visit more of the Valley, till next
Morning; the Armies lay down in the Fields, as did every Body else; the King
himself eat in a great Barn full of Corn and Hay, and then lay down upon some
of it. The next Morning, at break of Day, he was on Horseback again, and went
accordingly toward the French Camp, to see what places there were for our Men
to pass* but ^ou^d them such as no Man could have Climb^d had there been no
Oppo^^tion*

On Saturday Noon, the French began to play their Cannon, but did very little,
or no hurt; there were three killed, one was a Dutchman, one of our
Garducorps, the other two Spaniards, so at the Evening we returned to our Camp
again ^t C^^r, which (...) five English Miles from them; but the King is in
hopes ^o meet with them as soon as ev^^ they come out of the^r D^^s: Our
O^^-Gu^rds and the^rs are every d^^ picquiering at one another. We have
abundance of Deserters come in to us, and we have taken abundance of them
Prisoners, a Foraging; and we hear, a great many more will come if they can get
Opportunity; there were two Hundred got in^^ a Wood to come away, but the
French had notice, and have got most of them back aga^^; and since, we hear
they are mighty busy at Hanging them.

But if the King cannot possibly get them to Battle, it is thought he will
Besiege still some Town, for we have Army enough to Cover and Besiege, and
fight in the Field; our Army consists of near a Hundred Thousand Men, and you
would not imagine the pai^^ our good King takes; he is mightily Concerned, he
cannot get to Fight them: The very Name of the King being at the Head of this
Army, puts the French into a great Consternation, insomuch, that they have made
such a Law, that whosoever shall say, the King of England is at the Head of the
Army, it is present Death.

We hear the Duke of Berwick is got into the French Army, but in a very poor
Equipage; he is in no Command of any thing.

We have had very great Rejoicing in the Army, for the Conquest in Ireland; God
be thanked, the Work is almost done there:

I could wish with all my Heart, I could send such News, as would make English
Hearts Rejoice; but thanks be to God, we do hunt them up and down; we have the
pleasure of that. It makes the King Smile to see the poor Dogs, what a fuge
they be in, and always a getting under their Garrisons, and under their Cannon;
and where ever they come, they cannot Sleep for fear, and always at work to
Entrench themselves.

So having no more at present, but hoping to give you a better Account by
Michaelmass, which is all from

From the Camp at Cour in Flanders, Aug. the 3d, 1691. Your humble Servant, etc.

LONDON, Printed for T. Bunce. 1691.


