Great News from Germany; OR, A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE DISCOVERY OF A Treacherous
Design To BETRAY the CITY of MENTZ To the FRENCH. With a LIST of the
Confederate Army near the RHINE.
LICENSED, July 1. 1691. J. F.
ONE Consbruk, Commissary-General in the City of Mentz, having kept a secret
Correspondency with the French King, in order to betray that City into his
hands, the Plot was discovered in this following manner:

The French sent a Trumpeter into the City of Mentz, under pretense to ransom
some Prisoners of War, but in effect to deliver secretly some Letters to the
Commissary-General. The Trumpeter staying at the said place somewhat longer
than was expected, the French General was very uneasy about it, and sent the
Marquess de Villacart, Maistre de Camp of the Regiment of Horse of Berry,
Commander of the Carabines, and Nephew to Monsieur de Louvois, together with
Monsieur Belleviere, Major of the Royal Regiment of Horse, and Mr. Fellinier,
Captain of a Troop of Horse, toward the City, to try if they could hear any
news of the said Trumpeter; but unluckily for them, they were all made
Prisoners by a Troop of Dragoons, who being sent by the Governor to go in
pursuit of a French Party, met these three abovementioned Officers on their
return. At the Entrance of the Gate of the City they met the Trumpeter; and one
of the Officers that was taken, told him in a great passion, That he was the
cause of their being made Prisoners; and that they would not fail to get him to
be hanged, as soon as they were set at liberty. The Trumpeter did not like the
Proposals; and being besides, a German, he thought it safest for him to return
into the City; and going straight to the Governor, acquainted him with what had
past. General Count Thungen, the Governor of the City, being extremely
surprised at it, sent immediately for the Commissary-General, and asking him
about the Letter, and the Commissary denying that ever he had received one, the
Governor sent for Six Hussares, who after having stripped him of all his Clothes
to his very shirt, in the General's presence, several Letters of dangerous
concern were found about him, hidden in some secret places of his Body. It was
plainly discovered by them, that he had betrayed to the French King all the
Measures that were taken in the City; and that he was to set the City on fire,
as soon as the French were come near to Bombard it. There was a Letter found
about him, writ by the French King's own hand; and another written by him to
the French King; wherein he thanks him for the exact and regular payment of his
Pension, which has been Two hundred French Pistoles; a Month: He tells him,
that a great many are ready to assist him in all his undertakings for the
French King's Service; and it is said, he will in few days be put to the Rack,
in order to discover the said Traitors He himself is put into Iron Chains and
an Express is sent to seize his Brother, who is Secretary to the Emperor; his
own Secretary, who was secured with his Master, has since Poisoned himself in
the Prison The Governor-General, Count Thungen, has ordered all his Goods to be
seized at Costheim, where the said Commissary did reside; amongst which, there
was found a Trunk full of French Money, and a Silver Service, if thi^ dangerous
Conspiracy had not been so opportunely discovered, the City of Mentz, the
taking of which cost the Duke of Lorain so much pains, and the Germans so much
Blood, had been now all in Ashes. The French have fent a Trumpeter into the
City, to let the Governor know, That in case he did not surrender the three
Officers, they would destroy the City: But the Governor has answered them, That
upon the throwing of the first Bomb into the City, he would immediately Hang
the said three Officers upon the Rampart.

A List of the Confederate Army near the Rhine. The Forces of the Elector of
Saxony.
FOOT. THE Regiment of Guards, 1500. General Schoning's, 1600. Count Reise's,
1000. Sintzendof's, 1000. Duke Christiana's, 1000. Dusterradts, 1000. Two
Regiments of Granadiers 800. HORSE. The Regiment of Guards, 500. Schoning's,
500. Braun's, 500. Haubitz's, 500. Lifeguard, Braunitz, 500. Two Regiments of
Dragoons 1000. Foot of Gotha. Bibra's, 1000. Neitsch, 1000. The Dragoons of
Ramsdorf. 500. Total 13900. The Troops of the Circle of Franconia, 1000. The
Troops of Suabia, 10000. The Duke of Wirtenberg's, 6000. Two Regiments of
Hussars, 1200. Two Bavarian Regiments. Three Regiments of Saltzburg. The
Regiments of Ziebelsdorf and Swanenfeld, 3000. The Regiment of Ottingen, 1600.
Total 3180^. In all, 45700.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Congress at the Hague, giving a succinct account, 1. Of His Majesty's
Entrance into the Hague, and the Triumphal Arches erected on that occasion. 2.
What was Transacted by His Majesty in the Assembly of the States General, first
for the Common, and then their Particular Safety; and especially things
relating to the Fleet; with is lively Character of Admiral Tromp, and his
Expeditions. 3. An exact List of the Electors and Princes that waited on His
Majesty at the Hague; with the Personal Character of each of them, their
Qualities, and their Forces. 4. An exact, List of the Foreign Ambassadors, and
Plenipotentiaries, the manner of their Introduction, with Reflections on their
Speeches. 5. Some Remarks on other Persons of Quality, and especially some
Foreign Generals. 6. The Figure that the English Noblemen made at the Hague;
with some Observations about the humor of the English and the Germans. 7. The
Diversions at the Hague; together with a Letter addressed to my Lord Marquess of
Carmarthen. Printed for Richard Baldwin.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms-Inn, Warwick Lane.
1691.


