The Game at Chesse. A metaphorical discourse showing the present estate of
this Kingdom. The Kings, the Queens, the Bishops, the Knights, the Rooks, the
Pawns. The Knights signify the high Court of Parliament; The Rookes, the
Cavaleers.

depiction of a game of chess between a parliamentarian and a royalist.

London, Printed for Thomas Johnson, Febr. 2. Anno Dom. 1643.

The Game at Chesse: A Metaphorical Discourse, showing the present estate of
this Kingdom.
TO discourse of the excellency and antiquity of the noble Game of Chesse,
would require a far larger volume then my occasion will permit to write, my
intention being only at the expression of this Kingdoms affairs, which fitly
may be Allegorically described by the battle of the Chesse; yet cannot I omit
to tell you, that this Chesse is the ancientest of all games of that nature,
being invented (as is credibly affirmed) by Xerxes, King of Persia, many years
before the nativity of our Savior, to avoid idleness among his soldiers,
when he led those great and stupendous armies that levelled mountains, and
drunk up rivers in their passage into Greece: and indisputably, it is allowed
to be the most excellent and ingenious of all games, being far superior to
Cards or Tables, which depend as much on the uncertain disposition of chance,
as upon the gamesters skill or cunning, when this of Chesse is merely directed
by the strength of wit and judgment: the Spanyard, whose gravity in carriage
is famous above all Nations, having it in so much esteem, that they will allow
any stranger to be a Gentleman that can play at the Chesse. But according to my
promise, to avoid prolixity, I shall briefly to my promised Allegory.

First, we must take into consideration, who are the principal combatants in
this battle, and we shall find to be two different armies, Black and White;
over each of which is a King, and Queen; their assistants, Bishops, Knights,
Rooks, and Pawnes.

And first for the King, He is the principal leader on of his men, the Queen
as his Lieutenant General, the Bishops his Counselors, the Knights his
supreme Officers, the Rooks and Pawnes his Gentlemen or Cavaliers, and
mercenary soldiers. This being presupposed, the application of this
Allegorical Game will be very easily alluded to the present business of this
Realm.

First, the black Army at Chesse, signifies justly and aptly his Majesty's,
which bath produced so many black and bloody effects in this Kingdom, and so
many plunderings, rapines and murders, that the beauteous face of this
pleasant Land is bestained and bedewed with blood; the Inhabitants thereof
beaten and terrified out of their peaceful dwellings, their goods dispoyled and
taken away by his Majesty's Rooks, namely the Cavaliers: and if the Euxine sea
is called the black sea, out of its black effects, certainly by the same
reason that may be termed the blaoke Army.

The white Army, which is the Ensign and Badge of innocence, betokens the
Parliaments Army, raised for the security and safety of the Commonwealth,
against the said black Army of Malignants. His Majesty moves as does the king
at Chesse; after the motion of his Pawnes, Rooks, Knights, Bishops and Queen;
and according as they thrive is the success in the battle: how evidently is
this paralelled with the Kings proceedings. First his Pawnes move, these were
those poor^e Courtiers, that to begin the afflictions of this Kingdom first
gave life to those fearful and oppressive Monopolies, begging such things to
themselves as were destructive to the essence of the peoples liberties, and the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; and when they, like common soldiers, or
forlorn hopes, had led the way to this game of death and destruction, forward
steps the Rooks, viz. the Cavaliers, young Gentlemen of as desperate fortunes
as conditions, and they fall pell mell into the conflict, perceiving the white
Knights, viz. the honorable the high Court of Parliament assembled to stop the
violent torrent of the Pawnes proceedings, instill into his Majesty, that
there was no safety for him, against the endeavors of the white Knights, if he
did not straight forsake their association, and betake himself to open
hostility and arms, that so this Kingdom, which in the precedent years of
his father, and his own peaceful reign, had been governed by the Laws and
Justice; might fall into the hands of the soldiery, that they whose arms had
long time rusted in ease might again be put into use, that they who had no
estates at all might have a military licencious privilege to prey upon the
estates of others, which how they have done is to the whole Kingdom
perspicuous; and communicating their intents with the black Knights, namely,
such of his Majesty's Cabinet-Councellors and the discontented Nobility (as
either ambition, or their own passed crimes had rendered obnoxious to the just
censure of the white Knights) they found them ready to assist their malevolent
and ungracious purposes, and they in their degree, as they are at Chesse, being
near the King, with open outcries, instill into his Majesty's too credulous
ears unheard jealousies, fears and suppositions, and intimated to him, that
the white Knights intended to abridge his Royal prerogative, and quite
contrary to the dignity of Kings to confine the Regal power to limits, and
lessen his authority descendent to him from his Ancestors; but fearing their
own persuasions would not be prevalent enough to set him into open hostility
with the white Knights they draw into their confederay the Bishops, who apted
for innovations readily joined in the conspiracy, telling his Majesty, that
the purity of Religion was perverted; that diverse new and unheard of Schisms
and Heresies were crept up in the Church, of which he was bound to be the
Defendor; that the white Knights by reducing an Annarchy upon the Church,
sought to inflict the same upon the sovereignty, that their power
Ecclesiastical being de jure Divino, was correlative and consubsistent with
Majesty; and if that the one were taken away, the other could not stand, using
all the subtle persuasions ambition and malice (which are two pernicious
counselors) could invent, to set afire the adust melancholy in His Majesty:
the Queen too (wrought upon by their means) incensing the King to this
dissension with the white Knights, namely, his Parliament, at last it took
effect according to their wishes, and his Majesty pretending he could not be
in safety at his own Palace, withdrew himself thence into the North, (after
the transportation of his Queen) who, as his Lieutenant General, was to
furnish him from beyond the Seas with foreign supplies, and from the North,
as the Proverb testifies, can come no goodness, and there drew his army of
Pawnes and Rooks, Cavaliers and Malignants, Knight and Bishops, discontented,
Nobility, Gentry and Clergy together, and with banner displayed, resolved to
bid the white Knights battle; who seeing themselves so endangered by the
malice of their enemies, began to bestir themselves, summoning their Pawnes,
namely well-affected soldiers, their Rooks, valiant Gentlemen and loyal
subjects; their Knights, those of the Nobility and Gentry, that stood for the
good of the Kingdom, and liberty of the Subject; their Bishops, the religious
and untainted Clergy, they created themselves in stead of a King and Queen, a
Lieutenant General, and a General to manage their army, and fight the Lords
battles against that black Regiment of Cavaliers, and so advanced toward the
Enemy. The game at Edgehill being now begun, first fell to it the Pawnes on
both sides, the Rooks and Knights sighting with much fortitude and courage; the
innocence of the cause on the white Knights side so animating their valiant
Pawnes and Rooks, that on the black Rooks, the Cavaliers, they fell with much
force and violence, disordering their Ranks, taking diverse of them prisoners,
and slaughtering others; for the black Bishops, they were taken prisoners by
the white ones, and their Knights; and according to the custom of Chesse, put
into a bag, diverse of them being imprisoned, and the wings of their authority
which soared so high, clipped so near, that they can now fly no more then tame
Jack-dawes. But yet the fight was not ended, those sturdy Knaves, the black
Rooks, the Cavaliers, rallying themselves again together, and as it were
leading His Majesty captive to Oxford, have there entrenched themselves, and
made since diverse attempts upon the white Knights forces, whose General
(vigilant on all occasions that might advantage this parties cause, and secure
the Commonwealth) has met those mischievous Rooks diverse times, and given
them strange and advantageous overthrowes; yet they according to their natural
condition, perverse and malignant, will not be persuaded to submit to
authority, or to suffer the Kingdom to be in peace, but with continual
excursions and inrodes, they invade the Subjects Estates and Persons that
continue firm in their Allegiance to the King and the white Knights,
plundering their Houses, and enforcing their wives and daughters to their
lusts; so that the cry of their iniquity has even ascended up to heaven, and
called out on the divine omnipotence for vengeance against their bestiall and
abominable cruelties. The black Bishops in the mean time stirring up the
people to their part, by wresting Texts of Scripture to serve their purpose, so
that when this battle at the Chesse between the white and black Houses will
be ended, surpasses my skill in prophecy, to determine. The only way to end
this desperate conflict in my opinion, were if His sacred Majesty would be
pleased to hearken to the counsels of the white Knights, and re-associate
himself with them; giving up his black Pawnes and Rooks, His Cavaliers and
Malignants, to the impartial hands of Gregory, who would finish all their
machinations and designs with a comfortable halter. If His Highness would
please to put the residue of His black Bishops into the same bag where their
fellows are; and for His black Knights, give them up to be judged by their
Peers, who would censure them with all equity according to their deserts, and
so return to His proper residence with His Queen to London, and then no doubt
this fatal game at Chesse would be finished, till when, it is likely to
continue in full force and vigor.

FINIS.

