THE GREAT VICTORY Obtained by His Majesty's Army Under the Command of his
GRACE the DUKE of MONMOUTH, Against the REBELS In the West of SCOTLAND, On
Sunday and Monday, being the 22. and 23. of this Instant.
SIR,
I Could not omit giving you an Account, of what happened lately between the
Kings Army and the Rebels, knowing you to be a person of great and exemplary
Piety, and untainted Loyalty, to whom such news will be altogether grateful.
Upon Sunday last being the 22d of this Instant, his Grace the Duke of Monmouth
marched with the Army under his Command toward the Rebels, and being upon his
March he received a Message by a Trumpet from the Rebels, to this effect, (viz)
That if his Grace was pleased to confirm, and agree to those terms they had
already made in their last Declaration, they would lay down their Arms, but
upon no other account. But his Grace contemning to agree to their terms, or to
indulge Rebellion at such a rate, contrary to the established Laws of that
Kingdom (drew up his Forces toward them) The Rebels had secured Bottle-bridge,
having strongly Barrocaded it, having a very Considerable party of Horse there,
and had planted their Army on the other side the River, but notwithstanding
that, his Grace made an Attacque upon them with a like party of Horse; which
behaved themselves with that galantry and Courage, as soon caused the Rebels to
quit their Post, with a very considerable loss. His Grace having thus
succesfully gained the Bridge, presently marched them over and drew up his main
body; and after having put them in Batalia, and given necessary orders to his
Officers, he engaged their main Body, and after a sharp dispute gave them a
final rout, destroyed most of their Horse, and so much disordering the foot,
that few of them escaped, save a small number which fled into the Woods about
Hambleton; Sir, it is incredible to express in what great numbers the Gentry
came in to join the Kings Forces, and are daily coming in to the great
satisfaction of all faithful and Loyal Subjects, and to the great hopes of
speedily putting an end to these Rebellious Insurrections.

Many thousands are upon their march from the North of Scotland cheerfully to
join his Majesty's Forces, which is believed will be stopped upon the account of
this happy Victory; and had not the Engagment begun so soon, till such time as
these Assistants had joined the Army, without all doubt the Rebels would have
never been able to have made the least escape.

His Majesty's Privy Council here have been indefatigably careful and
industrious in supplying the King's Army with all things necessary, acting as
with one head and heart, or rather striving to outdo each other in their
Fidelity and Loyalty. And whereas the Rebels made use of these words in the
latter part of their Declaration, (viz.) That they requested their Countrymen,
now the standing Forces of this Kingdom, some of them being their Friends and
Relations, not to fight against them, left in so doing they should be found
fighting against the Lord, whose Cause and Quarrel they were sure he would own
and signally countenance, seeing they fought under his Banner, who is the Lord
of Hosts.

Those whom they thus called their Friends and Kinsmen, were so ready and
vigorous in fighting against them, and the happy victory which they obtained
over them, seems rather to represent to every Loyal Subject, and impartial
mind, that it is not the Lords Cause or Quarrel, which they thus pretend to
maintain, but rather a fighting against God, in Rebelling against their lawful
and undoubted Sovereign, and his Government, and bringing upon themselves a
Curse instead of a Blessing; the Apostle declaring, That he that resists shall
receive damnation.

SIR,

SIR, Your humble Servant, etc.
Edinburgh, 22o Junii, 1679.

