TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now assembled in
Parliament.
The humble Petition of LEWIS DE GAND, a French Nobleman, Lord of Brachey and
Romecour.
HVMBLY SHOWING,
THat whereas since some certain months, I your petitioner did for some
certain business of mine, come over from France into England, in a ship
bearing the royal English Arms, and for greater security, having the Kings
Letters Pattents, it is happened I know not by what mischance, that the Spanish
Dunkerkers not a whit respecting or God, or the King, or England, contrary to
the right of Nations, did set upon us in the very English haven, and have
Robbed me your Petitioner, of all the money I had, to the value of two hundred
pound English. And that you may the better be certified of the truth of what I
say, I can call to witness diverse Englishmen, which came over with me your
petitioner in the same ship, and namely Master George Thomason, and Master
Iosuah Kirton, and Master Robert Martin, all three merchant booksellers, the
two first in Paul's Churchyard, the one at the sign of the Rose, the other at
the sign of the white-horse* the third in old Bailey at the sign of Venice,
who will without doubt, relate unto you how ignominiously the said Dunkerkers
have behaved themselves even against you in this their wicked robbery.

For first, they have been so audacious, as if they were Lords of the Seas,
yea of England it self, to discharge their artillery against our ship, and to
constrain us to yield unto them; After that, we having let them see the Kings
letters Patents, yet never the less disdaining them, they have furiously set
upon me your Petitioner with naked swords, and forced me to deliver them all my
money, the English that were present, not a little wondering at their audacity.

Thirdly, they were so greedy of prey, that they let not to use the Kings
natural subjects, namely some Irishmen, as if they had been Frenchmen.

Finally if I add unto what is said, that all this has been committed even
in the English haven, your selves may judge how great an injury, is it
redounding unto your selves.

And if the Spanish Ambassador here in England; or the Governors of Dunkerke
(to whom often has been written of this matter by the said Ambassador, would
by some way or other, have covered this their most manifest shame, and not
pretend Justice in this their most unjust account, in saying that they should
do against their conscience, if they should press to restore unto an enemy
(against the law of nature) a prise taken upon him, I your petitioner a
stranger would not have troubled you with this my particular business, you
having employment enough, in so many weighty affairs of your own: But yet I
your petitioner being not so a stranger, but that I have of late composed a
book in Latin, of the praises of the King and Kingdom, dedicated unto the
Kings Majesty entitled Sol Britannicus, would not (I say) have troubled your
ears with this my particular cause, except it touched the honor of all
England.

For if you suffer the Spanish to commit such things, why may it not be
permitted unto the French, the Portingalls, the Hollanders as many as are
living in this Kingdom peaceably with the Spaniards, to have the like power
upon the Spaniards. And what hinders us to use them here as enemies, but the
Friendship that is between our Princes and you likewise; but the honor and
reverence due unto you by us strangers living in this your kingdom. All which
respects seeing the Spaniards have notoriously slighted, and not regard but
injuriously violated:

Therefore I humbly crave at your hands, that you would be pleased either to
cause the said money, which has been taken from me perforce in your own ship
and haven, and the said ship having the Kings Arms, which should to me have
been a most sure asyle, to be restored unto me with all the damages which I
have sustained thereby, or else to give me leave, to recover it as I can upon
the next Spaniard I shall meet withal. And until you have taken such an
order, concerning this matter, as may well become England, I your petitioner
most humbly beseech you to cause the Spaniards to provide me some means,
whereby in the mean while I your petitioner may live.

And the petitioner shall ever pray for your honors etc.

