A GREAT FIGHT NEAR The City of Dublin in Ireland, between the Princes Forces
commanded by the Marquess of Ormond, and the Parliaments Forces under the
conduct of Col. Jones; with the particulars thereof, and the Names of those
Regiments who yielded upon quarrel, to march away without arms, with their
hands in their pockets. Also terrible News from the North of England, and
another great Army raising in Scotland.

portrait of a man

Imprinted at London, for R. W. May 2. 1649.

A Great VICTORY Obtained in IRELAND By the Princes Forces under the command of
the Marquess of Ormond, with the names of those Regiments who yielded upon
quarter, and the particulars of the fight.
SIR,
THe Marquess of Ormond (we hear) is sat down before the City of Dublin
with 12000 Horse and Foot, and has summoned Colonel Jones the Governor, to
submit and surrender the said City to the obedience of his Majesty, Charles the
II, for so is he called by those new Associates, but the Governor is resolved
to hold it out to the last hour with the hazard of life and fortunes, and in
order thereunto, has disputed several passes with great gallantry and forced
the Enemy to a disorderly retreat; insomuch that they have enlarged their
quarters, and caused the Marquess to withdraw at a further distance; but upon
this motion, fortune frowned upon our Sons of Mars, the Enemy making an attempt
upon some of the frontier Garrisons, adjacent to the City became both
successful and victorious, the manner thus:

When they were about six miles distant from the City, the General gave
command that a considerable party of Horse and Foot should be drawn forth, for
the assaulting of the aforesaid Garrisons, and subduing of the Parliaments
Forces: the first that they attempted was upon a part of Col. Hungerfords
Regiment, who defended the place with unanimous Spirits, and received the Enemy
with great courage; but being overpowred were constrained to article for their
lives, which took effect, and Hostages being appointed to treat, these ensuing
Articles were signed and agreed upon.

1 That all arms, powder, bullet, and other Necessaries appertaining to the
said Garrison, should be safely delivered to the Marquess of Ormond, or such
as he should appoint, without any imbezelment whatsoever. 2 That they shall
leave all their arms behind them, and march with their hands in their pockets.
3 That they shall not be interrupted in their passage, but have free liberty to
go where they please.
Thus may you apparently discern the exorbitances of the usurping Marquess,
and his Confederate Catholics, how, and with what insolences they begin, if
they surmount and dis empower Us there or here, a man that can but see with
half an eye, may easily discern what in future times may be expected from them,
what shall we say, The mercies of the wicked are cruelties.

They have also made an attempt upon another Garrison, which proved effectual,
but not without great loss; for it is said they lost above one hundred men in
the taking of it, besides as many wounded, occasioned by the unparalleled valor
of Col. Long (the Governor) and his Heroic Spirits, and after a hot dispute
articled as aforesaid, and surrendered upon honorable conditions.

They use their utmost endeavors for the reducing of all Garrisons ere new
forces be sent over, and are marching against Dublin with a resolution to
storm. But we hope, that supplies will be suddenly expedited thither, for the
preservation of the distressed defendants, from the rage and fury of the blood
thirsty Enemy.

Chester 26. April, 1649

The Committee of Estates sit daily in consultation, and are exceedingly
discontented at their new Kings refusal to grant their desires, and reject a
compliance with them; whereupon many of them have declared their assent for a
message to be sent to the parliament of England, in reference to a Treaty,
touching prince Charles; but many of the great Ones are divided in that
particular, and the Commoners cannot endure to hear of the subversion of
Monarchy.

Berwick 27 April, 1649.

Honored Sir,
Upon the 26. of this instant, here arrived a Messenger from Prince Maurice,
with a Letter to the Prince of Wales, wherein he gives an account to his
Highness of the present transactions at Sea, purporting, That without a speedy
supply of Moneys, and other necessaries appertaining thereunto, for
accommodation of the Mariners, a great distraction would suddenly break forth
amongst them new Coals being already kindling, which are ready to break forth
in a visible flame.

For we hear, that they mutiny exceedingly, and have declared, That they will
not engage against the Parliaments Navy without assurance both of present and
future satisfaction; insomuch, that many of them have undantedly remonstrated
to Prince Rupert, and other superior Officers, that they will rather die and
suffer martyrdom, then be enslaved and ruled by a usurping power and arbytrary
Government.

This strange allarum sounds in the ears of many like a terrible echo, and
puts a great demur to the proceedings at Court, many of the Grandees declining
Engagement; especially since the receipt of the Intelligence, that the
parliaments Navy are put forth to Sea who are jointly resolved to hazard the
encounter, and to bring them to obedience and subjection, who have perfidiously
deserted, and betrayed the trust reposed in them.

And by an Express from Helver-sluce it is further intimated, that upon the
lanching forth of the parliaments ships to the Ocean, they soon espied a
Squadron of the princes Fleet, all under sail, being about sixteen in number,
who making toward them, and coming within shot, gave them a broad side, which
by reason of a second Volley from the assaulted, a hot conflict began, being
disputed with great resolutenesse and gallantry on both sides, the Victory
seeming a long while doubtful, but at last it fell to the parliamenteers, who
unk one of their Combitants, chased the rest many leagues, and are now become
Masters of a great part of the British Seas.

This is reported here with great confidence, and it is verily believed, the
rest will not stand a fight, diverse of them fearing, that they shall be made
exemplary, if ever they be taken. Col. Popham one of the parliaments Admirals,
has cleared the Western Coast near the Isle of Portland, and forced many to
fly before him. The other two Admirals, Col. Blague, and Col. Deane, are upon
the same motion on the South-west point.

Hague 27. April, 1649. Postscript, Sir, Since the writing of my last, the two
extraordinary Ambassadors from Sweden and Denmark have had audience with the
titufar King of Scotland, representing the personal appearance of their
Masters, and promising him assistance for the obtaining of his Birthright. But
truly we cannot discern any visible Force as yet in Arms, and the Princes
Propositions to the old Soldiers of the United Provinces are much slighted and
rejected, having unanimously declared, that they will not any ways intermeddle
with the affairs of England, in relation to the erecting and setting up of
Monarchy, or any other Government whatsoever. Here is a great demur happened, at
Court, by reason of the Parliaments Navy putting forth to Sea, which causes
many who at first seemed very forward to promote the Royal Design, to desert
any further Engagement, taking a president by the late headless members, who
acted against the Commonwealth of England.

Hague 27. April 1649.



Letters from the North say, That the Scots are still levying of men, but what
the end of it is, time will manifest, all our enquiries cannot attain to the
certain knowledge of it: However we doubt not but to be as vigilant, as they
are politic, and if we can but faciliate the taking of Time by the fore top,
and reconcile our domestique distractions, we need not fear any foraign
commotions. Yet the necessities of these parts are so great, that the
Inhabitants are far from a defensive posture, especially Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Westmerland, where the poorer sort are almost famished, many
hundreds dying in the high ways for want of bread; it appearing by a
Certificate from the Justices of Cumberland, that there are near upon 30000.
families in that County, that have neither Seed, Bread corn, nor moneys to buy
either.

FINIS.

