THE SPEECH Which the SPEAKER of the House of Commons Made unto the KING In the
House of LORDS, at His Passing of the BILLS therein mentioned, The 29. of
August in the Year of our Lord 1660.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Husband and Tho. Newcomb, Printers to the House of
Commons, Anno 1660.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Commons made unto the King, the 29 of August, 1660.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
NOt many months since, England was but a great Prison, where the worst of men
were our Governors, and their vilest lusts the Laws by which they governed.

The great and most Wise God, conveyed divine intelligence into Your Patient
and Pious Soul, and taught You how by suffering for us, to deliver us from our
sufferings; to knock off our shackles, and set Your People at liberty, when
neither Power, nor Policy could effect it. So soon as Your Majesty set Your
Foot upon Your English shore, our Prison was turned into a Paradise of
Pleasure, and the whole Nation filled with Joy, and Love, and Peace.

Sir, This great Blessing is already registered in Your Peoples thankful Hearts;
and they desire that the memory thereof might be perpetuated; and therefore
they have laid it up amongst their choicest Jewels, and annexed it to their
Magna Charta* which they are willing to pawn unto Your Majesty, upon condition,
when they forget this, to forfeit that and (...).

Sir, Amongst Your many Illustrious Titles, which like fair and beautiful
flowers, do adorn and be-deck Your Royal Crown, there is one exceeds and excels
all the rest, as well in Virtue as in Beauty, and that is Your Title of
Defender of the Faith. Sir, As that Title is Your Honor, so the truth of it, is
our happiness. Neither the highest Provocations, nor the strongest Temptations,
that ever Prince met withal, have been able to shake Your Victorious Faith, nor
abate Your holy Zeal; witness Your first Act, after Your return to the exercise
of Your Regal Power, in Your early and timely suppressing Profaneness, and
discountenancing debaucht persons, who know not how to express their
thankfulness unto God for mercies, but by a sinful drinking them away; a
practice Your Soul abhors.

And as it is Your highest Honor, to be the Defender of that Faith which we
profess; so it is the greatest interest, prerogative, and privilege Your
Majesty can be endowed and invested withal in this world, and will be Your most
lasting comfort in the world to come, That God who has hitherto been a Sun to
direct You, will be a Shield to protect You; and that Faith which You defend,
will defend You against all Your enemies maugre the malice of the Devil, and
all his wicked instruments.

Royal Sir,

Your eminent Virtues, and those excellent Qualifications that God has
bestowed upon You, to make You every way worthy and fit for Government, invites
us at this time, with joyful hearts, to make our humble addresses unto Your
Majesty, and to give You a cheerful account of our proceedings this Parliament,
wherein we have spent our whole time upon Public Bills; some we must confess
of very great concernment to Your Majesty, and all Your People, are not yet
ripe, nor brought to perfection: But though like an after-crop, yet with the
fair weather of Your Majesty's wonted patience, we hope likewise to Inn them
well at last, to Your Majesty's full satisfaction, and the great contentment of
all Your Loyal and Faithful Subjects.

Some Bills are passed both Houses, and already lodged here, which attend and
wait for Your Majesty's Royal Assent, and I shall humbly beg the favor only
but to touch upon some of those of most public concernment, by the way, and in
transitu, to that Bill here in my hand.

Sir, There is one Bill now before You, entitled, An Act for the Confirmation
of Judicial Proceedings; the scope and intendment of that Bill, is to settle
Men's Estates, which is the way to quiet their minds; and when their minds are
at rest, there will be no fear of their breaking the Peace, or forfeiting their
Good-behavior any more in time to come.

There is another Bill, entitled, An Act to prevent the taking of Excessive
Usury. The restraining men of avaritious minds, whose Consciences are as large
as their Bags, will be a great ease to Your People, and an inablement to Your
Merchants the better to go on with their Trades. They are the Laborious Bees
that bring in Honey into Your Majesty's Hive; and Usurers are the lazy, idle
droues, that rob Your Hive of the Honey.

There is another Bill, Entitled, An Act for a perpetual Anniversary
Thanksgiving to be observed and kept upon the 29 of May: A say that God himself
was pleased to honor and adorn with a new additional Star, never seen before
nor since; a Star of rare aspect, which declared to all the world at once, the
happy news of Your Majesty's Blessed Nativity: And as it was Your Majesty's
Birthday, so it was the day of Your Restoration to Your Kingdoms, Parliament,
and People: And likewise the day of Your Peoples re-Creation out of a Chaos of
confusion and misery. And therefore they humbly pray, That not only we (for
there would need no Act for that so long as we live) but that our posterity,
and the ages that shall succeed us, might for ever be obliged to set apart that
day, as a Holy day, to dedicate their Praises and Thanksgivings up unto
Almighty God for his miraculous Deliverance of this poor Nation, when it lay in
dust and ashes, in a most miserable, desperate, forlorn, and deplorable
condition.

There is another Bill, Entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion. It may well be called a Free Pardon: for Your Majesty
was pleased to offer it before we had confidence enough to ask it, and at a
time when Your People had most need of it: And it may as truly be called a
General Pardon, in respect of the extensiveness of it. But looking over a long,
black, prodigious, dismal Roll and Catalogue of Malefactors, we there meet not
with men, but Monsters, guilty of Blood, Precious Blood, Precious Royal Blood,
never to be remembered without tears; incomparable in all the kinds of Villainy
that ever was acted by the worst of Miscreants, perverters of Religion,
subverters of Government, false to God, disloyal to the best of Kings, and
perfidious to their Country: And therefore we found an absolute and
indispensable necessity incumbent upon us, to except and set some apart for
Treacle, to expel the poison of Sin and Rebellion out of others, and that they
might be made sacrifices to appease Gods Wrath, and satisfy Divine Justice.

And now I am come to that Bill here in my hand, which I am commanded humbly to
present Your Majesty withal.

Royal Sir, Your Commons, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now assembled in
Parliament, taking into consideration the great and unsupportable Burden of the
Armies and Navy, that your people do now groan under; and knowing, as Money is
the sinews of War, so as the State of Affairs now stand, that it is likewise the
best Medium that can be used, in order to the attaining that end we have all so
much desired, and so long prayed for, The settlement of a Happy Peace; and
therefore they have passed this Bill Entitled, An Act for a speedy Provision
of Money, to pay off and disband all the Forces of this Kingdom both by Sea and
Land, upon which they hope such a Sum will be advanced and brought in, as may
be sufficient fully to discharge and dispatch that work. And they humbly pray
Your Majesty's gracious acceptance thereof, and Your Royal assent thereunto.

I am further to inform and assure your Majesty, that Your people have passed
another Supply and Revenue unto your Majesty, which far surmounteth all they
have already done in value, and that is, their Hearts and Affections; having
their hearts, your Majesty may command their purses.

Most Royal Sovereign, We have nothing more to offer, or to ask at this time,
but Your Majesty's gracious favor, so soon as your Service, and the Public
Affairs will permit, that we might have leave to go into our Countries, where
we shall make Your people sensible of their happiness, in having such a King to
govern and rule over them; and as we praise Your Majesty, so likewise to pray
for your Majesty, that you may Live long, and Reign prosperously.

FINIS.

