TO THE Children of Friends, and other Young People belonging to Falmouth, and
elsewhere.
Dear Friends, and well-beloved Children,
IN that love that earnestly longs for your Prosperity, and growth in the Truth
and Power of Godliness, I do tenderly Salute you; desiring that you may grow up
to be Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lords Right Hand, that he may
be glorified: I have often beheld you with an Eye of Love and Pity, and of late
it has been with meat diverse seasons to Visit you with a few Lines, if
possible to stir up that Mind or Spirit in you which is pure, by way of
remembrance, that you may give diligent heed thereto in all your Conversations,
and so may be preserved in the Truth of God over all the wiles of your Souls
Adversary.

And let me tell you by the way, Truth is the most excellent thing in the whole
Earth, and there is nothing to be desired in comparison with it, you may read
of many of its Excellencies in the Holy Scriptures; But as you become obedient
hereunto you will experience it so in your selves, and will know the Lord to be
your Leader, who will lead you out of all Iniquity to the perfecting Holiness
in his fear; To which end it is your duty and place not to neglect the Gift of
God which is in you, that which in the secret of your Hearts shows you that you
ought not to Lie, to Steal, to be Proud, Vain, or Wanton; be diligent in
harkening thereunto, and be very careful that you incline not to follow the
Enemy in these or any other of his Temptations; But have an Eye to the Lord,
and let your desires be to him, who administers strength to the Weak, that he
may endue you with spiritual Blessings in the knowledge of himself, and that
you may grow up to a living Zeal for the Honor of his Truth. And let me
further tell you, though your privileges be very great, and your Advantages
much beyond others, in that you have believing Parents, (at least some of you)
who have been unto you good Patterns of Holiness, and not only so, (...) their
Souls have been often poured out unto the Lord on your behalfs, that he may
bless you with his Heaveanly Dayspring from on high, and bring you unto his
divine Truth; yet after all this, and all the pains and care they used in your
Education, if you come not to know some Portion of the same Life, and quickening
Power in your own Hearts, that wrought in the minds of those your tender
Parents, or Friends, you will be as dead and lifeless, and as certainly
unaceptable to the Lord as any other Children whatsoever. And therefore the
Apostle's advice to Timothy is very expedient for you, 2 Timothy 1. 6, 7.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of God that is
in thee, and the unfeigned Faith which dwelt first thy Parents; for God has
not given us the Sprit of fear (the Spirit of carelessness and indifferency) but
of Power, of Love, and a Sound Mind. Now examine your selves, whether you have
this Spirit of Power Whether you have dominion over your Souls enemy. Or
whether your minds yet go after the Earth, or the vain Customs or Fashions of
it. If so, you have not this Spirit of Power, nor of the Love of God, and so
are far from a Sound Mind.

Therefore, Dear Children, be very watchful, walk circumspectly, not as Fools,
but as Wise; put away Lying, speak every one the Truth to each other; They are
my People, said the Lord, Children that will not Lie. So he was their Father [
Mark] God is a Father to those who will not Lie; here is a glorious Privilege
that you are called to, even to be Children of God.

Be careful likewise, that none of you be Busy-bodies, meddling with the affairs
of others, or ready to carry Tales and stories, for this will certainly corrupt
your Minds from the Simplicity of the Truth, and it will make you idle and
impertinent, that the Lord will have no regard unto you, nor his People any
respect for you.

And let all take care that they study not to outdo one another in Clothes and
Dressings, as who shall be finest: But rather, Dear Children, and young People,
if there be an emulation betwixt you, let it be who shall be humblest, and who
shall be lowest; For its the lowly God exalts, and the Meek he guides in
Judgment, and with the humble he will abide: And this I have to say, where that
over-earnest desire is to appear as fine as others, (tho with such things as
may seem plain) yet Pride creeps in under that Spirit, and your Profession will
no more keep you out of the reach of the Enemy's Power, than it does those who
wear Laces, Fringes and Ribands, but you will as really fall under, the just
Judgment of the Righteous God as any other proud People whatsoever.

I have this likewise to tell you, that it is your duty to be very careful of
what acquaintance, and society you use your selves to; that you may keep out of
the Worlds Ways, and Fellowships, and that you who are young Boys and Girls,
may not run with them in their Plays, and Sports, but may be grave and sober as
becomes those professing Godliness; for be assured such as your Companions be,
such are you like to be in a short time; and therefore it behooves you to seek
after the society of sober Friends, and such as love Truth, that your love
thereto may grow and increase, and the Lord may kindle a Zeal in your Spirits,
and make you serviceable to him in the days of your Youth.

And, Dear Children, be careful likewise to frequent Meetings, and to sit
soberly and in good order when you are there, and think not that it is enough
to appear there with your Bodies while your Minds go astray from the Lord, but
know the Lord abhors that Sacrifice, and has regard to the diligent and
careful, whose Minds are exercised in his Law, and who are under an holy aw and
fear, lest they should come short of that Inheritance to the which God has
called them; I believe you are not without your enemy, who when he has a
little clouded the mind, endeavors to be wilder it by drawing it into many
thoughts, wandering up and down in a multitude of unnecessary Cogitations, or
else on the other hand to settle down in a dry drowsy, sleepy state, and
condition; which is a great shame to behold, and a dishonor to the Name of the
Lord; and must therefore be watched against diligently; and let your earnset
and hearty Petition be to the Lord, that he may perserve you out of those
evils, for where these things become habitual, or customary to a People, Such
in time lose the sense of God's Refreshments and the renewings of Life, and
Power which he communicates tohis watchful People.

Therefore, Dear Friends, be concerned, God waits to be Gracious to you, my
Soul is a witness for him, he has not been wanting to us to bless our
Assemblies with his Presence and the bedewings of his precious Life; And why
should any of us either Young or Old, be careless of so great a Blessing, and
let our minds rest in earthly foolish things? Oh! Dear Friends, let us be a
concerned people before the Lord, that his Truth may shine in our
Conversations, and in all our Meetings, This is what the Lord looks for, that
we may be a living People, lively toward him, and if there be any deadness
remains, let it be toward that which is evil, that the Enemy of our Souls, may
never have his purpose on any of us, but that we may wait more and more for
Gods Salvation; who will certainly be near unto us as in sincerity we draw near
unto him.

And Dear Children, and Young People, I do further advise you, that you keep in
the simplicity of the Truth, out of all craft, and cunning, and out of all
shows and appearances beyond what you really are. But let it be your desire and
endeavor to appear simply unto all, as you are in the view of the Lord, and
its no matter how foolish men may esteem you: And that your earnest breathings
be, that the Lord may search and try you, and whatever evil is in you, that he
may do it away; and as your Hearts become thus exercised God will meet with
you, he will show you the joy of his Salvation, and make you beautiful in his
House of Prayer, and who knows but he may kindle such loving Zeal in your
Spirits as to concern you for the good of others, and furnish you with an
Heavenly effectual Gift, for the reproving and admonishing those who go out of
the way, and for comforting the weak and feeble, as he pleases to move in you;
And therefore it behooves you who are young, to be sober minded, and to wait on
the Lord that you may daily know his Instructions, and may follow Him who is a
Teacher near, when we have no outward Instructor. To the Word of whose divine
Grace that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless
before the Presence of his Glory, with exceeding joy, I heartily Recommend you,
and Remain,

Your Dearly Loving Friend and Brother in the Truth, Thomas Gwin.

Postcript.
THere is yet somewhat more on my mind to communicate to you, in respect of
your behavior toward your Parents, or any other Friends, who may be concerned
to caution you for your good, that you may receive it in meekness and
good will, and take heed of an angry obstinate Spirit that is heady, and high
minded, and kicks against reproof; God and good men hate that Spirit, and if
you go on therein it will surely destroy you, and the way of Peace you will
never know. Therefore be Jealous over your own Hearts, and let Judgment have
its free course, for That in you which hates reproof, and turns Judgment
backward, is the greatest of all your Enemies.

And you who are more grown, take care of letting out your Affections hastily
after any man or Woman in order to Marriage, but soberly wait the Lords time,
seek first Gods Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof, and know thy maker to be
thy Husband, who will sufficiently care for thee, and whose love is better than
the Love of the whole Earth. Be Cautious therefore and retired, for those who
let out their Minds, not having a regard to the Lord and the guidance of Truth
in these things, They fall (as the Apostle said in another Case) into a snare,
and many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown men in Perdition.

After this sort I have been often concerned to write to you, Dear Children and
Young People, and I heartily wish it may be effectual to the Spiritual benefit
of any one particular of you, which would be a sufficient recompense to your
well wishing Friend.

And you who are Parents of Children, the Concern that ought to be on you is
great, not only to instruct and admonish your tender Ones, but that you may be
patterns and examples of Holiness unto them, for Childrens Eyes are usually
more upon the manners and behavior of their Parents than upon their Precepts
and Instructions; do thou think, Oh vain Man or Woman! that when thou tellest
thyChild he ought not to Lie, and thou lie; or that he ought not to be Proud,
whilst thou art Proud; or that he must not be Obstinate, Vain or Angry; whilst
thou art so; do thou think thy instructions will prevail more than thy
Example? truly its not very likely they should; what a care then ought to be on
us in respect of our Issue, that they may see our good examples, and follow us,
and Glorify God on our behalfs! And so we shall be a blessing unto them, and
they may be blessings unto us, and the Lord as he has begun will continue to
bless us with his divine Presence, and the early and latter Rain of his Favor,
which causes a freshness, and a springing up of the Pure Seed, to the Praise
Honor and Glory of his divine Name, who is over all eternally worthy, says my
Soul and let the Dominion, and Authority be to him forever and for evermore.

Falmouth 14th of the 9th Month, 1690. T. G.

THE END.

