THE Groans of France In SLAVERY, Gasping after LIBERTY.
Done out of French.
WHEN such a powerful Confederacy was formed against our King, We who are not
so much as suffered to speak of Liberty our selves, did hope that our
Deliverance was at hand: But now, after six Years Experience, finding the
Policy of a Neighbor Nation (from whom alone, under God, we expect Exemption
from our Servitude) so much off the Hooks, that those among them who sit at the
Helm, and approach nearest to their Brave KING, do more mind Enriching
themselves, though at the expensive Ruin of their Fellow Subjects, than
Conquering their Enemies. Now, we think it time to speak, and, if possible, by
our lamentable Groans and Cries, to awaken those who are, we hope, designed by
God Almighty to set us miserable Creatures in Statu quo, and to make us truly
Franks again.

Can any Christian, without Remorse and Pity, hear the Miseries of our Poor,
that wander about the Streets, even of Paris it self, to rake the Dunghills for
dead Horses, wherewith to feed their raging Stomachs? The Form and Mildness of
our ancient Government is quite lost; and although neither. We nor our
Ancestors have ever yet given the King any one authentic Title to our
Privileges; yet we have a Yoke imposed upon us, that is more cruel and
insupportable than that which the Grand Signior and Great Mogull impose upon
their Slaves.

Our Tyrant would, if possible, hinder us from seeing Liberty enjoyed by
others; which has obliged him for so many Years to endeavor, with so much
Obstinacy, to make the English and Dutch our Companions in Slavery. He cannot
bear the Neighborhood of a Nation that has always asserted its Privileges with
a great deal of Vigor: Nor is he less prejudiced against another, that had the
Courage to shake off its Fetters. But since he has failed to Enslave Them, we
hope the time is come when Providence will set Us Free; for all good Frenchmen
are in love with the Constitution of the English Government, and hope, e're
long, to settle one like it at Home; which, after all, will be only our own
Ancient Form of Government restored: Our Court-Pensioners in England and
Holland, as we hear, give out, That we are enamored of our Bondage, in love
with our Chains; and like a Pack-Horse pleased with his Bells, go merrily with
the Burden that is laid upon us; and that our Riches are inexhaustible, and We
as able and willing to part with our Money, as the English and Dutch are to
part with theirs. But we hope our Neighbors will not be imposed upon so
grossly: Though we have lost our Liberty, we are not utterly bereaved of common
Sense. The Pack-Horse will not carry his Load very cheerfully, if he have not
Provender and Hay at Night, as well as his Bells in the Day. Can the
Confederates be ignorant of the Dissatisfaction of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Third Estate, which is so notorious in Paris, and all the Great Cities,
especially in this Kingdom? Have they not heard in England and Holland, how
vastly our King's Revenues are diminished? And as our Nobles have not Money to
spare for Wine, so our Common People want a Denier to buy 'em Bread. Our Fields
lie Untilled, and are almost turned to Deserts; an infinite number of People
are dead of Cold, Hunger, and other Distempers, now Epidemical in France; those
Towns which we have known in a flourishing Condition, and well Peopled, are now
ruined and abandoned by their Inhabitants, most of the Tradesmen being gone for
Soldiers, or reduced to Beggary.

What shall we do now? Whereby shall we put an end to all this Misery? Shall we
entreat the King to call a General Meeting of the Estates of the Realm? But who
dares undertake to present our Petition to him? Shall the Princes of the Blood?
There is not one amongst them that dares offer his Majesty the least
Remonstrance? Shall the Dukes and Peers of France, or the Officers of the
Crown? They would most certainly be rewarded with a Lodging in the Bastile; and
there are too many base Complyers, that would help to drag them thither. Should
the Parliament of Paris go in a Body, with their Primeir-President before them;
the Heads of that Assembly would be punished as Seditious Traitors. Should it
be presented by the Inhabitants of Paris, and the rest of the great Cities, we
should see Gibbets erected in every Corner of the Streets, and the Troops of
the Household sent to devour that small Pittance of Maintenance which is yet
left to maintain their Wives and Children. Our poor and ill paid Officers
would barbarously pillage the Houses of those Persons, who could be accused of
no other Crime, than endeavoring to preserve that little remainder of Liberty
which they seem still to enjoy.

Formerly, whenever our Kings acted contrary to the Privileges of the Kingdom,
the Nobility and People appealed to the General Assembly of Estates, and joined
in Leagues to oppose them: But now we have none left in France, but Young Lads,
or extreme Old Men, or Shadows of a Middle Age, so fatigued for the Glory of
our Grand Monarch, that they are sent Home to be recovered and nursed up, or
rather, to increase our Misery, by augmenting the Number of our Indigents, Our
Noblemens Houses want their Lords and Masters, who have been subtly engaged
into that Chargeable way of living, that they are now forced to make the Camp
their Refuge, and leave their miserable Ladies to be attended by an Equipage
fit only for an Hospital.

Our Inland Cities have no Cannon to defend them; they are sent to mend the
Barriers, and fortify the Frontiers of our Maritime Towns: And our Burghers
are not suffered even to repair our decayed Walls; it is enough for them to
erect Statues for the King, or to cause Inscriptions to be engraven in Honor
of that Immortal Man!

The Fortifications and numerous Garrisons of Casal, Strasburgh, and other
Frontier Places, have as well drein'd our Men as Money, to that degree, that
our Ban and Arrier-Ban must be composed of Women, or Non-Entities. But one
great Fetch we have, and that is, to obtain Contribution from our Friends in
England, or Ransom for Prisoners taken in Prizes, whereby we bribe some in all
the Courts of the Confederates, so as to prevail that the War shall be drawn
out in length, and their numerous Armies kept only to amuse our Frontiers,
their Efforts spent in Bombing our Maritime Towns; But not a word of Invading
our undefensive Continent: No; should such measures be taken, the War would
soon be ended. But then those that made Merchandise of their several Countries
and Commonwealths, would have their Trade destroyed. How glorious a Part we
acted, when the English made their last Descent! Their Orders were positive to
land at an appointed Place; and we not daring to trust our faint dispirited Ban
and Arrier-Ban, detached old Soldiers from the Frontiers, and with Thirty
thousand old Soldiers, and a good Tire of Cannon, killed and put to flight Five
hundred Englishmen. It Is like one of the Victories of Lewis the Fourteenth.

But let the English have a care; for if they e're should land, although the
best Men of our Militia are sent away to reinforce our Army on the Frontiers;
and though our Towns are Peopled rather with Skeletons than Men; our Brave
Nobles absent; our Cities without Men, Walls or Cannon: yet our grand puissant
Monarch, accompanied with his Brother of Great Britain (Hero's of equal
approved Fortitude) with Regiments of Mistresses, and Troops of Financiers, and
all the stately Statues and Figures of our Terrestrial Deity, will be ready to
oppose them. Who knows but the Statues may turn Talismans? and the Blind and
the Lame may confound the English and Dutch?

But alas, this is not a time for Mirth! Oh, that we had but some Carrier
Pigeons to send into England, to let those Brave Men, who have so often
recovered their near lost Liberty, know, that we are not such Madmen as they
are made believe; we are not desirous to perpetuate our Slavery: If they will
leave us free to enjoy our Religion (which indeed we do not deserve,
considering what Properties we suffered our selves to be made, in Persecuting
those of the Reformation,) if they will lay aside that fond Design, of making
us a Province under them, but will allow us to choose a King of our own, who yet
shall pay some small Acknowledgment to their Monarch: and if they will be sure
not to fail us, and leave us to the Wheel and Gibbet for our Good Will to them;
then they shall see the bravest of our Armies desert, our exhausted Kingdom
make them a Noble Present of their Gratitude; which shall make all Taxes and
Excises cease with them, and Europe shall once more enjoy Tranquillity; their
Trade and ours shall be restored, and not interfere; and we will turn our
Armies and our Fleets against the Enemies of the Christian Name, or against
those base Neuters, who have so long contributed toward our more than
unsufferable Bondage.

But where shall we obtain those Carrier-Pigeons? I have it, Tont pro Tont. I
will go a Privateering; that will delude our Argus: or I will bespeak some Wool
unwrought, or pretend a Message to the Malcontents, the Jacobites of
Great Britain: and if they will not hearken to this Call, which will put an end
to their Miseries and our own; then I will cry out with Tiberius, -- O Homines
ad servitutem paratos! -- I will shake the Dust from off my Feet, and throw my
self headlong off some Gliff, into the Sea, to be a Meal for some of Neptune's
Subjects, rather than longer endure the Tyranny of Lewis the Fourteenth.

Before I conclude; one late Accident accurring to my mind, I will relate: An
English Vessel, either a Privateer or a Merchant-man, happening lately to be
wreckt on our Coast, about forty of its Crew got on shore, well armed, many of
them, in their Boats; and another Spy-Boat, having had the fortune to escape
not far off, two or three happening to come in sight of those English, and to
be pursued by them, who posted away to Paris, to which they were bound, brought
the dreaded News, That the Confederates were Landed. Which alarmed Paris and
Versailles with different Sentiments: The first wished that they brought Bread
and Succor: The other dreaded the Report, and were struck with such a Pannick
Fear, that I verily believe, had Two hundred bold Men landed with good store of
Provisions, they would have gathered up our Half-starv'd Countrymen, and
increased like a Snow-Ball; and our Illustrious Monarch (the Plague of all
Mankind) would have ended our Misery by a French Abdication.

FINIS.

