THE SPEECH WHICH THE SPEAKER OF THE House of Commons Made unto the KING IN THE
Banqueting House at Whitehall; November 9. 1660.

CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed by John Bill Printer to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty. 1660.

THE SPEECH Which the SPEAKER of the House of Commons Made unto the KING in the
Banqueting House at Whitehall: November. 9. 1660.
Most Gracious and Royal Sovereign,
IF I had the command of as many Tongues, as Your Majesty has of Hearts, I
could not express the great Joy and Thankfulness of Your Commons now Assembled
in Parliament, for Your continual and indefatigable Labor and Pains in
repairing and making up our sad Breaches, and composing our unhappy
Differences; and in particular, for Your late most Gracious Declaration
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, wherein Your Majesty has provided wholesome
Food for all clean Stomachs, strong Meat for such as are able to bear it,
allowing them the use of our Church Liturgy, together with comely Vestments,
Ornaments, and Ceremonies in the Service and Worship of God; as likewise Milk
for tender Babes, dispencing with their Conformity in such Matters and Things,
as are not so much of the Substance and Essence of Faith and Religion, as of
Decency and Becomingness; which gives abundant satisfaction to all peaceable,
sober minded Men, and such as are truly Religious: For those that are really
and truly so, will find themselves bound ever in Conscience to the observation
and practice of that excellent Lesson taught us by the Apostle, which is,
Sapere ad temperantiam and Spartam ornare, with a Vade tu and fac simile. As
for those that have foul Stomachs, or rather foul Hearts, and will be pleased
with nothing, unless they may have a Licentious Liberty, Libertatem
perditionis, a Liberty Legem ponere oculis, minime cogitantes quod sunt pedes.
Men of turbulent Spirits, and disturbers of the Peace, and Civil Government of
Your Nation, Your Declaration takes no care of them, for they will indeed
better deserve Your Majesty's penance and punishment, then Your pity and
indulgence.

Royal Sir, The end of this humble Address at this time is to assure Your
Majesty, That Your Gracious Declaration does give general satisfaction; and I
am commanded by your Commons now Assembled in Parliament, to present Your
Majesty with as general Thanks; in which they were all unanimous, Nemine
contradicente: And in pursuance of Your Majesty's Directions therein, they have
Ordered a Bill to be drawn for that purpose; which after it has passed the
Scrutiny of both Your Houses of Parliament, they will then humbly beg Your
Favor and Leave, to tender it unto Your Majesty for Your Royal Assent.

Sir, That Gracious and Pious Disposition which God has put into Your Royal
Heart of doing Your People good, is the greatest Temporal Blessing we are
capable of here in this World. We must confess Your Majesty has not only
Jacobs voice, but You have likewise Jacobs hands: You have spoken kindly unto
Your People, and You have handled them gently; and therefore we must for ever
make it our humble Requests in our daily Prayers unto his Throne of Grace, to
bestow upon Your Majesty Jacobs Blessing, De rore coeli variaque pinguedine
terrae; That You may have for Your Portion of the Dew of Heaven, and of the
Fatness of the Earth; Serviant tibi populi, and incurvent se tibi Nationes,
Honorem exhibentes. Let Your People serve You, and let the Nations of the Earth
bow down before You: Those that curse You, let them be cursed; and they that
bless You, let them for ever be blessed.

FINIS.

