THE SPEECH OF Sr. HARBOTTLE GRIMSTON BARONET SPEAKER Of the Honorable House of
COMMONS, To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.

Delivered in the Banqueting House at Whitehal, 29 May. 1660* The MEMBERS of
that House being there present.

London, Printed by Edward Husbands and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Commons
House of Parliament. 1660.

The SPEECH of Sir HARBOTTLE GRIMSTON Baronet, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, delivered in the
Banqueting House at Whitehal May 29, 1660. The Members of that House being
then present.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
IF all the Reason and Eloquence that is dispersed in so many several heads and
tongues as are in the whole World, were conveyed into my Bra^ne, and united in
my Tongue, yet I should want sufficiency to discharge that great task I am now
enioined.

The restitution of your Majesty to the exercise of Your just and most
indubitable Native Right of Sovereignty, and the deliverance of your people
from Bondage and Slavery has been wrought out and brought to pass, by a
miraculous way of Divine Providence beyond and above the reach and
comprehension of our understandings, and therefore to be admired, impossible to
be expressed.

God has been pleased to train your Majesty up in the School of affliction,
where You have learnt that excellent Lesson of Patience so well, and improved
it so much for the good of your people, that we have all just cause for ever to
bless God for it, and We doubt not but your Name is Registered in the Records of
Heaven, to have a place in the highest from amongst those Glorious Martyrs of
whom it is reported, that through Faith in Christ and Patience in their
Sufferings, they converted their very Tormentors, and conquered those Barbarous
bloody Tyrants, under whom they then suffered, insomuch as they themselves were
many times enforced to confess and cry out, Sat est vicisti Gallilaeus, They
had their ( vicisti) and that deservedly, but Your Majesty must have a treble (
vicisti) for with the same Weapons, Faith and Patience, You have overcome and
conquered the Hearts and Affections of all Your people in Three great Nations,
the Hearts and Affections of all that are worthy the name of good Christians or
reasonable men.

It Is God and God alone to whom be the Glory, that has made Your Majesty so
great a Conqueror, indeed your conquest is incomparable, no story can instance
the like, or furnish us with an Example to parallel it withal; 'Twas a Use and
Custom amongst the Romans, when any of their Commanders had done eminent
Services abroad, at their Returns, to honor them with Triumphs, and rideing
through their streets, there they received the Praises and Applauses of the
people, with this Inscription upon their Laurel Crowns, (Vincenti Dabitur) But
your Majesty's victory is of another nature, and as it differs much from theirs
in the quality of it, so your Triumph must differ as much from theirs in the
manner of it; They conquered bodies, but your Majesty has conquered Souls;
they conquered for the Honor and good of themselves, but Your Majesty has
conquered for the Honor and good of your people; they conquered with force, but
your Majesty has conquered with Faith; they conquered with Power, but your
Majesty has conquered with Patience, and therefore God himself has written
your Motto, and inscribed it upon your Royal Crown ( Patienti Dabitur) Their
Triumphs were in narrow streets, but your Majesty's Triumphs must be in large
hearts; their Triumphs lasted but for a day, but your Majesty's Triumph must
last for all your days, and after that to triumph in Heaven to all Eternity.

I have read of a Duke of Burgundy, who was called Carolus Audax, the Historian
tells us that his Father was called Carolus Bonus, an Observator has this note
upon it, That Goodness does ever produce Boldness; Sir, you are the true Son of
such a good Father, and so long as You serve our good God, He who is goodness
it self, will give you Boldness, a Princely virtue, and the best foil Your
Majesty can use to set out the true luster of all your other most eminent and
lovely Graces.

Most Royal Sovereign, I have yet a few words more, and to doubt your
Patience, who is the mirror of Patience, were to commit a Crime unpardonable,
and fit to be excepted out of that Act of Olivion, which your Majesty has so
graciously tendered unto your people; therefore with an humble confidence I
shall presume to acquaint your Majesty, that I have it further in command to
present you at this time with a Petition of Right, and humbly upon my bended
knees to beg your Royal assent thereunto. Sir, it has already passed two great
Houses, Heaven and Earth, and I have vox Populi and vox Dei to warrant this
bold demand. It is, That Your Majesty would be pleased to remove your Throne of
State, and to set it up in the Hearts of Your people, and as You are deservedly
the King of Hearts, there to receive from your people a Crown of Hearts, Sir,
this Crown has three excellent and rare Properties, it is a sweet Crown, it is a
fast Crown, and it is a lasting Crown; it is a sweet Crown, for it is perfumed
with nothing but the incense of Prayers and Praises; and it is a fast Crown, for
it is set upon Your Royal Head, by him who only has the power of Hearts, the
King of Kings; and it is a lasting Crown, Your Majesty can never wear it out,
for the longer you wear this Crown, it will be the hetter for the wearing, and
it is the hearty desires, and most earnest Prayers of all your Loyal, Loveing
and Faithful Subjects, that You may never change that Crown till you change it
for a better, a Crown of Eternal Glory in the highest Heavens, and the Lord say
Amen.

FINIS.

