Legis Fluvius: OR, The FOUNTAIN Of the LAW OPENED.

Showing the Manner Method, and Forms of Proceedings, and Pleas on all Actions
and Informations, grounded on all the new and old Penal Statutes; and the
Statute it self quoted, upon which every Action depends.

With Presidents for the most usual Indictmens: Applicable to all Courts of
Record.

Being useful for all Atturneys, Clerks, and INFORMERS.

By A. G.

THe best writing-Ink for Deeds and Records, is made and sold by Tho. Rooks, at
the East End of Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Lamb, near the School.

London, printed by J. C. for the said T. Rooks, and are to be sold at the
place aforesaid. 1658.

To the Reader.
IT is not to be supposed, That ever Parliaments would spend so many long and
serious Hours in the making Laws, and not intend, that they should be put in
Execution; yet none are looked upon for more despicable Creatures, then the
Prosecutors of the Penal Laws; especially amongst the Alehouses and
Gaming-houses, which are Joynt-tenants, and dwell continually under one Roof:
but the High-way-Thief is by far the honester Man, then the Gamester; for By
him whole Lordships have been swept away,
Credit, and clothes, and all, for one nights play.


But since the Law has sufficiently provided a Remedy to suppress these
Monsters, I doubt not but there will be ingenious Persons to prosecute them.
And because these most useful Statutes seemed to lie obscure in a voluminous
Bulk, and no Presidents upon them are publicly extant; for the ready ease both
of the Informer and his Clerk, I have set down each Penal Statute in brief, and
a particular Form of proceeding thereupon: so that if this be duly observed and
practiced, I hope the Caterpillars and Locusts of this Commonwealth, as
Forestallers, Regradors, Ingrossers, etc. will be shaken off from our
Fruit Trees; for which purpose this was composed; and hoping it will prove
effectual, I conclude.

Legis Fluvius, Or the FOUNTAIN of the LAW Opened.
A Body without a Spirit is dead, and no more then an Image; of no other use
are the many wholesome Laws and Statutes, by great Councils, upon serious
debate Instituted for the preservation and welfare of this Nation, if life be
not given unto them, by putting them in Execution. But indeed they being in
great Volumes, are not, as they ought to be, known by every one; and to whom
they are known, are not Practiced by, for want of president, or a Path to walk
by: Therefore I Will briefly lay down Platforms of all Sorts for Example, and
direct you to the Statute it self for Encouragement.

Wine without License.
Statute 7. E. 6. 5. None shall sell or utter any Wines by retail, etc. without
License, on pain of ten pounds for every offense, etc.
The President of an Information against such as sell wine without License.
L. M. BE it remembered that H. M. who as well for the Lord Protector of the
Common wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. as for himself in this
behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the 17 day of June in the year of our
Lord, 1657. in his own person, and as well for the said Lord Protector as for
himself, gave the Court here to understand and be informed, that one I. F. late
of, etc Victualer, at sixty several times or turns between the first day of
Aug. last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this Information, at, etc. in the
said County did sell and utter by Retail to one certain person, or to diverse
certain persons, whose name^ to the said H. M. who, etc. as yet are unknown,
twenty several Pints of Claret Wine, wenty several Pints of White Wind, and
twenty several Pints of Sack; that is to say, one Pint at every several time
of the aforesaid sixty several times, or turns, within the time aforesaid, to
be drank and spent within the Mansion house, of him the said I. F. situate in,
etc. And the said sixty several Pints of the said several Wines aforesaid, at
the aforesaid several times or turns, within the time aforesaid, in the
aforesaid Mansion house of the aforesaid I. F. were drank and spent by the
aforesaid I, on certain person, or several certain persons, to the said H. who,
etc. unknown, contrary to the form of the Statute in this case made and
provided: Whereby the said I, has forfeited six hundred pounds of Lawful money
of England, That is to say, for every offense of the aforesaid sixty several
offenses, so by him committed in manner and form aforesaid, and against the
form of the Statute aforesaid, ten pounds, in the whole amounting after that
rate to the said six hundred pounds. Whereupon the said H. as well for the said
Lord Protector as for himself, prays the advice of the Court here in the
premises, and that he the said H. may have the moiety of the forfeitures
aforesaid, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid. And also that he the
said I. may come here into Court to answer the premises, etc. pledges, etc.

Plays and Games.
Stat. 33. H. 8. 9. No person or persons shall keep, hold, or maintain, either
in his or their dwelling or mansion House, Yard, or Backside, or any place, any
unlawful Games; or shall suffer any persons to play at Tables Cards, or Dice,
Tennis, Coyts, Clash, Logga^s, or any other unlawful Game, on pain of forty
shillings a day for every such offense: one moiety to the Protector, the other
moiety to any person that will sue for the same in any Court of Record, etc.
An Information against a Gaming-house.
L. M. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth, etc. as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into
Court the twelfth day of February, in the year of our Lord, 1656. in his own
person, and as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court
here to understand and be informed, that one G. S. late of London, Victualler,
the 24 day of June last past, and continually afterward by the space of twenty
days, for the lucre and gain of the said G. S. by himself and his servants at
L. aforesaid, That is to say, in the Parish of blessed Mary Bow, and Ward of
Cheap, did keep, hold, and maintain a common gaming-house, of, and for Tables,
Cards and Dice, Coyts, Clash, Tennis, Loggats, Bowls, and Nine-pins; and of and
for another unlawful game, called Shovegroat, otherwise Slidethrift: and at the
same unlawful games, every day by all the time aforesaid, at L. aforesaid, at
his dwelling house aforesaid, diverse persons, subjects of this Commonwealth, to
play, did permit and suffer, against the form of the Statute in this case made
and provided. By means whereof he, the said G. has forfeited to the said Lord
Protector and the said I. S. who, etc. the sum of forty pounds of lawful money
of England: to wit, for every day of the said twenty several days, wherein he
kept the said gaming-house as aforesaid, the sum of forty shillings; in the
whole, amounting after that rate to the said forty pounds: Whereupon the said
I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector, as for himself, prays the advice of
the Court here in the premises, and that he the said I. S. may have one moiety
of the said forfei^ures, according to the form of the Statu^e aforesaid, and
that he the said G. S. may come here into Court to answer the prem^^e^, etc.

By the same Statute, every person using or haunting any such gaming-house,
shall forfeit 6s. 8d. for every day he shall use the same: and every Artificer,
Journey-man, or Water-man, etc. 2 s. These forfeitures to be divided ut supra.

Recusants.
Stat. 23. Eliz. 1. Every person of the Age of sixteen years and upwards, shall
every Lords day duly repair to their Parish Church, or some other Parish
Church, on pain to forfeit for every month they shall make default, twenty
pounds, to be divided into three equal parts* one part to the Protector, the
other part to the poor of the Parish, where the defendant dwells, and another
part to the Informer, etc.
Information against Recusants.
BE it remembered that W. S. who as well for the now Lord Protector and the poor
of the Parish of S. in the said County, as for himself in this behalf,
prosecures; came here into Court the fifteenth day of April, in the year of our
Lord, 1657. in his own person, and gave the Court here to understand and be
Informed, That one P. S. late of the Parish of S. in the said County of G. who
the twenty ninth day of September, in the year of our Lord, 1656. was of the
Age of sixteen years and more, and abiding and inhabiting within the
Commonwealth of England, that is to say, in the Parish of S. in the County
aforesaid, and from the aforesaid twenty ninth day of September, in the year
aforesaid unto the day of the Exhibiting this information, That is to say, by
the space of six whole months, or more, did not repair nor m^ke his endeavor
to repair un^o the Parish Church of S. aforesaid, nor unto any other lawful or
public Church or Chapel, for the hearing of Divine Service, and Sermons,
according to the Laws and Ordinances of the Church and Commonwealth of England,
for the public Worship and Service of God, made, and ordained; and there
remain orderly, and nor go away, during the time of public Prayer and
Preaching, or other Doctrine and Services, according to the Ordinances of the
Commonwealth of England, for the public Service and Divine Worship of God,
made and ordained, and there used and administered. But for the whole time
aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, having no lawful
excuse, did voluntarily and obstinately forbear the same, against the form of
the Statute in this Case made and provided. Whereupon the said W. S. as well for
the said Lord Protector, and the poor of the said Parish, as for himself, prays
the advice of the Court here in the premises, And that due process of Law may be
awarded against the said P. S. in this behalf, And that the said P. S. may
thereof be lawfully convicted, and for his offense aforesaid, may forf^it 120l.
of lawful money of England, to wit, 20 l. for each month of the said six whole
mone^hs, in which the aforesaid P. S. did not repair to the Church as
aforesaid; And that the said forfei^ure may be divided into three equal parts,
And that the aforesaid W. S. may have thereof his third part, according to the
form of the Statute aforesaid: And moreover, That the aforesaid P. S. may come
here into Court to answer the premises, etc.

Shooemakers.
Stat. 1. Jam. 22. Shoomakers shall make their Shoes and Boots, etc. of good
and sufficient Stuff; and sow them well, in pain to forfeit for every default
or offense 3s. 4d. besides the full value of the Wares otherwise made or sold,
etc.
It were good if this were well looked after; for it is a common practice now
among Shoomakers to make the Rands of Shoes with Calves-leather; so that
as soon as it comes to the wet, the sole rends from the upper Leather, and can
never be mended. And to make the Heels of unlawful Leather is usual. At this
time I have a pair of Shoes on my feet, sold to me for Neats-leather in Saint
Martins-lane; and the pieces of the heels are Horse-hide, as those that deal in
Leather inform me: indeed if they did not look like Leather, I should have
imagined they had been Paper.

Information.
BE it remembered that John Saubrigde, who as well for the Lord Protector or
England, Scotland, and Ireland etc. as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes;
came here into Court the fifteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord, etc.
and gave the Court here to under^tand, and be informed, that one N. T. late of
L. Cordwainer, between the first day of January last past, and the day of the
Exhibiting this Information at London aforesaid, to wit, in the Parish of,
and^. and Ward, etc. at twenty several times or turns within the time
aforesaid, did sell and utter to diverse and several persons, whose names to the
said I. S. who, etc. as yet are unknown, twenty pair of Boots, price of every
pair thereof ten shillings; twenty pair of Shoes, price of every pair thereof
three shillings four pence. And the said I. S. as well for the said Lord
Protector, as for himself, will verify, that the said twenty several pair of
Boots, and the said twenty several pair of Shoes, were not made of good and
sufficient Stuff, but the R^nds thereof were made of Calves-leather; And the
said Boots and Shoes, were sowed with unwrought and rotten thread, mixed with
Rozen and Brimstone, contrary to the form of the Statute in this Case made and
provided. By means whereof the said N. T. has forfeited to the said Lord
Protector, and the said I. S. who as well, etc. the sum of thirteen pounds six
shillings and eight pence, of lawful money of England, That is to say, the
value of the said Boots and Shoes, so by him of unlawful and unsufficient
Stuff made and sold, as aforesaid: And also the sum of three pounds six
shillings and eight pence, That is to say, for every offense of the aforesaid
twenty several offenses, the sum of three shillings and four pence, of like
lawful money of England: which said forfeitures do amount in the whole, to the
sum of sixteen pounds thirteen shillings four pence, of lawful money of
England. Whereupon the said I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector, as for
himself, prays the advice of the Court here in the premises; and that due
process of Law may be awarded against him the said N. T. in this behalf, And
that he the said I. S. who, etc. may have one moiety of the said forfeitures,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid, And also that he the said N. T.
may come here into Court to answer the premises, etc.

Upholsters.
Stat. 9. 11. H. 7. 19. 5. 6. E. 6. 2. 3. None shall make, to the intent to
sell, or offer to be sold, any Featherbed, Bolster, Pillow, Cushion, Quilt,
Mattress, etc. except such as are stuffed with one sort of stuff, viz. Clean
Wool, Feathers, or Flocks alone, and not mixed with hair, or any unlawful
stuff, in pain to forfeit the same, so sold or put to sale, or the value
thereof.

Which said forfeitures are to be divided betwixt the Protector and the
prosecutor.


Information against Upholsters.
BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the now Lord Protector, as for
himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the fifteenth day of
June, in the year of Lord, 1657. in his own person, and gave the Court here to
understand, and be informed, that one J. J. late of London Upholster, between
the twenty fourth day of June last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this
information at London, aforesaid, That is to say, in the Parish of blessed Mary
Bow, and Ward of Cheap, using and exercising the Art, Trade, and Mystery of an
Upholster, did sell and utter to diverse persons, whose names to the said I. S.
who, etc. as yet are unknown, twenty Beds, price of every Bed forty shillings;
twenty Pillows, price of every Pillow ten shillings; twenty Bolsters, price of
every Bolster twenty shillings; twenty dozen of Cushions, price of every dozen
thereof forty shillings; twenty dozen of low Stools, price of every dozen
thereof three pounds; ten dozen of high Chairs, price of every dozen thereof
four pounds. And the said I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector, as for
himself, will verify that the said Beds, Pillows, Bolsters, Cushions, Stools,
and Chairs, were stuffed with mixed and unlawful stuff, as hair and feathers
mixed together; and not with clean feathers, or clean flocks alone; against the
form of the Statute in this Case made and provided: By means whereof, he the
said J. J. has forfeited to the said Lord Protector and the said I. S. who as
well, etc. the sum of two hundred and ten pounds of lawful money of England:
That is to say, the value of the said goods and wares, so by him in manner and
form aforesaid, and against the form of the Statute aforesaid, of unlawful and
mixed stuff, sold and put to sale aforesaid. Whereupon the said I. S. as well
for the said Lord Protector, as for himself, prays the advice of the Court
here in the premises. And that due process, etc. And that he, the said I. S.
who, etc. may have one moiety of the said forfeitures, according the form of
the Statute aforesaid: And moreover, that he the said J. J* may come here into
Court, to answer the premises, etc.

Forestalling.
Stat. 5. 6. E. 6. 14. If any person shall buy or contract for any Merchandise,
V^ctual, or other thing whatsoever, in the way before it be brought unto any
F^i^ or Market, where it should be sold; or shall c^use the same to be so
brought, or shall dissuade people from bringing any such Commodity unto such
place; or being brought shall persuade them to inhance the price thereof, every
such person and persons, shall be adjudged a forestaller. Stat 1 Edw. He shall
be adjudged a Regrador, that buys any Grain, Wine, Fish, Butter, Cheese,
Candles, Tallow, Sheep, L^mbs, Calves, Swine, Piggs, Geese, Capons, Hens,
Chickens, Pigeons, Coneys, or any other dead Victuals whatsoever, brought to a
Fair or Market to be sold there, and does sell the same again within the same
Fair or Market, or in any other Fair or Market, within four miles. Stat. idem.
He is an ingrosser who shall get into his hands, by buying, contract, or
promise (other then by demise) any corn growing on the ground, or other Grain,
Butter, Cheese, Fish, or other dead Victuals whatsoever, with an intent to fell
it again.
Information against an Ingrosser for buying Corn on the ground.
Essex ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the L. Protector of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging as for
himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the seventeenth day of
June, in the year of our Lord, 1657. in his own person, and gave the Court here
to understand, and be informed, that one R. D. late of D. in the County
aforesaid* Chandler, between the first day of April last past, and the day of
the Exhibiting this Information, at E. in the said County, did ingross and
obtain into his hands and possession, by buying, and not by demise, grant, sale
of Land or Tithes, of diverse persons, whose names to the said I. S. who, etc.
as yet are unknown; ten Acres of Wheat, every Acre thereof of the value of six
pounds; forty Acres of Rye, every Acre of the value of four pounds; an hundred
Acres of Barley, every Acre of the value of three pounds, being and growing in
the blades, and standing Corn, in the fields of D. aforesaid in the said
County, with an intent to sell again the Grain coming thereof, and of every
parcel thereof, after the buying thereof; contrary to the form of the Statute
in this Case made and provided. Whereby the said R. for this first offense has
forfeited five hundred and twenty pounds, of lawful money of England, to wit,
the value of the Corn aforesaid, so by him in manner and form aforesaid, and
against the form of the Statute aforesaid, bought and engrossed. Whereupon the
said R. B. who as well, etc. prays the advice of the Court here in the
premises, and that he the said R. B. who, etc. may have the moiety of the
forfeitures aforesaid, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid. And that
the said R. D may be accounted an unlawful ingrosser, and may suffer
imprisonment of his body by the space of two months, without bayl or
mainprize, and also that the said R. D. may come here into Court to answer the
premises, etc.

The penalty against Forestallers, Regradors, and Ingrossors.
The first offense is forfeiture of the goods so bought or had, and two months
imprisonment without bayl; the second offense is double the value, and six
months imprisonment without bayl: The party offending the third time shall
forfeit all his goods, be set upon the Pillory, and imprisoned at the Kings
pleasure.

An Information against a Forestaller.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the Lord Protector, etc. as
for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the thirteenth day
of June, in the year of our Lord, 1657. in his own person, and gave the Court
here to understand and be informed, that one E. D. late of London, Chandler,
between the first day of January last past, and the day of the exhibiting this
information, at London aforesaid; to wit, in the Parish of blessed Mary-Bow,
and Ward of Cheap, did by way of forestalling and unlawful engrossing, buy of
several persons, whose names to the said I, who as well, etc. as yet are
unknown at, diverse and several times two hundred pound weight of Butter, price
of every pound thereof six pence; two hundred pound weight of Cheese, price of
every pound thereof, three pence; four hundred Eggs, price of every hundred
thereof four shillings; two hundred pound weight of Bacon, price of every pound
weight thereof, four pence; ten dozen of Pigeons, price of every dozen thereof,
three shillings; five dozen of Capons, price of every dozen thereof, one pound
four shillings; five dozen of Pullets, price of every dozen thereof, eighteen
shillings; five dozen of Turkeys, price of every dozen, forty shillings,
contrary to the form of the Statute in this Case made and provided: by means
whereof, he the said E. D. has forfeited to the said Lord Protector, and the
said I. S. who, etc. for this his first offense, the sum of thirty and three
pounds twelve shillings eight pence, That is to say, the value of the said
goods and victuals, so by him, in manner and form aforesaid, and against the
form of the Statute aforesaid, bought and forestalled. Whereupon the said I. S.
as well for the said Lord Protector, as for himself, prays the advice of the
Court here in the premises. And that due process, etc. And that he, the said I.
S. who, etc. may have one moiety of the said forfeitures, according to the form
of the Statute aforesaid: And that he the said E. D. may be adjudged an
unlawful forestaller, and be thereof convicted, and may also for his first
offense suffer two months imprisonment of his body without bayl, according to
the form of the Statute aforesaid: and moreover, that he come here into Court
to answer the premises, etc.

Against Artificers using a Manual Occupation, not being Apprentice thereunto.
Stat. 5. Eliz. 4. None who has not served as an Apprentice seven years, to
any Art or Mystery now used, shall use the same, or set any others to work
therein, who has not served out that time, on pain to forfeit forty shillings
for every month, to be divided between the Queen and the prosecutor.
The Information for using a Trade not being an Apprentice.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the now Lord Protector, as
for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the twenty third
day of January, in the year of Lord, 1656. in his own person, and as well for
the said Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to understand, and
be informed, that one L. M. late of London Yeoman, the twentieth day of
February last past, and continually afterward, until the day of the Exhibiting
this information; to wit, by the space of eleven whole months and more, at
London aforesaid, to wit, in the Parish of blessed Mary Bow, and Ward of Cheap,
by himself and his servants, for his proper use, did use and exercise, the Art,
Science, Mystery, and Occupation of a Combmaker, being a Science, Artifice,
Mystery, Occupation, and Art, used and occupied within this Commonwealth of
England, the twelfth day of January, in the first year of the Reign of our Lady
Elizabeth, late Queen of England: Where in truth the said R. N. the said
twelfth day of January, in the said fifth year of the Reign of our said Lady
Queen Elizabeth, late Queen of England, etc. did not use, exercise, nor enjoy
the said Science, Art, Mystery, nor Occupation of a Combmaker, nor any other
Art, Mystery, nor Manual Ocbupation, nor was at any time edified in the said
Art, Mystery, or Manual Occupation of a Combmaker, nor of any other Art,
Mystery, or Manual Occupation, as an Apprentice by the space of seven years;
Against the form of the Statute in the fifth year of our said Lady Elizabeth,
Queen of England, etc. in this Case made and provided. Whereby the said R. N.
has forfeited to the said Lord Protector, and to the said I. S. who as well,
etc. twenty two pounds of good and lawful money of England, viz. for every
month of the said eleven months, in which the said R. N. so as aforesaid, the
said Science, Art, Mystery, or Manual Occupation of a Combmaker, against the
form of the said Statute, did use, occupy, and exercise, forty shillings of
lawful money of England; in the whole, amounting after that rate to the said
two and twenty pounds: Whereupon the said I. S. who as well, etc. prays the
advice of the Court here in the premises, and that due process of Law may be
awarded against the said R. N. in this behalf; And that he, the said I. S. who,
etc. may have the moiety of the forfeitures aforesaid, according to the form of
the Statute aforesaid; and that he, the said R. N. may come here into Court to
answer the premises, etc.

An Information against Tallow-Chandlers, in the City of London only.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that A. B. who as well for the now Lord Protector, as
also for the Chamberlain of the City of London aforesaid, as for himself in
this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the twentieth day of November, in
the year of our Lord, 1656. in his own person, and gave the Court here to
understand, and be informed, that one N. H. late of London, Tallow-Chandler,
the twentieth day of December last past, and continually afterward, till the
day of the Exhibiting this Information, That is to say, by the space of ten
whole months, and more; at London aforesaid, to wit, in the Parish of blessed
Mary Bow, and Ward of Cheap, within the Liberties and Walls of London
aforesaid, did keep, hold, and maintain a common melting house for Tallow, And
in the said house the said twentieth day of November, and nineteen other
several days and times within the time aforesaid, at the City of London
aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, did melt Tallow, to the great
annoyance of the Parishioners of the Parish aforesaid, against the form of the
Statute in this Case made and provided, and against the Customs, Liberties,
and Privileges of the City of London aforesaid: Whereupon the said A. as well
for the said Lord Protector, as also for the Chamberlain of the City of London
aforesaid, as for himself, prays the advice of the Court here in the
premises; And that due process of Law may be awarded against the said N. H. in
this behalf: And that the said N. H. may forfeit five pounds of lawful money of
England, for every day of the said twenty several days, in which the said N. in
his house aforesaid, in the form aforesaid, and against the form of the Statute
aforesaid, did melt Tallow aforesaid, within the Walls and Liberties of the
City of London aforesaid; in the whole amounting after that rate to an hundred
pounds, of lawful money of England; And that the said forfeitures may be
divided into three equal parts. And that he the said A. may have one third part
of the forfeitures aforesaid, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid:
And that he the said N. H. may come here into Court, to answer in and upon the
premises, etc.

Residence.
Stat. 21. H 8. 13. Every Spiritual person promoted to any Dignity or Benefice,
or being beneficed with any Personage or Vicarage, that he be personally
resident and abiding, upon his said Dignity, Prebendary, Rectory, Benefice, or
Vicarage, or at one of them at least, in pain to forfeit for not being so
resident by the space of a month together, the sum of ten pounds, to be
divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.
An Information against a Minister for non-residency.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the now Lord Protector as
for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the three and
twentieth day of Jan. this Term in his own person, and as well for the said
Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to understand and be
informed, that whereas by a certain Act of Parliament of King Henry the eighth,
held at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the third day of November, the
one and twentieth year of his Reign, it stands enacted by the Authority of the
same Parliament, That after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, then
next following, no person Spiritual, Secular, nor Regular, of whatsoever degree
he or they were, should from thence take to Farm, to him or to any person or
persons to his proper use, of the Leaf or Grant of our Lord the King, or of
any other person or persons; by Letters Patents, Indenture or Writing, or by
Word or otherwise, by any means, any Manors, Lands, or Tenements, or other
Hereditaments, for term of life, for term of years, or at will, under the pain
of forfeiture of ten pounds for every month, wherein be, or any other to his
use, did occupy any such Farm; the one moiety of such forfeiture to be to our
said Lord the King, and the other moiety thereof to be to any such person as
should prosecute suit for the same, in any of the Courts of Record, of our said
Lord the King: In which Action and Suit, no wager of Law was to be admitted for
the Defendant. And further it is enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That all
such Demises made, or then thereafter to be made, to any such Spiritual person
or persons, or to any others to their use, for term of life, years, or at will,
of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, of which they or any of
them should take any profit, or meddling by themselves, or by any other to their
use, after the same Feast of Saint Michael, by color of any Demise or Grant,
and by them not bargained, granted, and sold before the said Feast, as is
before limited, should from thence be void and of no sorce, as well against the
Lessor and Lessors, Grantor and Grantors, their Heirs and Assigns, and against
any of them, as against the Lessee and Lessees, And their Executors and
Assigns, and every of them. And lastly, it is Enacted by the Authority of the
same Parliament, that as well every Spiritual Person, then promoted to any
Arch-deaconry, Deaconry, or Dignity, in any Monastery or Cathedral Church, or
any Covent or Collegiate Church, or being Beneficed with any Parsonage or
Vicarage; That all and singular Spiritual person or persons, which from thence
hereafter should be promoted unto any Place, Dignities, or Benefices, with any
Parsonage or Vicaridge, from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, then
next following; should be personally resident, and abiding at and upon their
Dignities, Prebendaries, or Benefices, or at one of them at least. And in case
any such Spiritual Person at any time, after the same Feast, should not keep
residency at one of his Dignities, Prebendaries, or Benefices aforesaid, but
shall absent himself voluntarily, by the space of one month at one time, or by
the space of two months to be numbered at several times in any one year, And
shall make his residence and habitation in any other place by such time
aforesaid, That then he or they shall forfeit for every such default, ten
pounds of lawful money of England: Yet nevertheless, A. W. lately of London
aforesaid, being a Spiritual Person, and Rector of the Parish of Saint E. in
London aforesaid, very little weighing the Statute aforesaid, nor in any manner
fearing the punishment in the said Statute contained, after the publishing of
the Statute aforesaid, and before the day of the Exhibiting this information,
to wit, the tenth day of February last past, and continually afterward by the
space of eleven whole months then next following; did voluntarily absent
himself from his Rectory aforesaid: so that the aforesaid A. W. did in no wise
make his abode or residency in, at, or upon his Rectory aforesaid, by the time
aforesaid, against the form of the Statute in that Case made and provided as
aforesaid; By means whereof, the said A. W. has forfeited to the said Lord
Protector, and to the said I. S. who as well, etc, the sum of an hundred and
ten pounds of lawful money of England, That is to say, for each month of the
aforesaid eleven months, ten pounds; in the whole, amounting after that rate
to the said sum of an hundred and ten pounds: Whereupon the said I. S. as well
for the said Lord Protector as for himself, prays the advice of the Court
here in the premises; And that due process of Law may be awarded against him
the said A. W. in this behalf; And that he the said I. S. who etc. may have one
moiety of the said forfeitures, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid:
And also that the said A. W. may come here into Court to answer in and upon the
premises, etc.

Dyers.
Statute. No Dyer shall dye any Cloth with Logwood, Orchel, or Cork, or other
deceitful way, or means, on pain to forfeit the same or the value thereof.
An Information against Dyers using Logwood.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that I. B. who as well for the now Lord Protector as
for himself in this behalf, prosecutes: came here into Court the sixth day of
June, in the year of our Lord 1657. in his own person, and as well for the said
Lord Protector as for himself, gives the Court here to understand and be
informed, that one D. S. late of London, Dyer, between the first day of April
last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this Information at London, That is to
say, in the Parish of blessed Mary Bow, and Ward of Cheap, using and exercising
the Art and Mystery of a Dyer, did use for the dying of broad Woollen-cloathes,
Kerseys and Bays, a certain outlandish Wood called Logwood, otherwise
Blockwood, with other deceitful means, and within the time aforesaid, at London
aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, he the said D. S. ten broad
Woollen-cloathes, price of every Cloth thereof ten pounds; ten Kerseys, price
of every Kersey thereof five pounds; ten pieces of Bays, price of every piece
thereof four pounds, with the said Logwood, otherwise Blockwood, and other
false and deceitful means as aforesaid, did dye and color contrary to the form
of a certain Statute of the three and twentieth year of the Reign of Qu.
Elizabeth, late Queen of England, etc. in such Case made and provided; by means
whereof, he the said D. S. has forfeited to the said Lord Protector, and to
the said I. B. who, etc. the sum of an hundred fourscore and ten pounds of
lawful money of England, That is to say, the value of the said Woollen-clothes,
Kerseys, and Bays, so by him in manner and form aforesaid, and against the form
of Statute aforesaid with the said Logwood, otherwise Blockwood, and other
false and deceitful ways and means dyed and colored as aforesaid: Whereupon
the said I. B. as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, prays the
advice of the Court here in the premises: And that he, the said I. B. who, etc.
may have one moiety of the said forfeitures, according to the form of the
Statute aforesaid: And also that he, the said D. S. may come here into Court to
answer the premises, etc.

Against selling Flour and Meal in shops, An Information upon an Act of
Parliament, 1650.
Middl. ss. BE it remembered, that H. M. who as well for the poor of the Parish
of M. in the said County as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here
into Court the first day of February, in the year of our Lord, 1656. in his own
person and as well for the poor of the said Parish as for himself, gave the
Court here to understand and be informed, that one I. C. late of the Parish of
M. aforesaid, in the said County, between the 29 of September last past, and
the day of the Exhibiting this Information, at the Parish aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, did fell and utter, or cause to be sold and uttered to diverse
persons whose names to the said H. M. who, etc. as yet are unknown, at diverse
and several times, and by diverse and several parcels and quantities, ten
quarters of wheaten Meal, price of every quarter thereof thirty shillings; and
ten quarters of wheaten Flour, price of every quarter thereof forty shillings,
in the House or Shop of the said I. C. and not in any common or public
Marketplace appointed for the selling of Meal and Flour: contrary to the form
of a certain Act of the late Sessions of Parliament holden at Westminster, in
the County of Middlesex, Entitled, An Act touching Corn and Meal made and
provided; By means whereof, he the said I. C. has forfeited to the poor of the
said Parish, and to the said H. M. who as well, etc. the sum of threescore and
fifteen pounds of lawful money of England, That is to say, treble the value of
the said Meal and Flour, so by him in manner and form aforesaid, and contrary
to the form of the Act aforesaid sold and uttered as aforesaid: Whereupon the
said H. M. as well for the poor of the said Parish as for himself, prays the
advice of the Court here in the premises: And that due process of Law may be
awarded against him the said I. C. in this behalf; And that he, the said H. M.
may have one moiety of the forfeitures aforesaid, and that the poor of the said
Parish may have the other moiety. And that he, the said I. C. may suffer
imprisonment of his body, for the space of one month, according to the form of
the Act aforesaid: And moreover, that he come into Court here to answer the
premises, etc.

Against Usury and Extortion, An Act of Parliament was made the eighth day of
August, 1651. Entitled, An Act prohibiting any person to take above the rate
of six pounds for the Loan of one hundred pounds by year, and after that rate
for a greater or lesser sum, or for a shorter or longer time.
An Information upon the Act against Usury.
Middl. ss. BE it remembered, that I. T. who as well for the Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the
twenty fourth day of April, 1657. in his own person, and as well for the said
Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to understand and be
informed, that one I. M. late of the Parish of T. in the said County Yeoman,
between the four and twentieth day of June, last past, and the day of the
Exhibiting this Information at the Parish of T. aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, has by way and means of corrupt bargain, Loan, Exchange, Chivance,
and Shifts, by deceitful ways and means, and by Covin lent, or put to Loan, to
several persons whose names to the said John, who as well, etc. as yet are
unknown, diverse and sundry sum and sums of money, in the whole amounting to the
sum of two hundred pounds of lawful money of England; And the said I. T. as
well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, will verify that the said I.
M. has indirectly for the forbearing or giving day of payment for the said sum
of two hundred pounds for one whole year, taken above the sum of six pounds for
every hundred pounds thereof, against the form of a certain Act of Parliament,
holden at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, on Friday the eighth day of
August, 1651. Entitled, An Act prohibiting any person to take above six pounds
for Loan of one hundred pounds by the year, and after that rate for a greater
or lesser sum, or for a longer or shorter time: By means whereof, the said I.
M. has forfeited to the said Lord Protector, and to the said I. T. who as
well, etc. six hundred pounds of lawful money of England, That is to say,
treble the value of the said money, so by him in form aforesaid, and against
the form of the Act aforesaid, lent or put to Loan. Whereupon the said I. T. as
well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, prays the advice of the
Court here in the premises: And that the said I. T. who as well, etc. may have
the moiety of the said forfeitures, according to the form of the Act aforesaid:
And also, that the said I. M. may come here into Court to answer the premises,
etc.

Another form of an Information upon the same Act.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the now Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of Eng^^^^* as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came
here into Court the seventeenth day of April, this Term, in his own person, and
as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to
understand and be informed, that one I. H. late of London, Sadler, between the
nine and twentieth day of September last past, and the day of the Exhibiting
this Information, for the lucre and gain of the said I. H. at London aforesaid,
to wit, in the Parish of blessed Mary Bow, and Ward of Cheap, did indirectly,
and by way of corrupt bargain, and contract, Lend upon Usury, Loan, and
Interest, at one sum, or by diverse and several sums and parcels, and to one
person or diverse several persons, whose names to the said I. S. who as well,
etc. as yet are unknown, fifty pounds of lawful money of England; And the said
I. H. the Act of Parliament aforesaid, or the penalties in the same little
regarding, did corruptly and indirectly receive and take of the said one person
or of the said several persons, for the Use and Interest of every twenty
shillings of the said fifty pounds, for the Loan of the same, for the space of
twenty weeks, the sum of two shillings; In the whole amounting after that rate,
to the sum of five pounds, for the Use and Interest of the said fifty pounds,
for the said twenty weeks. And the said I. S. as well for the said Lord
Protector as for himself, will verify, that the said I. H. did also receive
and take, of the said one person or of several persons, the said fifty pounds
by one sum or several sums paid weekly, so that the same was fully paid within
the said twenty weeks, contrary to the form of a certain Act of the late
Sessions of Parliament, holden at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, on
Friday the eighth day of August, 1651. Entitled, An Act prohibiting any person
to take above the rate of six pounds, for the forbearance of an hundred pounds
for a whole year, and so after that rate for a greater or lesser sum, or for a
longer or shorter time: By means whereof, the said I. H. has forfeited to the
said Lord Protector and to the said I. S. who as well, etc. the sum of an
hundred and fifty pounds of lawful money of England, That is to say, treble the
value of the money so by him lent, upon corrupt Usury and Extortion in manner
and form aforesaid, and against the form of the Act aforesaid: Whereupon the
said I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, prays the
advice of the Court here in the premises, and that he, the said I. S. who as
well, etc. may have one moiety of the said forfeitures, according to the form
of the Act aforesaid: And also, that he the said I. H. may come here into Court
to answer in and upon the premises, etc. Pledges of prosecuting, etc. John Do
and Richard Roo, etc.

For the Brokers and Usurers sakes, I will here lay down the form of a
Declaration in an Action of Debt upon the said Statute.
L. ss. G. S. late of London, Gentlem. was summoned to answer unto I. T. who as
well for the now Lord Protector, etc. as for himself in this behalf prosecutes,
of a Plea, that he render unto the said Lord Protector and to the said I. T.
who as well, etc. six hundred pounds of lawful money of England, which unto the
said Lord Protector, and unto the said I. T. who as well, etc. he owes, and
unju^tly detaineth, etc. And whereupon the said I. T. as well for the said L.
Pr. as for himself, by R. T. his Attorney, says, That whereas in the
Parliament, holden at Westminster, in the County of Middl. on Friday the eighth
day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1651. It was Enacted, Established, and
Ordained by the same Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That no person
or persons whatsoever should from and after the twenty ninth of September then
next following; directly or indirectly, or by means of any corrupt bargain,
Loan, Exchange, Chivance, or Shifts, or by any deceitful ways or means
whatsoever, receive or take for the forbearance, or giving day of payment for
any sum or sums of money, Goods, Wares, or Merchandise, above the sum of six
pounds for the forbearance, or giving day of payment for the sum of one hundred
pounds for one whole year; and so after that rate for a greater or lesser sum,
or for a shorter or longer time, on pain of the forfeiture of treble the value
of the said Money, Goods, Wares, or Merchandise, lent or put to Loan, contrary
to the form and effect of the Act aforesaid; one moiety of which forfeitures to
be to the use of the then Keepers of the Liberty of England, etc. and their
Successors, the other moiety to any person that should sue for the same in any
Court or Courts of Record: wherein no Wager of Law, Essoyn, or other Protection
is to be allowed. And thereupon the said I. T. in fact, says, That the said G.
S. the Act of Parliament aforesaid or the penalties in the same little
regarding, has since the publishing of the said Act of Parliament, to wit, the
twenty fourth day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1656. at London aforesaid,
That is to say, in the Parish of Saint Mary Bow, and the Ward of Cheap, by ways
and means of Corrupt bargain, Loan, Exchange, Chivance, and Shifts, by
deceitful ways and means, and by Covin, Lent or put to Loan, to several
persons, whose names to the said I. T. who as well, etc. as yet are unknown;
diverse and sundry sum and sums of money, in the whole amounting to the sum of
two hundred pounds of lawful money of England; And the said I. T. as well for
the said Lord Protector as for himself, will verify that the said I. M. has
indirectly for the forbearing or giving day of payment, for one whole year for
the said sum of two hundred pounds, taken above the sum of six pounds for every
hundred pounds thereof, against the form of the Act aforesaid in this Case made
and provided. Whereby an Action has accrued to the said L. Protector and to
the said I. T. who as well, etc. to have and receive of the said G. S. the sum
of six hundred pounds of lawful money of England, That is to say, treble the
value of the said money so by him in manner and form aforesaid, and against the
form of the Act aforesaid, Lent or put to Loan: yet the said G. S. though often
required, the said six hundred pounds to the said, etc. has not paid, etc. to
the damage, etc.

Clothiers and Drapery.
Stat. 4. E 4. 1. None shall put into Cloth to be sold any Lambs-wooll, Flocks,
or Cork in pain to forfeit twenty shillings for every Cloth or half Cloth so
mingled, to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.
An Information against Clothiers, for making Cloth of mingled stuff.
L. ss. IT is to be remembered, that I. B. who as well for the now Lord
Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, as for himself in this behalf, does prosecute; came here into Court
the seventh day of June, in the year of our Lord 1657. in his own person, and
as well for the now Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to
understand and be informed, that one G. S. late of London, Clothier, between
the first day of August last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this
Information at London, That is to say, in the Parish of blessed Mary Bow, and
Ward of Cheap, using and exercising the Trade, Art, and Mystery of a Clothier,
did use to mix with his Wool for the making of Woollen-clothes, Kerseys, and
Bays, Lambs-wooll, and Flocks, and other deceitful stuff, and within the time
aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, he the said
G. S. twenty broad Woollen clothes, twenty Kerseys, and twenty pieces of Bays,
with the said Lambs-wooll, and Flocks, and other deceitful mingled stuff, did
make and put to sale, contrary to the form of the Statute in such Case made and
provided; By means whereof, he the said G. S. has forfeited to the said Lord
Protector, and to the said I. B. who as well, etc. the sum of threescore pounds
of lawful money of England, That is to say, the sum of twenty shillings for
every Woollen-cloth, Kersey, and Bays of the said twenty several pieces of
Woollen-cloth, Kersey, and Bays so by him of deceitful mingled stuff made as
aforesaid, in the whole amounting after that rate to the said threescore
pounds: Whereupon the said I. B. as well for the said Lord Protector as for
himself, prays the advice of the Court here in the premises, and that due
process of Law may be awarded against him the said G. S. here in the premises:
And that he, the said I. B. may have one moiety of the forfeitures aforesaid,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid: and that he, the said G. S. may
come here into Court to answer the premises, etc.

An Information against Drapers for stretching and tentoring Cloth after it is
wrought.
L. ss. IT. is to be remembered, that I. S. who as well for the Lord Protector,
etc. as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the
seventeenth day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1657. in his own person, and
as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to
understand and be informed, that one R. C. late of London, Draper, between the
first day of August last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this Information
at London aforesaid, to wit, in the Parish of Saint Mary Bow, and Ward of
Cheap, using and exercising the Art and Trade of a Draper, did use certain
Tentors, and other Engines, for the setting, stretching, and streining of
Woollen-clothes, Kerseys, and Bays, after the same was fully Watered, Milled
and Wrought, and Rowen: And within the time aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in
the Parish and Ward aforesaid, did by tentoring and other deceitful Engines and
Ways, set or draw in length above one yard, and in breadth above one half
quarter of a yard, above the length and breadth the same was made at, when it
was fully watered and wrought: ten broad Woollen-clothes, price of every Cloth
thereof ten pounds; ten Kerseys, price of every Kersey thereof five pounds, ten
pieces of Bays, price of every piece thereof four pounds; with the said Tentors
and other deceitful Engines as aforesaid, contrary to the form of the Statute
in this Case made and provided; By means whereof* he, the said R. C. has
forfeited to the said Lord Protector and the said I. S. who as well, etc. the
sum of an hundred fourscore and ten pounds of lawful money of England, That is
to say, the value of the said Woollen-clothes, Kerseys, and Bays, so by him in
manner and form aforesaid, and against the form of the Statute aforesaid, with
the said Tentors and other Engines as aforesaid, after the same was fully
watered, wrought, and rowen, set and drawn in length and breadth as aforesaid:
Whereupon the said I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself,
prays the advice of the Court here in the premises; and that due process of
Law, etc. And that he, the said I. S. who as well, etc. may have one moiety of
the said forfeitures, according to the form of the Statute, etc: and that he,
the said R. C. may come here into Court to answer the premises, etc.

This last Information is upon the Statute of 1. R. 3. 8. where there is also a
Penalty of twenty pounds upon any Draper, that shall keep in his house any
Te^tor or other Engine, to draw Cloth in length or breadth, after it is fully
watered or wrought. Which forfeitures are to be divided betwixt the King and
the prosecutor.

Against making Clothes of mixed stuff.
Stat. 43. Eliz. 10. None shall put any Hair, Flocks, Thrum, Yarn, made of
Lambs-wooll, or any other deceivable thing, in Broad-cloth, Kersey, Frize,
Dozen Penistone, Cotton, Taunton-Cloth, Bridgewater, or Dunster-Cotton* in pain
to forfeit such Cloth, Kersey, etc. And none shall buy or procure any such
deceivable thing for that intent, in pain to forfeit the same.

None shall use any Engine to stretch the said Clothes or Rugs, unwrought, in
length or breadth, on paid of twenty pounds, to be divided between the Queen
and the prosecutor.

None shall set any wrought Woollen*clo^h upon any Tentor or other Engine, to
stretch the same otherwise then as follows, viz. the whole Broad-cloth one
yard in length, and one half quarter in breadth; and the Kersey, Cotton, etc.
one half yard in length, and one nail in breadth, in pain to forfeit such
Cloth, Kersey, etc.


The Forms of the Information upon these Statutes, are before recited, etc.

If I should forget the Brewer and Alehouse-keeper, I know they would be
offended. Therefore
Stat. 4. Jam. 4. None shall sell Ale or Beer to an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper,
save only for the expense of his household, in pain of six shillings and eight
pence for every Barrel, and so more or less according to that proportion; which
forfeitures shall be equally divided between the Informer and the poor of the
parish.
An Information against Brewers serving an unlicensed Alehouse with Beer and
Ale.
Middl. ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the poor of the Parish
of B. in the said County as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here
into Court the twelfth day of February, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
six hundred and fifty six, in his own person, and as well for the poor of the
said Parish of B. as for himself, gives the Court here to understand and be
informed, that one I. R. late of the Parish of B. in the said County, Brewer,
between the first day of March last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this
Information, at the Parish of B. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did sell,
utter, and serve to one certain person, or to diverse certain persons, whose
names to the said I. S. who as well, etc. as yet are unknown, to sell the same
again without License, forty Barrels of strong Beer, and forty Barrels of
strong Ale, to be sold again in the house or houses of the said person or
persons, having no License to Authorize them thereunto; And the said I. S. as
well for the said poor of the Parish of B. aforesaid as for himself, will
verify, That the said I. R. did wittingly, and of his own knowledge, sell, and
utter the said Beer and Ale to the said house or houses, knowing the same was
to be sold again and uttered by retail by the said person or persons without
License: And that the same Beer and Ale within the time aforesaid, at the
dwelling houses of the said person or persons, was sold and uttered against the
form of the Statute in this Case made and provided: By means whereof, he, the
said I. R. has forfeited to the poor of the said Parish, and to the said I. S.
who as well, etc. the sum of six and twenty pounds thirteen shillings and four
pence, That is to say, for every Barrel of the said Beer and Ale sold by him in
manner and form aforesaid, to unlicensed Alehouses aforesaid, against the form
of the Statute aforesaid, sold and uttered, the sum of six shillings and eight
pence, in the whole amounting after that rate to the said six and twenty pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence; whereupon the said I. S. as well for the
poor of the said Parish as for himself, prays the advice of the Court here in
the premises, and that due process of Law, etc. And that he the said I. S. who,
etc. may have one moiety of the said forfeitures according to the form of the
Statute aforesaid: And also, that he the said I. R. may come here into Court to
answer the premises, etc.

Butchers.
Statute 4. H. 7. 3. No Butcher shall kill any Flesh in his scalding house, or
within the Walls of London, in pain to forfeit for every Ox so killed twelve
pence; and for every other beast eight pence, to be divided between the King
and the prosecutor.
An Information against Butchers for killing Flesh within the Walls of London.
L. ss. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the now Lord Protector of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, as for
himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court the seventeenth day of
June, in the year of our Lord, 1657. in his own person; and as well for the
said Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to understand and be
informed, that one A. B. late of London, Butcher, between the twenty ninth day
of September. last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this Information at London
aforesaid, to wit, in the Parish of etc. within the Walls and Liberties of the
City of London aforesaid, did keep a common Slaughterhouse for the killing of
Cattle; and between the time aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and
Ward aforesaid, within the Walls and Liberties of the City of London aforesaid,
did kill four hundred Oxen, six hundred Sheep, two hundred Prokers, two hundred
Calves, and two hundred Lambs; to the great annoyance of the Parishioners of
the Parish aforesaid, and against the form of the Statute in this Case made and
provided: By means whereof, he the said A. B. has forfeited to the said Lord
Protector, and to the said I. S. who as well, etc. the sum of threescore pounds
of lawful money of England, That is to say, for every Ox of the said four
hundred Oxen so by him in manner and form aforesaid, and against the form of
the Statute aforesaid, killed, the sum of twelve pence; and for every other
Beast aforesaid, by him killed as aforesaid, within the Walls of the City of
London aforesaid, contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid, the sum of
eight pence of like lawful money of England; in the whole amounting after that
rate to the said threescore pounds: Whereupon the said I. S. as well, etc.
prays the advice, etc. and that due process of Law, etc. And that he, the
said I. S. who as well, etc. may have the moiety of the forfeitures aforesaid,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid; and that he the said A. B. may
come here into Court to answer the premises, etc.

Against Butchers for buying Cattle, and selling them again alive.
Stat. 3. and. 4. E. 19. BE it remembered, that I. S. who as well for the now L.
Protector, etc. as for himself in this behalf, prosecutes; came here into Court
the seventeenth day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1657. in his own person,
and as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself, gave the Court here to
understand and be informed, that one I. R. late of London, Butcher, between the
first day of August last past, and the day of the Exhibiting this information
at London aforesaid, to wit, in the Parish of Saint Mary Bow, and Ward, did buy
of several persons, whose names to the said I. S. etc. as yet are unknown, ten
Oxen, price of every Ox ten pounds; twenty Sheep, price of every Sheep twenty
shillings; twenty Calves, price of every Calf thereof twenty shillings; and
twenty Lambs, price of every Lamb ten shillings. And the said I. R. afterward,
between the time aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, did sell the said several Cattle again alive to several persons,
whose names to the said I. S. who, etc. as yet are unknown, against the form of
the Statute in this Case made and provided: By means whereof he, the said I. R.
has forfeited to the said Lord Protector, and to the said I. R. who, etc. the
sum of an hundred and ten pounds of lawful money of England, That is to say,
the value of the said Cattle so by him in manner and form aforesaid, and
against the form of the Statute aforesaid, bought and sold again alive as
aforesaid: Whereupon the said I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector as for
himself, prays the advice of the Court here in the premises, and that due
process of Law may be awarded against him the said I. R. etc. And that he the
said I. S. who, etc. may have one moiety of the said forfeitures, according to
the form of the Statute aforesaid: And moreover, that he the said I. R. may
come here into Court to answer in and upon the premises, etc.

A Subpaena upon an Information.
OLIVER, Lord Protector, etc. to I. B. and C. D. greeting. We command you, that
all other occasions pretermitted, and excuses whatsoever ceasing; you appear in
your own persons before our Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster, on
Friday next after three weeks of Saint Michael, to answer us, of, and
concerning such things as shall then and there be objected against you on our
behalf: and further to do and receive what our said Court shall consider
thereof in this behalf: And this you shall not omit on pain of an hundred
pounds: And have you there this Writ; witness, etc. Pinsent.

On the backside of the Writ indorse the Informers Name, and the Statute on
which the Action is grounded: or if there be several Informations, then thus.

I. S. prosecutes this writ upon the breach of several Statutes.

Then if the Defendant appear not, Affidavit being made that the Subpaena was
served, an attachment is awarded against him to arrest his body; and he must
pay costs to the Informer before he can enter his appearance, which costs is to
be allowed by a Judge or Justice of the Court where the Information is brought.

An Information for buying of pretended Titles.
Le Stat. de 32. H. 8. cap. 9. S. ss. G. B. who as well for the Lord the King,
as for himself follows; came here into Court the twelfth day of February,
this same Term in his own person: And as well, etc. as for himself, gave the
Court here to understand and be informed, that whereas one I. W. the twentieth
day of May, in the year, etc. and by the space of two years then last past, was
seized in his demeasne, as of Fee, of and in one Message with the
appurtenances in G. in the County aforesaid, of the value of sixty pounds: And
the said I. W. by all the time aforesaid, the issues and profits of the said
Message with the appurtenances, had and received to his own proper use:
Nevertheless one I. O. the said twentieth day of May, in the year aforesaid,
did Enfeoffe one R. O. his brother, of the Message aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to hold to him and his Heirs for ever: And the said Richard the
said twentieth day of May, in the year aforesaid, at G. aforesaid, knowing the
same, did receive of the said I. O. the Feofment aforesaid, of the Message
aforesaid, with the appurtenances to him and his Heirs in the form aforesaid
made, whereas neither the said I. O. nor any of his Ancestors, nor he nor they
by whom the said I. O. claimed the Message aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
were in possession, nor in seized reversion thereof, neither did he or they
receive the rents or profits of the same Message by the space of one whole
year next before the said Feofment by the said I. O. to the said R. O. so
thereof made: And by the aforesaid R. of the said I. as aforesaid, received
against the form of the Statute in this Case made and provided: Whereby the
said I. O. has forfeited sixty pounds, that is to say, the value of the said
Message with the appurtenances, by him, against the form of the Statute
aforesaid to the aforesaid R. in the form aforesaid enfeoffed: And likewise the
said Richard has forfeited sixty pounds for the said value of the Message
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, by the said Richard, against the form of the
Statute aforesaid, of the said I. O. by the Feofment aforesaid, as aforesaid
taken: Whereupon the said G. B. who as well, etc, prays that he may have the
moyeties of the several forfeitures aforesaid, according to the form of the
Statute aforesaid; and as well for the said Lord the King as for himself,
prays the advice of the Court here in the premises: And that due process of
Law may be awarded against the said I O. and R. O. in this behalf, and that the
said I. and R. may come here into Court to answer, as well the said Lord the
King, as the said G. who, etc. in and upon the premises, etc. Hill. 2. Jac.
rot. 2933. com. Banco.

For buying of pretended Titles, Stat. 39. H. 8. cap. 9. An Information in the
upper Bench, and issue thereupon inter placita Coronae, 19 and 20. Eliz. Rot.
28.
K. ss. BE it remembered, that T. W. who as well for the Lady the Queen as for
himself in this behalf, prosecutes; gives the Court of our Lady the Queen here
to under and and be informed, that whereas by a certain Act in the Parliament
of the Lord Henry the eighth, late King of England, begun at Westminster the
twenty eighth day of April, in the one and thirtieth year of his Reign, and
afterward continued by diverse prorogations until the twelfth day of April then
next following, and from thence held until the eleventh day of May then next
following, and from thence continued by prorogation until the fifth day of May
then next following, and then held till the twenty fourth day of July, in the
two and thirtieth year of his Reign; It was Enacted amongst other things by the
Authority of the said Parliament, That no person or persons, of what degree,
estate, quality, or condition soever, he or they be, from that time forwards,
should bargain, buy, or sell, or by any way or means, shall obtain, acquire, or
have, by any pretense any Rights or Titles, or shall take or receive any
promise, grant, or conveyance, to have any Right or Title of any person or
persons in or to any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, unless such
person or persons which shall so bargain, sell, give grant, convey, or promise
the same, or his or their Ancestors by whom he or they claim the same, were in
possession of the same, or in the Reversion or Remainder thereof, or received
the Rents and Profits thereof by the space of one whole year next before the
said grant, bargain, conveyance, or promise made, upon pain that he who makes
any such bargain, sale, promise, conveyance, or grant, shall forfeit the full
value of the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, so bargained, sold, promised,
conveyed, or granted against the form of the said Act: And the buyer or
receiver thereof knowing the same, shall forfeit also the value of the said
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, so by him bought or received as aforesaid,
one moiety of which said forfeitures shall be to the Lord the King, the other
moiety to the party that will sue for the same in any Court of Record, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in which Action, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, no Essoyne, Protection, Wager of Law, or Injunction, shall be
allowed, as in the same Act amongst other things more plainly appears:
Nevertheless one L. A. of London, S. the Statute aforesaid little regarding,
after the publishing of the said Act, to wit, the eighteenth day of May, in the
year, etc. at G. in the County of K. claiming a certain pretended Right and
Title to her and her Heirs, of, and in one Message, two Gardens, two Orchards,
forty Acres of Land, twenty Acres of Meadow, ten Acres of pasture, and ten
Acres of Wood, and twelve pence half penny rent, with the appurtenances in G.
aforesaid; the Message aforesaid, and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances, to one P. W. of London, Grocer, and his Heirs, did convey; And
the same R. W. then of, and in the same with the appurtenances, by a writing of
Feosment did enfeoffe: of which said Tenements, neither the said S. nor any of
her Ancestors, nor he nor they, by whom she claims the same Tenements, were
in the possession of the same, nor in the possession of the reversion or the
remainder thereof, neither received the Rents and Profits thereof by the space
of one whole year next before the said conveyance and Feofment aforesaid:
Nevertheless the said R. W. the premises well enough knowing, the Statute
aforesaid not regarding, at G. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, the
eighteenth day of May in the year aforesaid, the Feofment aforesaid of the said
S. did receive, to hold the said pretended Title of the said S. of, and in the
aforesaid Tenements, to the same R. and his heirs for ever, against the form of
the Statute aforesaid. By virtue whereof, the said R. W. was seized of the said
Message, and all other the premises with the appurtenances, to him and his
heirs, according to the Tenor of the Feofment aforesaid. And the aforesaid T.
W. says in fact, that the Title of the said S. to the aforesaid Messuages, and
all other the premises with the appurtenances, at the time of the Feofment
aforesaid thereof by the said R. W. aforesaid made and received, was pretended:
And that the aforesaid Messuages, and all other the premises with the
appurtenances, at that time, were worth forty pounds of lawful money of
England, by which an Action has accrued to the said Lady the Queen, and to the
same T. W. who as well for the said Lady the Queen as for himself in this
behalf, prosecutes, to have and receive as well of the said S. A. forty pounds,
as of the said R. W. aforesaid, forty pounds of lawful money of England, for
the value of the Messuages aforesaid, and all other the premises with the
appurtenances, against the form of the Statute aforesaid, taken, granted, and
enfeoffed as aforesaid: Whereupon the said T. W. prays one moiety, according
to the form of the same Statute, and as well, etc. prays the advice of the
Court in the premises, and due process of Law to be awarded against the said S.
A. and R. W. in this behalf, to answer as well to the said Lady the Queen, as
to the said T. in the premises, etc. Whereby it was commanded the Sheriff, that
he omit not, but that he attach them, etc. to answer, etc. And now, to wit, on
Friday next after the morrow of Saint Martin, this same Term, before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, came the said R. W. by I. M* his Attorney: and having
heard the Information aforesaid, says, That the said Lady the Queen, or the
said R. W. who as well, etc. ought not any further to trouble him the said R.
by occasion of the Information aforesaid, because by Protestation he says,
That the said Messuages, Barns, Orchards, forty Acres of Land, twenty Acres of
Meadow, ten Acres of Pasture, ten Acres of Wood, and twelve pence and one
halfpenny rent, with the appurtenances in the Information abovesaid specified,
were not of so much value as in the Information aforesaid above is supposed.

And for Plea the same R. says, That he did not accept of the said S. A. the
Feofment aforesaid, to have any pretended Right or Title of the said S. of, and
in the Tenements aforesaid, in the Information aforesaid, specified to the same
R. and his Assigns for ever, against the form of the Statute aforesaid, in
manner and form as by the Information aforesaid above against him it is
supposed: and of this he puts himself upon the Country: And G. G. Esquire
Attorney General of the Lady the Queen, who for the same Lady the Queen in this
behalf, prosecutes, says, That the said R. W. did take of the said S. A. the
Feofment aforesaid, to have the pretended Right and Title of the said S. of,
and in the Tenements aforesaid, in the Information, aforesaid specified in
manner and form as by the Information aforesaid, against him above it is
supposed: And this he prays may be inquired of by the Country, and the said
R. W. in like manner, etc. Therefore let there come a Jury thereof, before the
Lady the Queen in eight days of S. Hillary: Wheresoever, etc. and who, etc. to
recognize, etc. because as well, etc. the same day is given as well to G. G.
who follows, etc. as to the said R. W. etc.

Against an Undersheriff for extortion, Stat. 23. H. 6. cap. 10.
Information. Middl. ss. BE it remembered, that I. E. of London Haberdasher, who
as well for the Lady the Queen as for himself, in this behalf follows in his
own person, came into the Court of the Lady the Queen, before the same Lady the
Queen at Westminster, on Friday next after fifteen days of Saint Hillary, to
wit, the first day of February, in the year, etc. the same Term; and as well,
etc. gave the Court here to understand and be informed, that whereas in a
certain Statute in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, the twenty fifth day of February, in the twenty third year of the
late King Henry the sixth, then King of England, amongst other things it was
Enacted, That no Sheriff, Undersheriff, nor any of their Clerks, Coroners,
Stewards of Franchises, Bailiffs, or Keepers of Prisons, or any other Officers
or Ministers, by occasion or color of their Office, should take any thing by
themselves, nor by any other to their use, profit, or advantage, of any person
by them or any other arrested or attached; nor of any person, nor any other,
for the forbearance or hindrance of an arrest upon his body, or of any other
person by them or any one of them, by virtue or color of his Office, to arrest
or attach for a Fine, Fee, Prison-fee, Manucaption, letting to Bail, or for
showing any assistance or favor to any such person arrested, or to be
arrested, for his reward or profit, otherwise then such as hereafter follows:
That is to say, for the Sheriff twenty pence, for the Bailiff that makes the
arrest four pence, to the Jailer, if he be committed to prison to his custody,
four pence: And that all Sheriffs, under-Sheriffs, Clerks of Sheriffs,
Stewards, or Bailiffs of Liberties, Sergeants, or Bailiffs, and Coroners; shall
not take any thing by color of their Office by themselves, or by any other
person to their use, of any person, for making the return of any panel, and
for the Copy of a panel, four pence: And that the aforesaid Sheriffs, and all
other Officers and Ministers aforesaid, shall let go at Liberty all and all
manner of persons by them, or by any of them arrested, or being in their
custody by virtue of any Writ, Bill, or Warrant in any personal Action, or by
reason of any Indictment of trespass, upon reasonable security of sufficient
persons, having sufficient within the County where such persons are so to be
let to Bayl, or Manucaption, to keep their days in such places where the said
Bills, Writs, or Warrants do require. (Such person and persons, who are or
hereafter shall be in their custody by condemnation, execution, Capias
utlagatum, Excommunication, security of the Peace; and all such persons, who
are or shall be committed by any special command of any Justice, and vagabonds
refusing to serve according to the form of the Statute of Laborers, altogether
excepted) And that no Sheriff, nor any of their Officers or Ministers
aforesaid, shall take, or cause to be taken or made any Obligation for any
cause before recited, or by color of their Office, but only to themselves, of
any person, nor by any person which shall be in their custody by order of Law,
but in the name of their office, and under a condition written, that the
aforesaid prisoners shall appear at the day in the said Writs, Bills, or
Warrants, contained, and in such places where the said Writs, Bills, or
Warrants, require: And if any Sheriff aforesaid, or any Officers or Ministers
aforesaid, shall take any Obligation in any other form, by color of their
Offices, that then such Obligation shall be void: And that they shall not take
for the making of any such Obligation, Warrant, or Precept, so by them to be
made above four pence. And also, that all Sheriffs, under-Sher^ffs, Clerks,
Bailiffs, Coroners, Stewards, Bailiffs of Franchizes, or any other Officers or
Ministers, who shall do contrary to the Ordination aforesaid in any point,
shall therefore forfeit forty pounds for every time, that they or any of them
shall Act or do contrary to the said Statute or any point thereof: of which
forfeitures the King shall have one moiety, to be employed to the use of his
household, and no otherwise; and the party who will prosecute shall have the
other moiety, as in the same Statute amongst other things more plainly it is
contained: And whereas in the Term of Saint Hillary, in the year, etc. one W.
M. prosecuted a certain Writ issuing out of the said Court of our Lady the
Queen, of Pleas, before our said Lady the Queen at Westminster, in the County
of Middlesex aforesaid, to the Sheriff of B. directed; by which Writ the
Sheriff was commanded that he should take E. F. I. Y. I. G. and W. C. and them
safe keep, etc. so that he should have their bodies before the said Lady the
Queen here at Westminster, on Wednesday next after fifteen days of Easter then
next following, to answer the said W. M. in a Plea of trespass, by virtue of
which Writ one E. L. Gentleman, the fifteenth day of February, in the year
abovesaid, at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, then being the
Undersheriff of A. B. Esquire, then Sheriff of the County of Berks, for and in
the name of the said A. B. Sheriff of the County aforesaid, did make four
several Warrants against the said E. F. I. Y. I. G. and W. C. directed to the
Bailiff of the hundred of Reading and Theale, in the said County of Berks, to
take the said E. F. etc. so that he might have their bodies, etc. to answer the
said W. M. according to the Exigence of the said several Warrants: And whereas
also in the Term of the Holy Trinity, in the year, etc. the said W. M.
prosecuted another Writ of our La. the Queen out of the said Court of our La.
the Queen here at West. to the said Sheriff of the County of B. directed; by
which Writ the said Sheriff was likewise commanded, that he should take L. G.
I. A. I. his wife I. Y. and W. B. and them safe keep, etc. so that he should
have their bodies, etc. to answer the said W. M. in a Plea of trespass: By
pretext of which said Writ, the said E. L. the thirteenth day of July, in the
year, etc. abovesaid at Westminster, then and there, being Undersheriff, of
the said A. B. then Sheriff of the said County of Berks, for and in the name of
the said A. B. Sheriff of the said County of B. did make two several Warrants
against the said L. G I. his wife, I. Y. and W. B. directed to the Bailiff of
the hundred of Reading and Theale, to take the said, etc. so that he might have
their bodies, etc. to answer the said W. M. according to the exigence of the
said two several Warrants: And whereas also in the same Term of the Holy
Trinity, in the year, etc. one A. P. prosecuted one other Writ of our Lady the
Queen, out of the same Court of, etc. at, etc. being to the said Sheriff of the
County of Berks directed; by which Writ the said Sheriff was likewise commanded
that he should take W. G. F. M. and T. K and them safe keep, etc. so that he
might have their bodies before the said Lady the Queen here at Westminster, on
Wednesday next after eight days of Saint Michael then next following, to answer
the said A. P. in a Plea of trespass; By pretext of which Writ the said E. L.
the said thirteenth day of July, in the year, etc. abovesaid at Westminster,
then being Undersheriff, of the said A. B. then being Sheriff of the said
County of B. for and in the name of the said A. B. Sheriff of the said County,
did make two several Warrants against the said W. G. W. F. and T. K. directed
to the said Bailiff of the hundred of Reading and Theale, in the said County of
B. to take the said, etc. so that he might have their bodies, etc. to answer
the said A. P. according to the exigency of the said several Warrants:
Nevertheless the said E. L. the Statute aforesaid not weighing, nor regarding
the penalty in the same Statute at Westminster, the aforesaid fifteenth day of
February, in the year, etc. did receive of the said W. M. for the making of
every one of the aforesaid first four several Warrants to the said Bailiff of
the hundred of Reading and Theale, in the same County of B. directed to take
the said E. F. I. Y. I. G. and W. C. to answer to the said W. M. in a Plea of
trespass on the said Wednesday, next after fifteen days of Easter then next
following, in the said Court of our said Lady the Queen, now here at
Westminster aforesaid, two shillings: and the said E. L. being then the
Undersheriff of the aforesaid A. B. of the said County of Berks: By color of
his Office as Undersheriff of the said County of Berks, did by way of
extortion receive, against the form of the Statute aforesaid, two shillings six
pence: And the said W. M. for making of the said two several Warrants, directed
to the Bailiff, etc. to take the said, etc. to the said E. L. did give two
shillings six pence, etc. and the said E. L. by way of extortion, under color
of his Office aforesaid, the said two shillings six pence did to his own use
receive, etc. against the form of the Statute aforesaid: Whereby an Action has
accrued to the said Lady the Queen, and to the said I. E. who as well, etc. to
have and receive of the said E. L. three hundred and twenty pound; to wit, for
every offense of the said several offenses, forty pounds, by him according to
the form of the Statute aforesaid forfeited: whereupon the said I. E. prays
one moiety, according to the form of the said Statute, and as well, etc.
prays the advice of the Court in the premises; and due process of Law against
the said E. L. in this behalf to be awarded, to answer as well to the said Lady
the Queen, as to the said I. L. in the premises, etc. Whereupon the Sheriff was
commanded etc. that he should not omit, etc. but that he attach him to answer,
etc. and now, to wit, on Friday next after the morrow of the holy Trinity, in
the same Term, before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, came the said E.
L. by I. I. his Attorney: And having heard the Information aforesaid, says,
That he is not thereof guilty; and of this he puts himself upon the Country,
and G. G. Esquire, Attorney General of the said Lady the Queen, for the said
Lady the Queen in like manner: Therefore let a Jury thereof come before the
said Lady the Queen, in eight days of Saint Michael, wheresoever, etc. and who,
etc. to recognize, etc. because as well, etc. The same day is given to the said
G. G. who follows, etc. and to the said E. L. etc.

The Sheriff in this Case compounded with the Informer, and submitted to a Fine
to the Court, as appears by the Roll. Trin. 19. Eliz. Rot. 42. inter placita
Coronae. And this was for taking two shillings for a Warrant; And now they will
not take under two shillings a name for a Warrant: Sure this Statute has lain
a long time asleep: I hope now some Informers will awaken the Statute, and the
Sheriffs and Bailiffs too.

Indictments.
An Indictment for Buggery, with the issue in the Crown-Office.
M. ss. OTherwise, to wit, on Tuesday next after one month of Easter this same
Term, before the Lord the King at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, by
the Oath of twelve Jurors, it is presented that H. S. late of London, Esquire,
God not having before his eyes, nor the order of nature regarding, but by the
malice and instigation of the Devil, being seduced the twelfth day of May last
past, at the Parish of Saint Andrew in High Holborn, in the County aforesaid,
to wit, in the Mansion House of one M then and there with force and arms, in
and upon one R. B. a Masculine-childe, of the age of sixteen years, did make an
assault: And with the said R. B. then and there wickedly, diabolically,
feloniously, and against nature, had carnal copulation, and him the said R.
then and there did carnally know; and that detestable and abominable sin of
Sodom (not to be named among Christians) called Buggery, then and there with
the said R. B. wickedly, feloniously, diabolically, and against nature, he did
commit and perpetrate, to the great displeasure of Almighty God, and disgrace
of mankind, against the peace of our Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity, and
against the form of the Statute in this Case made and provided, etc. Whereupon
it was commanded the Sheriff, that he should not omit, etc. but that he take
him, if, etc. to answer, etc. And now, to wit, on Saturday next after the
morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, this same Term, before the Lord the King
at Westminster, came the said H. S. in the custody of the Marshal of the
Marshalsey of our Lord the King, before the said King, to whose custody the
said H. S. before, for the cause aforesaid, was committed: And at the Bar here,
being brought in his own person, in the custody of the Marshal, etc. and being
asked how he will acquit himself of the premises above imposed upon him, says,
That he is in nothing guilty thereof, and of the good and evil thereof: he puts
himself upon the Country: Therefore let a Jury thereof come before the L. the
King, here on Monday next after eight days of the Holy Trinity, next coming,
and who, etc. to recognize, etc. because, etc. the same day is given to the
said H. S. in the mean time, unto the custody of the said Marshal committed, to
be safe kept, etc. At which day before the said Lord the King at Westminster,
came the said H. S. under the Custody of the said Marshal in his own person;
And the Jurors of the Country aforesaid, by the Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, hereunto impannalled, being called likewise came; who being elected,
tried, and sworn to speak the truth of the premises upon their Oath, do say,
That the said H. S. is guilty of the Felony and Trespass aforesaid, above
imposed upon him, in manner and form as he is above indicted: And that he has
no Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, to the knowledge of the Jury
aforesaid: And hereupon he is asked if he has any thing to say for himself
wherefore the Court should not proceed to judgment against him, and execution
thereupon concerning the premises; who says nothing more then what he has
already said: Whereupon by the Court here the premises being understood, it is
considered that the said H. S. be hanged until, etc. And the Marshal is
commanded, that he cause execution to be thereof done, on the peril, etc.

Par. 5. Jac. Rot. 3. inter placita Coronae. An Indictment for Burglary.
M. ss. OTherwise, that is to say, on Thursday next after three weeks of Easter
this same Term, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, by the Oath of twelve
Jurors it stands presented, That A. B. late of L. Yeoman, together with others,
the tenth day of April, in the year, etc. about the first hour before the
middle of the night of the same day with force and arms, that is to say, with
Swords, Staves, and Knives, etc. the Mansion House of C. D. Knight, in the
County aforesaid: one H. and E. servants of the said C. D. Knight, then and
there in the peace of God, and of our said Lady the Queen, being and resting
feloniously and burglarily did break and enter: And seventy Buttons of Gold of
the weight of four ounces and a half, to the value of eleven pounds; and one
Jewel of Gold, with a precious Stone called an Agat, in the same fixed, of the
value of five pounds; and fourteen pounds in moneys, numbered of the Goods,
Chatt^ls; and moneys of one B. K. Esquire, in the same house, then and there
found feloniously and burglarily, did take and carry away, against the peace,
etc.

The Capias.
Whereupon it was commanded the Sheriff that he omit not, etc. but that he take
them, if, etc. to answer, etc. and now, to wit, on Wednesday next after one
month of Easter this same Term, before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster,
came the said A. B. and the rest under the custody of N. B. and F. B. Sheriffs
of the City of London, by virtue of a Writ of the Lady the Queen of Hab.
Corpora, to them directed; unto whose custody they were before for the causes
aforesaid, and certain other causes, committed to the Bar, here brought in
their own persons, and are committed to the custody of the Marshal, etc. And
being severally demanded how they will acquit themselves of the premises above
imposed upon them, the said A, B. and the rest severally say, That they are not
thereof guilty: And of this they severally put themselves upon the Country, etc.

One of the Accessaries confesses the Indictment.

And one of them says, That he cannot say but that he is guilty of being
accessory to the felony and burglary aforesaid, above imposed upon him, in
manner and form as by the Indictment aforesaid, it is above supposed against
him, and the felony and burglary aforesaid; as accessory thereunto he did
expressly know: And thereupon he puts himself upon the mercy of the Lady the
Queen.

And the Jurors of the Jury aforesaid, by the Sheriff of the County of
Middlesex impannalled, being called likewise came; And being elected and sworn
to speak the truth of the premises, say upon their Oath, That the said A. B.
and the others, are, and every one of them is guilty in form aforesaid, above
imposed upon them, and that they have no Goods not Chattels, Lands nor
Tenements, etc.

For Manslaughter, an Enquest taken by the Coroner upon the view of the Body.
W. ss. OTherwise, to wit, the sixth day of December, etc. D. in the County
aforesaid, before I. H. one of the Coroners of the said La. the Queen of the
County aforesaid, upon view of the Body of H. B. there lying dead and slain; by
the Oath of twelve Jurors it is presented, That the fifteenth day of December,
in the year abovesaid, at D. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, it so
happened, that I. W. late of the Parish of St. L. etc. together with one H. M.
H. D. R. S. H. W. and diverse other persons, in the house of one E. C. Inholder,
then and there also being: And the said H. B. unto the said I. W. unknown, in
the same house also then being, and the said I. W. then and there having two
little Guns in a case, called a case of Daggs; one whereof was laden with
Powder and Lead, to the said I. W. likewise unknown: And the said H. B. did
then and there desire the said I. W. to show unto him the said H. B. one of the
Daggs aforesaid, which the said I. W. at the serious request of the said H. B.
did then and there draw forth of the case aforesaid, one of the Daggs
aforesaid, and did then and there deliver the same unto the said H. B. which
being seen by the said H. B. he did unto the said I. W. then and there again
redeliver; which said Gun, called a Dagg aforesaid, the said I. W. did put
again into the case aforesaid, and immediately afterward the said H. B. did
again desire the said I. W. to show him the Gun aforesaid, and how he might
discharge the same: And the said I. W. then and there at the further request of
the said H. B. did again draw forth the Gun aforesaid, out of the case
aforesaid, and asked the said I. W. then and there being present for the Key of
the Dagg aforesaid, and whether both the said case of Daggs were charged, or
not: which said H. B. then and there did answer the said I. W. that both the
said Daggs were charged; and the said I. W. then and there said to the said H.
B. Art thou certain hereof? And the said H. B. then and there again answered,
that they were both charged, and then and there delivered the Key of the Dagg
aforesaid, unto the said I. W. which said I. W. the Lock of the said Dagg did
then and there wind up and extend; and then delivered the Dagg aforesaid unto
the said H. B. according to his request aforesaid; and without any evil
felonious mind or malice forethought by the said I. W. against the said H. B.
had; the Dagg aforesaid suddenly, and by misfortune, then and there against the
said H. B. upon the forepart of his head, with the Lead aforesaid so laden,
did discharge it self, giving to the said H. then and there one mortal wound,
of the depth of four fingers, and the breadth of one finger; of which said
deadly wound the said H. B. then and there did instantly die: And the Jurors
aforesaid upon their Oath aforesaid, do say, That the said I. W. the said
fifteenth day of December, in the year, etc. abovesaid at D. aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, the said H. B. in manner and form aforesaid, casually and by
misfortune, did kill and murder, and not otherwise, nor in any other manner:
And further the said Jurors do say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said I.
W. at the time of the death of the said H. B. had no Goods, nor Chattels,
Lands, Tenements to their knowledge; And the Jurors aforesaid, do appraise the
said Gun, called a Dagg, to six shillings and eight pence, which remains in the
custody of the Parish of D. etc. inter placita Coronae.

For Manslaughter se defendendo.
K. ss. OTherwise, That is to say, the fourth day of October, in the year of
the Reign of, etc. at S. in the County aforesaid, before I. F. Gent. one of the
Coroners of our said Lord the King, of the County aforesaid, upon view of the
Body of T. H. there lying dead, who was the servant of G. F. of M. in the
County aforesaid, Esquire, by the Oath of twelve Jurors it stands presented,
That the said T. H. the twenty ninth day of September, in the year, etc. about
two of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, with force and arms, etc.
That is to say, with a Sword, and with a Dagger, of the value of five
shillings, which the said T. H. in his hands, then and there had, and held, at
S. aforesaid, in a common foot-way, there leading between S. aforesaid, and M.
toward S. in the County aforesaid, in a certain place there called B. in and
upon one I. H. of T. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, in the peace of God and
of our said Lord the King, then and there being, and toward M aforesaid, then
and there going; of his wicked malice forethought, did make an assault, and him
the said I. then and there with the Sword aforesaid, did wound, against the
peace, etc. Whereupon the said I. H. (that he might keep the peace of God, and
of our said Lord the King, and observe the Laws of this Land, in this behalf
provided) having in his hands for his defense, one Sword and one Dagger, of the
price of five shillings, and himself then and there defending: and for the
safeguard of his life with his Sword and Dagger aforesaid, the furious blows
and strikeings of the said I. H. from the body of him the said I. H. defending
and bearing off, and him the said T. in no wise at all striking again, but from
him the said T. H. continually backwards from the common foot-way aforesaid,
then and there did fly; And the said T. H. the fear of God then and there not
having before his eyes, but being seduced by the instigation, wrath, and malice
of the Devil, and the said I. H. to kill and murder intending, him the said I.
H. did then and there seriously follow, until the said I. by flying backwards,
came to a certain corner against a certain hedge in the said place, called B.
near the common foot-way aforesaid, then and there being; And because the said
I. H. for the height of the said hedge, then and there being and growing could
not any other ways escape without danger of sudden death: the said I. H. then
and there with his Sword and Dagger aforesaid, in defending himself and for the
safeguard of his life, and of inevitable necessity, with his Sword aforesaid,
did stretch a blow toward the said T. H. And him the said T. by the blow
aforesaid, with the Sword aforesaid, upon his left arm; and from his left arm
aforesaid, sliding down upon the belly also of the said T. with his Sword
aforesaid, then and there did smite: and two several wounds, to wit, one wound
upon his left arm aforesaid, of the length of three fingers, and in breadth and
depth, half a finger: and one other wound upon the belly of the said T. half a
finger broad, one finger long, and two fingers deep, then and there to him did
give, of which said wounds the said T. H. from the aforesaid hour of two a
clock in the after noon of the same day, etc. until six a clock in the
afternoon of the thirtieth day of September aforesaid, at S. aforesaid, did
languish* in which hour being the sixth hour after noon of the said thirtieth
day of Septem. aforesaid, in the year, etc. the said T. H. at S. aforesaid,
died: And the said Jurors do say upon their Oaths, That the said I. H. the day,
hour, year, and place abovesaid, the said T. H. with his Sword abovesaid, and
by the blow aforesaid in his own defense, and for the safety of his life, and
out of inevitable necessity, did kill: and that so and no otherwise the said T.
came to his death: And also the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath, That the
said I. H. the day and year abovesaid, had no Goods, nor Chattels, etc.

For Murder upon view of the Body.
K. ss. OTherwise, to wit, the first day of May, in the year, etc. by a certain
Inquisition indented, taken at W. in the County aforesaid, before E. H. one of
the Coroners of our said Lord the King, of the County aforesaid, upon view of
the Body of I. H. late of W. aforesaid, Husbandman, lying dead and slain, then
and there at W. aforesaid, by the Oath of twelve Jurors, good and lawful men of
W. aforesaid, and three other Villages to the said Village of W. aforesaid next
adjacent, as the manner and custom is, who being sworn and charged to inquire
how, in what manner, and when the said I. H. came to his death, upon their Oath
aforesaid, say, That on Saturday, to wit, the twenty fifth day of, etc. between
the hours of nine and eleven before noon, of the same day, the said I. H. being
at W. aforesaid in the Kings highway, leading from W. aforesaid toward D. in
the County aforesaid, in the peace of God and of our said Lord the King, one V.
G. late of W. aforesaid Gentleman, into the said Kings highway, then and there
came: And the said V. G. not having the fear of God before his eyes, but the
malice and instigation of the Devil him seducing and thereunto moving, then and
there, to wit, the said twenty fifth day of April, in the year abovesaid, with
force and arms, pursuing the said I. H. with a certain Sword feloniously drawn,
as a felon of our said Lord the King, voluntarily, and of his malice
forethought, did make an assault, in and upon the aforesaid J. H. and the
aforesaid V. G. with a Sword aforesaid of Iron and Steel, of the value of
twelve pence, which the said V. G. in his right hand then and there had and
held drawn* feloniously; and of his malice aforesaid, the said J. H. then and
there, did smite and wound, and gave to the said J. H. then and there
feloniously, and of his malice forethought, with the Sword aforesaid, one
deadly wound, in and upon the right part of his right thigh, of the length of
three fingers, and of the depth of two fingers and a half: of which said deadly
wound, in the form aforesaid given, the said J. H. from the aforesaid 25 day of
April, in the year aforesaid, until the 30 day of the said month of April, at
W. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did languish, and live languishing: on
which said 30 day of April, in the year, etc. abovesaid, the said J. H. at W.
aforesaid, in the County of K. aforesaid, of the mortal wound aforesaid, died;
and so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, do say that the said V.
G. late of W. aforesaid, Gent. the said 30 day of April, in the year, etc.
abovesaid, at W. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, the aforesaid J. H. in
manner and form aforesaid, of his malice forethought, feloniously and
voluntarily, did kill and murder, against the peace, etc. And furthermore the
said Jurors do say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said V. G. after the
felony and murder aforesaid, by the said V. in manner and form aforesaid done
and committed, then and there did fly away, and withdrew himself to places to
the Jurors aforesaid unknown; and what Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements,
he had at the time of the Felony and Murder aforesaid, by him in the manner and
form aforesaid done and committed, or now has, the Jurors are altogether
ignorant. In witness whereof, as well the said Coronor as the Jurors aforesaid,
have to this Inquisition indented, interchangeably put their Seals: dated the
day and year abovesaid. Which said Indictment the said Lord the King for
certain causes now afterward has caused to come before him, to be determined,
etc.

The Capias in Murder.
WHereby it was commanded the Sheriff, that he should not omit, etc. but that
he take him, etc. to answer, etc.

A Presentment for a Nuisance for not repairing of the Highway.
Middl. ss. OTherwise, that is to say, in the Term of Easter, in the year, etc.
before the Lord the King at Westminster, in the County aforesaid by the Oath of
twelve, etc. it stands presented, that part of the King's Highway, in the
Parish of S. in the County aforesaid, containing in length four Rod, and in
breadth two Rod, the first day of M. in the year, etc. was, and still is, very
hurtful and decayed for defect of Reparations, and amending of the same; so
that the liege People of our Lord the King, laboring to pass through the
Village aforesaid, cannot travel without danger of death, to the great and
common annoyance of all the Subjects and Liege-People of our said Lord the
King, through that way laboring and traveling: and that R. B. of S.
aforesaid, ought to amend and repair the aforesaid way, when, and so often, as
need shall require, by reason of the term of his Lands and Tenements there near
adjacent, etc.

Therefore it is commanded the Sheriff, that he omit not, but that he cause him
to come to answer, etc.

An Indictment for Rape.
S. ss. OTherwise, to wit, on Thursday next after the week of Easter, in the
year, etc. at J. in the County aforesaid, in a general Session of the Peace
there held, before H. P. and M. B. Knights, and others their Fellows, Justices,
etc. by the Oath of twelve Jurors it stands presented, that T. M. late of G. in
the County aforesaid, Yeoman, the 21 day of March, in the year etc. by force
and arms, at H. in the County aforesaid, in and upon J. W. the Daughter of one
G. W. then, and there, in the peace of God, and of our said Lord the King,
being, did make an assault, and her, the said J. did beat, wound, and evil
entreat: and the aforesaid J. then and there violently and against her will,
did feloniously ravish, and carnally know, against the form of the Statute in
this case made and provided, and against the Peace, etc.

An Indictment for starving an Apprentice.
Middl. ss. THe Jurors for the Lord the King, upon their Oath do present, That
W. T. late of, etc. the 23 day of March, in the year, etc. at the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did retain and receive into his service,
one J. R. to serve the said W. T. as an Apprentice, by the space of eight
years, thence next following. And further, the said J. R. then being found and
healthy in body, with the said W. T. from the aforesaid 23 day of M. in the
year aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, un^il the 4
day of November, in the year, etc. in the service and custody of the said W. T.
as his Apprentice, did remain and continue: nevertheless, the said W. T. God
not having before his eyes; but of all Humanity, and Christian Charity, being
totally deprived, after the 23 day of M. in the year aforesaid, to wit, between
the 10 day of June in the year* etc. and the 4 day of November, in the year
aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, feloniously,
voluntarily, and of his malice forethought, did detain, and not allow unto his
said Apprentice, necessary and sufficient food, for the sustentation and
preservation of his life: by reason whereof, the said J. R. between the
aforesaid 10 day of June, in the year aforesaid, and the said 4 day of
November, in the year aforesaid; then, and there, through hunger and want of
nourishment, died. And so the Jurors aforesaid, do say upon their Oath, That
the said W. T. his Apprentice aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, feloniously, voluntarily, and of his
malice forethought, did kill and murder, against the Peace, etc.

Hue and Cry.
Commit upon the Statute of Hue and Cry.
G. ss. THe Inhabitants in the Hundreds of Langtree and Crowthorne, in the
County aforesaid, were attached to answer as well the Lord the King, as J. B.
who as well for the said Lord the King as for himself, follows, of a Plea,
that whereas in a certain Statute in the Parliament holden at Wynton, in the
thirteenth year of Edward the first, late King of England, made and provided;
amongst other things it stands ordained, for that because Robberies, Murders
and Thefts, do daily increase, and are from day to day committed, more then
heretofore* and the Felons could not be attainted by the Oath of the Jurors,
because they too voluntarily suffered the Felons to escape, without punishment;
and for the most part the Felons have been of the same County: or if they have
been of any other Country, their Receivers have been of the same Visne, where
the same Felonies have been committed. Wherefore, for their concealment and
negligence, and to restrain the said Felonies, the late Lord the King has
ordained a Penalty in this Case, that from henceforth, for fear of the
Punishment, no Felons should be spared or concealed; and has commanded, That
Proclamation should be solemnly made in all Counties, Hundreds, Market Towns,
and all Churches, and other places where solemn Assemblies of people meet, so
that none be excused by ignorance, That every Country from thence forward
should be so kept, that immediately after any Robbery or Felony committed,
fresh pursuit should be made from Village to Village, and from Country to
Country; and also inquisition should be made, if it be needful, in every Town,
by the Head-Officer of the Town; and afterward in Hundreds and Franchises, and
in the County, and sometimes in three or four Counties, in case when the
Felonies are committed in the Marches of any County; so that the Felons might
be attainted: and if the Country should not answer for the Felons, then the
Penalty should be, That every Country, that is to say, the Inhabitants dwelling
in the said Country where the Robbery is committed, shall answer for the
Robberies done, and the Damages: so that the whole Hundred where the Robbery
shall be committed, together with the Franchises in the Precincts of the said
Hundred, shall answer for the same Robbery. And if a Robbery shall be committed
in the Division of two Hundreds, then both the said Hundreds, together with
their Franchises, shall answer for the same: and the said Country shall have no
longer time then forty days after the Robbery committed, to make satisfaction
for the same, or should answer for the Bodies of the Felons, as by the said
Statute more plainly appears. And whereas a certain Felon unto the said J.
unknown at T. in the Divisions of the Hundreds aforesaid, with force and Arms,
in and upon the said J. did make an assault, and three shillings and four pence
of the moneys of the said J. in moneys numbered, and one Gelding of the said
John of the price of ten pounds, and other Goods and Chattels of the price of
forty shillings, there lately found, feloniously from the said J. did take and
carry away, against the peace of the now Lord the King. And the said J.
immediately after the said Felony and Robbery aforesaid, committed at C. near
the said Hundreds of L. and C. did make Hue and Cry of the said Robbery, and
there did give notice to the Inhabitants of the said Town of C. of the Robbery
aforesaid. And after the said Robbery was committed, and within twenty days
before the day of the suing forth of this Original Writ by the said J. the said
John, before R. G. Esquire, then one of the Justices of the Lord the King, to
keep the Peace in the said County of G. assigned, within the Hundred of C. was
examined upon his Corporal Oath, according to the form of the Statute in the
twenty seventh year of the reign of Elizabeth, late Queen of England, made and
provided: and the said John, upon his Oath aforesaid, did then say, That he
knew not the party which did the Robbery aforesaid. And after the robbery
aforesaid, 40 days are now past. And the said Inhabitants of the Hundred
aforesaid, satisfaction of the robbery aforesaid, to the said John hitherto
have not made; neither have they taken the Body of the Felon and Malefactor
aforesaid, nor for his Body hitherto have answered; but the Felon aforesaid
have permitted to escape, in contempt of the said Lord the King, and to the
great damage of the said J. and against the form of the Statute of the
thirteenth year of the reign of Edward the first aforesaid, late King of
England, made and provided, etc. And whereupon the said John, who as well, etc.
by H. W. his Attorney, complains, That whereas a certain Malefactor, to the
said John unknown, the 15 day of M. in the year etc. with force and arms, that
is to say, with Swords, Staves and Knives, in and upon the said J. at T.
aforesaid, in the Division of the Hundreds aforesaid, did make an assault, and
three shillings and four pence of the money of the said J. in money numbered;
and one Gelding of the said J. of the price, etc. and other Goods and Chattels,
that is to say, one Bridle, etc. there found, feloniously from the said John
did take and carry away, against the peace, etc. And the said John immediately
after the Felony and Robery aforesaid, committed at C. near the said Hundreds
of L. and C. did make Hue and Cry of the Robbery aforesaid: And notice of the
Robbery aforesaid to the Inhabitants of the said Village, did then give: and
after the said Robbery committed, and within twenty days before the day of the
suing forth of the Original Writ aforesaid, that is to say, the 26 day of
January in the fourth year of the reign of our Lord the King, etc. the
aforesaid J. before R. G. Esquire, then one of the Justices assigned to keep
the Peace, etc. inhabiting near the aforesaid Hundreds of C. and L. to wit, at
B. in the aforesaid County of G. was examined upon his Corporal Oath, according
to the form of the Statute aforesaid, in the twenty seventh year of the reign
of the late Queen Elizabeth aforesaid, made and provided. And the said John
upon his Oath aforesaid, then said, That he knew not the party which did the
Robbery aforesaid: and that forty days are past, since the Robbery aforesaid.
Nevertheless, the Inhabitants of the Hundreds aforesaid, satisfaction for the
Robbery aforesaid, to the said John have not made; neither have they taken the
body of the Felon and Malefactor aforesaid, nor for his Body hitherto have not
answered; but the Felon and Robber aforesaid, have permitted to escape, in
contempt of the said Lord, etc. and to the great damage of the said John, and
against the form of the Statute in the thirteenth year aforesaid of the said
late King Edward the first, made and provided. Whereby he says, That he is the
worse, and has damage to the value of forty pounds: and thereupon he brings
his suit, etc.

And the Inhabitants aforesaid, by R. S. their Attorney, come and defend the
force and injury, when, etc. and whatsoever, etc. and say, That they are in
nothing guilty of the Premises above imposed upon them, against the form of the
Statute aforesaid, as the said John, who, etc. above complains against them;
and of this, they put themselves upon the Country: and the said John likewise.
And hereupon the said John says, That the Inhabitants in the aforesaid
Hundreds of L. and C. aforesaid, are the parties Defendants, against whom, the
said John, who, as well, etc. in form aforesaid, above complains: and for
that cause he prays a Writ of the said Lord the King, to the Sheriff of the
County aforesaid, to be directed, to cause to come here, twelve, etc. of the
Visne of the Hundred of B. in the County aforesaid, for that because the said
Hundred of B. is the next Hundred, in the County aforesaid, adjacent to the
aforesaid Hundreds of L. and C. to try the issue aforesaid, above in the form
aforesaid, joined; and because the Inhabitants of the Hundreds of L. and C.
aforesaid, do not this contradict, it is granted unto him, etc. Therefore it is
commanded the Sheriff, that he cause to come here from the day of the holy
Trinity in three weeks, twelve, etc. of the Visne of the aforesaid Hundred of
B. by whom, etc. and who neither, etc. to recognize, etc. because, as well,
etc. at which day, the Jurors between the parties aforesaid of the Plea
aforesaid, was respited between them here until this day, to wit, in eight
days of St. Michael then next following unless the Justices of our Lord the
King, assigned to take the Assizes in the County aforesaid, according to the
form of the Statute, on Monday the 20 day of July next following, at G. in the
County aforesaid, should first come. And now here, at this day, came the
aforesaid J. by his Attorney aforesaid: and the said Justices of Assize, before
whom, etc. sent here their Record in these words.

Afterward, the day and year within contained, before C. Y. Knight, one of the
Justices of the Lord the King, assigned to hold Pleas before the said Lord the
King, and D. W. Knight, another of the Justices of the said Lord the King,
assigned to hold Pleas before the said Lord the King, Justices of the said Lord
the King, assigned to take the Assizes in the County of Gloucester, according
to the form of the Statute, etc. came, as well the within named J. B. as the
within written Inhabitants of the Hundreds of L. and C. in their proper
persons: and the Jurors of the Country within mentioned, impanalled, and called
some of them, that is to say, N. F. of L. etc. (so naming all the Jurors that
appeared) came, and are sworn upon that Jury. And because the rest of the
Jurors of that Jury did not appear; therefore, (tales de circumstantibus,) etc.
who being called, and sworn to speak the Truth of the matter within contained;
say upon their Oaths, That the said Inhabitants of L. and C. are guilty of the
Premises within imposed upon them against the form of the Statute within
written, as the said J. B. has within complained against them: and they do
assess Damages of the said J. by the occasion within written, besides his Costs
and Charges by him about his Suit in this behalf expended, to ten pounds, and
ten shillings; and for his Costs and Charges to six pence. Therefore it is
considered, that the said John shall recover against the aforesaid Inhabitants,
in the Hundreds aforesaid, his Damages aforesaid, to ten pounds ten shillings
and six pence, by the Jurors aforesaid, in the form aforesaid, assessed: and
also nine pounds nine shillings and six pence, to the said J. who, as well,
etc. at his request for his Costs and Charges aforesaid, by the Court here of
Increase, adjudged. Which Damages in the whole, do amount to twenty pound, and
the aforesaid Inhabitants in mercy, etc.

Commit upon the Statute of Hue and Cry for a Robbery committed upon a Servant.
E. ss. THe Inhabitants in the Hundred of B. in the County aforesaid, were
attached to answer as well unto the Lord the King, as G. R. Esquire, of a Plea,
etc.

And whereupon the said G. who as well, etc. by C. N. his Attorney,
complains, That whereas certain Robbers, that is to say, six men unto the
said G. unknown, the 10 day of N. in the year, etc. at N. aforesaid, in a place
called, etc. within the aforesaid Hundred of B. with force and arms, that is to
say, with Swords, Staves, Daggers and Knives, in and upon the aforesaid H. P.
Servant of the said G. did make an assault, and twenty and five pounds, in
moneys, numbered of the moneys of the said G. and one Gelding of the price of
ten pounds of the Goods and Chattels of the said G. in the custody of the said
H. P. then and there found, feloniously from the said H. P. did spoil, rob,
take, and carry away, against the Peace of, etc. And the aforesaid H. P.
immediately after the Felony and Robbery aforesaid, committed at the aforesaid
Town of T. within the Hundred aforesaid, which said Town of T. is, and was a
Town nigh the place aforesaid, called the, etc. where the said Robbery
aforesaid was committed, did make Hue and Cry of the Robbery aforesaid; and
then, and there did give notice to the said Inhabitants of the said Town of T.
of the Robbery aforesaid. And after the said Robbery done and committed; and
within twenty days next before the bringing of this Original Writ of the said
G. that is to say, (tali Die and Anno) at E. in the County aforesaid, the said
H* P. before J. G. then one of the Justices, etc. was examined upon his Oath,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid, made at Westminster in the
County of Middlesex, in the twenty seventh year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, made and provided: And the said H. upon his Oath aforesaid, then did
say, That he did not know the Parties which committed the Robbery aforesaid,
nor any one of them. And after the said Robbery was committed, so, as
aforesaid, to wit, on the day of the suing out of the said G. that is to say,
the thirteenth day of May, in the year, etc. forty days are expired.
Nevertheless, the said Inhabitants within the Hundred of B. aforesaid,
satisfaction for the Robbery aforesaid, to the said G. hitherto have not made;
nor the Bodies of the Felons and Robbers aforesaid, nor the Body of any one of
them have not taken; nor for the Bodies of them, nor for the Body of any one of
them, have not answered; but the Robbers and Felons aforesaid, have permitted
to escape, in contempt of the said Lord the King, and to the great Damage of
the said G. and against the form of the Statute aforesaid: VVhereupon he says,
That he is the worse, and has Damage to the value of sixty pounds, and
thereupon he brings his Suit, etc.

A Return of a Writ of Error.
The Record and Process of the Complaint, whereof mention is made in this Writ,
in a Schedule hereunto annexed, follows in these words, (that is to say,)

THe Court of Record The Town of Wokingam in the Counties of Berks and Wilts.
of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, there
holden at the Town of Wokingham aforesaid, the twentieth day of June, in the
year of our Lord God, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Fifty and One; by virtue of a
Charter of our Sovereign Lord James, of England, late King thereof, made, etc.
before T. G. Gent. Alderman of the said Town, J. H. Esquire, Recorder or
Under-Steward of the said Town, A. B. Gent. J. S. Gent. and E. V. Gent. Capital
Burgesses of the said Town. At this Court, came R. S. in his proper person, and
complains against R. M. Executor of F. H. deceased, in a Plea of Trespass on
the Case, and did find Pledges to prosecute the Plaint aforesaid, (that is to
say,) J. D. and R. R. upon which the said R. S. demanded Process of the Court
to be made against the aforesaid R. M. therefore Command was given unto R. P.
Sergeant at Mace, and Minister of the said Court, That he arrest the aforesaid
R. M. Executor of the said F. H. deceased, and him safe keep, etc. and that he
have his Body here before the Alderman and Burgesses aforesaid, at the next
Court there held, (that is to say,) on Friday the three and twentieth day of
June next, to answer to the said R. S. of the Plea aforesaid: and the same day
is given there, unto the said R. S. etc. At which day, here at the same Court
of the said Keepers, etc. at Wokingham aforesaid, before T. G. Gent. Alderman;
J. H. Esquire, Recorder; R. B. A. B. and J. S. Gent. Capital Burgesses there in
the Guild Hall there held came as well the aforesaid R. S. by G. H. his
Attorney, as the aforesaid R. M. in his proper person, and the aforesaid R. P.
Sergeant at Mace, and Minister of the Court aforesaid, did return, that he did
take the aforesaid R. M. whose Body he has here to answer the aforesaid R. S.
of the Plaint aforesaid, as he was commanded: and at the same Court, the
aforesaid R. S. by the aforesaid G. H. his Attorney, did desire a day to
declare, until the next Court, to be holden before the said Alderman and
Burgesses, that is to say, Friday the fourth of July next following; and it was
granted him: and at the next Court of the Keepers, etc. before the said
Alderman and Burgesses held, the said R. S. by ^he said G. H. his Attorney,
complains against the aforesaid R. M. of the aforesaid Plea, in these words:
ss. The Town of Wokingham* in the Counties of Berks and Wilts, R. S.
complains against R. M. Executor of the last Will and Testament of F. H. late
of the Parish of Wokingham aforesaid, deceased; in a Plea of Trespass, upon the
Case. And thereupon the said R. S. by G. H. his Attorney, does say, That
whereas the said R. S. the nine and twentieth day of September, in the year of
our Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred Forty Seven, at the special Instance and
Request of the said F. H. did sell and deliver unto the said F. H. at the then
dwelling house of the said J. H. in Wokingham aforesaid, one Load of Straw; the
said F. in consideration thereof, then and there did assume, and to the said R.
S. did faithfully promise, that the said F. H. would well and truly pay unto
the said R. S. so much money as the said Load of Straw, and the carriage
thereof, would be reasonably worth* when he should be thereunto required: and
he, the said R. Sin truth says, That the said Load of Straw and the carriage
thereof, was well worth ten shilings of lawful money of England: and
afterward, the said F. H died, and did not pay the said ten shillings, nor any
penny thereof, being thereunto in his lifetime often required Here the
Declaration should have ended, if it had been agreeable to the Plaint: to this
part the Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations, and proved the Straw
carried two seven years before H^s. death, etc.
. After whose death, there was a certain Communication had between the said R.
M. and one T. S. (that is to say,) the first day of April, in the year of our
Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty and One, concerning the said Load of
Straw, and the carriage thereof, as aforesaid; and the said R. M. the said
first day of April, in the year of our Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty
and One, at Wokingham aforesaid, within the Jurisdiction of this Court, being
Executor as aforesaid, then and there did This Assumption should have been laid
by it self, and not declare against an Executor, and bring in an Assumpsit of
the Defendant both in one Declaration; yet an Honest Jury, and a Learned Judge,
gave Verdict and Judgment both, for the Plaintiff.
assume, and faithfully promise to pay unto the said R. S. for the said Load of
Str^w, and carriage thereof, so much money as the Load of straw and carriage
should be reasonably worth, when he should be thereunto required, if he, the
said R. S. would say, upon his word, That he was not paid formerly for the said
Load of Staw and carriage thereof: and the said R. S. in fact says, That he
was not paid for the said Load of Straw and carriage thereof, the same being
worth ten shillings, etc. aforesaid: yet for all that the said R. M. his
Promise and Assumption aforesaid little regarding; but thinking, and
fraudulently intending, the said R. S. in this part craftily and subtly to
deceive and defraud; the said ten shillings, nor any part thereof, unto the
said R. S. although he has been often thereunto required, has not hitherto
paid, nor the said R. S. any way contented for the same; but the same ten
shillings has refused to pay, and yet does refuse: whereupon the said R. S.
says, That he is damnified twenty shillings; and thereupon he brings his Suit

J. A.

Pledges to prosecute
And the said R. M. by J. A. his Attorney, did desire License of Imparlance,
and it was granted unto him; and upon this, a day thereby was given to the
aforesaid parties, until the next Court, to be held before the said Alderman
and Burgesses, (that is to say,) Friday the eleventh day of July next
following, (that is to say,) to the aforesaid R. M. to plead, and then to
answer, etc. at which next Court of the said Keepers, etc. truly here before
the Alderman and Burgesses held, the said R. M. further desired License of
Imparlance, and it was granted him: and upon this, a day was thereby given unto
the aforesaid parties, until the next Court, to be holden before the said
Alderman and Burgesses, (that is to say,) Friday the eighteenth day of July
next following, (that is to say,) to the said R. M. to imparle, and then to
answer, etc. truly: at which next Court of the said Keepers, etc. here before
the said Alderman and Burgesses to be held, (to wit) the aforesaid eighteenth
day of July, came as well the aforesaid R. S. as the aforesaid R. M. by their
Attorneys aforesaid, and the aforesaid R. M. by J. A. his Attorney, came and
defended the wrong and injury, when, etc. and says, That he, the said R. M.
made no such Promise as the Plaintiff has alleged against him; and of this,
he puts himself upon his Country; and the said R. likewise: therefore by the
same Court of the said Keepers, on Friday the said eighteenth day of July, it
was commanded to R. P. Sergeant at Mace, and Minister of the Court aforesaid,
within the Town aforesaid, that he should cause to come at the next Court of
the said Keepers, etc. here, upon Friday, to wit, the five and twentieth day of
July next following, before the Alderman and Burgesses aforesaid, to be held,
twelve free and lawful men of the Town, etc. by whom, etc. and who neither,
etc. to recognize, etc. for that as well, etc. and at the same Court of the
Keepers, etc. on Friday the five and twentieth day of July aforesaid, the said
R. P. returned his Precept of his, causing to come the Jurors aforesaid; and
the Jurors aforesaid called, came not: therefore it was commanded to the said
R. P. Sergeant at Mace, etc. That at the next Court of the said Keepers, etc.
Friday the first of August, then next following, before the said Alderman and
Burgesses to be held, he should have the bodies of E. W. W. A. T. H* elder, J.
G. J. C. R. S. Cordwainer, F. W. E. M. B. A. J. B. T. S. and J. T. to make a
certain Jury of the County, between the said R. S. and the said R. M. in the
Plea aforesaid. And the said R. P. returned his Precept, with the Panel of the
Jurors aforesaid: at which next Court of the said Keepers here, to wit, on
Friday the eighth day of August aforesaid, before the Alderman and Burgesses
aforesaid, came the said parties, in their proper persons, and the said Jurors,
to wit, E. W. W. A. T. H. the elder, J. G. J. C. R. S. Cordwainer, F. W. E. M.
B. A. J. B. T. S. and J. T. being called, came, and at the Court were charged
and sworn in form aforesaid, who upon their Oath say, in manner and form
following, that is to say, We find that the said R. M. the Defendant did A
malicious Knave the Prosecutor or Promoter of the Cause did swear so indeed;
but, etc.
promise unto the said R. S. the Plaintiff, since the death of the said F. H.
the Testator, to pay the Load of Straw; and therefore the Jurors do assess vj
d. for Damages, and Costs of Suit ij d. therefore it was considered by the said
Court, that the said R. S. should have thereof Execution, etc.

And for any other Record of any Judgment against the said R M. as Executor of
the said F. H. in this Record mentioned, we have no Judgment before us in the
Court of Record of the said Keepers, etc. of the said Town of Wokingham
aforesaid, etc. besides this, to certify, as by this Writ to us it is
commanded.

The Record and Process of the aforesaid Plaint, with all things thereunto
belonging, before the said Keepers, etc. wheresoever, etc. at the day within
specified, we have sent in a certain Record to this Writ annexed, as within it
is to us commanded, etc.

After this Writ was thus returned, before it could be gotten out of their
hands, in the absence of the Defendants Attorney, another Record was certified
for the Plaintiff; and in the Defendant's Writ of Error, R. was turned into T.
and S. into K. etc. That is in plain English, T. S. the Prosecutor, and Son of
the Plaintiff, was then, and since has been a suborning Knave; and by his
Subornation and Practice, he procured in this Cause an Action to be brought
against Magwick, in the Court of the Honor and Castle of Windsor; and then,
while, and afterward, our Writ of Error was reformed, as before, they, by the
knavery or foolery, and both together, of J. H. the Steward, by a Writ of
Certiorare certified a Judgment upon the second part of the Declaration of the
Oath -- hem vah -- of T. Syms desparately sworn. VVhereupon, by surprise in
Termtime they obtained a Judgment against Magwick in the Court of the Castle
of Windsor, and I paid the money, and Case I record to Posterity for a
president of the Town of Wokingham, de quo nil bonum nisi ut frugam, to be
practiced by Knaves and Fools, who there grow naturally as Gold in the Indies.
And now since T. S. is a suborning K. and suborned his own Son H. S. to commit,
as he did, wilful Perjury: which was plainly proved at the Sessions at W. and
yet, etc. and suborned Shag-bag to swear against F. VV. at A. and outlawed him
thereupon. I shall proceed to, and conclude with a President for that wicked
Crime equivalent to Murder, Perjury.

Perjury.
Stat. 5. Eliz. Cap. 5. L. ss. I. S. late of H. in the County N. Gent. was
summoned to answer unto A. C. who as well for the Lady the Queen, as for
himself, in this behalf prosecutes, of a Plea, that he render unto the said
Lady the Queen, and to the said A. 20 pounds, which to the said Lady the Queen,
and to the said A. he owes, and unjustly deteineth, etc. And whereupon the
said A. who as well for the said Lady the Queen, as for himself, prosecutes by
G. H. his Attorney, says, That whereas in a certain Statute in the Parliament
of our said Lady the Queen, now held at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, the 12 day of January, in the fifth year of Her Reign: amongst other
things it stands enacted by the said Lady the Queen, by the consent of ^he
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in the same Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same; That if any person or persons, after the 10
day of April, then next following, either by subornation, illegal procurement,
sinister persuasion, or any other means, or by their own proper Act, Consent,
or Agreement, voluntarily and corruptly should commit any wilful Perjury by
his or their depositions, in any Court of Chancery of our said Lady the Queen;
Star Chamber, White Hall, or in any Court of our Lady the Queen, of Record, or
in any Leet, view of Frank Pledge, Law day, Court of Ancient demeasne, Hundred
Court, Court Baron; or in any Court or Courts of Stannaryes in the Counties of
Devon, and Cornwall; or being examined ad perpetuam rei memoriam: That then
every person and persons so offending, and being thereof lawfully convicted or
atainted by the Laws of this Land, for his or their said offense, shall lose
and forfeit 20 pound, and shall suffer imprisonment by the space of six months
without bail or mainprize; and that the oath of such person or persons so
offending, shall not from thenceforth be rendered in any Court of Record in
England or Wales, or the Marches of the same, until the Judgment given against
such person or persons, be reversed by attaint, or otherwise: and that upon
every such Aversment, the parties grieved shall recover his or their damages
against all and every such person and persons, which shall recover the said
Judgment, so reversed, to be given against them, or any of them, by action or
actions upon the case to be prosecuted against them, according to the course of
the Common Law of this Land: and if it shall happen that the said offender so
offending, have not any Goods and Chattels, to the value of 20 pound; that then
he or they shall be set upon the Pillory, in some Marketplace, within the
County, City, or Borough, where such offense shall be committed, by the
Sheriff or his Ministers, if it shall happen to be without any City, or
Town-Corporate; and if it shall happen to be within any City, or
Town-Corporate, then by the chief Officer or Officers, of such City, or
Town-Corporate, or by his or their Ministers; and there to have both his Ears
nailed: And from thence shall be for ever after disabled to swear in any Court
of Record, aforesaid, until the Judgment shall be reversed, and
thereupon*shall recover his damage, in form aforementioned; one moiety of which
said forfeitures shall be to the use of our Lady the Queen, her Heirs and
Successors: and the other moiety to such person or persons who shall be grieved
or damaged by reason of such offense or offenses, aforementioned, who shall
prosecute for the same, by Action of debt, Bill, Plaint, Information, or
otherwise, in any Court of Record: wherein no wager of Law, Essoyne,
Protection, or Injunction shall be allowed, as in the same Statute amongst
other things more plainly appears; Nevertheless the said I. the Statute
aforesaid little weighing nor the penalty in the same contained any wise
fearing, after the said 10th day of April, in the year etc. at L. etc. before
I. M. etc. then being Commissioners, etc. by virtue of a certain Commission to
them and others directed, out of the Court of Chancery, at Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex, to examine Witnesses upon a certain Issue, between, etc.
And the said I did then and there voluntarily and corruptly commit willful
Perjury against the form of the Statute aforesaid, that is to say, by speaking
in English these words following, etc. whereas in truth the said I. and A. did
never, etc. by reason of which false Perjury, the aforesaid A. is much damaged
in his goods, and has been put to expense, whereby an action has accrued to
the said A who etc to have and receive of the said I. as well for the aforesaid
etc. as for himself, the aforesaid 20 pound; nevertheless the aforesaid I.
although often required, the aforesaid 20 pound to the said A. who etc. has
not rendered, but the same to the said A. who etc. hitherto to render has
refused, and still does refuse: whereupon the said A. who etc. says that he is
the worse and has damage to the value of 20 pound, and thereupon he brings his
suit, etc. and the aforesaid I. by S. B. his Atturny comes and defends the
force and wrong, when etc. and faith that he did not commit willful Perjury
against the form of the Statute aforesaid, as the aforesaid A. who etc. by his
Declaration aforesaid above, does suppose: and of this he puts himself upon the
Country; and the aforesaid A. who etc. likewise.

Brewers.
Stat. Jac. Rex. No Brewer shall sell Beer or Ale to any Unlicensed Alehouse,
on pain of forfeiting six Shillings eight Pence for every Barrel.
Information.
To the Justices of the Common Bench.
IT is to be remembered that James Roberts, -- who as well for the poor of the
Parish of Mary Matsellon, otherwise White-Chappel, in the County aforesaid; as
for himself, in this behalf, prosecutes; comes here into Court, the sixteenth
day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty six, in
his own person; and as well for the Poor of the said Parish, as for himself, he
gives the Court here to understand and be informed, That one J. W. of London,
Brewer, between the first day of September, last past, and the day of
exhibiting this Information, at the Parish of Mary Matsellon, otherwise
White-Chappel aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did sell and utter, or cause
to be sold and uttered to diverse persons, whose names to the said J. R. who,
etc. as yet are unknown, two hundred Barrels of Strong-Beer, and one hundred
Barrels of Strong-Ale; which said Beer and Ale, and every parcel thereof, was
and were afterward, that is to say within the time aforesaid, in the Parish
aforesaid, within the County aforesaid, by them sold again as common Tiplers or
Ale-House-keepers; the said persons, nor any of them, having any lawful License
then in force to sell Beer and Ale; contrary to the form of a certain Statute
of the third year of the Reign of King James, late King of England; etc. in
such cases made and provided. By means whereof he the said J. W. has
forfeited to the Poor of the said Parish, and to the said J. R. who etc. the
sum of one hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England; that is to say,
for every Barrel of the said Beer and Ale so by him, in manner aforesaid, and
contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid, sold and uttered as aforesaid,
the sum of six Shillings and eight Pence: the same in the whole amounting to
the said sum of one hundred pounds: Whereupon the said J. R. who, etc. as
well for the Poor of the said Parish as for himself, prays the advice of the
Court in the premises, and that due process of Law may be awarded against him
the said J. W. in this behalf, and that he the said J. R. who etc. may have the
one moiety of the forfeitures aforesaid, and the Poor of the said Parish may
have the other moiety thereof according to the form of the Statute aforesaid;
and moreover, that he the said J. may come here into Court to answer the
premises.

M. ss. The like Information for the same, and the Poor of the Parish of St.
Giles Cripplegate, against Richard Dashwood, of the same Parish and County,
Brewer.

Prohibited and sworn the day and year above written, before me

John Do, and Richard Roo, Edw. Atkins.

Pledges, etc.
An ACT for Discovering, Convicting, and Repressing of Popish RECVSANTS.
At the Parliament begun at Westminster the seventeenth day of September, Anno.
1656.
An Information upon the same Act.
L. ss. BE it Remembered, that John Saubridge* who as well for the now Lord
Protector, etc. as for himself in this behalf, prosecu^es; came here into Court
the three and twentieth day of this Term, in his own person; and as well for
the said Lord Protector, as for himself, gave the Court h^re to understand and
be informed, That whereas at the Parliament begun at Westminster the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord 1656. for the Repressing,
Convicting, and Discovering of Popish Recusants; it stands enacted by the same
Parliament, in a certain Act at the same Parliament made, entitled, An Act for
the Discovering, Convicting, and Repressing of Popish Recusants, made and
provided: Amongst other things in the same Act contained, That it shall not be
lawful for any Subject of this Commonwealth (other then the householdservants
that shall come over with any Ambassador or Agent) at any time to be present at
Mass, at the house of any such Ambassador or Agent, or any other place
whatsoever, upon pain and penalty of one hundred pounds, and imprisonment by
the space of six Months; The one moiety of the said forfeiture to be to the use
of his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Successors; and the other moiety to
the Informer, to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or Information in
any Courr of Record; in which no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be
allowed. Nevertheless one A. B. late of London aforesaid Gent. the Act
aforesaid, nor the Penalties in the same regarding, at London, aforesaid, that
is to say (Tali die and loco) did voluntarily repair unto the place and house
aforesaid, and then and there was present, and did hear one Popish Mass said
or sung, according to the manner and custom of the Church of Rome; against the
form of the said late Act of Parliament, in this case made and provided* by
means whereof, he the said A. B. has forfeited to the said Lord Protector,
and I. S. who etc. the sum of an hundred pounds of lawful money of England.
Whereupon the said I. S. as well for the said Lord Protector as for himself,
prays the advice of the Court here in the Premises, and that due process of
Law may be awarded against the said A. B. in this behalf: and that he the said
I. S. who etc. may have one moiety of the forfeiture aforesaid: and that he,
the said A. B. may suffer imprisonment by the space of six Months according to
the the form of the Act aforesaid: and moreover that he come here into Court to
answer the Premises, etc.

These Books following are to be sold at the Lamb, at the East end of St.
Paul's, near the School.
THe Secretaries study; A Piece of Elegant Letters in Fashion.

The Complete Bone-Setter.

A rare Treatise of the Philosophers Salt: both by Dr. Turner.

Two sober Paradoxes: By Malvezzi, Elementa Optica, in Oct.

Mr. Wentworth's Miscellania; a Piece of School Divinity.

There is in the Press, Re-Printing with Additions and Amendments, that most
wanted Piece of Fawlconry: By Mr. Latham.

FINIS.

