The HEADS of some SERMONS PREACHED at FINNICK, The 17 of August. 1662. BY MR
WILLIAM GUTHRY. upon Matthew. 14: 24, 25, 26.

Matthew. 14:





Printed in the Year. 1680.

The HEADS of some SERMONS PREACHED at FINNICK, The 17 of August. 1662. BY MR
WILLIAM GUTHRY.
Matthew. 14: 24, 25.
THE Fourth Doctrine is, That, although Christ seems sometimes to be far distant
from his People under their Trials, yet he does notice them in a singular way.
He saw them toiling and rowing (as Mark has it) and yet he was at Prayer all
the time. For clearing you, we shall (1.) show what way Christ noticeth the
Trials of his people. (2.) Why he does so. (3.) What his noticeing does to his
People in their Trials (4.) What are the Trials, wherein he does concern
himself.

In order to the First, He noticeth the Trials of his People, as he has
foreordained them in his eternal Counsel. Nothing ever befell his People but
what was decreed from Everlasting. 2. He so noticeth the Trials of his People,
in making them fall out for several cases, and keeping his eye upon them
therein. 3. He has not only a permissive but an active hand in seting all the
instruments of their Trials on foot, whether they be Devils, or Men, or wind,
or storm: he sisteth the house of Israel with a sieve, yet not one grain shall
be lost. By his Providence he tristes a convenient season for the trial, and
sometimes (as he did to Peter) gives them warning of it, before the Trial come,
-- thus night before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. 4. He so
noticeth the trials of his People, as to set bounds to them, that they come
such and such a length, and no further; as here in the Text, he lets the
Disciples toil-on till the fourth watch of the night. 5. He noticeth their
Trials so as he makes intercession to God for them anent their trials: as here
he was at prayer when they were toiling and rowing in the nightime in the
midst of the Sea. 6. He so noticeth their trials, that thereby he drives-on his
own purposes, and makes their trials subservient thereunto.

The Second thing is, Why he noticeth the Trials of his People. Answ. 1.
Because he is highly concerned in them: they stand in a near relation to him:
they are all the fruit of the travel of his Soul: he is engaged to the Father
for them, and them therein; and all that befalls them is committed unto him,
and He is to be answerable for the least of them. 2. There are few, or none,
but he is to take notice of their Trials; for they can do little themselves,
and others despise them. 3. His noticeing of his Peoples trial says they were
not cast under them by hap-hazard, but with deliberation, and that they are not
alone in their trials, although they oftentimes perceive him not, yea even
when they are as beasts, Psalm. 73. -- Nevertheless I am continually with thee.

The Third thing in the Doctrine is, What his People have by his notice. It
says, his Peoples trials cannot runn a full carrier, as otherwise they might:
he sets bounds to them, and has allowed the expenses wherewith to debate with
them.

As to the Fourth thing What are the Trials wherein he does most concern
himself. 1. He noticeth indeed his Peoples trials, but especially those which
their duty has led them to, as here he had commanded them to go to Sea. 2. He
noticeth all such trials as are above their reach, as to outgate; as here in
the text. 3. He noticeth all the trials wherein his People are laboring as
much as they are able, though all their labor signify not much. 4. He
noticeth all the trials that are hard, and far above the trials they have
formerly met with, as here in the text.

Use 1. Then let the People of God comfort themselves with this, that he takes
notice of al their trials in all the forementioned respects, and is much
concerned to do so. Then since it is so, men shall not get all the intents of
their heart against his People, but they shall have support under all their
trials, and relief from them.

Use 2. The trials of his People in Britain and Ireland are certainly
concerned by him: For First, He did engage them in the business, and it is
above remedy as to men. 2. It is above all other trials that ever we were under
before, and all his People are toiling as they can under them. We may add this
as a third, That they are tristed with many notorious indignitys don to the
King of Heaven. 4. His Name is singularly concerned in the thing. All Nations
are looking whether or not our matters will stand; for they have heard that we
were a Covenanted People with the God of heaven. 5. He considers he has a
goodly Remnant and Flock in the Vessel that is now tossed with the storm. If
his People would resolve to drown together rather than to sin by compliance, it
would speak much good of the business. But Christ's advocation is on foot for
his People who are engaged for him: he was at prayer when his Disciples were at
Sea: he prayed that Peter's faith might not fail. Now his Advocation is in order
to these things: First, That his Peoples faith fail not, as has been said. 2.
That the sin, which has brought-on the trial, may be forgiven them, and all
the circumstances of their trial. 3. That they may not take any unlawful way
for their outgate. 4. That their trial may be sanctified so as to produce its
proper fruit with them that are under it. 3. That their want of a right and
suitable frame of spirit may not increase their trials, or stop their out-gate
and issue, and that it may according to the promise be hastened, as it is in
Zech. The Man whom he saw among the mirtleTrees, that were in the bottom, was
CHRIST interposing for the poor Jerusalem. O for the faith of this, that he is
interposing himself for all our trials!

Then I say 1. Study all of you to be of one mind. 2. Let his People comply
with him in all the points or his Advocation we have spoken of, and keep up the
Cause of his concernments, acknowledging always your sin and short-coming, and
choose evermore affliction rather than sin, and study to have the right use of
the trial as much as the out-gate. 3. Let this comfort and establish your
hearts, that Christ is pleading and advocating your cause before God and his
Throne in all the foresaid respects, and remember that God hears him
always, and that he will not lie unto David, but will keep Covenant with him,
even when his Children transgress, and that is a good thing, Sirs, Psalm. 80.

Now from their toiling and rowing observe, That his People must be in the use
of any mean God has left them, although the use thereof signify very little
for their outgate. They wrought here against wind and weather, although to
little purpose. The Disciples brought the four or five loaves to Christ,
although it seemed to them a vain thing to feed so many. For amplification, we
would remember these things: 1. That in the worst of times God has left some
means for his People to use. 2. Remember that the Lord by these silly means
sometimes works great things, so that his People should not be altogether
hopeless in the use of them. 3. We would remember that the Lord one way or
other blesses the diligent use of ordinary means, how small so-ever they be.
4. When God has left no ordinary means proper for producing such and such
effects, he has appointed his People to pray, and stand still and look for his
salvation. When Israel is brought to the red Sea, and the Egyptians pursuing
them, and no mean left, Moses cries unto the Lord, and bids the People stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord. 5. Remember that it is ordinary for
God to reduce his People to very small means in their straits, and yet they are
commanded to use them; and by this he tries their loyalty and obedience, and
this also teaches them not to idolize the best of means. Then let his People
in all their straits look what means God has allowed them to make use of, and
be diligent in the use of them. 2. They would not despond, when the means
appear very despiseable, for God uses to bless the lawful use of small means.
3. When no proper mean is left, then be in the use of Prayer, for that is your
duty, and that may breed peace. Let God do what is good in his sight.

Now we come to the Third thing, and that is the out-gate of the Disciples, and
all the circumstances of it: when they began to drown, they were but four miles
from land, and not till then, And in the fourth watch of the night, and that is
near the morning. Then Love sets forward, and Christ comes without their
entreaty, and works by his Omnipotency upon the waters, which he made like a
beaten floor under his feet: then, when he comes, they mistake him, and are
afraid; and so their trial grows to a greater height: he speaks to them, and
inhibits their fear, and allayes it, by telling them that it was he. And so in
this their new trial they got a new discovery of him, and then he comes to the
ship. And next ye have Peter's seeking a singular evidence of this, if it was
Christ that spoke, to them.

Then observe this Doctrine: Sometimes when we think our trial great enough,
Christ is pleased to scrue it up a great deal higher. They surely judged their
trial at a great height before, with wind and storm: we may think it was at a
great height before the fourth watch of the night, and yet he is pleased to
drive it that length.

For clearing of the Doctrine, Consider that his People soon thinks their trial
at a great height: First, Because they measur it by former sufferings they have
met with, or by former trials, not remembering that the Lord intends to have his
People further tried, and that the latter trial will be sharper, and possibly
darker, as to the out-gate, than the first was. 2. They compare their trials
and measur them with the trials of his People, that have not been with the
highest, but with the lowest; and that makes them think their trial high
enough. 3. They often measur their trials with their present felt strength, not
remembering that he gives out expense according as the trial grows. 4. They
often compare their trials with the means that are left them for out-gate, not
remembering that God uses sometimes to lay-aside all means that People have
their eyes on, and create new means for their out-gate and deliverance. 5. They
often measur their trials by their own fore-casting one resolution for it,
whereas the trials sometimes swell to a greater height than his People
apprehended it to go: and because the trial soon goes to such a height, we
think it will go no further, and so we err, not knowing the Power and Counsel
of the Lord.

Next ^ Ye would consider that the Lord has different ends in the trials of his
People, which they know not, and different thoughts. 2. He is Master of their
trials, when it is above their reach, for he intends to magnify his Power in
their weaknese, and to give them singular proofs of his Love toward them,
which his People were not expecting; and to drive them to such things as are
not soon set on foot with them. 3. As this makes him wind-up their trials to an
higher pitch, so we would beware of some mistakes that are about his way in
this: First, We must not think that this is for want of love to the Party
tried. Or 2. that he forgets them, as they are apt to fancy: for here he saw
them toiling and rowing, and yet he was praying for them, as has been said. 3.
We would not think it undutifulness in the Party tried, for here the Disciples
were toiling and rowing as they could. 4. We would not think but less trials
would be sufficient to lay us on our back, if we were left to our selves, and
had no supply from him. Then learn 1. to judge of your trials aright, and to
measure rightly: for that will prevent many unsuteable complaints and
despondency of spirit. 2. When ye think your trials at a great height, and at
the highest pitch you can bear or be recovered from, to your apprehension,
leave room to him to wind them up a pin higher, and mistake him not, though he
do so.

The next Doctrine is, That though the deliverance of his People may be delayed,
yet it sets foreward in due time, Christ at length comes; and there is great
reason for his delays many times, as was showed before: and here we shall speak
1. How it may be said he comes in due time, though he delay. 2. What way he
comes, so as it may be said he comes in due time. And first, He comes in due
time, when he comes seasonably to prevent the ruin of his People, as Ps. 94:
10.18. When I said, my foot slippeth: thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. 2. He
comes seasonably, when he does trist with their fit condition: for as soon as
they are desperate of help any other way, and begin to look to God alone, Psalm.
142:4. I looked on my right hund, and beheld, but there was no man that would
know me; refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul. I cried unto thee, O Lord,
I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living. Then 3.
It comes seasonably, as it is measured out, to prevent any sinful course for
out-gate, which his People are ready to split upon in the time of trial, Psalm.
125. 3. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous:
lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity. 4. It comes
seasonably, as the deliverance comes forth, when it is sweetest to the Party
tried. O! how cheerful were they, when he came unto them? and how
affectionatly did they receive him into the ship?

The next thing we shall observe, shall be the things which appeared in their
deliverance, 1. When he comes, they were toiling in the use of the means they
had, though it did signify little for the time. 2. He comes without much
entreaty on their part: all this time we hear not much of their Prayers. 3. The
delivery comes as a fruit of Christ's intercession: He had been praying, and
now as the fruit of his intercession he is sent himself as the Deliverer of the
party that could do little for themselves, but were all dead men in their own
estimation. 4. The deliverance comes paving-out the way to its self through
difficulties, which nothing but free love and Omnipotency, and almighty power
could or would have done. No difficulty stands before him, when his Peopls case
so requires: he puts forth omnipotency for a refuge to his People that he has
engaged with hazards. 5. The deliverance appears in Christ's dominion over
that which did trouble his People: now he comes trampling upon the Sea which
was ready to swallow them up: he proves himself to be Lord over that which did
affright them, although they were not as yet delivered from it. 6. Their
deliverance comes with new proofs and discoveries of Christ's love to the
party, and of his sovereignty over that which was their fear, and sets them
free from all that which made them afraid. Then for

Use, Let his People take courage to them, and set their face to the storm, for
their deliverance will come in good opportunity and season, in all the foresaid
respects.

Use 2. Let his People make use of any means that he has left them, and all of
them pray and wrestle with him alittle while yet.

Use 3. We must look for more out of his compassion and pity, and as the fruit
of Christ's intercession, than from all our own devotion and diligence.

Use 4. Although difficulties be unsupportable, as to us, yet we are to wait
for singular casts of his Power, if the case so require.

Use 5. Let his People wait for discoveries of him, for (...) worthy of all
their toil and sufferings; and this shall not be the least discovery of him:
yet he shall appear trampling upon those that keep us captive, by his
omnipotent Power, when he thus appears, then lift up the head for deliverance
comes near. And whether I be dead, or alive, I charge all the godly to act
faith in him, when he is seting his foot on our Sea, when he shall begin to
out-will his Enemies, and divide them among themselves, and break their
purposes among their hands, and to intricat them with their own work, and
confound their purposes, and to execute vengeance here and there upon them.
There ye may conclude he is beginning to set his foot upon our Sea, and ye are
to look for deliverance to his Church!

Matthew. 14: 26.
WE were speaking of the out-gate of the Disciples from a sad trial, and that
their deliverance did not appear, until the fourth watch of the night. He is
pleased to wind-up the trials of his People higher than they thought they would
ever have born-out, but though he delayed a long time, yet now he sets
foreward, and comes to them. I told you that the deliverance of his People does
come in due time: Now when Christ sets foreward, they apprehend him to be some
Spirit or Devil. So it holds-out this Doctrine

1. That many times when the Lord sets foreward to the deliverance of his
People, they do exceedingly mistake him, as is eminently clear in the text, and
as it was in the case of his People, when Moses brought them out of Egypt. And
here I shall show you, in what cases his People mistake him, when he sets
foreward to deliver them. 2. What causes them mistake. First, They mistake
him, when they are under great affliction of spirit, and sorely beaten with
trials, then they are ready to mistake him; and in that case they are unfit
judges of God's appearance, or what he does or says for their help and good:
they are under such a frame of spirit, as to expound all he does or says, to
be wrath. When Israel was in Egypt, they were so sorely beaten with
affliction, that they would not give an answer or an ear to what Moses said
unto them, because of the anguish of spirit they were under, they had been so
injured with affliction for a long time. And when a soul has been sorely
beaten with the evidences of his anger a long time, and the terrors of hell
has compassed them about, ye will not readily persuade them of any thing that
is for their good; they are not fit judges. 2. They mistake him, when they are
under deep apprehensions of their own guilt, for then they measure every thing
by their own deserving, and speak as Peter did, Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man: ye will say it is a good word, but it does not belong to me.

3. They readily mistake him, when he moves in their deliverance in some
strange and unbeaten path; and so is it here, for Christ came to them walking
on the Sea, which was an uncouth way. Think ye but Jonah doubted his delivery,
when he was swallowed-up by the whale? It is natural for all men to mistake the
God of heaven, for his ways are not like our ways; for men savor of the
things of the earth, they take up every thing in a natural way: so that, except
they be helped by God, they cannot take up any thing aright that he does, there
is such a natural inclination in them to expound all things wrong. So it is no
strange thing that people do not take him up. The truth is, it is a more
strange thing that they take him up in any thing right, because of the bensil
of their natural spirits. 2. We have a miserable way of shaping God by the
creatur, and all his ways like the creaturs ways: the Disciples think it can
not be a man who walks upon the water, it is some phantasma or Devil. He was a
wise man, who said Is this the manner of men? Indeed not, David, there is not a
man in all the world that would have taken you from the sheep-keeping, and made
you a King. And if that principle were out of the hearts of the People of God,
they might come to much sweetness; no doubt that is the thing that always
speaks within them there is no man that would do this with me. Indeed that is
true, but yet it is the way of God for all that: and ye must conceive his ways
are far above men's ways, as the heavens are above the earth. The Third thing
wherein we mistake, is, We are ready to lay down a way for him to come, and if
he come not that way, then we mistake him. This was the great part of the
mistake in Christ's Disciples at the resurrection, they thought he should have
risen so glorious, that all the world should have fallen-down before him
presently: And now, say they, he is three days dead, and they had not seen
him. Yes they saw him, but they thought they would have seen him another way,
and so they mistook him, they look sometimes for him in such a mercy, and he
comes in another way than they look for him; they look sometimes for him in a
temporal mercy, and he comes in a spiritual mercy, in loosing the bonds of the
spirits of his People, they think he will come in such a mean, and he comes in
another that is as good. For Use

Then leave latitude for him to deliver his People from their bondage spiritual
or temporal, any way he will, and do not confine him to this or that mean: for
ordinarily he comes not that way that his People would have him to come, as has
often been made out in the experience of his People; so that they have been
sometimes afraid to speak of the way they would fain have had him to come, lest
he should have come another.

2. Put a favorable construction on every thing he does, and that will prevent
your mistakes of him and his way of coming for the deliverance, whatever it be.
His People would enure themselves to this way, which indeed is much our duty,
for charity thinks not evil, and it is want of love to God that makes us think
evil of his Dispensations. God loves a cheerful giver, and not a churl: he
loves always the man that bodes well.

Use 3. When your trials are at a great height, and the Lord is taking strange
ways and casts of Providence, be sparing to speak your judgment and
apprehension, till you see what the result will be: for the dispensation may
look ragged-like at first, yet will produce a great mercy to the Church.

The next Doctrine is: Sometimes when God is seting the deliverance of his
People on foot, he uses then to scrue up the trials a degree higher than they
were before. The Disciples were afraid of the Sea before, but now for an evil
spirit: it is said they cried-out for fear, which they did not before, and yet
he is coming for their deliverance: there is nothing more true in the many
deliverances God wrought for his People in Scriptur than this. Ye may remember
Moses is sent to Egypt to deliver the People, but indeed their trials grew
never great, till Moses came; and when they got out of Egypt, they are not far
off, till the Enemy and the Sea, and the mountains were on every side of them,
and yet their deliverance was on foot really.

There are these Reasons of the Doctrine: First, that he may decry all means,
and bring them down in the Peoples conceit, that he has called them to set on
foot, and that their eyes may be only set on God. Moses would have been a great
man, and likely idolized by the People, if his enterprise had not first broke
in his hand: if Israel had not been first broken before Benjamin, they would
have idolized their number of men; but God gave them on their finger-ends once
or twice, that they might not lean to their multitude. 2. He does so, that he
may prepare his People for the deliverance, though such be his pity and
compassion, that he waits not for his Peoples frame to deliver them. Ye will
say, the People is not fit to be delivered. Yes, it is true: but God will do as
much in the delivery some one way or other, as will fit them more than seven
years trouble would have don. A little trial in the deliverance it self will do
much good, it hastens the delivery before it come: it may be there will be
something in the delivery that will break your heart and humble you more than
all the trouble of conscience or estate ye have met with before.

3. He does so many times, to make the adversaries cruel and insolent, and
quickly to fill up their cup. When the trial is betwixt his People and their
Enemies, he makes the delivery to take an halt, of purpose to make the enemy
insolent and proud, and then to turn up their heels in the midst of their
pride. Wherefore did Isreal's delivery halt in Egypt, but that the Enemy might
grow more terrible and insolent? 4. He does so, to make the delivery more sweet
to his People than ever it could have been, if they had not met with that
trial. O! but Christ was welcome to the Disciples now! and this new trial made
him a great deal more welcome than he would have been? that they apprehended
him to be a Spirit. 5. He does so, that there may be fit wither-weights upon
his People in their deliverance, that they may carry soberly, and evenly under
their recept; for if his People want some wither-weight, they are so
lightheaded, that the delivery would make them stark mad: therefore he will
let some worthy instrument fall in the delivery of his People, that the loss of
them will almost counter-ballance the deliverance. Then 6. He does so, to
perfect some business, to debate with some persons, who are exceedingly
concerned in the difficulty, that falls on his People; and he avengeth the
Particular that he pursues in that case: and many such things are with him,
although I grant the comparison holds not in all, in that deliverance that
David met with from his son Absalom and his men, he overturned Absalom's heels,
which in David's account did countervail the deliverance it self. Well then,
Sirs, seeing this is God's way to make the deliverance halt, and to scrue up the
trial a pinn higher sometimes.

Then for Use, If it please the Lord to let you see your deliverance dawning
like day upon the mountains, then think that your difficultys are not all over.
I will not say what way God may take to deliver us, but I am very apprehensive
that whenever the deliverance shall come, there shall be multituds of
difficultys interwoven, that it shall be hard to discern it, whether it be a
deliverance or not, it will look so like the contrary. And this I have thought
many times, What if there should a Party appear for the work of God in the
fields, and be broken all to pieces, and yet that same Partys breaking
contribute for the deliverance of the Church? So I say, when the deliverance
first begins to dawn, do not think that your difficultys are over, ye may meet
with some thing in the delivery that may be worse than all the trouble ye have
seen, that ye will wish rather to be as ye were before than to abide it.

Use 2. I would not have the People of God to think that their deliverance
waits upon their frame of spirit for it: I say, there may be something in the
deliverance that will give you a frame of spirit; if the Lord give you a frame
of spirit before the deliverance come, it is well; but I am very apprehensive
there shall be something that will humble his People in Britain and Ireland
more than ever ye have yet met with these years by-gon. God may do that in a
night that will put them more to their prayers than all they have met with
before.

Use 3. I would have you to think that the deliverance will not come, till all
the means be laid aside. Now ye may be mistaken in that: But for the instrument
ye are afraid to idolize, fear not that, for in the deliverance God shall make
you quite of these, which shall accrese to your trial. Or, Sirs, is there any
of you that have the faith of an out-gate of the People of God in these Lands,
then I say, make your account and prepare your hearts to meet with greater
trials than ye have met with formerly, and that even in the dawning of your
deliverance. The Disciples were affrighted even almost out of their wits, when
they saw Christ come walking upon the water: now he comes to them, and he had
some little thing to do with Peter, Before they were fully delivered, he
behoved to have a proof of the strength of his own faith and Christ's
sufficiency to help.

The next Doctrine is this: That the People of God are very subject to slavish
fear, when new difficultys appear to them. It Is said, when Israel fled before
the men of Ai, their hearts melted, and became like water. O! but they were
afraid! I grant the People of God take sooner with their sin than any other
People. I shall speak First what this slavish fear is. 2. Why his People are so
subject to it. 3. What is the prejudice they have by it. 4. What may be the
cure of it.

As to the First then, What this slavish fear is that his People are troubled
with. It arises from the misbelief of what God has said, and forgeting what he
has said concerning them. 2. It flows from their fixing on his Providence, and
puts the worst construction on it. 3. It flows from despondency of spirit and
heartlesness, and that weakens their hands in the use of lawful means for
bearing their own trial and working for their own out-gate; they think they
will do no more good than dip their singer in water, and their faith and hope
and all goes to wrack: and upon this there follows an inclination to follow
some unlawful mean for their out-gate, and if they follow not that, then the
heart is kindly laid out for such a temptation; for ordinarily complaints are
the fruits of slavish fear. Slavish fear then stands in this, viz. in an
atheistical putting of the creatur in a channel of independency on God, as if
the creatur could come and go of its own accord without commission from him,
Isa. 5. It Is God who comfort: who art thou that art afraid of a man that
shall dye, etc.? The truth is, they had forgotten the Omnipotent Power and
Sovereignty of God, and thought men could do with them what they pleased
without God. When ye are so, it is an hundred to one if ye make not have to get
from under the trial some unlawful way.

For Reasons of this: First, There is the great ignorance of God's interest in
his People, that is the cause of all their slavish fear, and that which he
challenges his People for, Thou have feared every day, and have forgotten me:
who art thou that art afraid of a man that shall dye? We take up our selves as
standing alone without God. There feared they, where no fear was: for God is in
the congregation of the righteous: some take it that it is the Enemy, because of
God's being among his People. Yea but some take it also, that his People feared
although God was among them. 2. There is unbelief. 3. Atheism, a growing sin;
his people apprehending God to be like the creatur, and the creatur to be like
God, that he can work what he will without the creatur, and the creatur what it
will without him: he puts God above the creatur in somethings, and the creatur
above him in some other things.

The Fourth Reason is, because his People too soon yield to this fear: ye think
in no case ye do it without reason. Yea but ye are bound to shut-out those
things, when they come-in upon you. When slavish fear begins to mutter in our
bosom for harboring, it makes it prevail.

The Third thing is the prejudice of a slavish fear. 1. It weakens the hands of
his People in all duties; for when they begin to fear out of measur, they lose
all, and grow indifferent whether they do duty or not. No man will bide by his
duty, when his faith fails him; and if he go about any duty, it will be but
as a rat-rime, like the Papists, when they tell their beeds. The second
prejudice is discouragement of soul: nothing can comfort the People of God,
where this prevails. The third is the discomposur of their countenance, to the
prejudice of Religion: whenever it gets upper-hand, it makes them look as if
they served an hard Master, who puts his People to undergo such things as he
will not allow expense for. The Fourth is, it disobliges God to work for their
out-gate and deliverance from it, as it is said, he could do no mighty works,
because of their unbelief. 5. It puts them in an uncapacity to understand their
own mercy, when it begins to appear. This slavish fear mude them in Egypt that
they could not understand what Moses said touching their deliverance from it.
And when they are in such a case of slavish fear, all duty is a burden to them:
it is better for them to bear the ston-barrow than for them to go-about duty
that may tend to their out-gate. And sixthly, Whatever God may do to his People
in his Sovereignty and Mercy, the man, that is under slavish fear, has not a
promise in the Bible to look to that God will help him in such a case, Jac. 1:
I -- let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord,
because he asks not in faith.

The last thing in the Doctrine, is the cure of this disease: the thing that
cures the Disciples fear is Christ's approaching to them in favor. Behold he
comes, but they mistake him. There is none of the People of God, but bring
Christ and them together, he will heal them of all their disputs and diseases,
Christ approaches to them, and speaks friendly to them, and still they heard
that word, it is I, be not afraid, together with his approaching. Will that do
it? No: Christ adds his authority, rebuking their slavish fear, although they
themselves have ground to be quieted? yet they can not, until he say be not
afraid, it is I, I command your Devil to sit within your self, will that do it?
No: there are some of them that are peremptor, they will have a special
confirmation, and Peter steps out before the rest, -- if it be thou, bid mo
come to thee on the water, otherwise I will never believe. Well Peter, must ye
have a confirmation? Ye shall have it, but ye shall not crack much of it, ere
all be don; it may be ye be at a greater doubt, before the end of the day. Then
that which completely allayeth all their fear, is Christ's in-coming to them,
and nothing else does it.

For Use then, Let all the People of the Lord know there is such an infirmity
attending them: when difficultys are renewed upon you, and slavish fear labors
to take possession of you who are fled to Christ, guard against it, and know
the evils thereof, encourage your selves against it. When your fear grows in a
cloud, and dark day, to prevent it Consider 1. what interest God has in his
People, they are set as a seal upon his heart, and written upon the palms of
his hands; he has said, he that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.
Would we be afraid, if we believed that any that troubles the People of God,
do as ill as if they took God on the looking face? Indeed and in truth if we
believed that, we would think them won gear. 2. Believe this also, that
whatever the Lord does or suffers men to do, shall work together for the good
of his People. it is a common truth in every bodies mouth, yea but I may say the
least believed truth in all the Bible. Ye will not question the truth of the
promise, but yet ye stand at the application. I offer you that instance, and
put your selves to it, if ye can solidly acquiesce with it in your heart, that
all the distresses and afflictions his People are under in Britain and Ireland
shall work together for their good: then if it be so, as I do not doubt of it,
why then do ye not believe it, and are quiet?

3. Believe this also, that there is nothing that befalls his People; but what
is by his Providence: ye say, it is true, but there are many things, that we
meet with, that God does not allow. I say there is nothing ye meet with, but
that which is either by his active or permissive Providence. There is no evil
don in the city but what the Lord knows. That the Ministers in Britain and
Ireland are put from their houses, Kirks, and Lands, and banished out of the
country, is all his Providence, and shall work together for their good, and if
it be, then ye are to be silent. 4. Know this and believe that there is nothing
to be feared, but God and an evil conscience. As a man in Ireland said to a
Bishop, when he threatened to imprison him, he answered, I know no such prison
as an evil conscience, and so if ye resolve to fear nothing but the God of
Heaven and an evil conscience, ye need not fear men, for the fear of these will
quiet all your other fears.

A SERMON PREACHED, at FINNICK, The ^ of August. 1662. BY MR WILLIAM GUTHRY.
upon Matthew. 16: 25.
For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his
life for my sake, shall find it.
I Have told you that the natural life of man may come in competition with the
Cause and interests of Christ, and that some men will get a free choice in this
case to save or lose their life, though every one will not get it to their
option. I have likewise told you that the natural life of Man when put to a
man's option to save or to lose as he pleases, with denials, or not denial of
the Cause, was a mighty temptation, -- All that a man has will he give for his
life.

But however it might be a mighty tentation, and however many things may occurr
in the way to obstruct the man's right choice in the case, yet be it known unto
you all, that whosoever seeks to save his life with prejudice to the cause of
Christ and a good Conscience, thereby loses his life: I was beginning to tell
you what ways a man would study to save his life with prejudice to Christ and
his cause, and he does so either by omitting that which is his duty before God,
for fear of his life or for fear of inconveniences that might follow upon his
doing of his duty; or he does it by committing that which is positively sinful
before God, for fear of his life.

First of all the man prefers his natural life to Christ and his cause and a
good Conscience, by omitting his duty: and that is 1. when he forbears to
testify for God in his place and station, I mean by witnessing with the mouth
for him; this reaches both minister and People, when they will not speak for
Christ's cause when it is reproached, for fear of hazard: this is to seek to
save their life by omitting of duty.

2. Folk may be said to seek to save their life with prejudice to the cause of
Christ, by omission of duty in this case, when God lays an opportunity of his
service and work before them for the good of his Church; but by reason of their
faint-heartedness they fear, and will not set about it, and so will not rescue
Christ and his cause by opposing what God calls them to oppose. 3. By omitting
other duties competent for them in their place and station, or by reason of the
wicked Laws made against such duties by the Supreme Magistrate, with
certification of such and such hazards to occurr upon them, by doing of those
duties, as ye ever already heard.

Having spoken to these things, we come now to speak of the next great Head of
cases and ways with prejudice to Christ and his cause and interests and our
own Conscience positively, by doing that which is sinful against God, and this
is don several and many ways. There are several and many cases, in which Folk
may be said to prefer their natural life to Christ's cause and their own
Conscience, by commmitting positively that which is sinful against GOD. And

First: Folk prefers their natural life to Christ his interests and Cause, when
men do disclaim the interests and cause of Christ, and all that party, side,
and faction, because of Christ Jesus and the Truth; I hope it is clear and
without controversy to you all: if Folk do this for fear of their life, or any
peril, or hazard that they may come under, with prejudice to his interest and
cause, that they are seeking to save their lives with prejudice to his
interests and cause, and so fall-in, under the hazard of the Text of losing
their life. This was Peter's fault, for as holy a man as he was, he thought he
was something hardly put to it, and he being under the apprehension that his
life might have gone if he had confessed his Master, and so judges himself to be
in hazard, upon that account he does formally disclaim Christ Jesus and all
that faction and party: -- thou art one of them, (say they) for thou wast with
him in the garden; thou art one of his Disciples, thy speech bewrays thee: I
vow and swear (says he) I am no fanatik, if ye will believe me. And thus he
formally disclaimes Christ and his interests and Cause, and forsware himself.
This is a very heinous way of seeking to save our life with prejudice to Christ
his interests and cause and our own conscience. But

Secondly: Some can hardly get it denied but they have been with Christ, and
one of that party, side, and company, and one of their sect, as it is said in
the Scripturs; but yet, for fear of their life, they will not only disclaim
that interest, party, side, and faction; but to put it out of all question that
they do so, they will now put it under their hand in a covenant, or
declaration, (as ye use to call it) that they do disclaim that party, side, and
way, and so that they do judge all their former works and actions in that way
and with that party to be sin, and so will solemnly oblige themselves by an
Oath that they shall never own that interest or way any more, if the Supreme
Magistrate put them not to it. I hope ye are all clear that this is one of the
most heinous ways that can be chosen for Folks seeking to save their lives
with prejudice to Christ his interest and cause; yet there are many of this
generation, that will not only disclaim that party, side, and faction, (for it
may he called a Faction) but they will also put it under their hand in a
declaration that they do judge that way their sin, and so shall never own that
interest or way of Christ any more, if the Supreme Magistrate put them not to
it, though he should turn them all Mahumetans. I have this much charity to give
some of their Lowns, albeit I have not much to give to any that ever have gone
that way, yet I have this much charity to give to some of them, that it has
been for fear of the loss of their lives, or for fear of the loss of some
personal interests, that has made them do so: if it has been the wickedness of
their Principles, betwixt themand God may it be, my part is clean of it,
however let them do it as they will, they have sought to save their lives with
prejudice to Christ his interests and cause. And there are two great witnesses
standing against them, that shall stand against them before God and man, and
that is their Tongue and their Hand, these two shall witness against them
before Heaven and Earth, declaring their unparalleled wickedness. Ye may
perhaps think the taking of that printed paper the Declaration is but a small
trivial business: but I would ask at any serious godly souls, that have the
least spunk of ingenuity remaining in them, that have not sinned away their
Conscience with this pernicious time, Sirs, what would ye think to see a
printed Covenant, such as our Covenant was, having so many men's names at the
end of it, as our Covenant has had in many places, men thinking it their glory
to have their Names at the end of that Covenant; I say, what would ye think to
see another Covenant disclaiming the former printed Covenant by the self-same
men that owned the former having their names at the former Covenant, vowing and
swearing to maintain the Cause and Interests of Christ, having their names at
the latter printed Covenant, vowing and swearing the quite contrary, never to
own the interests of Christ any more: what would ye think to see the names of
these Knaves now at this latter Covenant, infealing against their own names at
the former Covenant? Truly, construct of them as ye will, I think the world
may wonder of them, else ye may give them charity and the like; but if God
write not another Bible, I have none to give them, construct of them as ye
will. It Is a shame in the sight of the Nations for men to falsify their own
deed before Sun and Moon, Heaven and Earth, God and man, to put it under their
hand that they shall never own the Interests of Christ contrary to their Oath;
the hainousest perjury they put upon themselves that ever men put upon
themselves, or that ever we read of either in Scriptur or in any other history:
this is one of the most heinous ways that ever men took for shuning of
personal hazards, with prejudice to Christ his interests and cause; if they
lose not their life many of them, we wonder, and that some will possibly see
it, ere long, though perhaps we shall not be much witness to it, yet there will
be witnesses to it, ere the dreadful day of Doom. Folk sets always long
terms. But

There Is a Third way that many seek to save their lives with prejudice to
Christ's cause, by doing something that is positively sinful before God, and
that is neither by disclaiming Christ and his cause, and party, and side, nor
yet by putting it under their hand that they shall never own that party nor way
any more; but it is, by joining of interest and issue with those Enemies that
have so don, there is a joining of their interests with those that have so done,
that God looks on as very heinous in his sight. There are many ways of joining
interests and issue with that party: there are many plotings and complotings
and workings to and fro to their hands amongst us in this matter. How be it we
have so much charity to give to some of them that have so done, that it is not
so much out of malice that they have don so [perhaps], as the fear of personal
hazards, which has made them join issue and interests with that party. But
however here I shall give you some ways and cases in which men do join
interest and issue with the Enemies of God; and though I will not say that all
these, that I am about to name, may be properly applied to those that may be
called the Enemies of God, yet having these, or any of these, they look with
very black marks; and though I will not say that one, that is guilty of one or
them, will be guilty of all of them, yet I judge one of them uses to follow
another in a man's practice, so God's judicial plagues bring them to an height.
Ye will find always of a Peoples joining of interests and issues with God's
professed Enemies, in the Prophecy of Obadiah, they run all to the case of Esau
there, in the name of Edom, Jacob's bastard brother, a Lown, that had sold his
birthright for a fill of his own foul belly, and he had still an ill will to
the honest lad Jacob, and so whenever he got an opportunity, he joined issue
and interest with those that were his professed Enemies: and ye will see many
things brought in there, that God charges him with. This may be very properly
applied to many within our times, that have joined interest and issue with that
Party that is the Enemies of God and Church at this time, to lay their hand to
their heart, and see whether or not they speak not their very case and theirs.

First: This there charged upon Edom, is, In the day of thy Brothers affliction
thou stoodst on the other side. Now that ye may understand the matter, ye must
take it up thus: There were two Partys in that day, standing confronted over
against another, videlicet, poor Israel standing on the one side, and Isreal's
Enemies, that had invaded them, standing on the other side; Edom is a bastard
brother in the house, and he comes-in, for his own hand, and sides with Isreal's
Enemies. When God had placed the two Partys one against another, Edom comes in,
and when he should have sided with the People of God, he sides with the Enemies
of the People of God; so soon as he knew who were the professed Enemies of the
People of God, he sided with them, he stood on the other side. It Is like he
declared not himself to be an Enemy at the first, but he stood on the other
side, and that was enough to declare him to be one of the Enemies of Jacob.
There are some of you who will speak nothing against the People of God, and ye
will not declare t;o be Enemies, but yet ye will speak as little good for them
for all that, and that says ye stand upon the other side, else ye would help
when they are in need; your indifferency in such a day will prove you to be
Enemies of the People of God, and ere long, in God's righteous judgment, it is
like ye'l go the full length, if ye be standing there, else ye will not stand
long there, God will declare you to be rank Enemies to his Cause and People. It
is not good to side with God's Enemies either in jest or in earnest. There is
not much word of some of our compliances yet, but we stand on the other side
for all that. Truly I fear you very sore ere all be don: then it is enough to
declare any man to be a joyner of issue and interests with God's enemies and
the enemies of his People, because though they speak nothing against the People
of God, yet they speak nothing for them, in the day of their affliction; thou
stoodst on the other side, in the day of thy Brother's affliction.

2. It Is charged on them there, that they rejoiced at Jacob's affliction, and
at the prosperity of their Enemies, that is another step of compliance or
joining of interest and issue with them, rejoicing at the Enemies prosperity,
and at their success, and at the calamity and destruction of the People of God.
Indeed quoth some, I am not guilty of that, I had rather have them that ye call
the People of God upmost; do ye so? What think ye then of the keeping of days
of Thanksgiving? then ye may say, ye kept those days, on this account and on
that account. Yes ye may put Folk by so, but see if ye put God and your own
conscience by so. God knows on what account ye kept those days of
thanksgiving. I defy you or any else on any account. But ye justify all the
Gospel work, that the Enemies have don for the overthrow of the work of God in
these Lands. Ye may go about the bush with me, how to find our distinctions,
but gang about it, as ye will, (my Friend) I shall hook you: for the matter
stands directly thus, that on one of these two accounts ye behooved to rejoice
at, either at the prosperity of the wicked, or at the adversity of the godly.
For just in the day of our affliction, when our Worthies fell, and when our
Government and Ministers were cried down, and all the conjured Enemies of our
Lord Jesus Christ got up, then Head and Mischief by our Rulers established by a
Law, that day ye stated your day of thanksgiving. Know ye how, and what at ye
rejoiced? Lay then your hand to your hearts, and read that Scriptur, it is only
Jacob that is in affliction; and its not only the wicked crew, Jacobs enemies
that are exalted. Now lay your hand to your hearts, and learn to know on what
account ye rejoiced, and know that ye are but bastard brethren, rejoicing at
the prosperity of the enemies of Jesus, and at the affliction or Jacob, and
know what hazard ye are in. Indeed perhaps ye may say, it was the fear of your
life, or fear of inconveniences, that might follow on your not keeping of such
days; ye may lose your means, or ye may lose your life, or something that
belongs to life. Indeed I believe you now, I seek no more of you than that,
that is enough to prove that ye have sought your life, to save them, with
prejudice to Christ and his Cause, by thy keeping of a day of thanksgiving.
Indeed I give you that much charity, that it has been for fear of your life, or
some inconveniency that has made you keep a day of thanksgiving, with prejudice
to Christ and his Cause. If it has been but the wickedness of your principles,
it is the worse of that, betwixt you and God may it be. But I give you the
charity, that it has been for fear of your life, or some inconveniences, that
has made you wrong the cause of Christ, by keeping a day of Thanksgiving.

3. There is this charged on Edom, and ye may take it as another degree of
joining interest and issue with God's enemies, and it is this, neither should
they have spoken proudly in the day of his distress. There are some, that are
given to homologat the courses of the time, and yet they have no will to be
called the enemies of the People of God, and they have as ill will to be called
Phanatiks: but they are even such fools as are given to take a rant sometimes;
and not to give them too much charity, it is to be judged they will take some
more than ordinary, for fear they be judged phanatiks: and when they are taking
their rant, they will reproach the poor People of God thus: It Is well war'd on
them: they were all grown so proud, that they could be tolerat: they could not
but meet with a mischief, thy were all grown so proud, so saucy, and so
precise, there could not better come of them. Well, be doing so, talk-on so; but
remember that this is no small part and way of joining issue and interest with
God's enemies, and remember ye are of the black band that has spoken proudly
in the day of Jacobs affliction. What is the cause I pray you. Was it not, that
ye your selves should not be suspected to be of that Party that is called
Phanatiks, that so ye might not be under the hazard they are in at this time?
Therefore ye have spoken so proudly against that Party in the day of their
affliction. It had not been so ill for you to have called them so in the day of
their prosperity. But in this ye are exceeding guilty, that ye have spoken
proudly in the day of Jacobs distress and affliction.

4. There is this charged on Edom, and ye may take it here as another step and
degree of compliance with the enemies of God, neither should thou have laid
thy hand on thy Brothers substance in the day that strangers carried away his
forces. Will any body think ye, that prosesses love to the cause, take an harl
of an honest man's gear, when its going for the Cause and Covenant and work of
Reformation? Indeed I Will warrant you, that they will. Its true, none I know that
has love really to the Cause and Covenant and work of Reformation will do so.
But I know enough of Lowns that have professed much love to the Work, will be
very glad to winn a days wages, to drive an honest man's pound, when it is going
for the work of Reformation, and many will not hook to put-in their hand among
the honest man's gear, when it is going for the Work of Reformation, and take a
good deal of it. Will ye do so? Then truly it shall be the dearest gear that
ever ye wan in your life. Will the States take a fine of a man, for promoving
of the work of God? And will ye take any off-fallings, that ye can get? Will ye
lay your hand on your Brothers substance in the day of his distress? Take it as
ye will, but ye may as well take God's vengeance, as take it: and if ye take it,
ye shall take God's vengeance with it. It shall be the dearest gear in your
aught the thing that ye take of them that way, if ye take any thing of the
People of God, for the Covenant and Work of Reformation, or for any thing
relating thereunto, believe it, ye shall get the broad curse of God with it,
that shall crow in their crop, and burst out at the broad side, and turn out
that which is in or you, that all the world shall see as well within as without:
and withal know assuredly this is one of the highest ways of joining issues
and interests with God's enemies, that the Spirit of God has left on record in
the Scriptur; and know ye are once scrued up and over among the black band, and
God knows when ye shall come-off again.

5. There is this there charged on Edom, and ye may take it likewise as another
step and degree of compliance, and that is, thou stoodst on the cross way to
cut off those of his that did remain. There is even some folk at this present
that has not gone the full length they resolve, that from the Work of God are
going over the bray, and the People of God is like to be ruined, as its to lend
all a putt together, to put all further wrong, to reproach any thing that
remains. Professed enemies have gotten the one wheel of the work of God over
the bray, and ye wait well under thumb to get the other put over the bray also,
the vote and cause will go against them. Quoth ye, we can not help it, and we
need not cast our selves into needless hazards, from the work be going, let it
go, and from that party be going, let them even go, we need not speak for them,
for they will over the bray, be as it will, therefore let us vote even as the
rest vote, lest we bring our selves into hazard. I know there are some of you
that would not have taken the lives of those that were execut at this time, nay
but ye will not hook to reproach them for all that, and amongst the enemies of
God not care to say they were guilty of death: its an high way of joining
interest and issue with that Party: hereby ye seek to save your life, with
prejudice to Christ his cause, interests, and People. God shall serve you up
among that number that put his People to execution.

6. There is another degree of joining issues and interests with that Party
charged on Edom, and that is the discovering those that were hidd: and that
follows still on the other, the matters of God are going wrong, these have a
rant and hand to put it further wrong; the next thing that they will do, if
they have an opportunity, they will delate and discover any body that they know
hidd, that they think if they were discovered, would come into hazard, for the
Covenant and Cause and Work of Reformation, there is not much dinn of our
compliance yet; but we are busy enough else tatling and telling to some others
of some that we know hidden, that we know, if they come to light, they will come
into the chalk, for the work of God. Wherefore do ye so? Is it not that ye your
selves should not be suspected to be one of that Party? or is out of malice
that ye do so? This is also an high degree of joining issue and interest with
that Party.

7. There is another degree of this evil here charged on Edom, take it also as
another part of compliance or joining of interest with God's enemies, and that
is, drinking upon the Holy Mountain of God. There is some folk having come all
the lengths, in the end the end they will even come to this to drink, to the
confusion of the Covenant and all that Party that will adhere to it; and so
when they fall upon their rants among their companions, will say, here to the
confusion of the Covenant and all the Phanatiks, and some of them will even be
so absurd as to say, the Devil clank over with it. Such of you may read in the
16 verse of the Prophecy of Obadiah, and look what it speaks of you, and
throughout all that chapter of Obadiah, ye may read in at your own leisur, ye
will find many instances there and degrees of compliance. I shall not speak
much more upon it: but remember this general head, that though ye do not
disclaim Christ, nor his Cause, nor yet take the declaration, yet that there is
a joining of issue and interest with that Party that are the professed enemies
of God, that ye have so don for personal hazards, and it goes readily from one
degree to another, till it winn to the last.

1. They begin and they side with that Party that is the enemies of the Church
of God, and will speak but little, and debate for that Party, and they will
speak nothing against the People of God, yet they will say as little for them;
but they will stand on the other side, and indeed if they be there, they will
gang alittle further the next time, and profess that they have reason to
evidence something of joy, for the success and prosperity of the wicked, at
lest to profess joy in that case, for fear of hazard or inconveniences, once
being there, they will not stand much to speak proudly, and testify against
the People of God in affliction, and to blame them thus, that it is all justly
come upon them, they were all so proud, that they could not stand; indeed when
once they be at this, to reproach the People of God thus, without all debate
when they see their gear going for the Covenant and Cause and Work of
Reformation, if they get opportunity of any thing that is ado, they will even
find in their heart to take a clat of it. Indeed when once they be at that with
it, they will take a clat of an honest man's gear, when it is going for the
honest Cause without debate, they will not spare to stand in the cross-way to
cut off those of his that does remain. Woe them! I nothing doubt, if they be
cuting-off any thing of the Work of God, that remains, but they will discover
any that they know hidd, that they think will come into the calk, for that
work. If they do all the rest, doubtless when they come to their own
companions, and have taken a rant, they will drink to the confusion of the
Covenant and all the Phanatiks.

Now ye see there are many ways of joining interests and issues with the
Enemies of God, and gang from less to more, from one degree unto another, till
God in his righteous judgment lay-on the last stone, as their plague: it may be
ye are but standing on the other side to day yet, and if ye be speaking nothing
for the People of God, ye are speaking as little against them. Well, are ye
standing on the other side else, in God's righteous judgment, ere some few
years gang about, ye will be drinking to the confusion of the Covenant, and all
that will adhere to it.

Fourthly: There is a way that men prefer their natural life to the Cause and
interests of Christ by doing that which is positively sinful, and that by
giving obedience to sinful Acts and Laws, for fear of personal hazard, is such
a thing as I know to be iniquous and sinful; but there comes out such a Law
from the Supreme Magistrate, that such a thing must be done, or then be liable
to such and such hazard, and for fear of that hazard I give obedience to that
iniquous Law, and that way seek to save my life with prejudice to Christ and
his Cause. This was the case of the three children that were put to it at
Babylon, but they did not obey; there came out a wicked Law against them, that
whenever they heard all the bagg-pipes blow, they should without any more fall
down and worship the idol that Nebuchadnezzar had set up, or then take it upon
their peril to be cast into the fiery furnace. O! but the three children made a
fair and honest choice, Be it known to you all Gentiles, quoth they if the
bagg-pipes should blow till they burst again, we will not fall down and worship
the Idol that Nebuchadnezzar has set-up; if our God please, he can deliver us,
but whether he will deliver us or not, we will not bow down to your glecks. O!
but they made a fair choice! There are many Folks now in our days, I think, if
the King would command the most iniquous Law that ever was commanded in a
church, I doubt not but they would give obedience thereunto, for fear of
inconveniences that they fear would come upon them for their disobedience:
they have given a great proof of this already, and a greater proof than this
can not be given, for they have sworn that his Majestys will shall be the rule,
according to which they shall level all their actions. I hope it is clear to
you all, that these Lowns have taken a sinful way to save their life, with
prejudice to Christ and his Cause, as ever was taken. I am sure their lives
must be in hazard.

The next I proposed to speak to, was, What pretenses have men to say, for
their own defense, for this unhappy way of compliance. What shadow or pretext
have they for this? Have they nothing to say for themselves, for taking of such
an uncanny gate as this? Yes, that they have, it is an ill deed but they will
always get some excuse for it: and so they have much to say for their evil
deeds too: they have many pretenses and reasons for their own defense here,
though I hope ye are all clear, that no pretext or reasons formable can be
given, without a ragg about the foot of them. No formable reason can be given
why men seek to save their lives with prejudice to Christ and his Cause, but
such as they are they have enough of them, and ye shall judge them, for I shall
give you an instance of some few of them. Now let every man lay his hand to his
heart, and be judge here.

The first pretext that we shall name, which many have for their compliance, is
this, LAW and AUTHORITY, there is Law and Authority for the thing. When we say,
what meant ye to comply, and take that unhappy course by the end? they choose
this goodly pretense, there is Law and Authority for it: in this they fortify
themselves in all their abominable courses, there is Law and Authority for such
things. Will thou tell me? O man, if thou have any spunk of ingenuity remaining
in thee, whether or not was there not Law and authority at Babylon for the
three children to fall down and worship the graven image that Nebuchadnezzar
the King set-up? Though this Law and Authority came from the King, yet it was
not a lawful authority, and therefore they behoved to say to the King in this,
we will neither obey Law nor Authority. Or will thou tell me man, of all the
Martyrs that ever thou heardst of martyred for the Cause of Christ, if ever any
of them was martyred without a shadow of Law and Authority, save some that
have been killed secretly. Any that were brought to any public hearing, there
was always some shadow of Law and authority laid against them. Was it not so
from the beginning? All the cruelty that ever was done to Christ, his Church,
and his Cause, since the beginning, it was still sent-out with some shadow of
Law and authority, it was still so since the beginning. I think, man, if thou
were a man, and not a beast, thou should resolve not to make thy conscien^^
subject to all the iniquous Laws that may come through a Land. I mean'd one
that has rational understanding above a beast should know that he should not
make his Conscience subject to all the iniquous Laws that come through the
world. I had thoughts that thou that art a man baptized into the name of
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, there is some spunk of ingenuity left within thee,
that thou should know this much, that the humane Laws of the Prince do not
make void all the Divine Laws and authority of our Lord Jesus upon the
consciences of men. I mean'd when a Divine Law and an humane law had
confronted, in opposition one to another, that the Divine Law was to make void
the humane: but I never knew that the humane laws of the Prince made void all
the Divine laws of Christ before. I never heard that doctrine taught, but within
these four years, God be thanked. Short while may the Law of the Prince last,
that makes void all the Divine Laws and authority of our blessed Lord Jesus.
Truly, man, thou have a bony plea of it, thou must fell thy conscience, abjure
the Covenant, and comply with their iniquous laws and authority for it. If thou
art a man, and not a beast, man, I think thou should know this, that it is
more lawful to obey God than man. The Apostle made greatest enemies judges in
this matter, whether it be most lawful to obey God rather than man, judge ye.
But ye must obey man, though opposite to all the commands of God. The King's
laws are for this, quoth ye, there is law and authority for it. Truly ye have
a bony plea of it, a brave pretense of it forsooth. I think a man baptized into
the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, should think shame to instance
such a pretext. It Is even like your self, there is law and authority for it.
There are many also who for their compliance pretend loyalty to their Prince:
they must comply, they must abjure the Covenant, that they may prove their
loyalty and respects to his Majestys grace. Goodsooth let me tell it quietly
betwixt me and you, there is few good news in the land, since the like of you
became so loyal. If our King had been a man qualified with grace, as once we
supposed him to be, and had born down vice and profanity, there had not been so
much loyalty in the breasts of a thousand of you, as is in the breast of one of
you, at this day. Always I thought it had been true loyalty to the Prince, to
have kept him in his own room, and given him his own due, to have kept him
subordinat to Christ, and his laws subordinat to the Laws of Christ. I thought
true loyalty to the Prince had been to have kept his House in the line of
subordination to the fear of God. Fear God, and honor the King, I judged that
had stood well in all the world; but there is a generation now, that has turned
it even contrary, Fear the King, and then honor God. I thought never that that
was true loyalty yet: I never heard that doctrine taught before: but I thought
always that was true loyalty, Fear God, and honor the Prince. God's vengeance
be on them that have altered that Divine law, ever, until they set as good an
one in the place of it. They made the rule all wrong, that put the King in the
first place: he will never stand well there. I do think men of rational
judgment, that have not sold themselves to this iniquous time, will think it
the true honor of the Prince, to keep him in the line of subordination to
God's honor, Fear God, and honor the King. He is the best subject, who is the
best Christian. And ask some, What makes you take such a mischievous course by
the end, for the overthrow of the work of God? O! I behoved to prove my loyalty
to my Prince: ye understand not there are many who question my loyalty now. In
truth, Sir, say I, there is many a better man, than ever stood on your shinnes,
or his either, that questions your loyalty now to the God of heaven. Will ye
make this once clear in the first place, that ye are a loyal subject to the God
of heaven, and then prove your loyalty to your Prince, by things that do not
contradict the Scriptures of Truth and the Laws of the God of heaven. It is
never a soncy loyalty that makes folk to quite their Religion. Tho his Religion
justled against that which they accounted loyalty, they charged him with this,
that his way was a way of sedition and heresy. His way did not prove him to be
loyal enough. Well, says he, I am a loyal subject for all that, after that way,
so I worship the God of my Fathers: if that be heresy, quoth ye, I am an
heretik; if that be rebellion against the Prince, I am a rebel to him, for so
worship I the God of my Fathers. But albeit ye will quite with your Religion,
to prove your loyalty to your Prince, yet truly we will not do so. And if ye
call such Fanatiks, that take the way we do, then we are such, after the way,
that ye call Fanaticisme, so worship we the God of our Fathers: we may not
quite with our Religion, albeit ye call it by the name of Treason, Heresy,
Rebellion, and Division: hold ye by your thing, and we will hold us by our
thing: it is always best for Folks to hold them still by their own thing.

3. There is many Folks, who for their compliance pretend peace to the Church,
and to themselves. Know ye not what discord and mischief that way breeds every
where? Quoth ye, I am even gone the length, I am gone, for peace, in some cases.
Peace, man, peace, man, I pray thee, what peace would thou? would thou have
peace with God's enemies, that has destroyed all that is precious in our sight?
Whom with would ye have peace? I hope ye may have peace with all the People of
God, without compliance. Why then tell ye us, that we should keep peace with a
party, that has destroyed all the work of God? I weened the Scriptur had stated
the matter thus, Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no flesh
shall see God. Ye forget still the one half of your tale, my friend. Would ye
have peace among us, without holiness? Lord let never that peace be among us.
God send us red war, ere he send us that peace: red war, fire and sword be
among us, ere that peace be among us. Woeful will be the peace of these lands,
if peace without holiness be among us. I know not what peace is, for if it have
not holiness with it, I know not what ye would be at, if ye would not have
communion betwixt Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, which shall never keep
under one roof, one bed, nor one board together. We profess no peace with that
Party that is enemies to God, we profess no peace with such a party; let red
war be betwixt us, but God let never peace be betwixt us.

4. There are many who pretend this for their compliance, even usefulness to
the Church, in their cases, they say they have done what they have done of that
kind, that they may be useful to the work of God in other cases. What moved
thee to comply, Man, and run with that unhappy party so great a length, for the
overthrow of the work of God? But ye understand not my drift in it, it was that
I might get credit from them, and thereby I will have place, and opportunity to
speak for the People of God, and for the Cause, and so this is a way to be
useful for the Work of God, by their putting credit upon me, that way, I will
have a fair opportunity to get many a good turn don in the favor of honest
men. Gang thy way, Man, the vengeance of God gang with thee, for we will either
have good God's gate, or will never have good at all, for good is not good, if
it come not God's gate: we look never that God will trist us with good through
such foul fingers as yours; we look that God will trist us with good through a
cleanlier hand. But I never knew that this was your duty to do evil, that good
might come of it: I never knew that the Scriptur stated the matter thus, that
Folk should do evil, than good might come of it. I ween'd ay that Folk should
have done good at present, if they would have had good to have followed on it.
But I never knew that Folk was to do evil, that good might follow, I never read
that in all the Bible, and I have read it all from the one end to the other,
and some of it twice over, but I never read that in it all. Go thy way, Man,
the vengeance of God gang with thee; for we look never for good at the like of
thy hand. I dare say, if it were not more respect to thy carnal interests, that
thou lookst most to, than any respect that thou have to the Cause of Christ and
his People, thou would never have gone the length thou have gone, God reward
you for that ye have don to Christ and his Cause, and so he will, in his own
due time, ye will get the Devil to your thanks yet, for the good ye have don to
the Cause of Christ and his People by compliance.

But there are many likewise who have this pretext for their compliance, they
profess to be keeping their life till a better time: it is a sin to us to let
our life, and what belongs to us gang this gate, we may keep our life till a
better time: indeed, as I was telling you before, I never heard tell, that that
man's life did ever any more good to Christ and his Cause, that once did compet
therewith, and was preferred thereunto, and so was brought-off with prejudice
to the same; God will never be in such a Knaves common, as thine, to prefer thy
life with that honor, as to make it useful for the Cause of Christ again, who
has preferred thy life to the Cause. I ween'd the Scriptur had arted thee
better, Man, that he that is faithful in the little, will be faithful in the
greater, and he that is not faithful in little, will not be faitfull in much.
We will never honor such as have denied his Cause, to make them useful for
the Cause and Work again, such as is faithful in the little, and keeps his
garments clean, in an evil time, God will prefer that honest man with taking a
good turn of his hand, for his Cause and People. He will take nothing of a
Lown's hand that has defiled himself, and has not been faithful in the little.
Let still that sound in your ears, that he that is faithful in the little,
will be faithful in the much; he that is not faithful in the little, will not
be faithful in the much. I Will wad ye shall see these children, that have gone
that gate, and are keeping their life till a better time, goodsooth I Will wad
that ye shall see an evil time take them. Goodsooth they will look with clear
eyes that ever will see their life do a good turn more in this world. I believe
the most part of them, if not all of them, is kept for a black hour. They will
look with clear eyes, that ever will see them get a good time, or yet be
useful to the Church in this world again.

There are many likewise that have this pretext for their compliance, that they
do what they do that way out of no ill intention, it was upon such good
accounts that they did such and such things, we had no ill intention in so
doing, we intended to wrong no man, far be it from us to persecut or bid any
body do any thing against their Light, we had no ill intention in what we have
don. Ye have a bony pretext of it forsooth! I shall desire any man to search
through all the Scripturs, and see if any such a thing be to be found in them,
of God's stating men's honesty upon good intentions, while the good intentions
brought-forth evil fruit, I never read such a thing in all the Bible. I thought
the Scriptur had said, with the heart man believes, and with the tongue
confession is made unto Salvation: in contending for the matters of God, for
his Cause and interest, hands, tongues and feet are to be made use of. Good
deeds and actions are useful for the Cause of Christ, but for your good
thoughts and intentions, while they have brought forth such bad fruits, as the
apples of Sodom and the grapes of Gomorrah, I have no skill of them. The most
part of those Knaves that say they had good thoughts and intentions, we will
see them the greatest persecuters that the People of God will have. These good
intentions of yours, ye will get a black reward for them, for they have wronged
the church ^arr, and so ye are at the loss and the church both, with those good
intentions of yours.

But in the next place I suppose that this is as ordinary a pretext among us,
for compliance, as any. What could my bare testimony do to it? it could not
turn the chase: all that Party, Side, and Way, that ye say is for Jesus Christ,
they are all dung down, ere ever I sided with any Party. We might well have cast
our selves into hazard, by doing or speaking for that way, but that could never
have don the turn, it would never have turned the chase. What could my speaking
have don, for keeping in the Ministers, when Acts and Laws was for their
casting-out? it would never have don good, I might well have cast my self into
hazard. What could my vote have done for such a man's life, that Acts and Laws
were for the execution of? And when once it was so, what need we hazard our
selves needlessly? For what would the testimony of silly poor lasses and lads
have done?

A bony pretense ye have of it forsooth! I never read it in all the Scripturs
where ever God made a man's foresight of events the measur of his actions in
duty. I never heard that a man was to shift his duty upon that account, because
he thought his duty would not have good consequences. I never understood that
before, that issues and events belonged to us. I weend ay known duty had
belonged to us, but issues and events had belonged to God. Indeed the Prophets,
that the Lord sent forth long since to speak in his Name, had a little more
ground to shift their duty, when God told them the issue and event would not
prove good, yet they durst not for their life shift their duty even in that
case: Go, says he, speak to this People, but they are a stiff-necked and
rebellious people, they will not hear. Will they not hear, might they say, then
we will never speak to them, it is but folly to cast our selves into hazard,
when it needs not. We may as well gang and speak to stocks and stones, and they
will not persecut us, since the thing we speak will have alike effect upon
both. Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, speak ye my word to
them, or their blood will I require at your hand: speak, when God bids you
speak, whether there come evil or good of it; if ye will not, God will make
your tongues to fry and flutter upon the hot coals of Hell, he will garr it
blutter and blyze upon the burning coals of hell. Speak, Sir, when God bids you
speak, or he will garr that tongue that he has put into your mouth, pople and
play in the pow pot of hell. Ye have a bony pretense of it, Man, your bare
testimony will not turn the chase. Sir, did those two Witnesses in the
Revelation, that prophesied in saccloath, by their testimony turn the chase?
yet they were to witness against the abominations of the time, till they were
slain for all that. Folk have gotten a brave gate of it now forsooth, rhat they
will speak nothing for the Cause of Christ now, because that will not turn the
chase. Speak, when God calls you to speak, or he will garr you do worse in a
worse time. At last when Folks have made all the pretenses they can make, in
end they must even come to this, I dought not stand it out for fear, flesh and
blood would not do it, when I considered the hardships, that now the People of
God is in hazard of, of ripping-up of the nose, and cuting-off of the ears and
hands, and losing of the life, it was so terrible to me, while flesh and blood
would not serve me to stand it out. Indeed it is even the best and most honest
pretense of all that ye have had yet from the beginning; yet there is no
consolation to you from this Text, I would have you to remember that the Text
speaks peremptorily, he that seeks to save his life, shall lose it. I have not
a dispensation to grant you from these words, but I shall read-over the good
Text of our Lord Jesus to you, that will speak better for it self than I or any
body that will speak on it, he that seeks to save his life shall lose it. See
if that grants you a dispensation. The man his heart would not serve him to
stand it out, yea but he that seeks to save his life (says the Text) shall
lose it. Alas! my flesh and blood dought not do it, my fear moved me to such a
course, he that seeks to save his life, shall lose it. O! I had great
tentations, many burdens, wife, and children, which my care was engaged for, I
could not get it stood out, he that seeks to save his life shall lose it: a
dreadful word, that may make you all tremble, he that seeks to save his life
shall lose it! Never make a pretext of your own weakness; never make a pretext
of this, that other Folk that had more wit than ye* did such a thing before
you, though ye were not clear in it, yet that ye thought that they behoved to
be clear in it, there is no excuse to you from this, he that seeks to save his
life shall lose it. Ye saw many that ye judged good and godly doing so, that is
no excuse for you, fra ye saw an appearance of evil, he that seeks to save his
life shall lose it. Therefore I charge you in the Name and Authority of our
Lord Jesus Christ, when ye see the Cause of Christ on the one side, and your
Life on the other side, competing and justling against one another, that ye
make a right choice, for the good of the Cause, or ye shall come under the
hazard of this Text, he that seeks to save his life shall lose it.

A Third thing we would speak a word to, is this: 1. What way does the Folk
lose their life; that goes about so preposterously to save their life, either
by committing that which is their sin, or for fear of personal hazard, doing
that which is wrong? 2. How do they lose their lives? 3. What sort of Life is
this, that they lose? 4. What is mean'd, by losing their life?


Here First of all, they lose their life, as they lose life everlasting
thereby, for Christ has in even-down terms said in the words following, He
that denies me before men, him will I deny before the Father and the holy
Angels. In truth then if he deny you, I know not who will own you in that day,
none of all that Court and Side that he is on will own you: but I know another
Court that will own you, believe, even the court and side of all the Devils in
hell, they will own you, they will know you well enough, believe, they will
gather all together about the poor Soul, as so many greedy crows about a
gushorn, every one gripping it straiter in their clooks than another. But none
of that court will own you, all that Court will say, I know you not, although
ye were their born brother: they dare not say, they know you in that day, if
Christ know you not: it is everlasting life that ye will lose, my Dove, by
taking such preposterous ways, to save it, that is a sore word, O! but that is a
great pawn, ye lose life, as thereby ye will lose life everlasting. O! that is a
pawn ye shall never exchange again, -- what shall a man give in exchange for
his Soul? Prove your loyalty to your Prince by losing of your Soul that gate.

Secondly, They lose their natural life, as God's blessing to them. Man's
natural life, while God calls him not to lay it down, is God's blessing to him;
but if God call for it, and he lay it not down, it is no more God's blessing to
him, but God's curse; he holds it no more of God, but of the Devil in hell: the
saving of his life is God's plague and vengeance on him, his life after that is
God's plague and curse to him, he holds it no more of God: and that time, when
God calls for his life, and he lays it not down, he forfeits his right holding
of his life in God, and fo he loses his life, as he loses God's blessing upon
his natural life, he has lost his life as God's blessing, and he holds it as
God's curse, he shall never have power again by his life to committ a good
deed, all the actions again proceeding from that life shall be cursed, cursed
in his in-going and in his outgoing, in his basket, and in his store, and in
every thing he does: he may build houses, and buy land after that, but all
shall be accursed, all the actions proceeding from that cursed life shall be
cursed, live they long, or live he short, the curse of God shall fall upon him,
though he should live to be the sinner of an hundred years old, he shall be
accursed, his life cursed, his actions cursed, all that he does shall be but
fuel to the curse of God that shall light broad flaught upon him, he shall eat,
and drink, and wear in the curse of God, he shall feed and live upon the curse
of God, and the curse of God shall feed and live upon him, he shall hold bed
and board on the curse of God, and the curse of God shall hold bed and board on
him, that way they shall lose their life, they shall lose it as God's blessing.

Thirdly: The man that goes thus preposterously about to save his life, he
shall lose his life so, as within alittle he shall lose the comfort of his
life, within alittle he shall be full of Hells sorrow, hells terror shall seize
upon him, the worm that never dies shall begin an inward gnawing at his heart,
the worm of an ill conscience rugging at his heart, and intrals of him, like a
canker-worm drawing at his leaver, an inward flame like the fire of hell ready
to burn him up within, ere ever death come, to take-away the cursed carcass of
him, the gnawing worm that never dies shall ever draw at the conscience of
him, like a greedy glade riving at a gushorn ay as if the Devil were within
going to rive out the Soul at his broad side, and to run away to hell with it.
God will kindle the fire of hell in the heart of him, wherein he shall find
that hungry worm like the Devil, drawing at the heart of him, drawing-out the
soul and intrals of him, like a few hungry glades riving at a gushorn, thou
shall never have rest henceforth, but an inward gnawing and rugging at the
heart, till thou be fully possessed in everlasting flames. Gang thy way, man, if
thou have wronged the Cause of Christ for fear of thy life, I would not have an
hour of thy life for all the gold of Gawry.

Fourthly: This man loses his life another way more formally, as God upon this
account for the man's seeking to save his life, garres his life gang upon a
miserable account, and that many times or long as the just reward of his sin;
he dies in the midst of his days, God garres him make some tykes testament, he
does not dye properly, he is cut off in the midst of his days, he disownes God
and betrays the cause for fear of his life, ere ever he wit, God clieks him
off. He had an honorable opportunity to have let his life go, but he would not
let it go, so God garres him let it go upon a more miserable account, and very
readily God garres his life gang by that self same mean that he took to save
his life: it is like their eyes are open now that will see the like of that yet,
now will ever we see that day that the Declaration, and the Service Book, and
keeping days of men's invention, will be the highway to garr some folk lose
their life. Will ye have patience a little? Ye shall either see that day, or ye
shall say I had no skill of preaching, or of the mind of God, ye will see this,
that those folks that have betrayed the People of God, have most of all
betrayed their own life, they think they have gotten a safe-gate for their life
now, as ever man had, for they have made the King Head of the Church, and they
shall be of any Religion that ever he likes to bring through the Land, that
they may save their life. Goodsooth that will not workyet, all that will not
bide you, that will even but bring you the sooner to the gallows, that will
garr your bones whistle in the wind some day. Will the taking of the
Declaration do your turn, think ye? God will garr the taking of that
Declaration, that many a man thinks to be the safety of his life, that way of
the safety of his life will garr his head weigh his tail yet, and his bones
whistle in the wind. All those shifts will but the sooner bring them to the
gallows: ye must come to the gallows for these shifts that ye take against the
Light of your own Conscience. Ye will to the gallows, for all the plots that ye
plot against the People of God. Wicked Haman must to the gallows, for all the
plot that he plots so deep against the People. Ye think that these laws, that
ye make against the People of God, will only bring them to distress, sorrow,
and bonds. Yea but they will garr your bones whistle in the wind, for all that.
The readyest way to bring folk to a miserable hinder-end, is, that wicked
Declaration. What would ye think of such a cast of kindness from God's hand, as
that to make your mischief turn upon your own head? Wicked Haman's plots and
contriving cruelty against the People of God most haste to help him to haste
him to the gallows. Haman may make many decrees, but he must to the gallows,
ere he see them put to execution. What would ye think, if those laws that they
are making against the People of God, to bring them to ruin, bring their own
carcases to the gallows? These their Acts and Laws that they are making
against the People of God, is the way in all the world to hasten themselves to
a miserable hinder-end. The sinful way, that a man takes for the safety of his
life, proves the very mean and way of his overthrow, and so will come of them
yet.

Now, what is the reason of this, that he, that seeks to save his life, shall
come to a miserable hinder-end that way that he seeks to save it?

Answ. The reason is the righteousness of God: God is a Righteous God, that is
even the reason of it; God is a Righteous God, he will make it known to all the
world that he is an Upright God, and that there is no unrighteousness in him.
He is righteous in this, to rain snares on such wicked Souls, that lay snares
before the consciences of his People. The Righteous God loves Righteousness,
as ye heard in the morning, upon the hinder-end of that Psalm, that we
lectur'd on; the way that the man went to save his life, when God called him to
lay it down, he is a Righteous God to garr his life gang by that way which he
looks to save it, the man that before Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon, und the
World, makes such a choice, as God has forbidden to save his life; God is
Righteous to hold him at his choice, and that way to bring him to a miserable
hinder-end. I offered you life eternal, Peace of Conscience, the way to save
your life for ever, ye would not, but ye would have your ventur on a way of
your own. Well, as I live, says God, I shall take you at your word, that choice
shall you make, that ye have made, and that choice shall be your ruin, ye shall
take the holding of your life in that choice, that ye have made; ye shall never
get more of me, ye have no more to crave of me. Now, God is a Righteous God in
this. Well now, for the Use of the Doctrine,

First of all, Ye would labor to know with your self, in what hazard your life
is in, when the Cause of Christ is upon the stage, ye would reckon with your
selves, how many ways ye may run the hazard of your life, when Christ's Cause
is upon the stage, either by not doing and omitting that which ye should do, or
by committing and doing that which ye should not do, it were not amiss to
consider these hazards, and what the Scriptur speaks of folks seeking to save
their lives, any of these ways.

Secondly: Do not hold up, nor satisfy your selves with any of your broken
pretenses, that I have named, or others, that I have not named, they hold no
weight before God, ye must be even-down in the matter, for he that seeks any
way to save his life, shall lose it. Ye need not speak of this, there is Law
and Authority for such a false cause; ye need not speak of your proving your
loyalty to your Prince, that way; ye need never pretend that such a way ye
thought best for peace; ye need never pretend your usefulness to God's People,
by your taking such a gate; ye need never say, ye are keeping your life till a
better time; ye need never tell us, ye had no ill intentions, or that your bare
testimony would not have don good: these are fools devices, he that seeks to
save his life, shall lose it. That word has more weight, than all the foolish
intentions and pretexts that ye have, he that seeks to save his life, shall
lose it.

Thirdly: Let me obtest you, as ye love your own life, as ye love the life of
your Soul, and your natural life, as God's blessing, and not as God's curse,
and as ye love the comfort of your life, and life it self; then by all these I
obtest you to make a right choice: it is like ere long your life may come upon
the stage for Christ and his Cause, and ye may get it in your option, to save
or to lose your life, with denial or not denial of the Cause. Now as ye love
the life of your souls, and a blessing upon your natural life the comfort of
your life, the keeping of your life, make a right choice.

Fourthly: Sirs, Never covet the life of those that have kept their life by
wronging the Cause of Christ, covet not their life, I say, therefore. Have they
not a brave life of it? God save me and all that I good would from a trial of
it, for all that? will ye let alone, for all that, if ye had a trial of it,
within a little ye would think it worse than the most miserable death that ever
a man dyed. One dying not long ago may be exemplary for this, it is a brave
testimony that he gave for this, lying on his deathbed, I would not (says he)
bide one night again, as I have had, for that Declaration, for all the World.
When heard ye one of our side, that ever said the like of that, for taking the
Covenant, and abiding by it? God be thanked, we will get some of the other
side, that will say so for taking of that Declaration, albeit they be scarce as
yet, nevertheless I hope there shall be more of them, ere it be long. I say,
covet not their life: black and miserable is the life that some of them have of
it, a fearful looking for of the Soul to be rugged out of them, the worm that
never dies ay sitting rugging at the heart of them, where the life sits, the
broad curse of God upon their life and all that they gather together with their
hands, as the work of their life, God's curse upon all holding bed and board of
them, and it may be that make a sad sight to be seen of some of them and all
that they have, what they are. That is a dreadful thing, beside the inward
worm gnawing with terror, like a worm rugging at the mawe of them, ready to
rugg-out the very miserable life, that they would fain be quite of, which God
shall within a little cause to gang in the favor of the Devil, in the midst of
their days. Therefore, Sirs, covet not their life, they have a miserable life
of it; yet, Sirs, upon the other hand, ye must ever pity poor folk in this
case, for their tentation was even very great, as I was saying to you before,
Now, that we may end this doctrine, observe here the righteous wisdom of God in
destroying men's lives, who for fear of personal hazard seek to save them, with
prejudice to Christ and his Cause, who love their lives better than Christ's
Cause, and so wrong it, for the safety of their life. Ye may see much of that
now adays, and if ye live long, ye will see more of it, there may be much of
it seen already, if ye see a man falling into a snare, to enrich himself, as
indeed ye will get hundreds not far off, O then admire the Righteous Wisdom of
God, in that ye see a man seeking to save his life, and falling into a mischief
by that, admire the righteousness of God in it, if ye see my complying with
that wicked Party, for fear of their life, or for fear of their means, admire
the righteous wisdom of God in this, for making that a snare, for destroying of
their life, which they made use of, for a mean to save their lives.

So much for this Doctrine.
Matthew. 16: 20. Then charged he his Disciples that they should tell no man that
he was Jesus the Christ.
YE have heard several reasons of this inhibition served upon this Truth in the
mouth of the Disciples, which does not warrant any man to conceal this gracious
Truth, unless they have a peremptory command for the doing of it, as the
Disciples here had. He did it as a Minister, not seeking his own glory, he did
it as much pitying the Disciples in their weak and unsettled condition,
because they could not well maintain that Truth before the Jews and learned
Rabbis, which Truth was controverted then, they being then unsettled, until
the Spirit was poured-out upon them from on high, that the Son of Man was
risen. He did it also as a plague upon the Jews, because they abused this
truth, therefore as a just punishment and recompense of their sin, he lays on
an arrestment on the Truth, that they should tell no man, that he was Jesus the
Christ, the Savior of sinners, the King, Priest, and Prophet of his People. He
did it as a recompense of the sins of many for the accusing of the Truth. But
one of the greatest Reasons of this inhibition was to make way for another
glorious design, which was on foot in Heaven anent Christ's suffering at
Jerusalem, for, says the Apostle, if they had known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. Jesus Christ knowing that he behooved to go to
Jerusalem, and suffer, and to redeem the world, and so he sets them at liberty
to crucify him, by their not knowing that he was the Lord of glory, and so he
leaves them to a latitude to persecut and crucify him, that so he might
accomplish the great design that his Father and He had on foot anent the
Redemption of the World. And the Doctrine I shall here hold forth upon this
Reason of the inhibition is this, that the Lord by the most uncouth and strange
Dispensation in his Church brings about the most glorious Purposes and Works of
God, that can be imagined in the world. There was no Dispensation almost that
was more uncouth and more strange, and more dark, and more desperate-like, than
this was, Let no body know that I am the Christ, Let none know that I am the
Savior of the world, yet all was don by the burial of that Truth. The Lord
Jesus Christ brought about the most glorious work that ever was wrought for his
Church, which was by the death of a stain Christ, which was occasioned here
some way by his hiding of this Truth from those that were to crucify him. I
say, the Lord uses by the most strange and uncouth dispensation in his Church,
to bring about the most glorious purposes and advantageous works for the good
of his Church of any in the world. In following out this Doctrine, I shall
speak to these few things: First, we shall speak a little of strange and
uncouth dispensations, that fall-out in the Church, and then a word to what
those glorious works of God are, that are brought about by those glorious
dispensations. 3. We shall give you some instances, by which it will appear
that the Lord by the sadest and uncouthest dispensations, that ever fell-out in
the Church, has brought about the greatest and most advantageous work for her.
And in the close of the Doctrine we shall speak a word of Reason, why the Lord
chooses this way, for bringing about such glorious works and purposes by such
uncouth and strange dispensations. For the First, We call Dispensations uncouth
and strange and dreadfull-like, when things, as it were, fall out by a kind of
special Providence, yet do justle with the revealed Word of God and his
commands, such as a lie put into the mouth of Jacob by Rebekkah, there was a
kind of secret Providence in the thing that justled with the command of God,
yet ye know there came some strange advantage to him thereby. So Esther ye know
came in the place of Vasthi the Queen, this did exceedingly justle against the
command of God, for the Jews should not have entered in marriage with any of
that place that was not in Covenant with God, this seemed to justle against the
command of God, yet ye know how this did amount to the good and advantage of
the Kingdom of Christ. So the sons of Jacob fell upon the Shechemites: that was
an uncouth dispensation, the poor man was justled exceedingly for that living
among strangers, yet there came a great advantage for Jacob out of that; Jacob
had too long rested in that nest, therefore says he, Arise Jacob, and go to
Bethel. 2. We call Dispensations strange and uncouth, as they justle with
promises, predictions or prophecys of the Lord's great things toward his
People; ye know he endeavored for the People of Israel to bring them out of
the Land of Egypt, it makes the burden seven-times worse, their task is
doubled, this justled with God's promises or prophecyes of coming out of Egypt,
a bonny beginning indeed, there is not one of them will come out of it, their
task is doubled, yet by these things he brought about their delivery
gloriously, for great advantage to them, and great ruin to their enemies.
Hamans promotion with all his followers to the court of the King, it did
directly justle against the oath that he had sworn he would have war with
Amalek for ever, Haman is so high, that he is like to overthrow all his Church
and followers, that was an uncouth dispensation, yet his height overthrew him
for evermore. 3. We call dispensations uncouth, as they justle against the
People of God, and as they difficult all the People of God, so as they cau not
extricat themselves out of that plunge, nor know what way to do it, these are
uncouth and strange dispensations. The People of Israel in their march out of
Egypt instead of liberty and freedom of march God straitens them all betwixt
Pharaoh and the red Sea, with a rock on every hand, there was no escape there,
that was an uncouth dispensation, yet that made way for a glorious out-gate for
them and the utter overthrow of the enemy for ever. Yea says Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, they are entangled in the land of Israel, the wilderness has shut
them in, we have gotten you in an hose-net. Yea, goodman, crack at leisur, it
will be as good fishing you with an hose-net to morrow ere this time. 4. We
call dispensations uncouth and strange, as in themselves they are destructive
to the purposes and works he intends to bring about, as they are in themselves
destructive to these purposes, they are uncouth enough. Why are they not? As
for example, the Lord buryeth a truth of great importance, lets men lay a great
stone upon it, and say it shall never rise again, then he brings up that truth
again more glorious than ever. When he intends to make a truth famous on the
earth, then he lets bury it; that is an uncouth and strange providence and
dispensation: this was the dispensation here mentioned in the Text, let no body
know that I am the Christ; once says he, bury that truth. I forbid you to tell
any body that Truth. That Is a strange dispensation, it seems to be destructive
to the whole Covenant of Grace. Nay but bury it for all that, for I shall garr
it rise with a thousand advantages more than ever yet; he has a sweet sharp
hand in these things, yes truly he has a sellon gate to make contraries work
for good. I confess it is a bare moor that he goes over, and gets nothing; that
dispensation never fell-out in the Church, but he gets ay an harle of it, for
the good and advantage of the Church and People of God. I say then there are
many uncouth and strange dispensations, now some of them justling with
commands, some with promises and predictions, some of them difficulting all the
People of God, putting them all to their wits end, some of them of them selves
destructive to the purposes he intends, yet by all those he will bring about
the most glorious purposes and works for the good of his Church in the world.
This is the cross wheel that appears in a wheel, whose spoaks are dreadful for
height, and full of eyes; this is the wisdom of God in his dealing with his
Church going out of all men's sight, whereby he intends to bring about glorious
things for his Church.

The second thing we would speak to, is, what are those most glorious works and
purposes of God for his Church, that he intends to bring-in by uncouth,
dispensations. In a word, we mean by those such works and purposes as do
minister occasion for the administration of the glorious attributes of God,
whereby they may be gloriously seen for the good and advantage of the Church,
such works and purposes as do manifestly bear ground to discover mercy to his
friends, justice to his enemies, and God discovered thereby his glorious
wisdom, faithfulness, holiness and justice exercised both to friends and
enemies; I mean these glorious works and purposes, that offer in them a
discovery of the Attributes of God, an evident discovery of Mercy for his
People, and an evident discovery of justice toward his adversaries, those are
the glorious Works, that are brought about by strange and uncouth dispensations.

The third thing, I would here speak a word to, is, to give some instances
wherein ye may see the truth of the doctrine many instances may be given in
Scriptur, I shall reduce them to these few Heads, 1. Take the dispensation or
providence that was first managed in man's sin, and is still managed yet in
man's transgressions, and ye shall find by the most uncouth and dread full-like
dispensations the most glorious works of God fall-out for his Church: I shall
mention but two Particulars in all that Head of Providence, the one was Adam's
fall; Adam's fall was a most dreadful dispensation, it justled exceedingly
with the command of God, and with promises, and was destructive in it self to
his advantage, yet thereby the Lord brings about a better state for Adam and
his posterity, than they were in before, thereby he did bring about admirable
mercy to his Friends, and admirable justice to his Enemies, which will be seen
for admiration, to the world's end, and for evermore. 2. Consider even in the
ordinary falls of his People into sin, these are uncouth dispensations, yet I
hope ye will all grant that the Lord lets his People be broken thereby? that he
may the more and the surer many times bind them up. It Is true ye should
abominat every evil way, and ye may not sin, that grace may abound, yet it is as
true in this respect, I may say, that grace has many times super abounded,
when sin has abounded: the thing wherein it holds true, that uncouth and
strange dispensations bring about a most glorious work, which I shall instance
was in that dispensation, which was managed in the Church of God before shown,
to Egypt there was an uncouth dispensation falls-out, yet always glorious: in
end, of all Jacob's bairns Joseph was the best bairn of all the coupe, he was
thinking on and dreaming of some things, and he is ay telling something of
them, for anger of that they will take-away his life, yet, as it fell-out, they
sell him to the Egyptians into Egypt, where the dreamer and all his dreams now,
quoth they? There is an uncouth dispensation, what shall become of the Kirk
now, for the special man, that should keep her alive, is sold a slave? This was
an uncouth dispensation, yet a dispensation most useful for the Church of any
dispensation that could fall-out. Hold your tongues, says Joseph to his
brethren, God is wise enough in this, much shame and lack belongs to you for
your selling of me, but God was wise enough for all that, he brought it about
for good; and then ye know the uncouth dispensation that was tristed with the
Church in Egypt, what sad things they met with, before they went forth from it,
that justled against both commands prophecys, and predictions, after promised
liberty their bondage grows ay the longer the worse, then they resolve to slay
all the male-children, but truly they never throve fast till then there is an
uncouth providence, the decree comes out to slay all the men children, but it is
said, the more they slew, the more they increased. Now but ye may think they
had grown many of them, and they had not slain none of them in faith, ye are
all mistaken, there would never have been so many of them, the more they slew,
the more they increased, and that way God brought them to be above these lowns,
wherein they were cruel, well yet the dispensation grows ay the more and the
more uncouth, the King grows ay angryer and angryer: angryer may he be, shame
nor he burst at the broad side for anger, but if his anger should rive him all
a bitts, they shall come out of Egypt that day, 400 years that they entered in,
and so they did, ye would even be telling their things now, Sirs, to one
another, and then ye know the sad dispensation they were exercised with, after
they went out of Egypt, before they came to the land of Canaan, when the red
sea is before them, and a rock on every hand, and Pharaoh and all his host
behind, this was the uncouthest dispensation of all, yet by it came the most
glorious work of all, for then they were made fully and for ever quite of
Pharaoh and all his company, they were never troubled more with them, God sets
ay all his enemies once fair a foot on the field, he gives ay a good account of
his enemies once in the field, and some to the sword, but the next time they
are sought, they are not to be found. Ye need not think that these days are
all away, in truth I think they are but even coming, yet many of them whenever
God gives over good an account of the adversaries of the Church, they had need
to say their last prayers, for truly they are near a close. Fra once Pharaoh
and all his host came out of Egypt, he had need to have fallen to his last
prayers with it, for he was near an end, and then ye know what difficulties
they met with in the wilderness and in the land of Canaan, and yet all of these
brought about a most glorious work, in end theirs are right brave wives tales,
to tell about the fireside at night: there was another uncouth providence
falls out in David's time anent the three years famine that was upon the Church,
that all the land was like to be starved with hunger, many would think that was
an unhappy dispensation, but truly it was one of the happyest dispensations
that ever fell out in the Church, for were it not these years of famine, the
dreadfulness of the breach of sacred oaths to God had never been known, and
then ye know what uncouth-like dispensations fall out upon the Church in
Esthers days, the enemies of the Jews, there is all at a very great height,
they having gotten authority on their side, they have all the People of God
forehand hanged, for they had a Religion that other Folks knew not, this
uncouth dispensation brought about the most glorious work imaginable for the
overthrow of all the enemies of the Church. It Is not believed what good God
brings about for the Church by uncouth and strange dispensations, that when the
wicked spring as the grass, and are as the green bay tree, it is that they may
be cut off for ever. Brutish men know not this, that when the wicked are
brought to a great height, it is that they may be cutoff for ever, it is the
forerunner of the dreadful vengeance of God upon them, when he raises them
to a great height, that it is that his vengeance may cut them off for ever, and
then ye know the sad things that befell the Church at Babylon, ye know what
decrees came out there against those that worshipped the True God: if any man
seek but a suit from the King for so many days, he shall be cast into the den
of Lions; if any man worship not the image which Nebuchadnezzar has set-up, he
shall be cast into the fiery furnace. This was a dreadful dispensation, that
these laws and decrees should have been settled by the Kings of the Earth,
against whom there was no rising-up. Nay but there were as many bony decrees
came out the back of these again, if any man speak a word against the God of
Heaven, they shall be cast into the Den of Lions, and a midden made of their
houses, they shall rot in the Earth; no God can save in the manner that this
God can do. In truth I think, though one had sworn it to you, if it had not
been in the Book of God, ye should not have believed it, I doubt if ye believe
it well as it is. Bot believe this, if ye will, that uncouth and strange
dispensations bring about glorious works of God for the good of the Church, I
know well ye have many instances of it, the great part of the Bible clears it,
and the Book will be believed by better than ever stood on your shinnes. The
weakest turns that ever fell out in the Church that way, he made them ay the
strongest turns. I can not help it that ye will not believe it, but it is true
enough.

Bot next there is many instances of this under the New Testament also, for he
is even that same God under the New Testament that he was under the Old. The
First great and remarkable thing, that fell out under the New Testament, was
the destruction of Jerusalem, and the abomination that makes desolat, set-up in
the midst thereof. This was a dreadful thing, the place of the public worship
of the Lord is all dung down and overthrown. Yea bot we are all obliged to God
for that, for all that the Lord took occasion by that to build many a Kirk in
these lands, the Lord set up a Christian Church better than ever that was, he
brought out a good turn out of that evil. And there was another remarkable
thing fell out there at Jerusalem, anent the Jews persecution at Jerusalem,
there is nothing then bot heading and hanging, drugging and drawing to prisons,
all the twelve Apostles are put away, and there may be no more public
preaching, all the Apostles and ministers must be banished and put away, no man
may speak more in the Name of the Lord. In truth that was a canny gate that
they took, for truth, for if they had sitten seven years in a general assembly
to have spread truth, and made it famous through the Earth, they took the ready
way and the shortest cut, that was an happy luck that that Persecution rose, it
would have been long ere our wit had brought it that way about, that way the
Gospel came to us, we were unworthy of it, bot God was good that gave us it for
all that, it was even by that dispensation and the like, whereby God took
occasion to send the Gospel over to these Islands. Whenever God had a mind to
make some Truth eminently glorious, then he let it ay fall into some Enemies
hand to suppress and bury it, and by the burial of it he made it to rise again,
and be the most famous Truth upon the Earth. And the last tale I shall tell you
about it, is this, and it is even the last that will be, and that is, Gog and
Magog will even gather together to rout-out the Church, and then when they are
all well drawn up, and fair on the field, God will even make an end of all
together, and soon decide the controversy that way; they will all gather up,
and then God will even make an end of them. God hasten that day of their
gathering together. For if they were all once well gathered together, God will
make us quite of them. So goodsooth ye wiil find the Pope and the Turk take
even other by the hand, to drive one design, the Pope and the Turk and
Prelates and Malignants will even all shake hands together, and draw up fair
once in the field, for the swallowing-up of the Church, Lord hasten them all
fair afoot on the field, that so the poor sad People of God may see a good
sport in the downcome. For if they were once well drawn-up, there should be a
sudden down-come, God would make us quite of them, that gate. We must even
wait-on a while, until they draw better up; bot if they were all well drawn-up,
I assure you we would not need to wait long afterward.

Now for Reason why the Lord takes such uncouth dispensations, to bring about
his glorious Work and Purposes for the good of the Church, it is even for this,
that he may discover the hearts of all men, much weakness in some, much
wickedness in others; he lets poor silly weak things even babble on, and every
one tell their own tale, and thereby discovers their weakness, and others, he
gives them opportunity to vent the malice that is in their hearts, and thereby
discovers their wickedness, a sword shall pierce through manies hearts, that
the hearts of many may be disclosed. He does it also, that he himself may be
the more seen in his glorious work for the Church, that no body may say they
have a hand in that work, to ascribe glory to themselves, but that the Lord
alone way be exalted. Now for Use of this Doctrine, I would have you all
considering with your selves that there is now a junctur of strange
dispensations concurring together upon the Church at this time, as ever was
upon the Kirk of God. Are not those that should feed the Lord's People with the
Word of Life, sold as slaves? of the People of God under bondage? the
Sanctuaries of the Lord all thrown down and desolat? the Ministry thrust-out,
a number of them, and the rest of them ready to be thrust-away? unrighteous
decrees multiplying day after day? This is a clear thing to you all, the
adversaries of our Lord Jesus and his Church are all at an eminency, and on
foot, so that I dare say, the hearts of many of the Godly are at a stand, about
what will become of all, there is such a junctur of difficulties and dreadful
dispensations rolled over upon us.

Now is there any of you that has a heart to believe in this case, that the
result of this shall be the most glorious work for the good of the Church, that
ever came about? Have ye an heart to believe this truth? I dare say ye want
nothing, but an heart to believe it. Do ye believe this, that these uncouth
dispensations shall bring about the most glorious works, that ever our eyes
saw? This will be, whether ye believe it or not. God never brought about such
an uncouth dispensation, but he brought about a most glorious work at the back
of it. Christ Jesus is, in a manner, now dead and buried: goodsooth his being
buried will make him victorious over them all. The uncouthest dispensation that
ever was, brought ay about the most glorious Work for the Church. No body has
an heart to believe this. Has any of you an heart to believe this Doctrine. that
the whole tenor of the Bible holds out that the Lord by uncouth dispensations
brings ay about a most glorious work for the good of the Church? Have ye an
heart to believe this? Has any of you that Charity to give God, that believes
all things, and hopes all things, without which though a man would give all his
goods to the poor, and his body to be burnt, it were an unacceptable sacrifice.
Ye must have that charity, that bodes ay luck on God's hand, and thinks ay
liberally of him. Have ye an heart to believe this, that the generation to come
will have the Lord to bless, for strange and uncouth Dispensations? Every
generation yet had the Lord to bless, for the uncouth dispensations that were
tristed with their forefathers Has any of you an heart to believe that the
generation to come will have the Lord to bless, for these uncouth dispensations
that now we are tristed with? The Truths of God are now buried, the Covenant is
buried; that great Truth [that CHRIST is sole HEAD of his CHURCH, and LORD over
the CONSCIENCES of Men] is now buried. Now has any of you an heart to believe
it, that the burial of the Covenant will be the resurrection and glory of the
Covenant? Has any of you an heart to believe this? It will be true enough,
believe it as ye will, that burial of the Covenant shall be the resurrection
and glory of the Covenant: it shall be seen, to their everlasting shame, that
it was an uncanny gate that they took for themselves, to break the Covenant,
that day they broke it, and burnt it at the Cross of London. If they had sitten
seven years in a General Assembly, contriving how to make it a famous Covenant,
they fell upon the right gate that day. Have ye an heart to believe this? It
will be true, whether ye will believe it or not. The burial of the Covenant
shall be the glory of the Covenant.

Now this is a controverted Truth, that CHRIST is sole HEAD and KING of his
CHURCH, and LORD over the CONSCIENCES of Men; his Laws and Officers are
rejected, and the King's Laws and Officers are chosen. Now, has any of you an
heart to believe this, that the burial of this Truth shall make it the most
famous Truth on the Earth? The most glorious days of the Church of God are ay
brought about by the most sad and dark days. Therefore let us rest in hope,
and endure patiently.

FINIS.

