MASTER GRIMSTON HIS WORTHY AND LEARNED SPEECH: SPOKEN In the High Court of
PARLIAMENT. CONCERNING TROUBLES ABROAD, AND GREEVANCES AT HOME. SHOWING The
inward Symptoms and Causes of all our fears and Dangers. And what probability
there is of Reformation, in case due punishment be speedily executed on
Incendiaries, and chief Causers of those Distractions, that have oppressed our
Church, and Commonwealth.



London, Printed for W. H. 1641.

Master GRIMSTON HIS Learned Speech in Parliament.
Mr Speaker,
There has now a great and weighty business bin presented to this house, and a
Letter has bin read importing a dicesion of the Kings natural Subjects.

Mr. Speaker, this is a great case, and very worthy of the consideration and
advisement of this great Counsel; but J am very much mistaken, if there be not
a case here at home, of as great a danger as that now put to be abroad, the one
stands without the door (for so dangers from thence, in all our histories,
have ever bin termed:) but the case that I would put, is a case of danger
already upon our backs.

And in those great cases of danger, which so much concern the welfare of the
body politic we ought to do in them like skillfull Physicians that are not
led in their judgments so much by the outward expressions of a Disease, as by
the inward Symptoms, and causes of it. For it fares with a body politic, as
it does with a body natural: It is impossible to cure an ulcerous body,
unless you first cleanse the veins, and purge the body from those
obstructions, and pestilentiall humors that overcharge Nature, and being once
done too, botches, blaines, and scabs, that grew upon the superficies and
outside of the body, dry up, shed, and fall away of themselves.

Mr. Speaker, the danger that has now bin presented to the house, it stands
at a far distance, and J wish heartily, that it were further off; yet as it
stands at a far distance, it is so much the less dangerous. But the case that
J shall put, is a case of great danger here at home, domestique: and therefore
so much the more dangerous, because it is homebred, and runs in the veins.

And, Mr. Speaker, if the one shall appear, to be of as great danger, as the
other, J hope it will not be thought unreasonable at this time, to put the one
as well as the other; And the case that I would put, is this.

The Charter of our liberties called Magna Charta was granted unto us by King
John,; which was but a renovation and a restitution of the ancient Laws of
this Kingdom. This Charter was afterward in the succession of several ages,
confirmed unto us above thirty several times, and in the third year of his
Majesty's reign that now is, we had no more then a bare confirmation of it.
For we had an Act declaratory past, and then to put it out of all question and
dispute for the future, his Majesty by his gtatious answer, Soit droit comme
est desire, invested it with the title of Petition of right,

Master Speaker.

It may be some may object, Parturiunt montes etc I promised to present the
house with a case of very great danger here at home, but the Mountain at last
has brought forth nothing but a Mouse, That this case is not worthy the name
of a case, and so not worthy the putting.

And truly, for mine own part, J should have bin of the same opinion (had not
some expositors, contrary to the Laws of God, and Man, and reason, and J am
sure contrary to the Dictamen of their own Consciences) marred the text with
their expositions, undermining the liberty of the Subjects, with new invented
subtle distinctions, and assuming to themselves a power (I know not where they
had it) out of Parliament, to supercede, annihilate and make void the Laws of
this Kingdom.

What sad effects, these ways and opinions have produced, I am confident, his
Majesty has neither seen nor heard, as we have felt them. And it is now his
Majesty's goodness and Piety, to give us leave to speak them, and to present
them with our Greevances, which are not few.

Mr. Speaker, the Commonwealth has bin miserably torn and macerated, and all
the proprieties, and Liberties shaken: the Church distracted, the Gospel and
Professors of it persecuted, and the whole Kingdom overrun with Multitudes,
and swarms of projecting Cater-wormes, and Caterpillars, the worst of all the
Egyptian Plagues.

Then as the case now stands with us, I conceive there are two poinis very
considerable.

The first is, what has bin done any way to impeach the Liberty of the
Subject, contrary to the Petition of Right.

The second is, who have bin the Authors and Causers of it.

Mr. Speaker, the serious examination and decision of those two questions, do
highly concern his Majesty in the point of Honor, and his subjects in the
point of Interest: and all that I shall say to it is but the words that Ezra
did to King Artaxerxes, to the setlement of that State: which at that time was
as much out of frame and order* as ours is at this present; and which cured
theirs, I hope will cure ours. His words were these.

Whosoever has not done the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgment
be speedily executed upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or
unto Confication of goods, or to Imprisonment.

Now, M. Speaker, it may be some do think this a strange text, and is it
possible! Some may think it as strange a case. As for the text, every man may
read it, that will. And for the case, I am afraid there are but few here,
which do not experimentally know it, to be as bad as I have put it: And how to
mend a bad case, is part of the business we met about. His Majesty has
graciously confirmed unto us, our great and ancient privilege of Freedom af
Speech: and having his Kingly word for it, J shall rest confidently upon it, as
the greatest security under heaven. And whilst J have the honor to have a
place here, I shall with humility be bound to express my self as a Freeman.

The Diseases and Distempers that are now in our body politic, are grown to
that height, that they pray for, and importune a Cure. And his Majesty out of
his tender care, and Affection to his people, like a nursing Father, has now
freely offered himself to hear our prayers and Complaints.

Mr. Speaker,

We cannot complain that we want good Laws; for the wit of man cannot invent
better then are already made; There want only some Examples, that such as have
been the Authors, and causets of all miseries, and distractions in Church and
Common wealth, contrary to those good Laws which be like TREAKLE to expel the
poison of mischief out of others,

But my part is but ostendere Portam, and rherefore having put the Case, I must
leave it to the judgment of this house, whether our dangers here at home be
not as great and considerable; as that which was even now presented.

FINIS.

