Mr. GRIMSTON HIS SPEECH, At the Committee sitting in Guild Hall on Thursday
the 6. of January 1641.

Concerning the breaches of the privileges of Parliament; by breaking open the
Chambers, Studies, and Trunks of the Lord Kimbolton, and the rest of the
members of the House of Commons, accused by His Majesty of high Treason.

Whereupon, The same day there was a declaration agreed upon, and published,
for the preservation of their privileges, and protection of their Members from
the like violence in time to come.

Printed at London for B. W. 1642.

Mr. GRIMSTON His Speech, at the Committee sitting in Guild Hall on Thursday
the sixth of January, 1641.
M. SPEAKER,
THere is no Courts of Judicature within this Kingdom of England, but have
several rights and privileges appertaining and belonging unto them: and have
such power and authority in the several jurisdictions of the same, that they
may call to an account, prosecute, and bring to judgment the infringers and
breakers of the same. Of all these Courts there is none, yea put them all
together, they are not of such power and jurisdiction, but inferior and
subject to the Ordinances and Statutes of the high Court of Parliament.

M. Speaker, Of such awful predominance is the very name of a Parliament to
this Nation, that it strikes with terror and despair all such evil doers as
are malefactors in the State: on the contrary side, it cheares and comforts the
drooping Spirits of men groaning under the burden of tyrannical oppression
inflicted on them unjustly and maliciously by unmercifull and wicked men that
have usurped to themselves places and offices of power and authority both in
Church and State.

M. Speaker, This great and high Court is not only the powerfullest of all
other Courts whatsoever, but the prudentest and wisest, made and compacted not
only of men sound in Religion, well learned, but ripe in their judgments,
contracted from all parts of this Kingdom, elected and chosen with the free
consent of the whole body politic of the Kingdom. This great and high
Council is not only of such power and wisdom, but endowed and attended with
the most and greatest privileges of all others; yea, so great are the
privileges thereof, that not only the meanest of his Majesty's Subjects, but
the greatest personages of the Kingdom are in danger, if infringers of the
same, to be called in question and by them punished therefore. Give me leave M.
Speaker, to speak somewhat of the privileges in particular, incident and
appertaining to this wise Senate: and in speaking thereof, I shall observe
these three particulars: first, the rights and privileges belonging to the
same, in the free votes and judicature thereof. Secondly, the rights and
privileges belonging to the power and jurisdiction thereof; and thirdly, the
rights and privileges in the continuance thereof, being freely called and
assembled by his Majesty's royal authority, not to be dissolved or broken off
till all things agitated therein for the good both of Church and Commonwealth,
be fully concluded and determined.

First, M. Speaker, concerning the privileges of a Parliament belonging to the
free votes and judicature thereof, I shall observe these particulars: first, to
speak freely without interruption or contradiction in any debate, dispute, or
argument, upon any business agitated in the same being a member thereof, I
conceive to be one privilege of a Parliament.

Secondly, not to be questioned, for any such free dispute, argument, or
debate, to be taxed or accused for the same, either during the free sitting
thereof, or after, is another privilege of Parliament.

Thirdly, freely to give vote, judgment, or sentence, upon the reading of any
Bill, to be made a law, or any bill, either of Attainder, or other charge
against Delinquents and Criminous persons of the State at their trial upon the
same, is a third privilege of Parliament.

Fourthly, to defend and maintain, the free votes, judgments, and sentences of
the whole House, by Protestation, Remonstrance, or other Declaration, if not
consented unto or opposed by the House of Lords, is a fourth privilege.

Fifthly, for any member of the House not to be accused of any crime, or
impeached for treason by any person whatsoever, during the continuance of the
Parliament for things done in the same, without legal accusation and
prosecution of any such member by the whole House, is another privilege of
Parliament.

Sixthly, not to be apprehended upon such impeachment, or arrested by any
officer, or to have upon such accusation their Chambers, Trunks, and Studies
broken open, their books and writings seized upon, without consent or warrant
of the whole Parliament, is another privilege of the same. And thus much Mr.
Speaker shall suffice to be spoken concerning the privileges and rites of
Parliament, pertinent to the subject, of which I am to speak. I come now to
the second thing I proposed to your audience, which was the rites and
privileges belonging to the power and jurisdiction of the Parliament: In which
I shall observe these particulars. First, to consult and consider of what laws
are fit to be made and inacted in this kingdom for the good government
thereof, is one privilege belonging to the power and jurisdiction of this High
Court.

Secondly, to nullify and abrogate, repeal, make void, to ratify and
confirm, establish, and maintain laws, statutes, and ordinances, made and
enacted by precedent Parliament, by Councels of State, or other Courts of
judicature, is a second privilege pertaining to the power and jurisdiction of
the Parliament.

Thirdly, to give subsidies, to raise taxes, to impose loanes and other charges
upon the subject, is another privilege belonging to the power and jurisdiction
of the Parliament.

Fourthly, to accuse or impeach any Incendiaries or Delinquents in this
kingdom of any crime notorious, tending to the prejudice of his Majesty or any
of his loyal Subjects, whether it be for treason or otherwise, be they members
of the Parliament or no, is another privilege belonging to the power and
jurisdiction of the Parliament.

Fifthly, and lastly, to proceed and bring to judgment such persons so accused
or impeached for any crime whatsoever, is another privilege belonging to the
power and jurisdiction of this Court, and thus much of the rites and
privileges belonging to the power and jurisdiction of a Parliament.

And now Mr. Speaker, I come to the last things I mentioned to you, concerning
the privileges belonging to the continuance and free sitting till all things
be concluded of for the good government both of Church and state, in which I
shall also observe these particulars. First, that for a Parliament when freely
called and assembled by royal authority, not to be tied to debate, or argue
any one particular business appointed by any person whatsoever, is one
privilege belonging to the free continuance of a Parliament.

Secondly, not to break off or dissolve a free Parliament, until all the
grievances and oppressions of all his Majesty's loyal subjects be fully
redressed and remedied, is a second privilege belonging to the continuance of
a Parliament.

Thirdly, not to break off or dissolve a Parliament, till all Incendiaries and
Delinquents in the state be brought to condign punishment for their crimes.

Fourthly and lastly, not to accuse or impeach any member of the Parliament
thereby to hinder and interrupt the legal proceedings thereof in the weighty
affairs of the Commonwealth, is another privilege belonging to the
continuance of a Parliament.

And thus Master Speaker, having briefly declared unto you the power and
jurisdiction of a Parliament above all other Courts of Judicature in this land,
the wisdom and policy of a Parliament above all other Councels, the rights and
privileges of a Parliament, in respect of the free votes and judicature
thereof, the power and jurisdiction thereof, and the free continuance thereof;
I humbly leave to the consideration of this House, whether the accusation of
these Gentlemen accused by his Majesty, and the illegal breaking open upon
this their accusation, of their Chambers, Trunks, and studies, be not a breach
of some of the Privileges of Parliament which I have mentioned unto you.

FINIS.

