A Grounded Voice, or some Discoveries offered to the view, with certain
Queries propounded to the Consideration of the whole Army in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, Officers and Common-Souldiers, Horse and Foot.

WITH Certain Queries to the Anabaptists in particular that Bear any Office,
either in Court or Army, under the present self-created Politic Power.

And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity
shall have a^ end. Thus says the Lord God, remove the Diadem and take of the
Crown: This shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and abase him that is
high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more. To the
Decreasing Army of O. Cromwell.
SIR's! what are your ayms and intentions? What are your persuasions? Are
they, we shall live for ever insulting and domineering over our Brethren? Think
ye, that the day of your visitation shall never come? Shall ye for ever plunder
and none resist! Shall ye always hurry to Prison and none cry out violence and
spoil: Will ye, who once was valiant against tyrants, now (coward-like)
uphold and maintain tyrants: If you will so, open your deaf-ears and hear what
the Angel says, you shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, etc. Rev. 14.10.
The night is far spent (have, have!) and the day's at hand! the shadows begin's
to fly away, the mornings ready to break forth; do not you see how Antichrist
has and is, and more shall be put to it to keep himself on the Stage, and it is
because his night of ignorant darkness is almost gone, wherein he wrought
because his works are evil, and will not abide the light of the Sun? Pray
consider what you do! see ye not that the truth (which is strongest of all)
begins afresh to justle Antichrist and to check him, and (ere long) will justle
him into the Pit of Destruction? Amen.

Friends, (Oh that you were the friends of Zion then would you rejoice!) what
see you that's beautiful in your Masters, that you are so loath (or rather
fearful) to change them? Can you (without an hard and seared conscience)
maintain a man, who by cheating, lying, perjury, plotting, dissimulation and
hypocrisy, have gotten himself seated into the Sadle of wickedness? Surely if
you do, you are as much guilty as himself, and so will incur the same
punishment with him and the rest of his partakers.

Therefore remember that day which is at the door, the day of the Lords
visitation, wherein you (as inhabiters of the old heavens and earth with your
Kings, mighty-men, chief-Captains, etc.) will be forced to run to the rocks (or
strength) of the mountains (Monarch's and Monarchies) crying, fall on us, fall
on us! and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne: It was wont to
be your Masters that sat on the Throne; but now the case is altered, he (the
Lamb) sits on the Throne, oh hide us from his face; for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.16, 17. What will become
of your Protector in this day? where will be his strength? he is become
helpless, and all his and your cryings will be then in vain: For verily if you
continue Christ's enemies till that day, it may be said of you as it was said of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and thereby Moses, if these men dye the common-death
of all men; or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then the
Lord has not sent me. Numb. 16.29.

These Queries was writ on purpose for the good and benefit of your souls and
bodies, to see if you would yet hearken to the voice of God and live; and
therefore we humbly beseech you for Christ Jesus his sake, for Zions sake, and
for your souls sake, to hearken and give ear whilst the voice of pity cries,
come freely and buy without money or prise, even wine and milk, the waters of
life, Isa. 55.1. for this voice will not cry long in our streets: there is
another Dispensation at the door, and the Doctrine is, Fear God and give glory
to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, Rev. 14.7. Christ will no more
beseech his enemies, but if they will repent so; if not, the hour of his
judgment is com^, and every one that is found (in opposition to him) shall be
thrust through, and every one that is joined to them, shall fall by the sword,
Isa. 13.15. if you will not repent, you shall be cut in pieces: Alas, alas! what a
dreadful slaughter will Christ make among his enemies, All his garments shall
be dyed in blood; his virtue is dipped in blood: Is. 63.1, 2, 3. Rev. 19.13. He
will tread his enemies in his anger, and trample them in his fury: A battle
will the Lord fight against his enemies with burning and fuel of fire: Isa.
9.5. Therefore come in, before this day come, for the Stone is almost ready to
rise, it begins to struggle, and yet a little while, and it falls on the Feet of
the Image, and breaks them to pieces; surely all that is Antichristian shall
then be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder and with earthquake, and
great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire: Dreadful
judgments indeed! Oh that we could but express unto you the nearinesse of the
Time, and the dreadfulnesse of the judgments, and the unheard of execution then
to be done upon Christ's enemies.

Farewell.
Grounds and Queries to the Army, etc.
IN the last (and overturning) days when the Kings and Rulers (those Branches
sprung from the old Draggon their root) of the old Earth shall hear the
Declaration and Proclamation of the Decree of the Lord of hosts, to set Jesus
of Nazareth hill, King upon the hill of Zion, as Judge, Ruler and Lawgiver,
not only of his Church, but in and over the whole Earth, therein to reign and
rule by his laws, And to break and dash in pieces (by and in his Saints, that
Stone which is not in the hands of any Power of this earth whatsoever. Dan.
2.34.45.) the whole Roman Monarchy or Fourth Beast as now divided, bearing rule
over the whole Earth: Either by Heathenish Emperors and Kings, or by refined
Rulers; taking in the whole Kingdom of Antichrist, the laws of his kingdom, the
makers of his laws, the pleaders of his laws, and the executors of them high
and low, under what name or title soever: so as to leave no place for them,
except the lake of fire and brimstone; the portion of the Dragon, Beast, and
False prophet, with their partakers and dependants: when (we say) the Beasts,
Kings and Rulers shall hear the Proclamation of this Decree; Then shall they
set themselves with all the might and power the Dragon has given them, and
take Council, politic, cunning, and crafty-councel (it being the last game
they have to play) against the Lord and his anointed; whom this decree
proclaims King: David's now anointed, that is the reason Saul persues him so
hotly; crying, Let us! Let us! they are all for acting their cursed design of
breaking the bands of Christ's Kingdom, and casting away (as a thing
destructive) the cords or laws thereof; all this rage and fury is but to
imagine a vain thing. Ps. 2.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9. This also is the thoughts or
vain imaginations of the little horn: fain would he change and put far off the
times of this kingdom; these bands and change the laws or cords thereof, Dan.
7.2 5. He thinks also to change the time and laws of those three Nations under
his Dominion. And therefore,

Rulers and Heads (who keep dark and hidden councels of wickedness) be not those
very Rulers (distinguished from the Kings of the earth by that title) that in
this day take cunning and crafty council point black against the Lords
anointed, his bands and cords against the very kingdom and laws of Christ
Jesus, in and over the Nations; endeavoring thereby to set up, and firmly
establish the kingdom and laws of Antichrist in all their usurped dominions,
in opposition to the Lords?

the Lord that sits in the heaven does not laugh at them for such folly and
madness, as for a few worms, to set themselves against the great and mighty God?
Has not the Lord them in derision? does not the Lord speak to them in his
wrath? By his judgments that meets the designs in their very face, does not the
late judgments of destruction in Hispaniola, and thereabouts speak to them in
wrath? Is nor the multitude, forsaken that flees before a small company? does
not the Lord vex and torment them in his sore displeasure? if so.

hire or wages from them, because it is the prize of blood; least thereby you be
found under this notion of a people imagining a vain thing (as to think the
kingdom of Oliver Cromwell can stand against Christ's) and thereby become guilty
of High treason against the great king of kings; and so (at his appearance) be
dashed to pieces (with your Rulers) like a potters vessel by him, or in the
mean time be cut off and destroyed as your fellows in the late expedition?

head Ruler, with his government^, that stands up over the three Kingdoms
plucked up by him, be not that same little horn, that arises after and among the
ten horns or kingdoms, subject to Antichrist, who is to reign for three years
and a half, and therein to persecute the Saints; seeing he (above all his
fellows, with more eagerness, greater stratagems, and subtiller devices then
any of his fellow horns) endeavors to change the times, and laws of Christ's
kingdom, now ready to break forth in power and great glory, Dan. 7.8.11.20,
21.24, 25. and not only so, but has changed the times of these Nations
deliverance, an^ made them the ^^imes of his exaltation; and has made null and
void those laws, which pvided for the safety and welfare of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

Babylons destruction is ready to come upon her from the Lord, the Lord will
cause his people, those that shall not partake of her plagues (which are so
dreadful to make a most full, absolute, and total separation from her, by
coming out of her; by separating from all Powers, Persons and things, that are
any ways Babylon sh, unclean, or Antichristian; Gods people must come out of,
and depart from Babylon Civil, and Babylon-Ecclesiastical, Rev. 14.14. Jer.
51.6.45. c. 50.8. Isa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.

Que. Whether or no you are not in Babylon, yea deeply in Babylon? in the very
midst of her; listed under her banner, in opposition to those listed under the
Banner of Jesus Christ the Lamb, whilst you daily obey the commands of her
Powers, daily (almost) going about robbing and dispoiling your brethren of
their goods and estates, because they will not pay taxes, nor contribute to the
upholding of the kingdom of Antichrist; pu^ting the yoke of bondage upon the
neck of a free people, encouraging Priests and Lawyers to press the souls and
bodies of the Lords people, whilst you are ready at hand to uphold them in
those cruelties? If so,

souls; seeing to depart out of Babylon is to save the soul; then whether or
not to stay in her, be not to destroy the soul, Jer. 51 6.45. And if so? 3.
Whether or no it should not now be your chiefest, greatest, and only care, to
make a speedy and an effectual separation from and out of her, in obedience to
that voice of the Lord, which sounds so loud in your ears now, by reason of the
destruction coming forth; and speedily come forth of, and leave your cursed
employments of acting for money in the Army, and so as fast as may be separate
from her in all other points? Is it better (O soldiers! to keep the mark of
this Beast in your foreheads openly, then to list your selves under the Banner
of Jesus Christ?

Babylon, its not for naught, but it is that they may act for him and his
kingdom against his enemies, and the kingdom and power of the Beast: they must
then wait on the Lord in the way of his judgments, Isa. 26.^. as soon as the
voice come out is accomplished, out comes the command, reward her even as she
rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup
which she has filled, fill to her double, etc. Rev. 18.6. So that as soon as
the Sts. are come out of Babylon, they must begin to destroy her; then her
plagues of death, murmuring and famine comes upon her: and she shall be utterly
burnt with fire. The everlasting gospel is preached, and the sword follows, and
down gos Babylon, Rev. 14 7, 8.

judgments begins (if till then you continue your standings in Babylon) there
will be any time of repentance either to you, or any in your dangerous
condition, seeing you neglect to kiss the son before his anger is kindled? If
so.

spirit, acknowledge and confess before the Lord the evil of your way, and
instead of following man, and doing his works and commands, follow Christ the
Lamb whether so ever he goes, doing his works and commands, though in
opposition to the powers of the Beast, for so it must be?

Christ the King of Zion, and men the Kings of Babylon both at a time? Can you
have the mark of the Beast, and worship him and his Image; and at the time have
the Fathers name written in your foreheads, standing with Christ upon the
Mount, singing unto him a new sing of Zions praises? If not,

inquisitive people, enquiring earnestly by Faith for the true ways and paths
of the Lamb, that you might become part of his company and followers? Ought you
not to run too and fro for increase of your knowledge, Dan. 12.4. that so you
might have a lot in the Kingdom of Jesus; that so ye may inherit all things and
be the sons of God, Rev. 21.7.

slaughter, who shall hide themselves in the Dens and rocks of the mountains,
calling for the mountains to fall on them (when alas their breaking to pieces)
and hide them from the face of him that sits on the throne? if in that number,
what will become on you when Christ sits on the throne alone, and all men
thrown down and laid in the dust? who will hide you from the wrath of the Lamb?
Rev. 6.15, 16.

trade within his domini^ns, whether they are small or great, rich or poor,
free or bond, must receive a mark in their right hands (more close and private)
or in their fo^eheads (openly and publicly, in the sight of all men, as not
being ashamed of their professed obedience to the B^ast;) none being suffered
to buy or sell, save those that receives this mark or the number of the Beasts
name, which number is the number of a man, and is 666. Rev. 13.15, 16, 17, 18.



If any man worship the Beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is powered out without mixture in to the cup of his Indignation, and he
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends for
ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night, that received the mark of
the Beasts name? Rev. 14 9, 10, 11. chap. 19.20, 21.

etc. who are prohibited trade with the Beast, both in civils and spirituals,
because conscientious of their upholding and maintaining any power of his; be
not the Saints and people of God contending for Christ and his kingdom,
against the Beast and his kingdom? are they not in this particular part of the
VVitnesses of Jesus Christ, which the beast has warred against and killed (so
as to liberty and a public testimony) having disabled them from proceeding in
the open bearing thereof? If so.

Rev. 11.11.13.

Rome, the consummation of the Turkish power, and the preparation of the way of
the Jews and Israelites to their own land? Do not you absolutely stand in the
way of this work by sitting down and taking up your possessions here in
Babylon, on this side Jordon: yea far before you come to Canaan, before you
have a sight of the good land? If so.

Judah's Tribe, who is coming roaring for his prey, as mountains of
opposition, in the way to his tak^ng possession of the throns and kingdoms of
the whole world, seeing he shall be as a Roe or young Heart (^n swift motions)
upon the mountains of Bether or division, Cant. 2.17. that would divide between
him and h^s kingdom? If so.

escaping so great punishments? O^ght ye not to kiss the Son, least he be
angry and ye perish and to fear God, and that because the hour of his judgment
is come, giving glory to him and not to man, that so you might rejoice in his
Highn^sse. Psalm. 2.12. Isa. 13.3. Rev. 14.7.

January 1648. The Commons assembled in Parliament Ordered the Printing of an
Act, which accordingly was printed, wherein was Enacted and Ordained that no
person or persons whatsoever, do presume to proclaim, declare, publish, or any
ways promote Charles Stuart ( heretofore commonly called the Prince of Wales)
or any other person to be King or chief Magistrate of England, or of Ireland,
or of any the Dominions belonging to them, or either of them without the free
consent of the People in Parliament, first had and signified, by a particular
Act, or Ordinance for that purpose. It also was Enacted and Ordained that
whosoever should contrary to that Act, Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any
ways promote Charles Stuart the son, or any other person to the King, o^ chief
Magistrate of England or of Ireland, etc. should be deemed and adjudged a
Traitor to be Commonwealth, and suffer pains of death and such other
punishments as belong to the crime of High Treason. Authority also was given by
that Act to all Officers as well Civil as Military, and ^o all other
well-affected persons to apprehend all such offenders, that they might be
proceeded against accordingly. Now this act was never repealed, nor made null
or void, but still remains in full force power, or virtue.

persons that did openly proclaim or gave advise or consent to proclaim O. C.
chief Magistrate of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and all the Dominions
thereto belonging, be not guilty of high treason as conspirers against the good
of all the People of this Nation, (except their partakers, upholders, abettors
and adherents) and also as breakers of those wholesome and good laws, made by
the consent of all the People of the three Nations met, and assembled together
in their Representatives, for their good and safety against Tyrants,
Oppressors, proud Usurpers, Crown-wearers, Parliament-breakers? etc. People in
Parliament raised for their own defense against the Invaders of their Liberties
be not all traitors to the Nations, in regard you uphold and maintain by force
and violence, those that exalt themselves in a tyrannizing way over the people,
and in regard you have and do still protect and defend him by the power of your
sword, those that proclaimed, and those that gave council and advise ^^n the
very act, and have ever since stood by them keeping them from being apprehended
by the well-affected people (seeing none else has hearts so to do) according
to law, to the end they might suffer the pains of death, deserved by them for
such villainies? are not you (as it were) the legs of this Lion, upon which he
runs among the people, hunting for the prey, which he devours so greedily, and
so furiously? If so. Nations, or of any part thereof, to join and unite
themselves together, and so to stand up for their Liberties; seeing they are
authorized, and required so to do by that act; so that they (in such an
enterprise) shall not only have the laws of God (which is strongest of all) but
also the laws of men on their side? Ought they not to apprehend, and cause to
be proceeded against, such persons as proclaimed O. Cromwell as aforesaid, as
traitors to them and the rest of their brethren in the highest degree? Nay
further (in case you the Army) shall yet defend those known Rebels, and in case
you yet continue as legs and supporters of the present Beast? Ought they not to
proceed against you ^o suppress you, seeing you are turned to be their
oppressors? Ought they not to cut off the legs of the Beast, and then pray what
will become of the Beast?

O Cromwell came to Hispaniola, they landed eight thousand men, and in marching
twenty miles many of them fell down dead, and the rest when they came to
engage, fled when none pursued. The Army of eight thousand men did never see
one hundred Spaniards in a body, and yet such a spirit of fear possessed your
fellows that they fled, and these few Spaniards pursued and killed them till
they were a weary; The Lord did exceedingly appear against them suitable to
that in Judges the 5. and 20. For on the 24th day of April at night the Moon
being four days old did shine (an impossible thing according to reason) till
two of the clock in the Morning, to their great admiration; For that night the
Spaniard killed diverse of your fellows (the Moon gave them light to do it.)
These passages are verified by Letters from the Fleet.

spirit of fear among those of your fellows, engaged in that design (blasted
and cursed from heaven) which has brought home (instead of golden-wedges, and
precious things of the Earth) so many and great wedges of disgrace to every
English soldier; Whether this was not on purpose to forwarn you of greater
mischief and destruction to come upon you, for your mercenary behaviors, among
your Brethren at home? Did not the Lord give this as a warning to you, and
ought it not so to be taken? Does he not speak to you with a ^^o^d and mighty
voice by his Judgments from heaven? If so. harken to his voice, and according
to the will of the Lord therein not be found acting or employed in any such,
the like, or the same design afresh? Ought you to be hurried as a company of
Dumb, and ignorant sheep to the slaughter? Ought you not rather to be found
acting in some more noble, and good design, wherein you may find the presence
of the Lord (as heretofore you used to do) which may make your Enemies fly and
tremble before you, as you, or some of yours have done; Two Thousands (or
neareupon) of whom has lost their lives by sword, and sickness as a plague? O.
C. be not guilty of all this Blood of your Brethren shed by his means beyond
the seas in the late undertaking seeing he drove them into the Net of the
Fowler, and into the snare of the hunter? The Scribes and Pharisees was gui^ty
of all the Bloodsheed from Abell to their days, though not actually spilt by
them; Is not O. C. guilty therefore of all this Bloodshed by his means and
devises to the dishonor of Englishmen? If so. well-affected people of the
Nation have not sufficient call and warranty, by the Laws of God and men to
proceed against him as a murderer and account him no otherwise; Least you
partaking with him in his sins, partake with him in his plagues, and
punishments also; For it is lawful for you to defend a Murderer? If you think
it is, defend him? till you and he be swallowed up with Gods vengance, when you
would give all the gold (if you had it) that Hispaniola and the Indi^'s afford
for a little of your vain past-time to repent? Therefore Oh Army remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, or I come quickly, says Christ, the only
lawful King and Protector, Rev. 2.5. which coming will be with fire to
Apostates.

CONCLUSION,
The Dreadful King, the mighty God of VVonder,
Against Apostates does begin to Thunder.
He has set open his great Armoury,
The host of Cromwell shall before him fly.
Great multitudes of slain there will be sound.
They Will all fall down at heavens angry found.
Some Queries offered to the view and serious consideration of the ANABAPTISTS.
principles of Religion, and the principles of an Antichristian Court, are
inconsistent the one with the other, for the persons that is commonly employed
(their offices being hellish, vain, and wicked,) in such Courts are either
loose, idle and profane, or else cunning and hipocriticall and full of
dissimulation, in which regard they are most fit for the designs of their
Masters: for a man that is conscientious, that makes any conscience of his ways
will be checked by his conscience, and conscience will at one time or other utter
it self: Such persons therefore are unfit for Courtiers, and it is well they are
so: This makes the present Court to swarm so thick with Cavaleers, wicked,
ungodly, vain, profane men, and also with Hypocrites, Polliticians, etc. and so
little with honest, godly, conscientious men.

strict profession, which you make of the name, way, and cause of Christ; and a
dishonor to to the name of God, for you to hold any Place, Office, or
employment in, or belonging to the present Court?

O. C. with the rest of his vain and politic courtiers (according to their
principles before named) do not aim and design (when they shall think
themselves, more fast and secure, in their seats) to reject and cast you out
from your present offices and employments of Court-honor and profit, with and
among them? If so.

Design (in retaining you at present) be not selfish, and base, with you, to
serve their own ends and pu^poses, and then to cast you of like fools,
thinking by their retaining you at present, to cloak and cover their designs,
and to breed thereby good opinions of themselves in the Churches, and among
your other Friends, knowing that you are a people that (if your eyes be open)
will not suster the wrack and loss of your lawful and r^ghtfull privileges,
had you not therefore better withdraw now with honor and some credit, then
hereafter be turned out with dishonor and disgrace?

Principles of Religion are in consistent with Principles of Court; so are they
with tho Army, whose standing is of, from, and by the Court: this appears 1. by
that discourse (if true) which O. Cromwell had with a Scotch Lord, one Twidle;
where you are brought in as in-lets to the designs of our new Courtiers, as
appears by those Queries writ by a well-wisher to the Anabaptists prosperity,
etc. 2. It appears by that spirit of inveterateness, and maliciousnes in the
Army against the Anabaptists, for proof whereof, take the passage of a Letter
from Hispaniola. Some of these wretches says the Author, meaning the remaining
feeble men of the Army sent thither, who seeing the hand of God visibly against
them, was thereby enraged) are extremely mad against the Lord and his poor
people, that they have sworn, that if they knew there were an Anabaptist, they
would bo the death of him, etc.



Rev. 2.5. That so you (returning) might discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God and him that serves him not, Mal. 2.18.
that so you might perceive their evil ways and eschew them?

Conclusion.
We desire you for Christ's sake to turn to these Scriptures, and seriously and
solemnly consider, and meditate upon them, seeking the face of the Lord in that
work, for wisdom and understanding therein: Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17. Jer.
51.6.45. chap. 50.8. Isa. 52.11. Numb. 16.21. Genesis 19.15.22. Exo. 33.16. Isa.
48.20. etc. The Lord teach you his mind in these, and take you up into the
Mount, and there reveal unto you the Salvation and Redemption of whole Zion,
and the Destruction and Overthrow of Babylon now near approaching, even at the
door.

FINIS.

