THE NULLITY OF THE PRETENDED-ASSEMBLY At Saint ANDREWS and DVNDEE: Wherein are
contained, The Representation for Adjournment, the Protestation and Reasons
thereof.

Together with A REVIEW and Examination of the VINDICATION of the said P.
ASSEMBLY. Hereunto is subjoyned the solemn Acknowledgment of Sins, and
Engagement to Duties, made and taken by the Nobility, Gentry, Buroughs,
Ministry, and Commonalty, in the year 1648. when the COVENANT was Renewed.

With sundry other Papers, related unto in the foresaid REVIEW.

Printed in the Year, 1652.

REader, We have here observed some few Escapes of the Press: some more gross
Errors thou will find in the Vindication, for which, neither the Printer, nor
theje who gave him the Copy can be blamed: for the truth is, a Letter was
written to the Moderator of the late p. Assembly at Edinburgh, desiring a
perfect Copy of the Vindication, by which any Error in that Copy which had come
to our hands, might have been corrected: And in that same Letter there was
desired a copy of the Kings Letter to the p. Assembly at St. Andrews, with the
Commissioners speech (seeing the Vindication does refer to these, although it
has been spread alone, and these copies kept up) but to neither of these
desires was there any answer returned.

ERRATA:
PAge 4, for nonformists, read nonconformists. page 7. f. whom, r. wherein: f.
tenants, r. tenets. page 8. f. too sharp-sighted, r. to be etc. page 15. f.
may, r. nay. page 17. f. required, r. being required. page 30. l. 25. r. which
seems. page 37. l. 1. r. Gentleman. page 58. r. as for and ibid. l. 29. r. no
evil before them in. page 59. l. 13. f. then, r. when. page 62. r. these after
against: ibid. f. accept, r. except: ibid. r. patiar f. patior: ibid. r.
defections f. desertions. page 63. r. for, after why. page 67. r. Quaries. f.
Presbyteries, r. Prelacies. page 170. l. 8. r. men, and this. ibid. l. 9. r. as
appears. p. 171. l. 19. r. concession.

TO THE CHRISTIAN-READER
Christian-Reader,
THat thou may with understanding read this Book, and the Debates contained
therein; Thou art to take notice, that in the year 1651. in the month of July,
many of the Commissioners from Presbyteries meeting at St. Andrews, did proceed
to constitute themselves into, and to act as a General Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland; against the constitution of which Assembly, sundry of the Ministers
who had formerly born testimony against the employing and intrusting of the
Malignant party, with the Cause and Kingdom did enter a public Protestation in
writing, subscribed by their hands as not being a free and lawful General
Assembly: within a few weeks thereafter one (as it seems of those Protesters)
did pen a Paper, for strengthening and clearing the grounds of that
Protestation, and taking off such Objections as are usually made against the
same. In Answer to both these, a Member (as I take it of that Assembly at St.
Andrews) did within few months after write a Treatise entitled, a Vindication
of the freedom and lawfulness, and so of the Authority of the General Assembly
met at St. Andrews, etc. To which Treatise in the month of May last, there was
a Reply written, bearing the name, of the Nullity of the Assembly at St.
Andrews; or, A Review of a Vindication etc. which does set down and make Answer
unto that Vindication by Parcels and Sections. All these four are now offered
to Thee in this Book, and in that order in which they were first penned, to
wit, The Protestation against the Meeting at St. Andrews in the first place;
the Reasons for strengthening and clearing thereof in the second place; the
Vindication and the Review thereof together in last place. There are also added
some other Papers upon the by, for clearing of some things in the debate. The
LORD give unto Thee a spirit of Judgment and understanding in reading, that
Thou may Judge true and righteous Judgment, condemning the Guilty, and
absolving the Innocent.

UNTO THE MODERATOR and BRETHREN Assembled at St. Andrews. The humble
Representation and Desire of the Ministers of the Gospel, under subscribed.
AMongst the many sad tokens of the Lords indignation and wrath against this
Church, the present unhappy differrences of His Servants of the Ministry is
looked upon by Us, and We believe by all the Godly of the Land, as one of the
greatest: And as We hold it a Duty lying upon Us to be deeply humbled before
the Lord in the sense thereof, and in our Stations and Callings to endeavor by
all lawful and fair means the remedy and removal of the same; so we acknowledge
a free Genesis Assembly, lawfully called, and rightly constitute, and meeting
together in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and proceeding with Meekness
and Love according to the Rule of His Word, and Constitutions of this Church,
to be amongst the first and most effectual Remedies appointed of God, for
attaining of these ends. Therefore considering that the Election of
Commissioners for the Assembly has been in many places limited and prejudiced
in the due liberty and freedom thereof, by the Letter and Act of the Commission
of the last Genesis Assembly, to Presbyteries appointing such as remain
unsatisfied with, and bear testimony against the Public Resolutions, to be
cited to the General Assembly; which upon the matter, has in many Presbyteries
really obstructed the Electing of such, though otherwise men of approven
abilities, and constant faithfulness and zeal for the Work of Reformation since
the beginning thereof: and that many Elections are questionable, some as
containing persons not in a capacity to be chosen by the Acts of this Church,
and some as not being made in a due order and right way; and that many
Commissioners of Presbyteries and Buroughs are absent, some of them wanting
free access, by reason of the English lying in the Country, and some upon other
impediments and occasions; And remembering that such Reasons have formerly had
weight in point of Discussion of the validity of some Assemblies, and may still
be looked upon as important and weighty, by these who may happen not to be
satisfied in their consciences with your proceedings. We did with all humble
earnestness, and in the bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ, desire and beseech you
for Truth and Peace sake; and that further mistakes and divisions may not be
increased unto the prejudice of the Lords Work, and rejoicing of Enemies, and
sadding the hearts of His People, That the Diet of the Genesis Assembly may by the
common consent and advice of the Brethren now met together be adjourned for
some competent time; and that by the same mutual advice and consent it may be
declared, That the Letter and Act of the Commission ought not to be any
prejudice to these who remain unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, why
they may not be chosen Commissioners to the General Assembly; And that such
Presbyteries as shall think fit, may make their Elections of new again,
especially these Presbyteries whose Elections or Commissioners are
questionable, to whom we desire it earnestly to be recomended, that they would
in an unanimous way make choice of men of approven abilities and integrity, and
against whom there can be no exception by the Acts and Constitutions of this
Church. And in the last place, We do humbly represent and desire, that in the
interval of time betwixt this and the Diet, to which the Assembly shall be
adjourned, there may be a Solemn Public Humiliation throughout the Land,
wherein God may be entreated to show us why He contends with us, and to give
light and clearing on all hands concerning the present differences of judgment,
and distempers of spirit that are amongst us, that we may be of one mind, and
one heart, for the carrying on of the Work of God amongst His People; And Your
Wisdoms Answer.

Subscribed by sundry Ministers of the Gospel.

St. Andrews, July 18. 1651.
HOw gracious the Lord has been to the Church of Scotland, in giving to her
pure Ordinances, we trust shall be acknowledged by us whilst we live, with
thankfulness to the Most High, of whom we desire mercy and grace to adhere unto
the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government established in this Land:
Amongst the many sad tokens of the Lords Indignation against this Church, The
present Differences of His Servants of the Ministry is looked upon by us as one
of the greatest: And as we hold it a duty to be deeply humbled before the Lord
in the sense thereof, and by all lawful and fair means within the compass of
our power and station to endeavor the remedy thereof; so we do ackdowledge a
free General Assembly, lawfully called, and rightly constituted, and proceeding
with meekness and love in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the
Rule of the Word, and the Acts and Constitutions of this Church, to be amongst
the first and most effectual means appointed of God, for attaining this end,
and for preserving the purity, and advancing the power of the Work of
Reformation in this Age, and transmitting the same to our Posterity, and to the
Ages and Generations that are to come. But as the faithful Servants of God in
this Church in former times, did by His good Hand upon them in the right
administration of free and lawful Assemblies, bring the Work of Reformation in
Scotland unto a great perfection, and near conformity with the first pattern:
So, unfaithful men minding their own things more then the things of Christ, and
usurping over their Brethren, and over the Lords Inheritance, did deface the
beauty thereof, first by encroaching upon the liberty and freedom of
Assemblies; afterward by taking away the Assembly themselves. Therefore,
remembering the many bonds and obligations that lie upon us before the Lord, and
being desirous to be found faithful in this day of temptation, and to exoner
our consciences as in His sight, and to avoid accession to that guiltiness in
which many have involved themselves, and conceiving that this present Meeting
is not a free lawful Genesis Assembly of the Church of Scotland, in regard that
the Election of Commissioners to the same has been pre-limited and prejudiced
in the due liberty and freedom thereof, by a Letter and Act of the
Commissioners of the last Gen Assembly sent to Presbyteries appointing such
Brethren as after conference remain unsatisfied with, and continue to oppose
the Public Resolutions, to be cited to the General Assembly; And in regard
that Commissioners from many Buroughs and Presbytries are absent, as wanting
free access, by reason of the motion of the --; and in regard that many of the
Commissioners of the former Assembly, who have carried on a course of
defection, contrary to the trust committed to them; and who in their
Remonstrances and Papers have stirred up the Civil Magistrate against such who
are unsatisfied in their consciences with their proceedings, and who have by
their Letter and Act prelimited the Assembly, are admitted to sit and vote as
Members of the Assembly, and their Moderator appointed to be Moderator of the
Assembly, notwithstanding that timous exception was made against them, that
they ought not to be admitted as Members of the Assembly, until their
proceedings were first tried and approven by the Assembly; And in regard that
his Majesty by his Letter, and his Majesty's Commissioner by his Speech to the
Assembly has incited to hard courses against those who are unsatisfied in
their consciences with the proceedings of the Commission. Before these
proceedings be tried and approven by the Assembly it self. We do upon these and
many other important grounds and Reasons to be propounded and given in, in time
and place convenient, protest in the Name of the Church of Scotland, and in our
own Names and in the Name of all Ministers, Ruling-Elders and Professors of
this Church, who do, or shall adhere to us against the validity and
Constitution of this Assembly, as not being free and lawful, and that they may
not arrogat nor assume to themselves any authority, nor exercise any power or
jurisdiction for determining of Controversies, making of Acts, emitting of
Declarations, judging of Protestations or Appeals, or proceedings of Synods or
inferior Judicatures, or censuring of Persons or Papers, or issuing of
Commissions of whatsoever sort, to any persons whatsoever; and particularly we
protest, that they may not proceed unto the approving or ratifying of the
proceedings of the former Commission, not only because of their want of just
power and authority so to do, but also because these proceedings contain many
things contrary to the trust committed to these Commissioners, especially the
allowing and carrying on of a conjunction with the Malignant party, and
bringing them in to places of Power and Trust in the Army, and in the
Judicatures, contrary to the Word of God, the Solemn League and Covenant, the
Solemn Confession of Sins and Engagement to Duties, the constant tenor of the
Declarations, Warnings, Remonstrances, Causes of Humiliations, Letters,
Supplications and Acts, and Constitutions of this Church, and the laying of a
Foundation for the Civil Magistrate to meddle with Ministers in those things
which concern their Doctrine and the exercise of Ministerial Duties before they
be cited, tried and censured by the Judicatories of the Church. And we protest
that whatsoever Determinations, Acts, Ratifications, Declarations, Sentences,
Censures or Commissions that shall be made, or given out by them, may be void
and null, and may be interpreted as binding to the Church of Scotland, and that
notwithstanding thereof it may be free for us, and such as adhere to us, to
exercise our Ministry, and enjoy the warrantable Christian liberty of our
consciences according to the Word of God, the National Covenant, and Solemn
League and Covenant, and Solemn Engagement to Duties, and all the Acts and
Constitutions of this Church; and that there may be liberty to choose
Commissioners, and to conveen in a free lawful General Assembly, when there
shall be need, and the Lord shall give opportunity, and to add what further
Reasons shall have weight for showing the nullity of this Assembly, and the
unwarrantableness of the proceedings of the Commission of the former Assembly.
And that these Presents may be put upon Record by the Clerk in the Regesters of
the Assembly, to be extant ad futuram rei memoream, and that we may have
subscribed Extracts thereof under the Clerks hand.

This following Paper was enclosed in a Letter from the Lord Wariston, to the
Meeting at S. Andrews; which Letter, although it could not be gotten printed,
yet we have published the enclosed; both, because it tends very much to
clear, That the way of protesting against every encroachment upon the liberties
of this Church, is no new thing, but has been the constant practice of our
faithful Predecessors, from the beginning of the work of Reformation: And also,
because it does contain a particular Testimony against the Ratification of the
Paper, given by the Commission of the Kirk, to the Parliament, anent the
confinement of the Ministers of Sterline, and of all other Papers prejudicial
to the Covenant and Cause of Jesus Christ.
The Paper enclosed within the Letter, containing a Narration of some former
Protestations; with My present Protestation subjoyned thereto.
ANent the Protestation it may be remembered, that the Doctrine and Discipline
of the Kirk of Scotland, sworn to by the Covenants, is clear anent th^s R^ght
and Privilege, acknowledged even by King and Parliament, That none of her
Pastors can be judged or troubled by King, Council or Parliament for their
preaching and Ministerial Duties, ^nless the Assemblies of the Kirk, the on^y
competent Judges thereof, had first cited, tried and censured them therefore,
and had upon their disobedience craved the concurrence of the Civil Magistrate;
for clearing whereof, remember, that this having been mightily debated betwixt
the Kirk and the State, it was not only thereupon maintained and declared by
the General Assembly in 1581. immediately after rat^fying the Book of
Discipline, and swearing the National Covenant; but also is acknowledged by the
King and the Council, in the Case of Mr. Walter Balcanquel, who had been
challenged for a Sermon as seditious; thereafter in the Assembly 1582. John
Dury, being challenged by King and Council for his Sermon, as seditious; and
being advised by his friends to retire; and seeking the Assemblies advise,
seeing his Doctrine accused to the Council, was justified by his Presbytery and
Session, he was directed to the Assembly, to abide rather the charge of Horning
and Caption, and give his testimony against their Procedor, then privately to
retire. And the whole Assembly gives in their Grievances to the King, and to the
Estates, complaining, that this their Procedor is one erection of a Popedom in
the Kings Person, and a wronging of Jesus Christ the only King of the Church
(wherein the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets) and a
confounding of the Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdiction which God has divided.
Thereafter when the first Act of the Eighth Parliament 1584. giving power to
the Kings Council to enquire and examine anent these things, was proclaimed; it
was protested against by the Ministers of Edinburgh, in the Name of the Kirk of
Scotland, who in that hour of darkness was put to Banishment; and thereafter
Mr. David Blake, and Mr. Andrew Melvin, being cited for their Doctrine before
the King and Council, declined from both, and entered a Protestation, and in the
Genesis Assembly, June 1587. the King and the Estates in the case of M. John
Couper, and Mr. James Gibson Ministers, acknowledged the Assembly to be the
only competent Judges, and desires them to try, and judge. And such like
thereafter in the case of John Rosse in the Assembly 1594. and the King and
Parliament 1592. in end of the first Act, which is anent Assemblies Repealed
the foresaid Acts 1584 in so far as they were prejudicial to the Privileges,
which God has given to his Spiritual Office-bearers in His Church: The
Assemblies 92. and 94, 95, 96. gives most free admonitions to the King and
Estate to abstain from such Procedors, lest they commit High Treason against
Jesus Christ the only Monarch of His Church, for whom they behoved to fight by
the Spiritual Armor, granted to them of God, and potent in Him, for
overthrowing all strong holds and bulwarks, set up against His Kingdom; amongst
which it was a main one to have the freedom of the Spirit of God in the rebuke
of sin, restrained in the mouth of His Servants, and to extinguish the light
which would show the unlawfulness of their proceeding, and stop (under the name
of vice, of stirring up sedition and tumult) the liberty of preaching. When Mr.
John Craig, and Mr. Andrew Melvin were threatened for their Declinator and free
speech against the Acts 84. by Chancellor Arrane at the Councel-Table with
stobbing; they instantly unloosed their Buttons, and laid their Breasts open
and bare* saying, They durst receive, if he durst strike; and then publicly
fore told the Judgment which God brought to pass upon him shortly thereafter:
And Mr. Nichoal Daglish spoke no less resolutely when the Scaffold was erected
for him: and so did Mr. Welsh and his collegs 1606. both when they declined,
and protested against the King and the Council, and when they were panold and
condemned at Lithgow. I need not insist on the large Declaration, and the
Reasons thereof, emitted in this very point against the States proceedings by
the Grand Commission of the Assembly 1596. appointed on purpose, Ne quid
detrimenti Ecclesia capiat: Nor yet to insist on the Fourth Act of the
Parliament 1640. anent the Assemblies determining all Ecclesiastic matters:
Nor the Sixth Act Rescissorie, which establishes that of the 92. etc. And in
the end rescinds all Confinements, Banishments, Deprivations made in the times
of defection; which Two Acts were ratified in the large Treaty: Neither need I
to remember the end of the Kings Oath, prescribed in 1567. and sworn by his
Majesty lately at his Coronation: Nor the beginning of the Parliaments Oath:
Nor one of the main Articles of the late Treaty with this King, anent the
Determination of matters Ecclesiastical: Neither need I transcribe the three
last Leaves of the Commission of the Kirks Vindication of their proceedings from
the Parliaments Letter May 11. 1648. which speaks fully to this point: Neither
need I transcribe the sixth Page of the Committee of Estates Observations upon
the Assemblies Declaration 1648. wherein they claim power to challenge
Ministers for seditious Doctrine: Whereunto the Commission of the Kirk, in
their Reply page 14. say, That the judgment of Ministers Doctrine belongs to
the Judicatories of the Kirk, both by Divine-Right, and by the Law of the Land;
and we hope your Lordships do not intend under color of quarelling sedition, a
new way of judging and trying Ministers Doctrine, nor to assume to themselves
the exercising of the same Power over all persons of whatsoever state, degree,
function or condition they be of, in all matters wherein they shall be charged
to answer a power once granted to the Council in 129. Act Parl. 8. James 6.
Anno 1584. but was afterward abrogated in the 114 Act Parl. 12. James 6. Anno
1592. as likewise in the Act Rescissory: I need not insist either on the Kirks
Protestation, or on the Dissenters Protestation against the States meddling in
these things without the Kirks concurrence, insert and approven in the
repealing Act 1649. no^ on what was said, written and preached against the 23
Act Parl. 48. ordaining Ministers to exhort the people to obedience to the Laws
of the Kingdom, and assuring them of their Stipends now; nor on the
dangerousness of this present preparative and practice, which from the strait
may be as terrifying as the other was alluring, and may at one time or other
meet with any who indirectly procured this: Neither need I insist, that this
argument of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland, as
acknowledged by the King and Parliament, and sworn to in the second Article of
the Covenant, is the bar and bond that hinders Genesis CROMWELL from stopping the
mouths of the honest free Preachers in Edinburgh, and the places by south
Forth, where he thinks he has as much Civil Command and may readily change his
practice, as soon as he sees the State here to change theirs: Neither need I
remember what good ground there is to fear the sprouting and spreading of
Erastianism in our Statesmen, seeing this is a main branch thereof, it will be
a strange thing to me if the Commission of the Kirk, for the Kirks interest,
testify not against this Procedor, and dangerous preparative; and the rather,
that it seems to be founded upon what has proceeded betwixt the Commission and
the Ministers of Sterline, whereof the State could not take notice, unless
there had been a Process, and a Sentence from the Kirk (which the Commission it
self denies, and therefore complains of the Appeal as from a mere desire, and
which sentence they could not have given at St. Andrews, it being neither their
Quarterly Meeting, nor after Process, nor a Trial of their Doctrine, and least
of all because it agrees not with their Commission to censure these who
preached according to the Acts of all our General Assemblies, from 1560. til
1650. in above 200. several places and passages, and which if they did not
preach, they might be censured and deprived, according to the Acts of the
Assembly 1648.) and had desired the States concurrence against them for their
disobedience, otherwise this Procedor is de facto like King James his practice
and threatening to Mr. David Calderwood at St. Andrews 1617. That if he would
not acknowledge his power of spiritually suspending him, he would suspend him
corporally; and if h^ would not abstain from preaching and writing against the
five Articles, he would banish him, as he did; and thereafter in 1606. and
1608. he called for Mr. William Scot, and sundry other worthy men of the
Ministry, unto London, and detained them there until he caused hold the corrupt
Assembly at Lithgow; and this has been often called since in the public
Declarations and Warnings of the Church of Scotland; a persecution of the
Ministry and of the Gospel, which would, and did grow to a great height, and
both in Law and Reason, and in the words of our two Covenants, and solemn
Acknowledgment, quod non licet direct, non licet indirecte; and as I might
lawfully protest against the States direct doing of it, so against their
indirect doing of it. And now for the point of protestation, Cui libet licet
protestari supplicare mendicare, as the common proverb goes: But it is most
remarkable that the Lord by these legal means of Protestations has preserved
in all times of Defection and hours of darkness (as betwixt 1571. and 1575.
betwixt 1582. and 1587. betwixt 1597. and 1638.) the Church of Scotland from a
total and universal back-slyding and breach of Covenant, and so from His Wrath
and Judgment against the whole, but kept ever a remnant in Covenant with Him
and Him fast to Them, and thereby they kept God in the Land; and the Lord in
all times of their reviving and recovery of light and life made their
successors, as it were, enter heirs by these Protestations to the Interests of
the Church of Scotland in God, and His Interest in Her, and so has He made us
in our two Covenants and solemn Acknowledgment per ipsa verba, to be, as it
were, served and retoured to all the former Protestations; And who knows what
successors may be to these that are now necessary? It is worth remembering at
this time, that in the Genesis Assembly 1586. when they were drawn on by the Kings
Court to absolve M. Patrick Adamson, that Mr. Andrew Melvin and Mr. Andrew
Hunter, in the name of the whole Synod of Fife, entered their Protestation
against it, as before the Almighty God. His holy Angels and Saints, that seeing
he had given no real signs and evidences of true Repentance, they had no
assurance in Gods Word, or in the sincere custom of this Kirk, and in
conscience to allow this his Absolvitor, and therefore until the time they
perceived his conversion to be true and effectual, they cannot but hold him a
man justly delivered up to Satan; which is too like to the present receiving of
the Malignant party, then in the Assembly 1597. when the King carries in it the
Commissioners of the Kirk with caveats to have vote in Parliament: but M. Jo.
Davidon entered his Protestation, so did some Ministers at Perth in the
Null-Assembly 1617, so did they in the name of the Kirk of Scotland, give in a
Protestation to the Parliament 1584. 1597. 1606. 1612. 1617. 1621. and 1633.
against all these Procedors, to the prejudice of the Kirk of Scotland, and so
they preserved and transmitted by Protestations (which was first given in by
our Reformers to the Parl. 1560.) unto this Generation 1638. and 1640. Jura
Ecclesiae Scoticanae intacta in jure quamvis, frequentur violata de facto,
which I pray God we may preserve and transmit with as great fidelity and
boldness to our posterity, I will only add to this point the remembrance, that
in November. 1646. Mr. Rob. Duglas and Mr. Rob. Blair upon their hearing of some
expressions in a report of Parliament anent their peace made with the Rebels,
importing as if these Ministers had not opposed the same, but by silence
consented thereto, which they disclaimed in face of Parliament, and entered
their protestation, That all the Judicatories of the Kirk were free of it, and
that the Acts of Parliament approving it should be without any prejudice of the
liberty of the Kirk, and of any servant of Jesus Christ to exoner their
consciences according to His Wo^d and the Principles and Declarations of this
Kirk against it, notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament, which Protestation
was approven by the Commission of the Kirk, and inserted in their Records; and
good reason is there for such Protestations, especially in Scotland, because
not only by Gods Word, but also by our National Covenant, solemn League and
Covenant, and solemn Acknowledgment, all Interest of King or Parliament or
Kingdom are subordinate to the Interest of Christ and all duties to men
subordinate to our duty unto God, In hoc foederato regno federati Dei,
according to the 2 Kings 11.17. and 2 Chronicles. 23.16. in both which the substance
of that Covenant and our Covenant is, that we should be Gods people, and all
other relations subserviant to that: sit ergo gloria Christi, and salus
Eclecsiae suprema Lex nostra; and whenever we see it in any hazard or contest
and any thing in competition with it, let us, according to our calling, at
least protest, that our Lord and our Mother may get right, which will legaly
preserve it to another Judgment, and if they get wrong thereby they will have
witness of it, which is the least which we should do for Him (though we suffer
for it) who has done and suffered so much for us, and who puts a great favor
and honor upon any whom He calls to be witnesses to and for Him; and where one
has a necessity to protest for his particular right, or place in Parliament,
we see they do it ordinarily, and in all Acts of Parliament the last is, savo
jure cujuslibet; and why not far rather, solvo jure Christi ac Ecclesiae? Which
Protestation by communicating of this Paper I do enter against the Ratification
of the Paper given in by the Commission to the Parliament, anent the
confinement of the Ministers of Sterling for their preaching, or of any other
Paper of theirs prejudicial to the Covenant and Cause of Jesus Christ.

REASONS PROVING, That the late Meeting at St. Andrews is not a Lawful Free
GENERAL-ASSEMBLY Of the KIRK of SCOTLAND, With ANSWERS to the OBjECTIONS on the
contrary
THat is not a lawful free General Assembly, the election of whose
Commissioners is so prejudiced and pre-limited in the due liberty and freedom
thereof, that many Ministers of Presbyteries in a capacity of deserving to be
chosen for their abilities and faithfulness, are by the Presbyteries at the
order and appointment of a superior Judicatory, past by and set aside in the
election, and rendered incapable to be Members of the Assembly; but the late
meeting at St. Andrews was such: Therefore, etc. The first Proposition albeit
(as we conceive) unquestionable, yet shall afterward be alittle further spoken
to The second is proved by Presbyteries proceeding according to the Letter, and
Act of the Commission of the former Assembly, sent unto them about the time of
their choosing Commissioners, appointing that such as after conference should
remain unsatisfied with, and continue to oppose the public resolutions, to be
cited to the General Assembly, which Act does upon the matter include these
Four things. 1. A direction that Presbyteries should choose none to be
Commissioners, but such as did concur with the public resolutions. 2. An
intimation of the Commissions mind, that Dissenters from the public
resolutions were so far from being in a capacity to be chosen Commissioners,
and to sit as Judges of the matter in the Genesis Assembly, that they ought to be
looked upon as guilty persons, who were for their guiltiness to be cited and
judged. 3. A Declaration that if they should be chosen, they could not be
admitted to sit upon the Bench as Judges, but behoved to stand at the Bar and
answer as rei. 4. That if the Presbyteries should choose them, they were to be
esteemed disobedient, and looked upon as persons having no respect to public
orders of the Kirk; which things do clearly enough prove that there was such a
prelimiting of the election as is formerly spoken of.

Object. The Commissioners of the General Assembly in the year 1648. did by a
Letter written to the several Presbyteries, appoint such Ministers as refused
to declare their judgment against the Engagement, which was then carried on,
or did declare themselves satisfied there with to be refered by their several
Presbyteries to the General Assembly, which upon the matter is equivalent to a
citation; and yet was not that judged a pre-limitation of the freedom of the
Assembly. Answer. To say nothing of the difference of a Reference and Citation,
neither yet of the difference of a Letter and an Act: We desire these things to
be considered in answer to what is objected. 1. That in the year 1648. when a
little before the election of Commissioners by the Presbyteries to the General
Assembly; it was moved by some in the Commission, that some thing might be
written to Presbyteries to choose none but such as were against the engagement;
it was opposed as savouring away of pre-limitation, and so only a Letter was
written, giving them an account of the Commissions proceeding, and exhorting
them to their duty and to choose able and faithful men. 2. That that Letter
which is mentioned in the objection, was not written by the Commission (as we
remember) until most part, if not all the elections in Presbyteries were past,
will be cleared by the date thereof. 3. That before the writing of that Letter,
the whole Kirks of Scotland, almost in all the Presbyteries and Synods thereof
had declared themselves unsatisfied in conscience with the Engaegment,
excepting a very few Ministers scatered here and there in Presbyteries, which
few were also known to have been either opposers of the work of God, or
neutrall and indefferent therein from the beginning. 4. That the resolutions of
the Commission were then agreeable to the Covenant and Act; and constitutions
of former General Assemblies, which things being put together make a vive
difference betwixt that which was then done, and that which the Commission has
now done, because the Letter and Act of the Commission this year was previous
to most part of the elections in Scotland, and whilst many Presbytries were
bearing testimony against their Resolutions, and the most part of the godly of
the Land remain unsatisfied therewith, and many p^ecious, able, and faithful
men in the Ministry, who are known to have been straight and zealous in the
work of God from the begin^ing were bearing record against it, and whilst the
Resolutions of the Commission were point blank contrary to the Covenant, and to
the former Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk.

Objection. It was not only in the power of the Commission to appoint those who
did oppose the public Resolutions, to be cited to the General Assembly, but
also to have Censured them, because there is a Clause in their Commission which
gives them power to Censure such as oppose them in their proceedings, as if
they opposed the Assembly it self: and therefore seeing the Commission has
been so far from excluding that they have kept themselves fair within the
limits and bonds of that power given them by the Assembly; it cannot be said,
That their Letter and Act does import any prelimitation of the Assembly, or any
prejudice to the freedom of Election, or any wrong to these, who were ordainned
to be cited. Answ. We deny that the Commission had any power either to censure
or cite these who opposed the public Resolutions now in Controversy. The
clause of the Commission in 1648. (to which we suppose theirs to be consonant)
is that all opposers of the Authority of the Commission in matters entrusted to
them, shall be holden as opposers of the Authority of the General Assembly, but
was never int^usted to them to bring in the Malignant Party: nay, a great part
of their Trust was, to keep them out. But for further clearing of the business,
we desire that it may be considered, That as the light of Nature and common
Reason teaches all superior Judicatories to limit any to whom they give
Delegations and Commissions to a certain Rule, according to which they are to
walk in their administrations, to wit, the known standing Laws of the
incorporations, to which the Judicatories do belong, and to a certain end which
they are to have before them in all their actings, to wit, The good and
preservation of the whole Body to whom they belong: so unless we will speak
gross absurdities, it is undeniable, that the Commission of the General
Assembly were in all their actings to have walked according to the Acts of
former General Assemblies, and to have had before them the preserving and
promoving of the work of Reformation, and the keeping of the Liberty and
Privileges of the Kirk entire and untouched, ne quid deurementi capiat
Ecclesia: having been the main end why Commissioners from General Assemblies
were at first appointed: but so it is that their Resolutions and Proceedings in
order to the taking in of the Malignant party were not only without the warrant
of any Act of Assembly, and not only not contributive for the preserving and
advancing of the work of Reformation, but expressly contrary to the clear Letter
of the Covenant, and of multitude of Acts, and destructive to the work, and
therefore had they no power at all either to Censure or Cite such as did oppose
them therein, and stand for the Covenant and Acts of the Assembly; and by
assuming to themselves such a power they did not only beyond the bonds of their
Commission, but destroy the very end for which their Commission was given them,
to wit, The preserving the Liberties and Privileges of the Kirk, for by this
means they brought the Genesis Assembly it self into servitude and bondage, by
excluding all such therefrom as would not be consenting to that course of
Defection which they had carried on, a very dangerous and damnable preparative
which lays a foundation, First, for the total overthrow of the Discipline of
this Kirk, then of the Doctrine and Worship: for by this means if the Commission
once be corrupted, though it were so far as to the introducing of Prelacy and
the Service Book; nay, though it were to the bringing in of the Popes Supremacy
and the whole Body of Popery; there is no remedy left, none can vote in a Genesis
Assembly where the remedy is to be expected, but such as Concur with them in
Judgment; others, who Differ and Oppose, are to be Cited and Censured.

Object. Albeit the Commission did send such a Letter and Act as is spoken of,
yet it does not from thence follow that thereby Election of Commissioners in
Presbyteries to the Assembly is prelimited or pre-judged in the due liberty and
freedom thereof. 1 Because it was free to Presbyteries, notwithstanding
thereof, to choose whom they pleased. 2 A Citation to the General Assembly does
not bar a man from being chosen Commissioner thereto, nor exclude him when he
is chosen from voting therein. 3 Because that Letter and Act had little or no
influence upon Presbyteries in the choice of their Commissioners, but
notwithstanding thereof several Presbyteries did choose men who were unsatisfied
with the Public Resolutions. 4 None who were unsatisfied with the Public
Resolutions, and were Commissioners, were upon that account, of their not being
satisfied; or being cited, denied a Voice in the Assembly. Answ. As to the
First, it is true, That Presbyteries were physically free, notwithstanding of
that Letter and Act to choose whom they pleased, That is, the Letter and Act put
no external coaction and constraint upon them by any coersive power upon the
outward man; but they were not morally free, that is, they were not free from a
moral over-awing power, having influence upon their will, to wit, the authority
of the Commission, commanding them upon the matter to choose none such, and upon
the matter threatening them if they should do otherwise. They were so far bound
as the Commission could bind them: and who knows not what influence the
Direction and Commands thereof have upon Presbyteries to determine them in
their actings. As to the Second, Though every Citation, or Citations of all
kinds, do not exclude a man from being chosen a Commissioner, or sitting a
Member of the Assembly, yet we think that it will not be denied, that a
Citation in matter of scandal, either in Doctrine or manners, will, and ought
to exclude him from being chosen Commissioner to, or sitting in a Genesis
Assembly. The Assembly, since the first Reformation, and that upon good
grounds, having always taken care that all her Members should be free of
scandal, and of a good report: and that this is a scandal more then ordinary in
the judgment of the Commission, both in Doctrine and manners, is clear from
their Papers and Warnings, wherein they do not only laden it with many
grievous imputations, but stir up the Civil Magistrate to punish such as are
guilty of it, and gives directions to Presbyteries for censuring them with
Ecclesiastical Censures: Besides, it is unquestionable that all citations do
exclude men from being Judges in the matter for which they are cited; and
therefore though they might have been admitted to sit as Judges in the Assembly
in other particulars, which yet is not granted for the reason above mentioned,
yet it is above controversy that they could not have sitten in this: and
therefore it still follows, that as to this particular, which was indeed the
main thing, if not in a sort, all that was to be handled in the Assembly, it
was prelimited. As to the Third, That that Letter and Act had no influence upon
Presbyteries in the choice of their Commissioners: it is spoken against the
truth, as will appear by these Instances: 1 All those Ministers who oppose the
Public Resolutions are known to be honest and faithful men, and most of them
as had wont (ordinarily these years past, because of their ability and
integrity) to be chosen Commissioners; but few of these were chosen in
Presbyteries this year to be Commissioners to the Assembly; and if any such
were chosen, it was where the whole Presbytery was unanimous against the
Public Resolutions; or if the Presbytery were divided in their judgments, then
was there, for most part, either two Elections, or else dissents from, and
Protestation against the Election of such as were unsatisfied with the Public
Resolutions; or else both, as in the Elections of Glasgow and Sterline; of all
which no Reason can be given, except the Letter and Act of the Commission. 2
The Presbytery of Dunkel having chosen their Commissioners to the Genesis
Assembly, and one of their number who was a member of the Commission having
dissented from, and protested against the Election; because such as were chosen
were unsatisfied with the Commissions proceedings: the Synod of Perth meeting a
little thereafter, and receiving the Letter and Act of the Commission did
thereupon sustain the Dissent and Protestation of that man of their number, and
appointed the Presbytery of Dunkel to choose their Commissioners anew again. As
to the Fourth, That none were denied a voice in the Assembly upon the account
of their not being satisfied, or being cited: albeit that were true, yet it
does not make void what is said for pre-limiting the Elections by the Letter
and Act of the Commission, because the Elections were primo instanti, prejudged
in Presbyteries, by barring those from being chosen who otherwise were in a
capacity and likelihood to have been chosen, by which it having come to pass
that few such were chosen; Policy taught the Assembly not to deny such of them
as were chosen, a vote upon that account, the votes of so few a number not
being like to prove so great a disadvantage to their business as the professed
denial of them a vote would have done: But in order to this particular, we do
further offer these two things for one Answer. 1 That the discussing and
judging of the Commissions of these in the Presbytery of Glasgow, who were
unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, was laid aside upon this
consideration, only, because the Reason of Mr. Rob. Ramsay his Protestation
against the Election, taken from their dissatisfaction with the Public
Resolutions, could not (as was alleged) be discussed till these Resolutions
were either condemned or approven, which was in effect to exclude them from
voting, because of their not approving the Public Resolutions: And this is so
much the stronger, if we shall consider that it was refused to lay aside the
Commissions of these who had carried on these Resolutions in the Commission of
the Assembly, until their proceedings should be tried and approven. 2 It is to
be considered, that the Assembly did sustain and approve the Letter and Act of
the Commission for citing such as were unsatisfied, which was a real excluding
of all these who were cited upon dissatisfaction, at least from being made
Judges in that particular.

Reas. That cannot be, or is not accounted a lawful free Genesis Assembly, in
which relevant Exceptions being timously propounded against many of the Members
thereof, and offered to be verified and instructed, were refused to be taken in
consideration; but, notwithstanding of the timous proponing of these
Exceptions, and offering to instruct the same, these Members were allowed to
sit and vote before these Exceptions were taken in consideration and discussed:
But the Meeting of St. Andrews was such, because it being propounded and urged
by sundry in that Meeting, that such of the Commission as had hand in the
Public Resolutions should not be permitted to sit and vote in the Assembly,
they being under a scandal and guilty of the promoting a course of Defection
which was offered to be instructed until such time as they should be tried: yet
it was refused to take any such Exception in consideration, or to remove them
till this should be tried and discussed. Therefore, etc. For further clearing
and confirming of this Argument, it is needful to speak to these two things. 1
To show, that it was incumbent in duty to the Assembly to have removed from
their Meeting all persons under scandal (the same being made known unto them)
until they were purged thereof. 2 To show, that the persons objected against
were under such scandals as is alleged for the first; albeit (as we conceive)
no great controversy will be made about it, yet we offer these things for
proof of it: 1 That the light of Nature, and the Word of God speaks for it. 2
That some clauses both of our National Covenant, and Solemn League and
Covenant, and Eight Desires of the Commission in the year 1648. and of the
solemn Engagement in the same year, and all the Church Remonstrances for
purging of Armies and Judicatories, even the late Papers given in by the same
Commissioners to the Parliament at Sterlin^ about the Act of Classes for
excluding of scandalous persons from being Members of our Judicatories. 3 There
is a Rule and Order set down in the Third Gen Assembly of this Kirk in July
1562. That at the entry of every Assembly, the first work is to be anent trying
and purging of the Members thereof; where men are appointed to be charged in
Gods behalf, to declare their consciences to^ching their Doctrine, Life and
execution of their Office, if therein they be scandalous: like as it is
appointed that any to whose charge any thing is laid, ought to be removed out
of the Assembly, until his cause be tried; and if he be convicted, he can have
no Voice until the Kirk receive satisfaction, and in the common order of
proceeding set down in subsequent Assemblies, set down by the Assembly in March
1568. It is appointed, that before any meddle with any business they shall f^ll
unto the trial of their Members. The same is to be found in the Assembly 1578.
August 6. at Edinburgh, and in the Assembly 1580. and in the Assembly 1581.
which two last Assemblies, as the one of them condemned the O^fice of
Episcopacie and p^t out the Bishops; and the other established Presbyteries and
the Book of Policy, and the short Confession of Faith, or our National
Covenant: so were they so exact and diligent in this trying, purging work of
their Members, that at their very entry they require all men as they render the
Glory of God and the weal of this Kirk, and as they shall be answerable to God
upon their consciences, that they delat and give in the Names and Faults of any
of their number, to the removing of the slander which arises to the whole Kirk
by their admitting of such Members; which custom and practice was exactly kept
for above twenty Assemblies, and twenty years together. 4 All the Assemblies of
this Kirk, since the late Reformation in the year 16^8. have upon the objection
of scandal against any of their Members in the time of the Constitution of
their Meeting, removed these Members until the Exception were tried and
discussed; nay, this same Meeting at St. Andrews upon like exception and
objection, that the scandal of the Lord of Blaketer and some others, their
accession to the unlawful Engagement was not yet sufficiently purged, by
notifying their repentance to the Assembly, and approving the same where they
were removed from sitting as Members: And we would have any man in the world to
bring a reason why some Members, upon Exceptions propounded, should have been
removed, till these were tried and discussed; and yet other Members admitted
against them as relevant? nay, more relevant Exceptions were propounded before
the trying and discussing of them. For the Second, That the persons objected
against, were under scandal of carrying on a course of Defection: It is
manifest, not only from hearsay and common report, the first whereof in the
13. of Deuteronomy and 12. Verse, is made a ground for enquiring and making
search, and asking diligently after these who seduce to false-worship: And the
other ground of proceeding against the incestous person 1 Cor. 5.1. 2 These.
3.11. But also from these Four Particulars. 1 The offense and stumbling, and
sad complaint of the plurality of the godly in the Land against their
proceedings. 2 The Testimony and Letters of many Presbyteries bearing their
stumbling and dissatisfaction with such courses. 3. The clear standing Acts,
Remonstrances, and Declarations of former General Assemblies, unto the which
these proceedings were diametrally opposite. 4 The Testimony of sundry Brethren
of the Assembly offering to instruct what was alleged.

Objection. The Commissioners of former Assemblies have always such of them as
was chosen by Presbytries being admitted to be Members, before the trial, and
approbation of their proceedings. Answer. It is true, That the Commissioners
have been allowed to sit until their proceedings come to be tried and judged;
but it is as true that such Exception and Objection being proponed, was never
rejected; There was since the late Reformation, no cause to propound any such
thing: the Commissioners till this year having always carried themselves
faithfully, but upon supposal they had done otherwise, it cannot in reason be
denied, but that there was reason both to propound it, and take it in
consideration: In order to this particular, it is to be remembered, that upon
occasion of the great Debate in the Assembly 1597. concerning the carriage and
proceedings of the Commission of the Genesis Assembly who had led the Church into
defection in the interval betwixt Assemblies by taking upon them to give in
Petitions to the Parliament for Vote in Parliament to the Ministers that should
be provided to Prelacies and representing the true Kirk of God, and being the
Third Estate of the Realm; the next Assembly which sat in the year 1601 did
make an Act appointing the Commissioners of the preceding Assembly to give an
account of their whole proceedings in the beginning of the next, before any
other cause or matter be handled, and their proceeedings be allowed, or
dissallowed, as the Assembly shall think expedient; which Act was renewed in
the year 1648. and does necessarily infer, That they are not to be admitted to
sit as Members of the Assembly, though there be no scandal nor exception
propounded thereupon, till their carriage be first tried and approven: muchless
they are to be admitted when there is scandal and exception propounded
thereupon.

Object. It was sufficient to remove them, when the Report of their proceedings
come in to be judged, or not to admit them as Judges of the things wherein they
were to be tried; and as this was done in former Assemblies, so it was also
done in this. Answ. That was not sufficient, because it being objected and
offered to be instructed, that they were under a scandal, and that of a very
high nature, they ought not to have sitten as Members until they had first been
purged thereof, unless we may say that any scandalous man may judge in any
thing, except in the matter of his own scandal. 2. There was a manifest
prejudice to the judging of their own proceedings by their sitting, because
they had a hand in nominating, and appointing men, who did consider their
proceedings, and make Report thereof to the Assembly: nay, their Moderator and
Clerk, being Moderator and Clerk of the Assembly, did nominate all these men,
and were so gross therein, that except one man, they nominated none to be upon
the Committee, except such as were of their own judgment, though some few days
after they did add some few others, after it was taken notice of, and
regraited in private Conference with the Moderator.

Object. If the propounding of one Exception was reason sufficient to have
removed so many considerable Members of the Assembly, then might the whole
Members one after another, have been removed by propounding Exceptions against
them, and so not only that Assembly, but all Assemblies whatsoever, might by
any contentious of malevolous person be brought to nothing, because they might
propound Exceptions against each of the Members, and allege, That they could
not sit until these were first tried and discussed, otherwise it were not a
lawful free General Assembly. Answ. This Objection strikes against the
propounding and hearing of any Exception whatsoever, against any constituent
Member of a Judicatory, as well as against the present case; and therefore if
the makers of it admit Exceptions against constituent Members in any case, they
are bound no less then we are, to frame an Answer thereto, which answer in the
present Case, as in others, they would not grant. But to the thing it self, we
say, That it is not sufficient for removing of Members of Judicatories simply
to propound and offer Exceptions against them; but these two things are
requisite in the Exception propounded and offered. 1. That for the matter it be
such as prima front, at least seems relevant in law. 2. That for the truth of
the fact in application to the persons against whom it is made there be a
scandal, or some presumptions, or some offering to instruct and make it out;
now in the present case it is clear that the exceptions propounded was relevant
in jure: if there be any relevant, why a man should not sit in the General
Assembly, this certainly is one, that he has betrayed his former Trust, has
made defection from the covenant and cause, and being instrumental to carry on
a course of defection throughout the Kirk and Kingdom; and as to the truth of
the Fact in reference to these against whom the exception was made, all these
three did concur a flagrant scandal, pregnant presumptions, and persons in the
Judicatory offering to instruct and verify what was alleged.

Object. No Exception could be taken in consideration, nor discussed until the
Judicatories was first constituted, and a Moderator chosen, and therefore it is
nothing against the freedom of the Meeting, that the Assembly not yet being
constitute, and a Moderator not chosen, that they did refuse to fall upon the
trial and discussing of that Exception against the Commissioners of the former
Assembly. Answ. If the Assembly had immediately, upon the choice of the
Moderator, fallen upon the trial and discussing of that Exception, and removed
these against whom it was made, from sitting in the Assembly as Judges in any
thing until that had been done, though it could not have loosed, yet it would
have lessened the difficulty and strength of the Argument; but even after the
Moderator was chosen, and the Assembly now formally constitute, these men were
all allowed to sit as Members, and to be Judges in every thing that come before
the Assembly for many days together before the Assembly had judged of the
exception; nay, which is more, before their proceedings were approven by the
Assembly, they sat as Judges to give vote and sentence upon this very
exception propounded against themselves, the same being one of the special
reasons contained in the Protestation, which was condemned before the
proceedings of the Commissioners were reported and approven, we said that it
would not have loosed the difficulty, because the thing which was Desired, was
not the Trial and Discussion of the Exception instantly before the choice of a
Moderator, but that accordingly as was done in reference to other Members
excepted against, so these should be laid aside, and not allowed to vote until
the Assembly being constitute, take in consideration, and discuss the the
same, which they were so far from doing, that they did peremptorily reject it,
and admit him to vote, which was in effect to reject the exception wholly, and
to determine either that it was not relevant, or else that it was false, both
which were absurd. 1. Because to say that it was not relevant, was to
contradict most clear light of reason, and to say it was false, was to approve
the Commissions proceedings before trial of them, or hearing what was to be
said for verifying the exception.

Object. They could not be debarred until they were found judicially
scandalous, 1. Because they were many of them, men of approven integrity in all
their former carriage. 2. This had been to fasten an imputation, nay a kind of
censure upon them before they were found guilty. 3. It had been to make way for
a bad preparative, to remove a number of able and faithful men out of a
Judicatory whenever it should please any to come in against them with any
such alleadgeances. Ans. All these things are clearly enough answered already,
yet for further satisfaction, we shortly reply, that though a Judicial trial
and sentence may happily be required for removing one who is already a received
member of a constitute Judicatory, yet its not in regard of the members of a
Judicatory yet to be constituted, or in regard of members yet not admitted; for
if it were so, then it would follow, either that no Judicatory could constitute
it self, but behaved to have some other Judicatory to judge of the constituent
Members of it, or else that it behoved to constitute it self of scandalous
persons: notwithstanding of timeous information given of these scandals and
exceptions propounded against the persons under the same, why they could not
sit till these scandals were purged. 2. It destroys the common order and
directorie of procedour in the constitution of all Judicatories. 3. It
contradicts the current and constant tenor of the practices and proceedings of
the General Assemblies of this Kirk, in order to their constitution, who have
always removed persons against whom exceptions were made, till they took
trial of the same, though there were no Judicial sentence at the propounding
of them produced for verifying of them. As for their former integrity, we shall
not deny to sundry of them that testimony. But as it is not the first time in
the Kirk of Scotland, that men of understanding have fallen to prove others so,
neither did their former carriage when they fell from their stedfastnes,
persuade others to wink or be silent at their defection, and for the fastening
an imputation or kind of censure upon them. It was much better and more safe
and reasonable (supposing what is alleged) to fasten a just imputation upon
them, then to fasten an unjust and remeadilesse prejudice upon the cause. But
would not their being vindicated after trial, have made their righteousness
shine more brightly. And for the preparative, it is already answered, That it
is not sufficient to propound things by way of exception, but that they must be
relevant for the matter, and probable for the truth, because of scandal or
presumptions, or persons offering to verify and instruct: All which were in
the present case.

3. Reason. That is not a lawful f^ee Assembly, where there is not liberty and
freedom to vote in the matters agitated and debated therein: But the Meeting at
S. Andrews had no liberty nor freedom in the chief matters that came in
consideration, to wit, the Public Resolutions and Proceedings of the
Commission, as it is manifest from these particulars. 1. The Commission had in
their Remonstrances and Papers, stirred up the Civil Magistrate against such
as did differ from them in these Resolutions and Proceedings, and accordingly
the Civil Magistrate had confined some Ministers, to wit these of Sterlin,
upon that account, and had made Laws and Acts of Parliament, appointing all
such to be proceeded against as Enemies to Religion and the Kingdom. 2. The
Commission had by their Warnings and Papers to Presbyteries, stirred up
Presbyteries to censure such, and cite them to the General Assembly, and
accordingly the Presbyteries did cite many of them. 3. The Kings Majesty wrote
to the Assembly, a Letter inciting and stirring up to punishment and censure
these who differed from the Public Resolutions; and his Commissioner did
second the same by a Speech to the Assembly, intimating that he hoped that such
a course should be taken with them, as that all others might be deterred from
doing the like hereafter: none of all which things that Meeting did resent, but
first were silent thereat, and afterward did approve them.

Object. It was not any prelimiting of the Assembly in the freedom of their
voices for the King and his Commissioner to stir them up to their duty against
these who differed, and should not obey the Assembly: Nay, it was incumbent to
the King and his Commissioner to do so, as it is incumbent to the Judicatories
of the Kirk to stir up the Civil Magistrate to his duty. Ans. If the King and
his Commissioner had kept themselves within the bounds spoken of in the
Objection, less could have been said; but whilst the Assembly had not yet
meddled with the Public Resolutions and proceedings of the Commission either to
condemn or approve them, they stirred up of the Assembly to punish and censure,
not these who shall differ from the Assembly in their Acts and Conclusions, but
these who differ from the Commission in their Acts and Conclusions.

4. Reason. That is not a free Assembly wherein persons allowed by the Acts and
Policy of the Kirk to speak their Consciences are denied liberty so to do. But
so it was in the Assembly at S. Andrews, that such persons were denied that
liberty. Persons allowed to speak in an Assembly, are not only Ecclesiastic
persons having calling and power to vote therein; but others also are allowed
to propone hear and reason, as is evident from the Policy of the Kirk, and
Acts of Assembly 1581, and 1586, and 1596. all which expresses this as a part
of the freedom of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, and it was the
usual practice of this Kirk, to desire any judicious Member of the Kirk to
present unto the Assembly in writing their thoughts of any dangers to Religion,
or to the Kirk, and of the best remedies of the same, as is evident from the
Records of the Assemblies 1567, 1587, 159^, 1594, 1595 and especially in the
time of any trouble or difference. Yet notwithstanding of all these things, Sir
Archibald Johnstou^ Clerk of the General Assembly, a man to this time
undeniably faithful, and singularly acquainted with the acts and proceedings
of this Kirk, and with the matters presently in controversy and debate, and
who has been useful above many in all the tract of the work of Reformation
from the beginning throughout all the steps thereof, both at home and abroad;
having written his mind to the Meeting (not being able to come himself) about
the things which were to be agitat in the Assembly, and holden out much clear
light from the Scriptures, and from Acts of former Assemblies in these
particulars; albeit the Letter was delivered publicly to the Moderator in the
face of the Assembly, and urged to be read by him who presented it, that then
the Moderator did break it up, and promised to cause read it; and that many
Members did thereafter upon several occasions, and at several Diets press the
reading of it, yet could never the reading thereof be obtained, but it was
smothered together with a Ptotestation which was contained therein against a
Paper given in by the Commission to the Parliament, approving what was done by
the King and the Committee of Estates against the Ministers of Sterline.

5 Reas. That cannot be accounted a free Assembly to which there was not free
access and recess: But there was not free access to this Assembly by reason of
two Armies being interjacent bewixt the place of meeting, and the dwellings of
many of the Commissioners; these Armies in the very time when the Commissioners
should have come to the Assembly, being pursuing one another hotly, and having
their parties roving abroad every where, Therefore many Members were absent,
above the one half of the Buroughs, and many Presbyteries, to the number of
nine or ten: Neither was there free recess from it, not only because of the
former reason, but also because the King and the Committee of Estates did
detain and keep under a kind of confinement at Sterling, several Members
thereof, as they were returning to their own home, having nothing, nor
alleging any thing to challenge them of, unless it were their carriage at the
Assembly.

6 Reas. That is not a lawful free Assembly, in which persons lawfully under
the trial thereof, are admitted to sit as Judges in the same thing for which
they are under trial. But the Meeting at St. Andrews and Dundee is such,
because the Commissioners of the Gen Assembly were, before the approbation of
their proceedings by the Assembly, admitted to sit as Judges of the
Protestation, a part whereof was, that their proceedings should not be
ratified, because they did involve a conjunction with the Malignant Party;
which is contrary to the Word of God, the Solemn League and Covenant, the
Solemn Engagement, many Acts, Warnings and Declarations of this Kirk etc. Yea,
not only did they before the approving of these proceedings by the Assembly,
judge the Protestation, whereof their own proceedings were a part, but did also
before the approving their proceedings, judge the persons who had given it in,
and gave their voices amongst others who of them should be cited, in order to
Censure; nay, the Committee wherein that business relating to the Protestation
and the in-givers of it was handled, and upon whose report thereanent the
Resolutions of the Assembly therein did mainly hang, was for most part made up
of those who had been Members of the Commission; which things, when they are
impartially considered by indifferent men, I believe will be acknowledged to be
very unsuitable and inconsistent with the liberty of a free Assembly. There be
two things, as to the matter of Fact needful to be verified in this Argument:
one is, That the Protestation was judged and condemned, and the five Members
appointed to be cited before the approving of the Commission-Book. Another is
this, That the Members of the Commission had voice in these things. Of the
truth of both these we are informed by some, but if any doubt, we shall desire
him to lay no weight upon the Argument until he get the certainty; and we our
selves do not lay any weight upon it, but as these things shall be found true.

Object. Albeit these Reasons do indeed hold forth some kind of encroachment
upon the liberty and freedom of the Assembly, yet do they not prove the Nullity
thereof: Every degree of encroachment is not such as destroies an Assembly, and
makes it no Assembly; but it were hard ever to find a lawful free Assembly in
the World. Ans. It is true, That every encroachment upon the liberty of an
Assembly does not destroy it and make it no Assembly, but we deny that these
encroachments contained in our arguments does it not, and we give these two
Reasons of our denial: 1 Because the things mentioned destroy almost all the
essential requisits of a free Assembly; freedom of Elections, freedom of
Voicing, free access and recess, and free hearing of what is offered for light,
impartial hearing and discussing of Exceptions against constituent Members,
admitting parties, or these who are under trial, to be Judges in the same
thing. 2 Because these are such encroachments as moved the General Assembly in
the year 1638. because of the like, to judge several of the former Assemblies
of this Kirk to be null, as may be seen in the Acts of that Assembly. We
believe, that there is none of these pretended Assemblies for the Nullity of
which stronger Reasons are brought then these are which we have brought for the
Nullity of this, and will appear to those who shall take but a little pains to
compare them together.

Object. If so be this Assembly had proceeded right upon the matter, or
according to the mind of these who oppose the Public Resolutions, it is not
like that they would have thought that the Reasons alleged did prove the
Nullity of it; and if so, why then should such things be made use of to prove
the nullity of it, because some men are not satisfied with the proceedings and
acts thereof. A. Albeit there were no such Reasons as is alleged, nor any
thing relating to the point of form, yet conceive, and that with much
appearance of Reason, that any Assembly proceeding wrong upon the matter, is a
Null Assembly; because Kirk Judicatories have no power to destruction, but all
their power is to Edification. But whatsoever power the Commissioners in a Genesis
Assembly have, it is by Commission from their Presbyteries, which Commission
limits them to the Word of God and the Covenant, and Acts of former Assemblies;
therefore in so far as they do any thing contrary to these, in so far they may
be declined, as having no power nor authority for doing any such thing; which
furnishes another considerable reason for declining of this Assembly, not
before alleged, because they have in most of all, and the most material of
their proceedings, proceeded contrary to the trust committed unto them by
Presbyteries. 2. Albeit they had proceeded right upon the matter, yet would
there still have been reason to have insisted upon the Objecting of these
things, for preserving and vindicating the liberty of Assemblies; and if any
had, even in the case of their right, proceed or stuck closely to these things,
we see not what cause there was to blame him for so doing, though yet we
believe that men in the case of right procedor, upon the matter would have more
easy digested faults; in the form we must suppose it to be in these things as
in the case of two Ministers, both of them for the same fault, deserving
deposition in stricto jure; and the one, as a man who is known not to Edify,
but Destroy; the other, known to Edify, though guilty of these faults: Will
not men think that they may with some good conscience spare the one, when they
depose the other? We take it to be not without special providence, that the
Lord has trysted together in this Assembly so much illegality in Form, and so
much iniquity in Matter, and these being joined together, do convincingly
prove, That it is none of the lawful free Courts of Jesus Christ, nor to be
reckoned amongst the free Genesis Assemblies of the Kirk of Scotland.

Object. It is without precedent, that the Constitution of a Genesis Assembly has
been Protested against in the Kirk of Scotland: Answ. It is the Ignorance of
the History and Acts of the Kirk that makes men speak so, we shall give but one
instance, because it does most quadrat to the present case in the year, 1597.
it being carried by plurality of voices in the Assembly, that the Petition of
the Commissioners of the former Assembly, given in to the Parliament, for
Ministers voting in Parliament in name of the Kirk, and as the third Estate of
the Kingdom, should be approven; and that the Paper of Greivances which was
given to the Assembly against that Petition by several Members thereof, should
be buried and obliterate for the continuance of Peace and Quietness in the
Kirk; Mr. John Davidson for himself, and in the Name of the Brethren, entered
his Protestation in these terms, That this present Assembly is not a free
General Assembly; and desired it be inserted in the Books of the Assembly.

Object. It seems that the Protesting against this Assembly has in it no good
nor profitable use at all, because protesting against their proceedings, had
been testimony enough for the truth, though there had been no Protestation
against the Assembly; yet the next being such as it ought, might have taken the
Constitution of this in consideration, and declared it Null. Answ. If the
latter part of what is alleged have any weight, it speaks also against any
Protestation against the matter of their proceedings: But the Lord calls for
Protestation against both the matter and manner, and it has these goods in it,
besides many other: 1. Our exoneration of our Consciences to the duty and
respect which we owe to Jesus Christ, in maintaining the liberty and freedom of
his Courts, unviolated. 2. Ground of conviction upon the Consciences of these
who have incroached upon the same. 3. A keeping of the whole Kirk of Scotland
free of such guiltiness. 4. Preserving a legal right and fair regress to these
outward Privileges of Christ's visible Kingdom. 5. One example of the like
faithfulness and zeal to others in this, and the following generations.

Object. This Protestation seems to have two great evils in it, 1. Is a
discovery of our Nakedness before the face of the Enemy, who is now in the
Land, and does insult, and rejoice, in these our Divisions; and takes occasion
thereby, to speak evil of the Government and Discipline of our Kirk. 2. It
casts loose the whole Frame of our Kirk-Government, and puts out of capacity of
having any more Assemblies. Answ. It is not the Protesting that has discovered
our Nakedness, or made the Enemy speak evil of, or despise our Government, but
it is the gross miscarriages which are Protested against: The Protestation is
rather a covering of our Nakedness, and making up of the Breach, and stopping
of the mouths of Enemies, when they hear that all are not involved, nor give
not way to these corruptions of Government, but that many bear testimony
against the same: Neither does it cast loose the Form of Kirk-Government, or
put us out of a capacity of having Assemblies, because it is not a Protestation
simply against Genesis Assemblies, but against the Constitution of this Assembly:
The Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, and Government of the Kirk of Scotland is
fully and clearly acknowledged and asserted in the Protestation, and General
Assemblies rightly constituted, and proceeding rightly, are acknowledged to be
amongst the effectual means for remeding the present differences and
distractions; and there are several ways and capacities left unto us, by
which a General Assembly may again be called, one is by the mutual consent of
Presbyteries; a second is by the Commission of the former Assembly, which
seems to be in force until another lawful free Genesis Assembly do sit: a third is
by the Civil Magistrate, and others also there be which providence may offer.
But it may be said, That by the Protestation the exercise of the Government is
suspended, which may consequently prove dangerous and destructive; To which we
reply, 1 That the exercise of the Government is preserved in the inferior,
Judicatories. 2 It is much better that these who assume power to themselves and
exercise it to destruction, that they should want it, and not have it; Better
no General Assembly then a pretended one, which destroies instead of edifying:
as better no Minister then one Usurper over the Flock, who poisons instead of
feeding.

Object. To protest against a General Assembly has always been looked upon in
this Kirk as a thing very censurable; and therefore in the year 1582. there is
one Act of the General Assembly, appointing such as decline the General
Assembly, to be summarily excommunicated. Answ. To make such an act were,
either to suppose that a General Assembly could not be wrong constitute, and
could not err in their proceedings; or else, that suppose they should be wrong
constitute and err, yet they ought not to be declined or protested against,
both which are equally absurd, and therefore we cannot think that the Kirk of
Scotland has at any time made any such Act in so general and unlimited terms.
As to that in the year 1582. it is grossly mistaken, because it is no ways
anent declining of unlawful Assemblies, but against appealing from lawful
Assemblies to the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastic causes, for stopping
Ecclesiastic Discipline against the persons appealers, as is further evident
by the occasion thereof: Mr. Robert Montgomery Bishop of Glasgow, his producing
Letters of Horning from the King and Counsel, charging the Assembly to desist
from his Process, and suspending their Sentence in the mean time, till the King
and Counsel consider the same; against which the Kirk entered a Protestation.
From these things it may appear how unwarantably the Meeting at Dundee did upon
alleadgance of this Act fall upon debate of the summar Excommunication of these
who had protested.

A VINDICATION OF THE Freedom and Lawfulness, and so of the Authority of the
late GENERAL ASSEMBLY, Begun at St. Andrews, and continued at Dundee, in
Answer to the Reasons alleged against the same in the Protestation and
Declinator given in by some Brethren at St. Andrews; and in another Paper
lately contrived by some, etc. 1651.

Together with a Review of the said Vindication, plainly holding forth the
Nullity and unlawfulness of that pretended General Assembly: In which the
aspersions cast upon the Protesters in that Vindication are taken off: And the
Answers brought unto the Reasons contained in the Protestation, against the
freedom and lawfulness of that Meeting and in the Paper afterward penned for
clearing and confirming thereof are discussed, and the strength of these
reasons established to be a Null Assembly.

By a Friend of the Protesters cause.

Gal 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

2. Cor. 10.8. Our authority which the Lord has given us for edification, and
not for your destruction.

For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

Printed Anno Dom. 1652.

The Inscription of the Vindication.
A Vindication of the freedom and lawfulness, and so of the authority of the
late General Assembly begun at S. Andrews, and continued at Dundee, in Answer
to the Reasons alleged against the same in the Protestation and Declinator
given in by some Brethren at S. Andrews, and in another Paper lately contrived
by some practizing to foment divisions, and to fix a Schism in this Kirk; and
for that effect, spread abroad only into the hands of such as they conceive
will be inclinable to follow their way, but kept up from all others.

The Review of the Inscription,
IN this Title, some things are insinuated, and others are asserted. It is
insinuated, that the Protestation was given in but by a few, for he calls them
some Brethren; I acknowledge, that the multitude and greater number are upon
the other side, yet that is not a thing wherein they have cause to boast, or
the Protesters need to be ashamed; it seldom falls out, especially in
declining times, that the followers of the truth are the most numerous; yet
were these even for their number, many more then by the Law are accounted
witnesses sufficient to attest a truth; and many there be throughout the Land,
who put to their seal to their Testimony as true; Ministers, Elders and
Professors; yea, the Generality of the Generation of the Righteous, and such as
know GOD, and live godly in the Land. It is asserted first, That the other
Paper was lately contrived, that is, a little while before the writing of this
Vindication: But if the Vindication was not written many months before it came
abroad, the Author thereof is mistaken in this, because this Paper was
contrived within a very few weeks, three or four at most, after the
Protestation it self, it may be that it came but lately to his hand, but it was
abroad long before his Vindication was heard of. 2. It is asserted, that this
Paper was contrived by some, practizing to foment divisions, and to fix a
Schism in this Kirk. But their hearts bear them record, that the fomenting or
fixing of division or schism justly so called, as it never was, nor is their
purpose, so has it been far from their practice, either in that or any other
particular This indeed they do acknowledge, that they are unwilling to suffer
themselves to be divided from the truth formerly received and professed by the
Church of Scotland; and that they conceive themselves bound in their stations
and Callings, to bear testimony against the course of backsliding, carried on
in the Land, of which they judge the common Constitution and Acts of that
Assembly to be no small part; and though to foment divisions and fix a Schism
in the Church, be a heavy imputation, yet being conscious to themselves of
their own innocence, they are not much moved with it, remembering that it is
the common Topic whence decliners in all the Ages of the Church have argued
against these who would not be consenting unto, or did testify against their
defection; Peace and unity has been their plea, and sedition, division and
schism their charge against their opposers; upon this account does the Lord
Jesus and his Apostles, by the Scribes and Pharisees and Elders of the Jews,
Luther and Calvin, and our first Reformers by the Pope and his Clergy;
Nonformists by the Prelates and their adherents, stand recorded in the Catalogue
of these who practiced to foment divisions, and fix a schism in the Church. 3.
It is asserted, That this Paper was spread abroad only into the hands of such
as they conceive will be inclineable to follow their way, but kept up from
all others. If they had directly sent Copies to these of a contrary judgment,
it might happily been thought a piece of vanity and presumption; and if the
Author of this Vindication thought such a thing incumbent to them, why did he
not send a Copy of his Answer to the contrivers of these Papers, whom (as he
afterward bears us in hand) he does very well know, or has he spoken with, or
received evidence from all others, who were not inclinable to follow that way
that he does so confidently assert that Paper to have been kept up from all of
them; I will assure him, it was not so as he affirms; As the contrivers did
not vainly nor boastingly spread it to the provoking of any, so did they not
purposely keep it up from any of whatsoever judgment, but were willing and
desirous that it should go abroad, for edifying of as many as the Lord should
be pleased to bless it unto; And therefore did they not only give Copies to
such as did desire them, but also did use some means to have gotten it Printed,
and could get none to undertake it.

VINDICATION.
Before I fall upon the Examination of the Reasons brought against, and the
discovery of the false Aspersions cast upon the Assembly by these Papers
mentioned; I do obtest the Reader, whosoever he be, into whose hands this
Vindication shall come in the fear of God, and as thou loves not to be led away
with error, but to know, debate, and for thy edification decern on what side
Truth and Justice is; thou would take heed that thy Judgment be not either
blindfolded, or biased and fixed in prejudice by somewhat which may have
strong influence this way, and that is merely extrinsecall to the Cause, as to
truth or falsehood, justice or injustice.

There be three things, one or more, have (I doubt not) had influence on the
misleading of some already in this matter, and may yet I suspect miscarry
others, and fix some that come to the reading of this Paper, with a mind
pre-occupyed with one of these Extrinsecall respects.

REVIEW.
I shall not contend with the Author about the truth of that General Assertion:
That things extrinsecal to a Cause may have influence upon men's judgments, to
byasse them against the weight of reason; It does indeed oft-times fall out so
to be, especially in things that relate to Religion, neither shall I make any
application to himself, or to the owners and fallowers of the Cause which he
defends. I wish that all of us, on all hands may from the real sense of the
great blindness that is in our understandings, and many byasses that are in
our hearts, with much trembling and fear, make humble, serious and frequent
addresses unto God, that he would give us rightly to know, and in singleness
of heart to judge of the truth in these things, without laying weight on any
thing that will not bear weight in the balance of the Sanctuary. But happily
indifferent men would have accounted it fairer dealing, if not more prudence if
he had left the Cause simply to be determined by the weight of his Answers and
Reasons; and had not so operously and industriously labored to bring the
Reader in dislike with the Protesters, by charging some of them with high
crimes, and endeavoring to weaken the Reputation of all of them, by a long
deduction, and many far fetched Instances of things on the by; If his Answers
be strong enough for a battery, what needed these undermindings? But its fit
to take some View of these misleading Principles, wherewith he charge the
Protesters, and their adherents, and of which he desires others to beware least
they be thereby also ensnared; only this advertisement I give, that his charge
in all these things runs only upon the Principles and Practices of some of
the Protesters; Now upon supposall that all his allegiance were true, what a
poor way of arguing would these that are for the Public Resolutions, and for
the Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee account it, to tell them over some few
of the many gross Principles, and Practices holden and acted by some of their
party, and from thence to conclude against their professions, and to the
prejudice of their Cause.

VINDICATION.
First selfish Interest, it is far from my thoughts to charge this upon all who
have concurred in Protesting against, and declining this Assembly as the motive
that led them thereupon; I am persuaded of many of them that they followed that
course in the simplicity of their hearts; yet I leave it to all judicious
indifferent men to consider and give their judgment, if it be not very apparent
that somewhat of this kind was the spring that moved some, the prime contrivers
and sticklers in this business, who having adventured upon such high courses
and attempts, tending to the violation of the National Faith, renting and
ruining the Kingdom, trampling upon Authority, and carrying with them tenants,
contrary to the mind and Practice of all Orthodox Kirks, and to the Faith, and
not being able to abide trial in these things by an Assembly, who in
themselves was not able to bear the sway, and carry things to their mind, and
finding others in simplicity of heart with them disliking some Public
Resolutions and Actings, and so apt to be led on with them upon any course that
could be presented with the color of a Testimony against these Resolutions and
Actings, found it safest; for they rather altogether do disclaim the authority
of the Assembly, then to hazard upon a fair and orderly trial of their
matters; yea, have we not seen some already ship in, and land out of, and ship
in again in that Protestation, according as they conceived the wind of affairs
then in the time to blow with, or against it, to credit, or discredit,
advantage or disadvantage; conscientious men would beware now that this same
motive or interest, do not prevail over them, to neglect due Examination of the
grounds of that Protestation, or to close their eye against such light as might
happily be holden forth in this matter, to the discovery of the lightness and
non-relevancy of these grounds and reasons; Therefore put reputation and
dis-reputation in the estimation of men, advantage, or dis-advantage worldly to
thee and thy condition, put off thy sight for a while, until thou have
pondered and compared reason with reason.

REVIEW.
In the Application of this Principle of selfish interest, the Author assoils
some, conceiving them to be led on in the simplicity of their hearts, by the
subtilty and misguiding of others, whom he charges with adventuring on high
courses and attempts, tending to the violation of the National Oath, renting
and ruining the Kingdom, trampling on Authority, and carrying with them tenets
contrary to the mind and practice of all Orthodox Churches and to the Faith,
etc What is all this, but the way, if not very near the words of the
Prelaticall and Malignant party, against the Instruments of the Work of
Reformation Anno 1638 and thereafter, who because the Integrity of some of
these Instruments was above exception, they did cast the appearing of these in
that Work upon their simplicity, and did charge others with falling on a course
of rebellion, as not being able to endure trial in the high crimes, whereof
(as they said) they were guilty; but the Lord ere long did make their
righteousness break forth as the morning, and their clearing as the noon day,
and I trust that he who knows the Innocence of these Protesters upon whom the
like things are charged, shall also show them the like mercy in Vindicating
them from all the reproach that has been unjustly cast upon them. But to the
point if these prime Contrivers, and sticklers in the business, had before
that time adventured on such high courses, and were guilty of such grievous
crimes as the Author charge them with, then surely these simple ones of whom
he speaks, were simple exceedingly, who could see nor discern none of these
things that were so obvious to the view of others; but notwithstanding of what
he says, they are known to sharp sighted decerning men, and for learning,
circumspection, judgment prudence and experience in the things of God, and the
Affairs of his house to be far beyond these whom he takes for the prime
contrivers and sticklers in the business, and to be inferior to none of their
opposers; yea, if there be any who deserve the name of the prime contrivers and
sticklers in the matter of the Protestation it is some of these who had no hand
in these high courses which he mentions, and who upon his account are among the
simple ones. These crimes which he does so positively, and without hesitation
charge upon some, especially being so heinous and great: It would seem, that
both charity and and justice would have required that he had brought some good
evidence of them, least happily his Reader trust not his naked Assertion, in that
which does not only reach the reputation, but also the life and being of
others; And if he would have men to believe their tenets to be contrary to the
mind and practice of all Orthodox Churches, and to the Faith; he would do well
to prove them to be so, until he do it, he will I hope allow charity to these
who deny it: Some of the greatest Divines of this Church, and of this age whose
praise is in all the Reformed Churches do affirm and have proved the contrary,
and if the Authors Assertion be true, I fear not to say, that the mind and
practice of this Church these years past has not been Orthodox nor agreeable
to the faith in order to these tenets, because they have been clearly taught
and practiced by this Church these years past, and a man but slenderly seen in
the Doctrine thereof may bring forth these tenets asserted by this Church in
the same letters and sillabes; and may give clear instances of her practices
aagreeing with the same; It has been done already by some in a more convincing
way then the sharpest opposers of these tenets have as yet satisfyingly
answered. I would fain know what ground the Author had to say, that the prime
contrivers and sticklers found it safest for them rather altogether to disclaim
the Authority of the Assembly, then to hazard upon a fair and orderly trial of
their matters. Their consciences do bear them record, that it was not upon any
jealousy or suspicion they had of their Cause as not being able to endure the
light; and reason may persuade indifferent men to think, that they did not look
upon protesting against the Assembly as the safest course otherwise then in
order to their duty, for if we take safety as it might concern their persons,
they could hardly have done any thing that could have more endangered these: It
was a speedy way to expose them to the censures both of Church and State, as
did appear in the sequel, some of them because of their Protesting being
deposed by that Assembly, and others of them confined by the civil Magistrate,
and there is ground to presume that they would have been proceeded against with
further censures, both civil and Ecclesiastic, if the Lord had not stopped the
current of these things; If this was their safest way, why do men of his own
judgment so frequently say, that if the Protestation had been forborne, the
Assembly would not have censured any, no not in the case of their adhering to
their judgment, and dissenting from the judgment of the Assembly in the matters
of the Public Resolutions. If we shall take safety in order to the cause, they
could not be so dull as to think, that their Protesting against the Assembly
would keep the Assembly from trying and judging of their cause, or other
indifferent men from searching into the same, and if before the Protestation,
it could not abide the trial, it did but put them in a much worse condition to
Protest upon an unwarrantable ground, it being worse to defend two evil causes
then one: And therefore it does not appear from these things that self-interest
was the spring from whence these Actings did flow; yea, the contrary (if any
thing) is manifest, because by such a way they could expect nothing but the
hightning of all former reproaches cast on them, the exposing of themselves to
the censures both of Church and State, if men that in all their precious
interests must be sufferers because of their doing of such things, be led to
act therein upon a principle of selfish interest, we leave it to judicious and
indifferent men to consider and give their judgment, whether it be very
apparent, yea, or not? It is true that some two or three did partly by the
persuasion, and partly by the threatening of some at Dundee, resile a little
from the Testimony which they had given at St Andrews in the matter of the
Protestation, which within a short time thereafter they did repent of, and
again adhered to their former Testimony, not upon any selfish-interest, or eye
to credit or advantage (as the Author affirms) there being no appearance
first or last, that by adhering to the Protestation they could gain any of
these things, but on the checks of their own consciences, and the voice they
heard behind them, saying, this is the way walk ye in it, when they had turned
aside, some of them are since that time taken out of the land of the living,
and I trust are now in glory, and I can assure the Author and all others, and
if it be doubted, I will get it attested under the hands of famous witnesses;
that after their resiling from that testimony they had no peace nor quietness in
their spirits for a long time, but went down mourning to their graves, because
they had so done, and upon their death beds did often and sadly bemoan it, that
they had missed the opportunity to give some public Testimony and Declaration
with others of their sorrow for the same, and of their purpose and resolution
to adhere to the Protestation. It had been no loss to the Author nor his
cause, to have spared such sharp (let me not say bitter) and personal
reflections upon conscientious and godly men, as he many times needlessly uses,
he and all others whose eyes God has opened, to see their way, cannot but be
conscious to themselves of their own wanderings, and how much they owe to the
exceeding riches of the mercy and free grace of God, that has recovered them
out of snares.

VINDICATION.
SEcondly, estimation of the persons, the Authors or Abbettors of this
Protestation* God forbid I should think, say, or advise any thing to the
prejudice or disadvantage of godliness or godly persons, neither shall I
question their godliness, my judgment concerning some, yea many of them is
very positive; having by experience and acquaintance seen, I must say, much of
the image of JESUS CHRIST in them, as for others what ever they have been every
whit, I take not on me to judge them, nor yet think I it pertinent or fit so to
do; That there are godly men, not a few on the other side too, is manifest,
some that were in Christ before them, and men that has suffered for the Truth
and Cause of God, when others had not the honor to be doers for it; and are
ready to suffer, if he shall call them to it, though some uncharitably and
rashly (to say to the best of it) spares not to traduce them as Apostates and
backsliders; but this is it I would say, that men should take heed that they
make not a snare of their opinion; yea, or the real conviction of the
godliness they have of any persons by approving, taking up, or following their
sayings, opinions or practices, without due examination and trial upon this
account, because they are godly persons from whom such things proceeds.

It is well and expedient for such as would in this dangerous time walk
circumspectly, and shun snares, to remember as to this present caution two
things: 1. That true godliness is not of such perfection in any on this side
of eternity, as does exempt them from all erring, whether in judgment or
practice, nor yet from stiff maintaining mistakes, when once they have turned
aside unto them. Luther was a godly man, and had much of CHRIST in him; I think
none of them interessed in the present business will compare with him, yet who
knows not what great errouns he held in the matters of God, and maintained
not only stiffely, but violently to the great prejudice of Religion, and
obstruction of the work of Reformation, under which the Reformed Kirks do groan
yet unto this day. 2. How woeful a snare; this (I mean not godliness, but the
overweighing conceit of persons reputed to be godly) has proved in the
neighbor Nation and Kirk; Has not this been one of the chiefest stratagems
and engines whereby Satan has prevailed, to mar the fair work of Reformation,
so happily and hopefully once begun there, and silled that Land with
unparalelled confusions under which now it groans? Foelix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum. It were good for us to learn wisdom by other men's dangers,
and to be warned by the beacons which others shipwreck has set up to us, lest
we also make shipwreck upon the the same schelves; and then say, but too late,
non putavimus, proverb, still Scottish men, wise behind the hand, prove all
things, from whatsoever hand they come, and hold fast that which is good.

REVIEW.
I do indeed believe, that the Author does not intend to say or advise any
thing to the prejudice or disadvantage of godliness, or godly men; yet do I
desire him seriously, and in soberness of mind, as before the Lord, to
consider, whether there has been something in the late Public Resolutions,
and in the proceedings and Acts of the late Assembly at Dundee, to both which
(if I mistake not) he had a great accession, that is prejudicial to godliness
and to godly men: Respect to these did exceedingly abate with the Public
Resolutions; yea, enimity against these did exceedingly grow with these
resolutions; a thing so manifest, that they who did run, could not but read it;
and did not the Acts at Dundee, wherein besides the censures that were
inflicted on some, all, whether Ministers, Elders, Expectants, Schoolmasters,
Students or Professors of whatsoever sort, who shall not acquiesce to the Acts
and Conclusions of that Assembly, and who after conference for their
satisfaction, oppose the same, are appointed to be censured, do not (I say)
these Acts import a prejudice to godliness and godly men, if prosecuted and
executed, they would at last non-Office, and non-Church many Godly
Church Officers and godly Church Members; yea, I fear the greatest part of the
Godly in the Land. His testimony concerning the godliness of many of the
Authors and Abettors of this Protestation, I do willingly accept, as savouring
of ingenuity, and having truth in it: I wish he had been as plain and positive
in giving his judgment concerning others: Whilst he differences them from
these to whose godliness he bears testimony, and says, that what ever they
have been every whit, he will not take upon him to judge; it seems that he
would render them suspected, if not have them taken for persons naughty or
little worth, what ever be his meaning in it, or his judgment of these others,
I shall not stand to enquire into it; there be none of the Authors or Abettors
of that Protestation, to whom many of the godly in Scotland will not give an
honest testimony, neither will any thing that any of them have been, contradict
the same, if at any time they have been in a wrong way, yet have they through
grace repented of, and forsaken the same: And it concerns the Author, who has
been a sharer of the like precious mercy, not to upbraid them, but to
acknowledge the goodness of the Lord both to them and to himself. I deny not,
that there are godly men on the other side, and such as suffered for the Truth
and Cause of God; but why he should say, that some of them were in Christ
before the Protesters, and that they were sufferers for the truth, when others
had not the honor to be deors for it, I do not well understand; sundry of the
Protesters, for their being in Christ, and suffering for the Truth and Cause of
God, are through grace, of a very old and longstanding, and famous and
honorable in all this Church. I cannot reckon the months or years since the
one or the other did begin to be in Christ, and had the honor to suffer for
the truth, neither do I desire to insist on the comparison, blessed be the Lord
for all that are in Christ, and for all who suffers for his Cause, I wish and
pray, that all of them may conquer and overcome, and if any of them be turned
out of the way, the Lord may again recover them, and make their last days
better then their first. It is true, some of the Protesters had not the honor
to be doers for the Cause; yea, were opposers of it, when some of the other
side were suffering for it; but what if they have obtained mercy, because they
did it ignorantly through unbelief: if not to be a doer for the Cause; yea, if
to be bearers down and opposers of the Cause, when others were suffering for
it, be a good plea against any of the Protesters, I fear most part of the late
Assembly must leave their Benches and go to the Bar. I know none that traduces
these godly men as Apostates; yea, I know and am persuaded, that the Protesters
have an high and honorable estimation of them for their piety and parts, and
for the great things whereof the Lord has made sundry of them isntrumental in
his House; and though they cannot but testify, unless they would be
unfaithful, that the course which these men have followed this while past in
the matter of the Public Resolutions, is a course of defection and
backsliding, yet do they not use to call them back-sliders, much less
Apostates, and if any others do it, they are not therein approven or allowed by
them. I join with the Author in his advice, that men should take heed that they
make not a snare of the opinion; yea, or the real conviction of the godliness
they have of any persons by approving, taking up, or following their sayings,
opinions or practices, without due examination and trial upon this account
because they are godly persons, from whom such things proceeds, as being an
advice wholesome and profitable in it self, and as having ground to think, that
the estimation of some men's persons and judgments the last year, had influence
upon some, to gain them to the Public Resolutions, and to the proceedings of
the Assembly. I do also join with him in the substance of the two things which
he adds for strengthening of this present caution, only desiring him to be
impartial in the application of the first, and to look homeward as well as
abroad, and to guard well both in the first and last, that in discovering the
errors or weakness of some who are truly godly, or the hypocrisy of others who
pretend it, the hands of the profane, and such as hate and mock at godliness,
and insult over the infirmities and blemishes of the Saints be not
strengthened, nor godliness nor godly men brought in contempt.

VINDICATION.
3. The pretenses and big professions of good, upright and zealous intentions
and affections toward the Cause of God and welfare of the Kirk of God in this
Land. I shall, nor dare question the uprightnes of the intentions of some; yea,
many of them may, I am verily persuaded of some of them, that they are far from
doing any thing intentionally or formally and directly intending the
overthrowing or wronging any of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ settled in this
Kirk, or the peace thereof: and that if they be led in any course in the matter
prejudicial to any of these, it is as many w^t out with Absalom, in the
simplicity of their hearts. But first it would be remembered, that many may be
very zealous in their intentions for God, and yet that zeal be not according to
knowledge: where there is much zeal for any end, there be also much mistake
about mids toward that end: and where there is much and clear knowledge in
many things, there may be much mistaking about some or more particulars: a good
intention is necessary, that a man may be approven before God in his actions;
but it is not enough to make his actions good or imitable by others: And
certainly this is the chief thing to be considered by thee, ere thou allow,
follow, or comply with the course of any other man, not what good intention or
zeal they do profess, but what good ground or reason they have for the course;
ay, but may some great knowers say, This is poor, who knows not this? this is
a common known principle of acting, that we should not lippen to men's
professions, of straight, honest and good intentions, but seek what warrant
they have for their actions. It is true, it is a common known and plain
principle; but common principles are better known, then made use of, and has
need to be pressed, that they may be hated in our actings, and amongst others,
this especially in these times, Great Professions of honest and straight
purposes and intentions, especially made by men who are presumed to have much
knowledge, and have been found in many things right, are ready to make others
who are credulou^ and more simple, oftentimes secure and negligent, to try and
prove their actings, and so oftentimes suffer themselves to be led out of the
way. 2. Albeit (as I said before) I do not question the uprightnes and
sincerity of some profession, concerning their intention and their affection,
yet I shall desire the Reader to compare the professions made in the Narrative
of the Protestation in hand, with some late practices of some that had hand
therein, and these not of the low form. First, they profess, that while they
live it shall be acknowledged how gracious GOD has been, in giving to this
Kirk pure Ordinances, and that they desire mercy and grace to adhere to the
Worship, Doctrine, Discipline and Government established in this Land. This
indeed is a good Profession, but suppose that which is certain and evident,
that when we speak of great estimation of, and adhering to the Discipline and
Government established in this Kirk we must conceive this in relation to the
Ordinances, not only in the abstract and dogmate, but also in concreto, and as
they are in actu exercito, actually existing, and as they are exercised in
Judicatories constituted accordingly, let a man profess what he will of
soundnes and constancy in point of judgment concerning Discipline and
Government established in the Kirk, yet if he be found a contemner of the
exercise of that Discipline, and of the lawful Judicatories invested with the
Government, no wise man will acknowledge that man to have a due estimation of,
or to be a constant adherer to these ordinances, except it may be in so far as
he holds something of them in his own hand, and that is himself; nay, such
professions are but (...), good words and fair speeches to deceive the hearts
of the simple. This laid down, let any ingenuous and indifferent men take unto
consideration but some practice of some of the Protesters, and judge how
agreeable they are to the former profession, and adhering to the Discipline and
Government settled in this Church; 1. Condemning Acts and Constitutions of the
supreme Judicatories of the Kirk most unanimously concluded, (themselves being
present and not contradicting, but positively by their votes consenting
thereunto) and that not in a private way, but in a Remonstrance publicly
emitted to the World, and presented to the State, without having so much
respect to these Judicatories, as (which due estimation of, and adhering to the
established Government of the Kirk did require) once to have had recourse to
them, first by supplication or desire to re-examine, or to take to their
consideration again these Acts and Constitutions; yea, refusing to apply
themselves to them in such a way, as that when advised and earnestly pressed
thereunto, as orderly, by some to whom they had communicated the design of the
Remonstrance: the former part of this is evident from the Western Remonstrance,
condemning the Treaty with the King, and closing thereof, allowed, approven and
ratified by the General Assembly 1650. If it be said, that that Remonstrance
was communicated to the Commission of the Kirk before it was presented to the
Estate, that is true; But beside that, the Commission had not power to judge
the Acts and Constisutions of the Assembly. It was presented unto them merely
to have had their concurrence in presenting it to the Estate, if that could
have been obtained; but with no desire to advise and give their judgment upon
the matter contained in it; yea, these that came with it, required, If they had
any power committed to them to change any thing of it; they plainly declared,
that though some expressions might be changed, yet they had no power, and were
not to alter one jote of the matter; so determined were they of themselves, and
antecedently to the cognition of the Public Judicatories. The latter part is
evident by Mr. John Carstaires Letters written to the Lord Register, about the
time of the contriving that Remonstrance from Edinburgh, and intercepted at the
Ferry of Airth, or thereabout.

REVIEW.
I Shall say nothing of the charity he allows many, and of the persuasion
that he has of some, that they are far from doing any thing intentionally, or
formally and directly intending to overthrow or wrong any of the Ordinances of
JESUS CHRIST, settled in this Church, or the peace thereof; he has reason to
allow them that and somewhat more, but this allowance of his to some, does
leave others under a hard construction, not only in regard of their work, but
also in respect of that which is their formal and direct intention, another
years proof of them, may happily force better thoughts both of their intentions
and actions, in the hearts of some who now for along time have mistaken them,
because they could not join in the Public Resolutions, which to them was to be
found in the way of Egypt, and to drink the waters of Sihor; in the mean while
they are comforted in this, that their own hearts does not condemn them,
neither in their intentions or actions, what he says of a zeal, not according
to knowledge and of mistakes about midses and of a good intention, that it is
not enough to make a man's actions good or imitable by others; but that is to be
considered, what good ground or reason they have for their course, and of the
applying of common principles which are better known then made use of. In all
these things I do agree with him, and wishes, that they may be blessed of God
unto his Readers and all others. But let us come to examine the things whereby
he endeavors to render the Professions of the Protesters suspected, as not
agreeing with some of their principles and actions; for making out of which, he
desires the Reader to compare the professions made in the Narrative of the
Protestation, with some late principle* of some that had hand therein, and
these not of the lowest note. Fir^, (says he) they profess, that while they
live, etc. I acknowledge, that I have no great skill of School terms; but I
conceive, that when in this place he speaks of the Ordinances in concreto, and
as they are in actu exercito, actually existing, and as they are exercised in
Judicatories constitute accordingly, he means not of every kind of concretion
and exercise of Ordinance quovis modo; for they may have an honest and
honorable estimation of Ordinances, who bear testimony against the corruptions
and mal-administrations of the abusers of them; otherwise these who have been
most zealous and straight-hearted for the Ordinances in all Ages, should be
found among the despisers of Ordinances, and none more then many of the
gracious Worthies of this Land, who were ready to lay down their lives for the
Ordinances, and yet did bear public testimony both against the corrupt
constitution and corrupt Acts of Assemblies, and all male-administrations that
were of any importance to the prejudice of the Kirk, or any of the Ordinances
of Christ therein, which was so far from rendering their professions suspected,
that it was a real evidence of the truth and sincerity thereof. But I think he
means of such a concretion and exercise of Ordinances, (though it had been fit
to express it more clearly) as is agreeable to the rule of Gods Word, for so
he seems to hint, when he says, as they are Judicatories constitute
accordingly; and in this sense the carriage of the Protesters does well stand
with their Professiors, in reference to the Ordinances. Having laid down this
ground and distinction of Ordinances, not only in the abstract and dogmate,
but also in concreto, and as they are in actu exercito; he comes in the next
place to give some instances of some practices of some of the Protesters, in
setting down of which he has been very industrious, to gather and put together
a bundle of such things as he thinks may bring their Professions in suspicion
and contempt; I shall not meet him with the like measure; if it were Christian
and seasonable work, more happily might be holden forth of the practices, not of
some only, but of many sticklers for the Public Resolutions, that goes cross
their Profession to the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of the
Church of Scotland, then the Author can or will answer; but because to
recriminate, is not to answer, I come to the particular instances which he
gives: The first is, their condemning Acts and Constitutions of the supreme
Judicatories of this Church. which he aggravates by many circumstances. First,
that these Acts were most unanimously concluded. Secondly, that themselves were
present, and did not contradict. Thirdly, that they were positively consenting
thereto by their Votes. Fourthly, that they condemned these Acts, not in a
private way, but in a Remonstrance, publicly emitted to the World, and
presented to the State. Fifthly, that all this was done, without having so much
respect to these Judicatories, as first to have recourse to them by
supplication, and desire to re-examine, or take to consideration again these
Acts and Constitutions. yea, refusing to apply themselves to them in such a
way, when advised and earnestly pressed thereto, as orderly, by some to whom
they had communicated the design of the Remonstrance. To all which I return,
that the Argument taken in its strength, does not seem to conclude much for
evacuating the Professions of the Protesters to the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government of this Church, unless we lay this for a ground,
that whosoever represents and remonstrates his judgment against any one of the
Acts of the Assembly of this Church, belyes the Profession which he makes of
respect to the Doctrine, Worship, Government and Discipline thereof. Secondly,
the Assembly was not sufficiently informed concerning these transactions with
the King, but several important particulars which would have contributed much
for clearing of the business, were kept up from, and not reported to the
Assembly; to wit, the first invitation given to the King, the Act appointing
him to be restored to the exercise of his power, the Kings Letters to James
Graham, the Kings taking the Sacrament after the order of the Service Book
kneeling, from an Episcopal Doctor, and an Irish Bishop, notwithstanding that
he had signed the Treaty, and that intercessions were made to him both by word
and write, to forbear the bringing to sea with the King all the English and
Scots Malignants that were with him at Breda after the Commissioners had
received the Letters and Acts both of Church and State, disapproving the Treaty
at Breda: The way how the King was induced to subscribe the Covenant, and how
immediately before his taking it, being ready to land in Scotland, he was about
to have made a Protestation, but that some of the Commissioners would not
tender him the Covenant upon these terms. How lame the account was that was
given to the General Assembly of that business; some of the Commissioners
confession before the Commission of the Church at Striveling after Dunbar does
bear witness; it may be remembered that the Moderator then regrated, that the
plain business was not made known to the General Assembly, and that most of
what was spoken in that debate at Striveling tended rather to clear the Genesis
Assembly then to justify the Treaty; and indeed these after discovery; of
hidden and sinfully concealed truths, may plead for a fair construction of what
the Assembly did in approving their Commissioners proceedings, which belike
they would not have approven if they had known all the truth: And do afford
sufficient ground for the Remonstrators afterward to Remonstrate them, without
reflecting upon the Assembly or upon their own professions of respect to the
Doctrine and Government of this Church. Secondly, these acts were not so most
unanimously concluded as the Author affirms: It is true, that there was no
Protestation nor open and plain dissent by any member of the Assembly against
them, but several members who had professed their dis-satisfaction with that
matter in private, when it came to be voted in Public, they did so qualify
their Vote, that it did relate only to the approving of the diligence of the
Commissioners, insinuating that they were not clear to approve of the matter; I
acknowledge that it was a weakness that they did not plainly declare their
mind (which some of them were requested to forbear) but this shows that there
was not so great unanimity in that matter as he speaks of: He is not ignorant
that as that business was from the first to the last rashly transacted, and
against the inclinations of the generality of the Godly in the land, whilst
they yet did see the King continuing in his opposition to the work of God, so
also against the inclination of many in the Assembly, who yet could not find a
ground to dissent oppenly from that conclusion, because of the fair
representation of the matter made to them. Thirdly, before the Remonstrance was
penned, there was palpable and clear discoveries of the hollownes of that
transaction in Holland; the King had given Commissions to the Malignants to
rise in Arms, and had himself deserted the Judicatories, and gone away to join
with the Malignants, and several other things of that kind were made known,
before there was any meeting about the Remonstrance, let be any conclusion
taken upon it. Fourthly, there could not be any address to these Judicatories
by way of supplication, or otherwise to desire them to reexamine, or to take to
their consideration again these Acts and Constitutions, because the Genesis Ass.
which (only by the Authors own acknowledgement) had power so to do, was not
then sitting, nor to sit for eight or nine months thereafter; and the Lord
having smitten us so sore, as at Dunbar, and being still threatening more wrath,
it was no time to delay, nor dally the representing the grounds of his
controversy. Fifthly, when that Remonstrance past, the Forces of the West,
were enclosed between the English Forces at Glasgow, and those at Carlisle, and
resolved to lay down their lives in the defense of their Religion and Country,
and therefore thought themselves bound to exoner their consciences in a free
and plain way, and to leave that Testimony behind them concerning the
guiltiness of the Land, and the Judicatories thereof. Sixthly, that
Remonstrance was not the deed of some of the Protesters only, but for the
substance: First, the deed of one of the best, and most famous Synods of this
Church, and afterward both for substance and words, the deed of a very
considerable number of Officers, gentlemen and Ministers, whose integrity and
zeal for the Public Cause from the beginning was known and approven, not
only to the Judicatories of Church and State, but to all good men throughout
the Land. Seventhly, that as it is true, that these who came with the
Remonstrance to present it to the Committee of Estates, being required if they
had any power committed to them to change any thing thereof, did plainly
declare, that though some expressions might be changed, yet they had no power
to alter any thing in the matter; So it is no less true, that these who did
require them, if they had any such power, being told, that they had power to
communicate the same unto them, before they gave it in to the Committee, and to
take their advice and assistance therein, did not after the reading and hearing
thereof, profess any dislike of the matter therein contained, much less did
they use any arguments to diswade them from giving it in, which gave just
ground to the other to think that they did approve thereof, they being men of
such ripnesse of judgment, freedom, intimacy and friendlinesse with these who
gave it in, that they could not but look upon their silence as an approving of
their way. Eigthly, let it be considered, whether the Remonstrators, or these
who were hugged by the Commission of the Church, and the Meeting at St. Andrews
and Dundee, was their best friends, and most forward for the Public
Resolutions, are this day most tender of the Liberties of Church and State; the
latter consenting to all the demands of the present power, and the former every
where refusing, as to that which is said to be proved by Mr. John Carstares his
Letter to the Lord Register, how weakly is this alleged; Mr. John Carstares
was then a prisoner at Edinburgh, the Remonstrators were at Dumfreis: the
Remonstrance was presented at Striveling; he knew not so much as either matter
or form of the Remonstrance till it was presented, how then could he give
advice therein? Or if his Letter was intercepted, how could that advice come to
their hands that they might hearken thereto? If there had been any thing in
that Letter that made for his purpose, why did not the Author cite the words of
it after the intercepting thereof? It was showed to Mr. Robert Douglas, and
diverse others, and as it did then, so if it were needful to make it public,
it would now prove, that there was nothing in it of which either Mr. John, or
my Lord Register needs to be ashamed; and it would abundantly confute the
calumnies of some, and correct the mistakes of others, particularly in the
thing for which it is alleged.

VINDICATION.
SEcondly, public vilifying of Acts of the General Assembly, as not to be
pressed in matters of conscience, witness Mr. James Guthrie his Speech,
uttered publicly in the Commission at Striveling, where in conference upon the
Western Remonstrance when the Moderator did once and again press the Act of
the General Assembly approving the close of the Treaty with the King, and the
Declaration of the same Assembly, emitted when the English Army entered the
Land, against that part of the Remonstrance, condemning the close of the
Treaty, he publicly answered, Press me not with humane constitutions in
matters of Conscience; all that were present, who were many from several parts
of the Kingdom, besides Commissioners can well remember this.

REVIEW.
IF Mr. Ja. Guthrie be a vilifier of the Acts of the Assembly, he seems to be
neither so ingenuous nor prudent as need were, for none has pleaded more Acts
of Assemblies in all these public differences, and (for any thing I know)
hitherto without any satisfying answer: as for that Speech of his, it was thus,
in that meeting many Arguments being brought to confirm the Remonstrance, in
that point, relating to the Treaty, and some continuing still to argue against
the Remonstrance in that particular; Mr. To. Ramsay summed up the arguments
brought for strengthening the Remonstrance into a Sylogisme, to which no reply
was made, but the Authority of the Gen: Assembly was pressed in the mean while:
some godly and tender men, who were Commissioners for the Church in Holland,
did publicly and with much weight of spirit, declare themselves in the hearing
of all the Meeting, that they by their mistakes in that matter, did conceive
themselves accessory to all the misery that was come upon Scotland, and that
they desired to repent thereof: and others having added somewhat concerning the
smitings of their conscience in that particular, it was replied by one in the
Meeting, where were all these tender consciences at the General Assembly, and
when he who made that Reply, and others did insist in pressing the Act of the
Assembly, Mr. James Guthrie said, you would study to satisfy the scruples of
men's consciences, otherwise then by pressing on them the Act of the Assembly:
was this speech thus circumstantiate, a public vilifying of the Acts of the
Assembly. Let us take the words as the Author alleadges them, yet have they a
very good meaning, because humane Constitutions as such do not bind the
Conscience, neque enim cum hominibus, sed cum uno Deo negotium est conscientiis
nostris, says a gteat Divine: and therefore unless men would strain the words
of their brethren further then charity or verity will allow them, there can be
no weight laid upon these words for proving Mr. James Guthries practices to be
contrary to his professions: We shall find the Author happily before the close
of this Vindication, going as great a length as this speech will reach, in
order to Acts of General Assemblies, and yet I believe he would think it hard
measure to infer such consequences from his words.

VINDICATION.
THirdly, tumultuous deserting and running out of the public Judicatories of
the Kirk, and threatening the same, because of some matters carried therein
contrary to their own mind, witness their carriage at the Commission in Perth,
November. 1650. where because of that moderate sense given them upon the Western
Remonstrance, many of them did in a disorderly way, desert and leave the
Commission, never daigning to come to any meeting thereof afterward; some of
them as they were going out, threatening from an high place, with a loud voice
and revenge flaming out of their eyes, in such words as these, We hope well we
shall get our day about of them yet.

REVIEW.
THey did not tumultuously desert and run out of the Commission, much less did
they threaten the same, because of some matters carried therein, contrary to
their mind; such of them as did depart, did go away in a peaceable and quiet
way, without any tumult and disorder, having now stayed for a considerable
time, first at Sterlin, and then at Perth, and not knowing any further business
of importance that the Commission meant to meddle with at that time. As for the
instance given by the Author, seeing he is pleased in other places of his Paper
to name particular persons, why did he not also name the persons who spoke
these threatening words, with revenge flaming out of their eyes: I do indeed
remember, that the spirits of many gracious men who were then present, were
much weighted and sore grieved with the precipitant proceeding of the
Commission at that time, and that a brother did lay this seriously before the
Commission, and did use some such expression, as the Author relates; but that
it was in a threatening way, or with revenge flaming out of his eye, is more
then can be made good: Such a word may be spoken with soberness of mind, and
to good purpose, without any threatening or desire of revenge: whither they did
never daign to come to any meeting of the Commission thereafter, I cannot
confidently speak to it either upon the one hand or on the other; but I can
confidently say, that as they did never take any resolution not to come, so
also that their staying a way was not so much occasioned by this proceeding
against the Remonstrance, though that was a matter of stumbling and offense
unto them, as by something that followed thereafter, which did convince them,
that their coming to the Commission might well increase strife and debate, but
that it would contribute little or nothing for their own edification, or the
edification of others. Before we pass this point, I shall give the Reader a
short account of this whole business. After the presenting of the Remonstrance
unto the Committee of Estates at Sterline, it was thought fit both by the
Committee of Estates, and Commission of the Assembly, that these respective
Meetings should meet at Sterline, the (...) day of (...) to take into
consideration what answer it was fit to give unto the Remonstrance, and what to
do in other things that did concern the Defense of Religion, and of the Kingdom
in that strait they then stood, and that therefore not only the Members of
these Meetings but also several others Gentlemen and Ministers should be
advertised to keep the diet; notwithstanding of which appointment, the
Committee of Estates did afterward adjourn their Meeting to Pearth, where the
King was for the time; the Commission of the Church, according to the first
appointment, with several other Ministers, having met at Sterline. The
Remonstrators came there to understand their judgment of the matters contained
in the Remonstrance; which being read, and the chief heads thereof debated, the
major part of the Commission then present, seemed to be satisfied therewith,
and some were desirous to have a present determination upon it: The Moderator
and some others, inclined to give no sense at all upon it, either for it, or
against it: and the Committee of Estates which was then sitting at Perth,
having now once and again written to the Commission; it was for peace sake
condescended to on all hands, that no sense should be past on the Remonstrance
by the Commission, and that the Meeting should be adjourned to Pearth, and that
it should be their endeavor, that the States should declare nothing against
it. This resolution being taken at Sterlin upon the Saturday, the Members of
the Commission, and such other Ministers as was present, and the Remonstrators,
did address themselves to Pearth. On the Monday morning, the Remonstrators
after their coming thither, hearing that the Committee of Estates were about
the condemning of the Remonstrance, they having it in Commission from these
that sent them, and thinking it incumbent to them in duty to desire an answer,
and in such an exigent to profess their adherence thereto, did make
application to the Committee of Estates for that effect; after which, the
Committee of Estates did pass several Votes condemning the Remonstrance, to
the great grief of sundry of their own number, who did dissent from it, and
protest against the same; and the sentence of the Committee being communicated
to the Commission of the Church, and they also desired by them to give their
judgment of the Remonstrance. These who were sent from the West, did earnestly
supplicate the Commission, before they should give any sentence upon the
Remonstrance, that they would be pleased to allow them some time, till they
might return and communicate with these who had sent them, hoping that all of
them would give such an explication or their meaning in the things which were
stumbled at, as would satisfy the Commission; Which desire seemed so
reasonable in it self, and necessary at that time, for preventing of
differences, and the grieving of the spirits of many gracious and godly men,
who had been faithful and zealous in the Cause from the beginning, that many
Members of the Commission, did earnestly press that it might be granted,
especially seeing they had met with so great disappointment in the carriage of
the Committee of Estates in order to that business; yet notwithstanding hereof
it was refused, and the Commission did proceed also to condemn the
Remonstrance, and refer the further sentencing of it to the General Assembly;
sundry of these who were at Sterlin being now gone, and some others come from
places more Northward, which gave occasion to sundry at that time to apprehend
that, which is now plainly professed by some considerable Members of the
Committee of Estates, who were eager in condemning the Remonstrance, that if
they had not been put upon it by some Members of the Commission, they would not
have done ^t from this vote of the Commission, a considerable number of their
Members, about sixteen or seventeen, as I remember, did dissent and the persons
interessed in the Remonstrance, did protest; and I fear not to say, that this
peremptory precipitant, and needless haste of the plurality of the Commission
in that particular, was a great occasion of all the division and rent that
followed thereafter. In the mean while the Malignants who had risen in Arms,
were agreed with, and an Act of Indemnity was past to them, and Colonel
Montgomerie was sent against the Western Forces, with directions to force them,
if they would not willingly agree to the States demands; and it was no great
wonder, if after so many days staying at Sterlin and Perth, they thought fit
to return home, when not only the edge of the censures of Church and State, but
of the Civil Sword, which was just now employed against the Malignants that
rose in Arms without any warrant, is on a sudden turned against the Western
Forces which were raised by their special Warrant and encouragement, expressed in
diverse Acts and frequent Letters.

VINDICATION.
FOurthly, Taking upon them to determine matters of most public and greatest
concernment, antecedent unto, and without so much as once speaking or waiting
for the judgment of the Public Judicatories, to which the determination of
such matters do belong; and private men and inferior Judicatories ought to
have their recourse to, before they take upon them to e^it any determination
thereanent; witness the Western Remonstrance, determining the exclusion of the
Kings Interest out of the quarrel of the Defensive War, before any advice or
sentence given thereupon, or once sought from any Public Judicatory.

REVIEW.
THe matter of most public and greatest concernment which he alleadges, they
take upon them to determine was, the exclusion of the Kings interest out of the
quarrel of the defensive War, before any advice or sentence given thereupon,
or once sought from any public Judicatory; but they did not determine the
exclusion of the Kings interest out of the quarrel of the defensive war,
otherwise then it had been before that time determined, both by Church and
State, by their joint Declarations at the West Church of the date 13. of Aug.
1650. which at the time of the contriving of the Remonstrance, was standing
unrepealed, and to which there was the more reason then to adhere, because the
King had deserted the Public Counsels of the Kingdom, and joined himself to
the Malignant party. I know there are two things here alleged: 1. That that
Declaration at the West Church was repealed, by the Kings subscriving the
Declaration emitted by him at Dumfermeling, a little thereafter. 2. That the
Remonstrance goes a greater length in excluding the Kings Interest, then that
Declaration at the West Chutch. To the first of these I answer, that the Kings
emitting of his Declaration did not in the Judgment of the Committee of
Estates, and Commission of the Church, repeal the other; and therefore the
other Declaration had been sent unto the English Army, before the King did emit
his Declaration; so after that, upon the emitting and sending thereof to the
General of the English Forces, he did make a return, importing their sense
thereupon. The other Declaration at the West Kirk, with a Letter, was sent
back, intimating, that we did still adhere unto, and intend to fight upon that
state of quarrel contained therein; to the other it was often offered by these
who came from the West; that if there was any thing in the Remonstrance that
seemed to go a greater length in that particular then the Declaration at the
West Church had done, they were willing to explain it, and to fight on that
state of the quarrel that was contained in that Declaration, without adding
altering, or diminishing, but that was not accepted of, and order was given a
little thereafter to Colonel Robert Mountgomery to desire or force them in the
West to join under him, and fight for the Kings interest in all his Dominions,
as afterward the Meeting at Dundee did ratify all the proceedings of the
former Commission excepting that Declaration of the 13. of August, which as it
did insinuate a tacit condemning thereof, and of that state of our quarrel
and cause, upon which we have fought these 13. years past, so did it insinuate
a new state of quarrel in order to the Kings interest.

VINDICATION.
FIfthly, emitting causes of a Public fast, and sending them abroad to all the
Presbyteries and Congregations of the Kingdom, being but private men, and not
having Authority, nor being a Public Judicatory, witness the Fast appointed,
and Causes thereof emitted from Striveling the 1. September 1650. wherein take
these things to consideration, 1. The Meeting that emitted these Causes were no
Public Judicatorie, but some members of the Presbytery of the Army, and some
of the Commissioners. 2. That sundry godly and understanding men in that
Meeting earnestly endeavored that condescending upon Public Causes of the
wrath of God manifested in that defate at Dumbar, as Causes of a Fast might be
delayed until the week next following, that there might be a full Meeting of
the Commission conveened together, to go about that purpose with Authority, and
more deliberation, but were born down by the vehemence and headstrong
forwardness of some who are chief men in this Protestation, professing so much
respect to the established Government of this Kirk. 3. That there was no
necessity of haste in emitting particular Causes (there was rather much danger
in doing it upon so short deliberation) seeing the public calamity, and known
public sins was causes evident enough to all, of humiliation for the present,
and within less then eight days, a Meeting of the Commission might have been
conveened (as it was de facto conveened, within that space) to condescend upon
particulars; all these things being considered, was it not usurpation and
contempt of lawful Authority, and the Government established in this Kirk; to
say, that the Commission at their Meeting which followed, did approve of the
causes emitted by them, it does not avail to clear them from usurpation and
contempt of the Government, for to say nothing of that that the Commission did
both alter somethings in them, and add to them, about recommending prayer for
the King (as well as mourning for his sins) in the humiliation, which was
seemed to have been purposely left out, as appeared by the debate made about
it, when it was mentioned and desired in the Commission for the space of half
an hour at least, by Mr. James Guthrie, and the Register, to say nothing of
this, that which the Commission approved was the matter of these causes, and
not the way of emission, wherewith many of the Commission showed themselves
exceedingly dis-satisfied, as a practice without example, and a preparative
tending to the overthrow of the Authority of Government, but did forbear to
challenge it at that time for peace sake.

REVIEW.
THere is a great deal ado here for little or nothing, which says, that there
must be some mystery in the bottom, before I come to discover it, I shall make
answer to the particulars alleged, First by a narration of the History, as it
was in matter of fact, and then by taking off the things which are challenged
by the Author: Our Army being defeat at Dumbar upon the Tuesday morning, and
some of the scattered Forces having retired toward Striveling in the end of
that week, a considerable number of the members of the Commission, and
Presbytery with the Army did meet there, to take in consideration what was fit
for them to do in that juncture of time and affairs, and after mutual debate
and advice, finding that in all appearance they might be driven from thence,
and scattered one from another very suddenly, the Town then not being fenced,
nor any furniture or provision in it, nor we having any body of standing
Forces in the fields to interpose betwixt the Town and the Enemy, and the hand
of God laying heavy and sore upon the Army, and upon the whole Land, by that
dreadful stroke at Dumbar; they thought it expedient that there being one or
two wanting to make a Quorum of the Commission, and these of the Commission who
were present being also members of the Presbytery of the Army, and sundry other
Ministers who were also members of that Presbytery being present, that they
should set down the heads of these things for which (as they conceived) the
Lord had smitten us, and send them abroad to the Presbyteries throughout the
land, with a Letter written from the Presbytery of the Army, not injoining them
as causes of a humiliation to be kept by any Authority, but humbly
representing them as their thoughts ^n so sad a time, and desiring their
brethren to join in a public Fast and humiliation thereupon; What usurpation
or contempt of lawful Authority and the government established in this Church
was here? As to the things challenged by the Author, they did not assume to
themselves any authority, but only write their humble advice, as their Letter
did humbly show, and this they might do; yea, it was expedient for them to do
it, as things then stood; neither were they so private as the Author
insinuates; the Author speaks a little diminutively of them, when he calls them
some members of the Commission, and some members of the Presbytery of the Army;
there wanted but one or two of a Quorum of the Commission, and the Presbytery
of the Army was numerous and well conveened, as many certainly as gave them
power to Act in any thing that was fit for the Presbytery to meddle with. These
sundry godly and understanding men of who^ he speaks who were for a delay, were
but a few, and when the rest of their Brethren did not find it expedient, they
did not e^ter any dissent, which belike they would have done if they had
thought it a business of any such consequence as the Author would ^ow make it,
when he says, they were born down by the head strong forwardness of some,
professing so much respect to the established government of this Church: He
does but show himself like the man who wanting better weapons, did throw
feathers at his adversary, which did manifest a great deal of desire to reach
blows but drew no blood; all the Protesters who were then present were two or
three at most, and they had no more voices but their own; but it seems that in
some men's judgment, where ever any Protesters are they must bear the blame of
all the things that are conceived to be done amiss. As to the next, there was
a necessity, because there was no appearance that they would get leave to stay
together for to meet with any convenience for a long time thereafter, let be
that the Commission might meet within eight days as the Author asserts. It
will be acknowledged by such as knew the truth, that if the English had at any
time within eight days after Dumbar either advanced with their whole Army, or
sent any considerable part thereof to Striveling, they had in all appearance
gained that place, and so made an easy pass for themselves to overrun the
whole Land, and was it not every bodies fear that they should so have done at
that time; yea, did not all of us many time bless God that they did it not:
And what could be the danger of emitting these causes by way of humble desire,
and brotherly representation, seeing they did meddle with nothing but that which
was palpable and manifest; yea, which for the matter had been condescended upon
by the Commission, before that time, and was (as the Author himself
acknowledges) such as the Commission did at their next Meeting approve; the
only thing that had any shadow of newness in it, was that of the crooked and
precipitant ways that had been taken for carrying on the Treaty with the King,
but neither was that new, because the Commission at Edinburgh, before the Kings
home coming, had in a very large Letter to the Commissioners at Holland,
holden forth their great dis-satisfaction with the Proceedings of that Treaty
in many particulars; and the Commission at Leith, before the defeat at Dumbar,
had also holden forth the Malignant design that was then carried on, and had
given it in as a public cause of humiliation to the Committee of Estates. It
is true that the Commission was de facto conveened within eight days, but as
we have already said: It was not propable at the time or emitting these cause,
that it should so have been; and I pray the Author or any rational men
soberly, to think what motive but the sense of duty, and the pressing
expediencie of the thing should have induced these Protesters of whom he speaks
to be so headstrong and forward, to anticipate the Meeting of the Commission,
seeing they had ground to think, that the Commission at their Meeting were like
to condescend on these things as causes of Gods wrath, which was verified
thereafter, by the approving thereof; but the Author tells us that the
Commission did both alter somewhat (of which I shall afterward speak, and add
some thing; to wit, a Postscript, recommending prayer for the King; as well as
mourning for his sins, which by the debate that was made against it by Mr.
James Guthrie and the Register, for the space of half an hour (as he says)
seemed to have been purposely left out, and that which the Commission approved
was the matter of these causes, and not the way of emission, wherewith many of
the Commission showed themselves dis-satisfied as a practice without example,
and a preparative tending to the overthrow of the Government. The Commission
did indeed add that postscript concerning prayer for the King, against the
expediency of which addition to be made at that time, Mr. James Guthrie and the
Register did for a little debate, how the Author should know so exactly the
measure of the time, I leave it for himself to answer, the ground of their so
doing was not that which he alleges; the Register has many living witnesses
that he was no adversary to praying for the King; and Mr. James Guthrie having
kept that humiliation publicly in the Congregation at Striveling, before the
Commission did meet or make any such addition, did pray for the King, and why
should they have opposed that which was their own practice; the Author is a
little beyond due bounds, when he says, it seems to have been left out of
purpose, their debating against the adding of it was, because at first they did
not conceive that there was any necessity to make an express and distinct
Article of that, more th^n of many other things which we were no less bound to
pray for, it being a thing so obvious, common and ordinary, and that now to
add it was to minister occasion without ground, to make others conceive that
it had been indeed formerly left out of purpose, and so to raise needl^^^e
jealousies and supitions of some, as being disaffected to the King. Next,
because they took it to be included in the causes formerly emitted, though not
expressly; yet so as might be memorandum enough for decerning men not to omit
it; he that mourns rightly for the Kings sins, will also be an intercessor to
God for him, to bestow upon him the contrary graces and virtues. I shall not
debate with the Author whether the Commission did approve only the matter, or
also the way of emission of these causes; sure I am, they did not condemn the
way of emission, and if he shall be pleased to look upon the tenor of the
Letter that at that time was written by the Commission to the several
Presbyteries, wherein these causes are mentioned, he will find something that
looks toward an approving of the way of emission as well as of the matter; it
is true that some of the Commission showed themselves exceedingly
dis-satisfied; yea, more exceedingly then was fit and beseeming their place and
parts, or the gravity of such a meeting, but they were but some and not many;
if it was a practice without example, it had also a ground without example: but
if the Author shall be pleased to peruse the Registers of the Church, I believe
that he shall find examples of particular Presbyteries sending their advice
abroad concerning causes of a public humiliation, and that the members of the
Commission in things that were clear and unquestionable, and could not admit of
a delay, have sometimes when they wanted one or two of their Quorum done some
things of public concernment; let him look upon the Registers of the
Presbytery of Edinburgh, and of the Commission and he will find ir so. That it
was a preparative tending to the overthrow of government; I cannot see when I
look upon it as impartially as I can, I know that he formerly called it an
usurpation, and if it had been so, there were some ground for this new charge,
but I trust, I have sufficiently vindicated it from usurpation, and therefore
there is nothing brought that can bear the weight of this: But for the
discovering of the mystery of all this business, upon which so great a stresse
is laid, I desire the Reader to be informed, that when these causes of
humiliation were first sent abroad, one of the Commissioners of the Church who
had been employed in Holland in the matter of the Treaty with the King,
conceiving that his carriage in that employment was reflected upon in that
article, which speaks of the crooked and precipitant ways that were taken for
carrying on the Treaty with the King, as one of the causes for which the Land
ought to be humbled; he did take it so impatiently, that not only did he
declare that he could not read these causes as they were first emitted, and
that if they should be read in the Congregation, wherein he had charge, he
behoved to make some Protestation or bear some testimony against them; but also
when he came te the Commission did sharply challenge the way of emiting of them;
the want of an article relating to prayer for the King, and that Article
concerning the treaty, as reflecting upon the carriage of the Commissioners of
the Church employed in Holland in that business, because the Article as it was
first emitted, did mention the crooked and precipitant ways that were taken by
sundry for carrying on of the Treaty, without restricting the same to our
Statesmen, therefore for peace sake, and to give him satisfaction, a Postscript
was added to the Letter which was at that time written by the Commission, and
sent to Prebyteries concerning prayer for the King, and the Article concerning
the Treaty with the King was some what altered by restricting the sundry that
are spoken therein to sundry of our statesmen, whereas before it was
indefinite, and without any such restriction; and these are the additions and
alterations that he speaks of. I write not these things for lesning the credi^e
and reputation of that person, or bearing upon him more then upon others, any
particular guilt in the matter of the Treaty, but for the truths sake and that
he may be exhorted to consider yet again, whether the zeal of his own credit,
which many times byasses the spirits even of good men, have not too too much
engaged him in the defense of that business, and in exaggerating and
challenging every thing that seems in the least measure to reflect on the same,
which he has the more reason to do, not only because it is engraven on the
hearts of the generality of the godly in the Land, as with a pen of iron, and
with the point of a Diamond, that this Land, and especially the Rulers and
Minsters thereof, have sinned a great sin in that matter of the Treaty with the
King; but also because sundry of the precious and godly men who were with him
employed in that matter, do bear such a conviction of the guiltiness thereof
upon their spirits, that they are not like to forget it whilst they live, and
some of those who were most active and forward in the business, being now
taken out of the land of the living, did upon their death bed confess their
guiltiness in this thing, and sadly bemoaned it before the Lord in the hearing
of faithful witnesses who do bear record of it. I know that these things are
no rule to him, but they may, and I hope shall provoke him to search this
thing, and himself therein again and again.

VINDICATION.
SIxthly, Suffering some in their public Meeting at Edinburgh, contrary to
solemn Declaration and oath made, both in our National Covenant, and Solemn
League and Covenant, by writ, to represent this as a main cause of wrath upon
the Land, that we had bound and engaged our selves to Presbyteriall Government,
without any censure passed upon the said Paper or testimony given against it to
this day, though now it be going abroad in Print.

REVIEW.
THe Meeting at Edinburgh did not omit any thing that was in their power, for
the hindering of the giving in of that Paper, such of them as heard of it
before it came in, showed a great dislike of it, and dealt as seriously as they
could with the Gentlemen who gave it in, to forbear it; and when it came in the
Meeting show their dislike of it, and did appoint some of their number to
confer with him about it; who did accordingly confer with him, and endeavor to
inform him of the errors contained therein, and in the Causes of the Lords
wrath which were condescended upon by the Meeting at the same time; they did
give a testimony against the matter of the errors contained in that Paper,
though they did not express the particular words and articles thereof,
conceiving it not fit so to do, seeing the Paper was not then public, that it
afterward came in public, was contrary to their desires and endeavors, and
also to the knowledge and intention of him who gave it in, if we may trust his
own testimony, which I believe the Author will not question in matters of fact.
But the Author stumbles at this, that we have given no testimony against it to
this day: If he has read the testimonies which we have since that time given
against all things in that kind, that may import any prejudice to Presbyteriall
Government, or to any part of the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government
of the Church of Scotland, he does us wrong to write so; and if he has not
read them, then he shall be pleased to do it, I hope in this he shall receive
satisfaction: It becomes us not to boast of any thing that we do, it is
through grace, and not of our selves; but when groundless imputations are born
upon us, to render the integrity of our Profession suspected, indifferent men
will bear with us a little in our folly* if we say that in this day of
temptation we have not been behind the greatest Zealots for the Public
Resolutions, in bearing testimony for the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government of the Church of Scotland, and for all things relating to our
Religion and Liberty, and yet not we, but the grace of God in us.

VINDICATION.
SEventhly, taking upon them judicially to determine a General Assembly
conveened, continued and closed, to be an unlawful constitute Assembly, and
judicially to condemn the Acts thereof, which no power on earth could do,
inferior to another Genesis Assembly, and to assume unto themselves the authority
of a Public Judicatory in the Kirk, as having Commission from another prior
Assembly, before it was examined and determined by a judge competent, whether
the interveening Assembly, (whose meeting, if lawful, did extinguish all
Commission from a prior Assembly) was lawful constitute or not, all the world
shall not be able to clear this from usurpation. I shall add no more instances
to this purpose, though I might a^de not a few; and as for these I have
brought, the Reader may perceive that they do not belong directly and formally
to the matter of the questions in controversy between the Protesting Brethren,
and the late Judicatories of the Kirk, but that they are such at suppose the
late Judicatories had gone wrong in some of these matters in controversy, yet
they can never be cleared from contempt and wronging of the established
Government of this Kirk, which in their carriage to the General Assembly did
appear, which was not straight and according to their Profession and the
established government, I leave it to be judged by what follows in the
examination of the Reasons they allege for what they did.

REVIEW.
I Shall not debate with the Author, whether they have taken upon them
judicially to determine the nullity of the Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee,
and judicially to condemn the Acts thereof, though he take it for granted, it
may be that he have some difficulty to prove it from any deed of theirs; but
the hinge of this whole business in reference to that Assembly and the Acts
thereof, and the setting up and proceeding of the Commission of the Prior
Assembly of the year 1650. is in this, whether that Meeting at St. Andrews was
a lawful free General Assembly; for if it was not so, then was it null ab
initio, and the Commission of the prior Assembly are full in power; and
therefore are not guilty of usurpation, or of the assuming of any authority,
which is not competent for them, but do only exercise that which was given
them, whereof they have still the just possession; and the case being thus, as
I hope it shall be made to appear, notwithstanding of any thing the Author has
said to the contrary, might not the Commission being clearly convinced upon
good grounds, of the unlawfulness, unfreedome and corruptnesse of that
Meeting, and the Acts thereof, with the advice of diverse Ministers from
several parts of the Land, agree upon this as one o^ the Causes of the Lords
controversy, and offer and advise the ^ame to be made use of by all the Lords
people in this Land Was it a fault in our nonconforming forefathers, to bear
a testimony and give their judgment against the six corrupt Assemblies, and to
reckon these Assemblies among the sins and guiltiness of the Land, and to
desire the Land to be humbled for them. If any of the Presbyteries of these
times did pass a Presbyteriall judgment and sentence upon the nullity of any
of those Assemblies, and the iniquity of their Acts, did they wrong in so
doing? and was this more then any power on earth could do that is inferior to
another General Assembly? If it be thus, the Church is like to be in an ill
case, if a General Assembly once go wrong. I know that Inferior Judicatories
have not power over the Superior, as a Commission or Presbytery over a General
Assembly, but this hinders not if any assume to themselves the name and power of
the Superior to whom they do not belong, and by the pretended authority thereof
make unjust Acts; but the Inferior may from the Word of God, and from the Acts
and Constitutions of the Church, declare the nullity of these powers, and the
iniquity of these Acts. The Author has taught us, that an Assembly both wrong
constitute and erring, or only wrong constitute, is no other ways an Assembly,
then a painted Man is a Man; and it can be no great fault for any living Man to
discover the deceit of an Image, that others be not deceived thereby. He
insinuates, that he could add mo instances not a few: It is like that he has
brought forth these in which he conceived the greatest weight to lie; and if
these being weighed in the ba^lance be found light, we need not be afraid of
what is yet in his treasure. He says true, that the instances which he has
brought, does not belong formally and directly to the matter in question, but
he has fetched a great compass to get them in, supposing by these things to
reach sore blows to the Professions of the Protesters, and to discover the
hypocrisy thereof; but how he has proven his alleadgeance, I leave it to
indifferent men to judge, who may also give sentence of their carriage to the
General Assembly, after the perusal of his Vindication and this Review.

VINDICATION.
THeir next pretention or profession is, that they look upon the present
differences of the Lords servants of the Ministry, as one of the greatest
tokens of the Lord his indignation against this Kirk, and that they hold it
their duty to be humbled before the Lord in the sense thereof, and by all
lawful and sure means, within the compass of their power and station, to
endeavor the remedy. Verily, these differences are so to be looked upon,
because of the anger of the Lord, this Land is darkened; a man spares not his
brother, Ephraim is against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both
against Judah. And as all the Lords People and servants in the Land have cause
to be humbled before the Lord in the sense thereof; so, some of these Brethren
in a special way, as being the main Authors and promoters of these rents and
divisions. Let impartial men look back and consider the beginning and
progress, and every step of the present divisions in this Kirk and Kingdom,
since the defeat at Dunbar, and see who have been the prime Agents thereof. I
shall but point at some particulars, who were they who after the defeat at
Dunbar, divided one part of the remnant of the Army from the other (which was
the first appearing step of our divisions) and would never suffer them to join
and unite together again, was not the contriving of the Western Remonstrance
the next step of our division, and of it self a most divisive course; as
containing positive determinations of matters of public and high concernment,
and cond^mning approven public Acts, not only of the State, but also of the
Genesis Assembly by private men, without any advice had or sought from the Public
Judicatories either of Kirk or State; yea, containing also in the close
thereof, a band engaging themselves to prosecute the matters of that
Remonstrance according to their power, a thing judged always in this Kirk a
most divisive thing for any private men to do by themselves. Was it not some of
these Brethren, who when the Conference was at Pearth upon the Remonstrance
opposed by all means conjunction with the distracted Forces of the Kingdom, and
when it was proponed in the Conference, if they enjoying their own judgment
concerning the dis-owning of the Kings Interest, yet upon other grounds of the
quarrel, wherein they agreed with the rest of the Kingdom, would join with the
rest of the Forces for defense against the common Enemy, did not some publicly
and plainly profess, that they could not, and they would not join: Are not
these Brethren the men (that because the sense given upon the Western
Remonstrance, though the most moderate, and with much tenderness and respect
of the persons having hand in it) withdrew themselves in a most tumultuous and
disorderly way, never daigning themselves to come to the Meeting thereafter,
which was the next step of our divisions. Was it not a divisive course, when
the Resolutions were given to the Parliaments Quare, concerning persons for to
be employed in the defense of their Country, presently to emit and spread
Papers through the Country (under pretense of writing them only as Letters to
the Commission, expressing their scruples) condemning the said Resolutions as a
defection from the Covenant and former principles, suppose they thought in
their Consciences these Resolutions to be such: yea, suppose that really they
had contained some matter of that kind, and that their Commission had erred (as
humanum est labi) yet they shall never be able to clear themselves before
indifferent Judges, and impartial of divisive walking, in disdaining to come
and propone their doubts and reasons against that Resolution, in an amicable
and modest way in the Commission it self, and taking such a way of writing and
sending abroad testimonies (as they called them amongst themselves,
peremptorily condemning, traducing, and tending to the rendering odions, honest,
faithful] and godly Brethren, and agenting as diligently as they could, to
induce others through the Country to do the like. Many other instances, or
diverse motions may be given, but by this much let any man judge, if they have
not cause to be deeply humbled for the divisions in the Land amongst the Lords
servants.

REVIEW.
I Shall not deny, but some of these Brethren have in a special way, reason to
be humbled for the divisions of the Land, as they are the righteous judgments
of the Lord upon their sins, which have been greater then the sins of many;
neither am I so zealous of their credit, as to say, that no circumstance of
their carriage in these things, could have been better ordered, they are but
poor weak men, compassed with many infirmities, and subject to the like
passions with others; but that they have reason to be humbled in a special
way, upon the account of being the Authors, let be the main Authors and
promovers of these rents and divisions, is a groundless and unjust charge,
which no man is able to make out; the Author does either unknowingly or
willingly mistake in that which he calls the first step of the divisions, to
wit, the dividing of one part of the remnant of the Army from the Army, by
these Brethren: These Gentlemen who did remove from Sterlin immediately after
Dunbar, unto the West, did go thither by the order and approbation of the
Committee of Estates, who did also appoint the Leavies of the West, and their
Conducters, and designed their work to them from time to time, as can be made
good by many Acts and Letters, under the Lord Chancellor and Clerk of the
Committees hand, and they were therein also countenanced by the Commission of
the Church, who wrote to them for their encouragement; yea, it was the counsel
of some of these who were chief in the Assembly at Dundee, that these Gentlemen
went West. That they did not join with the rest of the Forces of the Kingdom,
was, because it was refused to state the War as it was formerly stated by the
Declation of the Church and State on the 13. of August, 1650. and to satisfy
them in the conduct of the Army, by appointing a man qualified according to the
solemn Engagement, to lead the Forces. What he says of the Remonstrance,
which he calls the next step of our division, is answered already, except that
which he alleadges, that it does in the close thereof contain a bond, engaging
themselves to prosecute the matters of that Remonstrance, according to their
power, which has been often cleared by themselves, that it did contain no new
bond to any new thing, but a declaration of their resolutions to keep their
former bonds and engagements; in testimony whereof, they were willing, and did
often offer to explain their meaning in this particular, for the satisfaction
of these who doubted thereof. He does (under favor) make a very lame relation
of the Conference at Pearth. In that conference these Gentlemen and Ministers
who were sent from the West, did often declare, that they were willing to fight
upon that state of the quarrel holden forth in the Declaration of the 13.
August, and to join under the leading Officer of the Forces of the Kingdom,
providing that he were a man qualified according to the solemn Engagement to
duties, to wit, of a blameless and Christian conversation, and of
unquestionable integrity and affection to the Cause of God; In neither of
which, satisfaction was offered unto them, and therefore it is no wonder though
they had refused to hearken to the Proposition which the Author speaks of. What
he says of their withdrawing themselves from the Commission, upon occasion
of condemning the Remonstrance, and of their not daigning to come again, I have
already answered somewhat unto it, and shall answer more hereafter. For
clearing of that which concerns the Letters written to the Commission, and
testimonies given against the Commissions Answer to the Parliaments Quare, I
shall first set down some thing of the matter of fact, then answer shortly to
what the Author says. After that the Party of Malignant and disaffected men
in the Land, who by subtility and fair pretenses had got the power of the
Judicatories and of the Army in their hand, Anno 1648. were defeat at Preston,
the Kingdom and Kirk of Scotland taking in consideration how often they had
been deceived by that Party, and how much they had sinned against God, and
smarted under his hand by intrusting of them, and complying with them, did in a
solemn public way confess this sin, and did solemnly before the Lord, engage
themselves to do no more so, but to be careful to purge out all scandalous and
malignant men out of the Judicatories and Army, and to endeavor that such as
was entrusted therein, should be of a blameless and Christian conversation,
and of constant integrity and affection to the Cause of God. In order to this
solemn Confession and engagement, did many Supplications, Warnings,
Remonstrances and Declarations issue from the Commission of the Church, and
several Laws and Acts from the Parliament and Commitree of Estates, for
purging and keeping pure the Judicatories and the Army, according to which,
many endeavors were used for putting the same in execution, which for some
time went on with some measure of success and blessing; but that so good and
necessary a work, did very soon begin to be retarded and opposed; first
closely, and in an undermining way by some who did again begin to own
Malignant Interests; and afterward more openly and avowedly; yet was the
sinfulness of complying with, and employing that Party so much abhorred and
feared by the Church of Scotland, that not only did the Commission of the
General Assembly of the year 1649. and the General Assembly it self 1650. in
the very time when the Land was invaded by the English, declare the employing
and intrusting of such to be unlawful, even in the case of scarcity of men for
the Lands defense, but also the Commission of the General Assembly of the year
1650. did after the defeat at Dunbar, once and again give public warning to
all the Land to beware of complyances with that Party, and to take heed that
under a pretense of doing for the Cause, and for the Kingdom, they get not
power and strength in their hands for advancing and promoting their old
malignant designs; yea, the question being directly propounded by the King to
the Commission, concerning the employing of these men, it was answered
negatively in a Letter written to him for that effect; yet after all this, the
Commission did at an occasional Meeting give that Answer to the Parliaments
Quaere; by which a door was opened to the speedy taking in and employing of all
that Party, first into the Army, and then into the Judicatories: Concerning
which occasional Meeting, I desire to be observed, that notwithstanding of all
that is formerly said, and that it was known that many members of the
Commission, and many godly Ministers and Professors throughout the Land, were
in their judgments opposite to the employing and intrusting of these men, and
that the resolving to employ them before satisfaction given to men's consciences
in the point could not but be matter of great stumbling and offense, and that a
little before that time there had been one or two solemn Meetings of the
Commission, and that there was a set Meeting of the Commission to be within a
week or two thereafter, yet was there no mention of that business in these
solemn frequent Meetings, and the other set Meeting was prevented by that
occasional Meeting called by the Moderators Letter, upon the desire of the
Parliament, the leading men whereof at that time having long hunted after, and
earnestly pressed that conjunction, did then on occasion of the defeat of the
Forces at Hammilton, drive it vehemently on, under a pretense of necessity; and
there were few above a Quorum of the Commission present at this occasional
Meeting, and many of these out of the Synod of Fife, who had gone far in the
determination of that business in their Synod before that time; neither can it
be alleged truly that the rest of the members of the Commission were
advertised to keep the Diet, because no advertisement at all was sent to many
in the North, who both might and ought to have been advertised; the business
being of so great and common concernment, and so much scrupled in conscience;
and the advertisements for Sterline, Dumblane, Glasgow, Dumbartan, Pasley,
Hammilton, Irwine, Air, Lanrick and these places, where a great many of the
Commissioners were, and who were most like to scrouple at the business, came
but to Sterline on Tuesday about ten a Clock in the forenoon, to keep the Diet
of the Commission the next Thursday thereafter at Pearth; and no man can
rationally say, that these advertisements could be transmitted from thence, and
the Commissioners come thereupon timeously to Pearth within the space of 48.
hours, it being now the Winter season, and when the day was about the
shortest; nay, though convenient speed was used in dispatching these Letters
from Sterline, yet the Diet was circumduced before the advertisement came to
several of the Commissioners hands: I am not ignorant that all this is colored
with the necessity of a present Leavy, because of the defeat of the Forces at
Hammilton, but to say nothing; that that seems to presuppose a determination of
the question in the affirmitive before it was either propounded or debated;
neither yet to say any thing, that in the construction of too many who did
drive on a conjunction with the Malignant party, the necessity of a present
Leavy was not increased but rather diminished by the defeat at Hammilton, if
there was such a necessity, then such a course ought to have been taken, as was
most like to bring the business soonest to effect, which was to have done
things in a fair way, and after mutual debate and advice of all parties having
interest, and not thus to have carried it without acquainting, let be hearing
or satisfying of many who were no less interessed then they, and whom they
knew to have many things to object against the employing of these men; but
after-carriages did make it plainly to appear, that there was no such pressing
impressions of necessity as was pretended, because no great speed was made in
the Leavies for sundry months thereafter, and nothing was acted for a long
time after the Leavying of the Army, and until the Act of Classes was
rescinded, yea, and until the General Assembly was set down to interpone
their judgments in approving the Public Resolutions, which was six months
after giving the answer to the Quare; and could not that necessity that
admitted of so many months before execution, have admitted of some weeks
before resolution. The Commission having thus determined in this grave and
important case, did presently write Letters to Presbyteries, requiring them to
concur in their stations to make the Leavies effectual, according to the Order
and Resolutions of the Parliament thereanent; which were founded upon the
Commissions answer to the Quaere, wherewith many Presbyteries not being
satisfied in their consciences, did write the ground of their stumbling and
dis-satisfaction in their several respective Letters, and sent the same to the
Commission by some of their own number, which Letters were not spread abroad
before they were communicated to the Commission, and if the Commission had
given a satisfying answer, it is not like that they would have been spread at
all, but Presbyteries being still pressed to obedience, without satisfaction to
their Consciences, they could not but make known the reason of their refusal,
lest they should have seemed to others to be wilful and obstinate, that they
did amongst themselves call them Testimones (and amongst others too) I believe
it to be true, and that incase they should not be satisfied, they did intend
them as standing Testimonies of their duty in that particular, which yet they
thought more fit to do by Letter then any other more public way, that they
might therein show themselves the more tender and respective of the Commission.
That they condemned the Public Resolutions as a defection from the Covenant
and former Principles, was that which their Duty and their Consciences called
them unto; yet did they no other ways condemn them then by asserting that they
conceived them to be so, of which assertion they did give a reason from the
Word of GOD, and from the Covenant, and Warnings, Declarations and
Remonstrances of this Church, to which if the Commission had returned a
satisfactory answer, they would have been quiet and said no more in the
business. That they did not come themselves and propound their doubts was,
because they were many in several places, whole Presbyteries; and such a way
as this seemed to them to savor rather of tumult and faction then the way
which they took, and experience did prove, that no great satisfaction was to be
expected in that way, because when the Ministers of Sterlin were called by the
Commission to a conference at St. Andrews, and did not acquiesce to be silent
and say no more against the public resolutions, the Commiss^on on did inform
the King, and Committee of Estates thereof, who sent for them to Perth, and
consined them a month in that place; and when the Synod of Glasgow by their
Letters to the Commission, desired a Conference, no satisfaction was obtained
in the point of the Public Resolutions. That they did in these things traduce
honest, godly, and faithful Brethren; I think they may with reason deny; These
Letters contained nothing that was personal, but only that which concerned the
matter of these resolutions, which if it was evil on these Brethrens part who
were Authors and abettors of the same; there is no cause to charge those who
did endeavor the discovery thereof as traducers, or as the doers of these
things that tend to render their Brethren odious. That they did agent
diligently thorough the Country to induce others to do the like, is more then
the Author can well prove; but though it had been so, was there not a cause to
stop (if they could) the beginnings of backslidings and defections, which is as
the breaking out of waters, therefore are they well able to clear themselves
before indifferent and impartial judges of divisive walking in this matter,
notwithstanding of any thing that is said by the Author in the contrary.

VINDICATION.
AS for their Professions, by all lawful and fair means within the compass of
their power and station to remead the divisions. It is the duty indeed of all
who would prove lively Members of CHRIST'S body, and lovers of the Prosperity of
Sion; and happy were the man that could be the Peacemaker, and repairer of our
breaches. But if the late and present practice of these our Brethren do well
agree with Profession, let GOD, and indifferent godly men judge. I shall not
now insist upon the carriage and motions of some of them, in the beginning of
the late Assembly at St. Andrews (which were by a reverend and judicious godly
man, in their own hearing, said justly to be fiery motions, and petere jugulum
pacis) nor yet upon the Protestation against the Assembly; as to this effect of
which I am now upon, I shall only say this for the present, had it not been a
more probable and Christian like mean for the remeading of the divisions, to
have dealt for a Meeting of judicious and godly men on both sides (which
certainly was within the compass of their power and station) for a brotherly
and amicable conference in equal terms about the differences: then they being
but the one side, to take upon them the Authority of a public Judicatorie, and
by themselves straight way to condemn the other side as guilty carrying on a
course of defection, and that to be the main Cause of the Lords wrath on the
Land, and to go on in that continued and assumed Authority, and acting by
virtue thereof (as they declare peremptorily they will do in their answer given
to the moderat and peaceable Paper sent to them by the Synod of Lowthian in
their late Meeting in November) whileas the most part of the Ministry in this
Kingdom cannot in conscience but give Testimony against this as usurpation,
which may heighten differences and render them more incurable; might not these
things have been forborne without prejudice to themselves, for peace safety, at
least till that other way had been essayed, I speak not now of the lawfulness
of the late Assembly, or of the Public resolutions, but supposing these
matters to be sub judice, as they are at most betwixt us and them, could there
have been a way more obstructive to union between the parties differing, or
more effectual to render the divisions desperate then for the one party, and
that the far less party by more at ten to one to condemn the other in a
Public way, and represent them as the main procurers of the wrath of GOD upon
the Land, and to take upon them at their own hand to be judges over their
Brethren; GOD will not be mocked, this is not agreeable to their Profession and
endeavors, by all lawful and fair means to use Remedies of Peace. What these
our Brethren will do hereafter toward Peace, I will not n^w take upon me to
predetermine nor to prepossess any with prejudices against them; many of them I
am persuaded are men fearing God, and not only loving the Peace of Sion, but
also are learned and understanding in these things that belong to the Peace of
the Kirk, yet certainly it is feared by many both godly and wise, that some
amongst them, for all the business that is made about Conferences upon
differences (which indeed are not to be rejected, but to be followed by all
means) and professions made of aims and desires thereby to have all divisions
removed, yet has no other purpose but so far as they can to strengthen their
own way in every point, and to fix the division from the most part of the Kirk
of Scotland, the good Lord avert this; but if this appear at last, we hope that
men of understanding and soundness upon that side of the differences will
remember and make use of what they have learned and know and have professed
concerning the Church Constitution and of schism, and separation against
independents and separatists.

REVIEW.
THere is nothing said here of the Protesters that does infringe the integrity
of their Profession, and resolution by all lawful and fair means within the
compass of their power and station to endeavor the remedy of the divisions: it
is true that one of the members of the Commission to whom I do not deny the
Testimony of a reverend, judicious and godly man, did call the exceptions
propounded against those members of the Assembly who had been members of the
Commission, a fiery motion, and such a thing as petit jugulum pacis, which was
not then more sharply spoken then it was modestly taken; but to say nothing
that in that particular, he was a party that speaks so ( pace tanti viri) there
was no just reason to call it so, the exception, being so well grounded as it
was. I wish the Author may lay as much weight upon the words of that worthy man
in other things concerning the Public resolutions, as he does in that speech
of his. As to the Authors discourse concerning their taking upon them the
Authority of a Public Judicatory, and declaring peremptorily that they will so
do, and condemning the other side, they being by far the fewer number, and
whilst the matter was yet sub judice, when he shall be pleased to give us an
answer concerning his and other men's taking upon them to be an Assembly and to
make acts not only condemning their Brethrens judgment but also censuring
them with the sentences of suspension and deposition, then shall an answer be
given him concerning this. If it be said that they were an lawful Assembly,
but the other was no lawful Commission, that is the question, and if truth be
on his side, as to the freedom and lawfulness of the Assembly what he says
of their setting up of the Commission has weight; but if that Assembly was no
Assembly, then was the former Commission still standing, and they were in no
fault to conveen and exercise the same; it is true that the matter is sub
judice: but was not the matter also sub judice betwixt the Meeting at Dundee,
and the Protesters when that Meeting took upon them, notwithstanding of the
Protestation to be an Assembly, and did make acts, censuring some, and laying
an foundation for the censuring of all these that should refuse to acknowledge
their constitution, or after conference oppose their Acts. In answer to the
rest of his discourse upon this head, I desire the Reader to take notice, that
after several essays of a conference with the Commission by the Synod of
Glasgow to little or no effect, at the Meeting at St. Andrews, these who were
dissatisfied with the Public resolutions, did offer to the Meeting a humble
suppcation, desiring them to forbear to constitute themselves in an Assembly,
and to adjurne the Meeting until peaceable and fair means should be used for
composing of differences, which was altogether refused to be read; then after
that the Meeting had constitute themselves in an Assembly, it was desired by
these brethren that they would appoint some of their number to confer with them
about differences, which was long and tenaciously opposed, as carrying with it
a reflection upon these of the Commission who had carried on the Public
Resolutions, and a prejudice to the Assembly in judging of these resolutions;
at last the result was this, that such of the Assembly as they desired to
confer with might speak with them, but that no particular person should be
nominated, nor any thing written thereof in the minutes of the Assembly: In
prosecution of this desire, some of the unsatisfied Brethren did meet with the
Moderator of that Assembly, and some other eminent men members of the
Commission at Mr. Robert Blair his chamber two several diets, and after some
conference to and fro, did earnestly beseech and press upon them (some with
tears) that they would be pleased to be instrumental in adjourning the
Assembly, and in delaying to ratify the Public Resolutions; but they were not
pleased to condescend so much as to undertake to be assisting to these brethren
in obtaining their desire, and that night in which the Meeting was adjourned
from St. Andrews to Dundee, the dis-satisfied Brethren did again publicly
press that the Assembly migh be adjourned till some considerable time, till
pains might be taken in an amicable way for composing of differences, which
being refused, they were necessitated to Protest, as seeing no other remedy
against the current of backsliding; notwithstanding of this Protestation, the
Meeting at Dundee went on, not only to the ratifying of the public
resolutions, but to the condemning of the Protestation, censuring of some of
the Protesters, and making of Acts declaring all of these censurable who shall
not acknowledge their constitution, and submit to their Acts, and appointing
Presbyteries and Synods in their respective bounds to proceed to the execution
thereof, and giving power to their Commission for that effect where
Presbyteries were negligent. What length their Commission was gone, and what
they had in consideration against the Protesters, when they were interrupted
and broken off by the surprizall at Eliot themselves best know. After that time
the Lord was pleased to exercise the Land with so sad dispensations, as for a
good while made all Public Meetings of Ministers very difficult and dangerous,
until the Country being somewhat quieted, about the midst of October, these
who had Protested against the Meeting at St. Andrews and Dundee, as not being a
lawful and free General Assembly, with many other Ministers and Elders from
several parts of the Country, did meet at Edinburgh, where after some days
spent together in Prayer, and supplication, and in confessing of their sins to
God, and one to annother, they did in the next place after conference, and
mutual communication of Light one with another, set down their thoughts
concerning the Causes of the Lords wrath against the Land, that in that time of
darkness, there might be some light and directory in these things to such as
were willing to receive and make use thereof; amongst these causes of wrath,
they did condescend upon and reckon the Public Resolutions of Church and
State, for bringing the Malignant party, first to the Army, and then to the
Judicatories, and the actual intrusting of them with the power of the Kingdom
both Military and Civil, and the prelimiting and corrupting of the General
Assembly in the free and lawful constitution thereof; and its ratifying of the
Public Resolutions, which did involve a defection from the Cause, and laying a
foundation for censuring of all such who did not approve of the constitution of
that Assembly, and submit to the Acts there of; and finding themselves more and
more convinced of the nullity of that Assembly at Dundee, and how needful it
was to preserve the Church of Scotland in the possession of her due
privileges, and to keep together a remnant, who might be as a branch of hope
(if so be the Lord would be favorable to them, and take pleasure in them) for
repairing of the breach, such of them as were Members of the Commission of the
Genesis Assembly, did find themselves warranted and called of God, to take
possession of the power and trust committed unto them by the Assembly 1650. yet
so, as they did not authoritatively, impose or require obedience to any of
their Emissions concerning the causes of the Lords wrath (which was the only
thing they meddled with) but having agreed upon these Causes, with the advice of
diverse Brethren from several parts of the Kingdom, did offer and advise the
same to be made use of by all the Lords people in the Land leaving place to
add, as the Lord should make further discoveries thereafter. At the same time
all the Brethren who were met, did write Letters to sundry reverend and godly
men in the Ministry, of a different judgment, desiring an amicable Conference
with them; and conceiving that they could not well be brought together to one
place in such a season of the year, and when traveling was so difficult, they
did appoint some of their number to wait upon some of them at St. Andrews, and
upon others of them at Glasgow, who might hold forth unto them what in their
judgments was the most conducible means for union and peace both with God and
among our selves, and to hear what should be offered unto them by these
Brethren; what passed in these Conferences, I leave it to these who were
present to relate, hoping that none who were present will say, that the desires
and endeavors of union did break off upon our side; those of our number not
only professing themselves willing to confer and hear what should be offered unto
them, but to attend at any other diet that should be appointed, and to
endeavor if it were desired, a more numerous and frequent meeting of Brethren
of both sides: From all which it does appear, that the Protesters all along,
have been pursuers of peace, and not promoters and fosterers of division. The
Author propounds the question, If it had not been a more probable and Christian
like mean for remedying the divisions, to have dealt for a meeting of judicious
and godly men on both sides, and for an amicable and brotherly Conference on
equal terms about the differences, then that the Protesters being but the one
side, should have taken upon themselves the authority of a Public Judicatory,
and by themselves straightway to condemn the other side as guilty. In answer to
which, beside what is already said, I would first ask the Author, Whether it be
fair dealing, that these at St. Andrews, after they were earnestly entreated of
their Brethren, to adjourn and delay the ratifying of the Public Resolutions,
shall first take upon them the Authority of a General Assembly, to ratify the
Public Resolutions, condemn their Brethren who protest against them, censure
some of them with Suspension, and others of them with Deposition for that very
thing, and lay a foundation for censuring all of them, and all others in the
Church of Scotland, who should continue to differ from them, and oppose them in
these things, and then afterward cry out upon their Brethren, who hold forth
the sin and iniquity of such proceedings, as upon men who are not for peace,
and do not take the most probable and Christian-like mean for remedying the
divisions; The Author knows who were in the Church of Scotland, who did tread
these steps not long ago: Next, they did conceive it to be the most probable
and Christian-like mean for remedying the divisions, to fall upon the root of
the matter, by holding ing forth that which had divided us from God, and God
from us, and one of us from another, taking this for the most genuine and
sound, and safe, and Christian method of proceeding, yet walking so therein, as
that they did only soberly and by way of advice hold forth their judgmnts, and
not impose upon any; and as they left an open door to others, to add what
further discoveries of guiltiness the Lord should make known to them, so were
they as sharp and searching against themselves, as against any others. What
dissonancie from their Profession is in all this, and if it be but a mocking of
God (as the Author insinuats) I hope and pray, that the Lord will reveal it
unto them, seeing they did it in the simplicity of their hearts, looking upon
the same as a special and necessary point of their duty, in this day of
indignation and backsliding; but if it was acceptable service to God, as I
trust it was, I hope the Lord will countenance and follow it with a blessing
from Heaven, that there may be a profitable fruit thereof to his poor servants,
and to his poor Church. I know not well who these be of whom the Author speaks,
who notwithstanding of all the business that is made upon conferences about
differences etc. yet if the fears of many, both godly and wise may have weight,
have no other purpose but so far as they can to strengthen themselves in their
own way, and to fix the division from the most part in the Church of Scotland.
If any profess what he does not intend, he may abuse others, but he does but
increase his own guiltiness. I dare say, that the desires of Union upon the
Protesters side in the Meeting at Edinburgh, which was professed to be called in
order to Union, were real, and in their hearts as well as in their mouths; as
it was to them a matter both of grief and wonder, when the Commissioners who
came from the several Synods, did not only refuse to delay, till Brethren of a
different judgment (who were absent because they had no calling or invitation
to come, and could not intrude themselves) might be gotten conveened, but also
without any previous right understanding, or any Overture in order thereunto,
did resolve upon keeping an Assembly, according to the Indiction at Dundee the
last year, which gives just occasion of suspicion to many godly and wise to
conceive that the zealotes of the Public Resolutions, had more in their eye
the strengthening of themselves in their own way, and bearing down and
censuring of their Brethren who differ from them, then any union and right
understanding with them; the Commissions that some who came to that Meeting
were clothed with, and the Letter and Articles that others of them did so much
magnify, and do so closely stick to, do confirm them therein, and this brings
forth in them this fear, that as the strict adhering to the Public
Resolutions, and to the Constitution and Acts of the Assembly at Dundee, shall
obstruct the purging of this Church from corrupt Officers and corrupt Members,
and bear down and drive out many precious ones, who cannot be consenting unto,
but most bear testimony against these things; so also that it shall make many of
the godly in the land to stumble exceedingly at the government of our Church,
and from a despair ever to see this Church purged, to think of separating from
it, in which though they may do what they ought not to do, yet it does
exceedingly concern the Author and others of his way to consider of this, and
to take heed that they do no more offend the little ones, nor tempt them above
what they are able to bear.

VINDICATION.
IT should now follow that we come to the examination of the Reasons alleged
against the Assembly, but that there is one passage more in the Narrative of
their Protestation, which cannot be passed by without some inquiry upon it, it
is in these words: But as the faithful servants of Jesus Christ in this Kirk
in former times, did by the good hand of God on them, bring the Work of
Reformation unto a great perfection and near conformity with the first pattern,
some unfaithful men minding their own things more then the things of Christ,
and usurping over their Brethren and the Lords Inheritance, ^id deface the
beauty thereof, first by encroaching on the liberty and freedom of the
Assembly; afterward by taking away the very Assembly themselves, therefore
remember, etc. I shall not stay here to examine the Gramar and Logic of this
passage in relation to antecedents and consequents, wherein (it seems) whileas
they have been too forward and earnest to let out indirectly a blow at honest
men, they have somewhat overseen themselves, as might be clearly evidenced; but
this is not worth the while, nor shall I insist upon it to enquire the mystery.
It may be insinuat there, where they say, that the faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ in former times brought the Work of Reformation to a great perfection,
and to a near conformity with the first pattern; for these epithets of great and
near cannot be looked on in this place, but as termini diminuentes, because
perfection and conformity to a rule, are in themselves and their own pure
signification, such terms as no epithet of quantity in the mere positive degree
can be added to them without diminution of the thing signified by them When you
say, an action is come to a great perfection, and to a conformi^y with. You say
not so much as if you said simply, it is come to perfection and conformity with
its rule; now the Work of Reformation here being meant the outward Ordinances;
the brethren would do well to tell, and it were wisdom for every honest
professor to enquire what they judge wanting of perfection and conformity to
the pattern, in a Reformation of outward Ordinances, carried on by the good hand
of God upon these his servants; for my own part, I am not given to be jealous,
yet I think it is safe now to take heed ne lateat anguis in herba, the rather,
knowing that it has bin the way of some of these lands since the work of
Uniformity began in them, to say, that the Work of Reformation in Scotland was
a good way on; but that there are yet further seize then it was brought
to, and now it is begun boldly to be presented into a Meeting, pretended to be
the public Commission of the Kirk, that the taking of Presbyterian Government
is the greatest perfection attainable in Church Government, and that the
maintaining less then positive evidences of Grace, is sufficient for
constituting one a member of the visible Kirk, and sundry other weighty points
of the Doctrine and Government of the Church of Scotland, are chief causes that
have brought the present judgments on the Land; which I dare say, the presenter
of them would never hazarded to have presented, had he not known of some good
liking of them in some Ministers; nay, I will say further, though the man be
understanding as to his station, beyond many others, yet who ever knows him
best, and will consider the style, contrivance and conceptions in those
articles now extant in Print, will (I doubt not) say, there has been the hand
of Joab, another head and pen in them then his own. This by the way, that which
I would have especially observed in this passage, is to what purpose in this
place are brought in these unfaithful men the Prelates, who minding their own
things, etc. and all this made an antecedent, whereupon is inferred the
Protestation against the late Assembly, for immediately it follows; therefore
remembering etc. whereunto tends all this, but to bear all in hand that shall
happen to read this Protestation, that the Brethren that have been lately, and
are opposite to them, the professors have been, and are treading the steps of
these unfaithful men the Prelates, and their mentioned practices? a shreud
suggestion (to say no more) against their Brethren, many of them not only such
as yet they dare not but profess to esteem highly of, but even many others
whom they despise, have been honored of God to stand constant against the
Prelates usurpations for the liberry of Assemblies, when few of their accusers
have had the honor to have had their hand at the work; yea, some (it may be
these from whom the suggestion issued) were taking unwarrantable orders from
Prelates, and doing more too? How can honest Christian hearts admit so
slanderous a suggestion against so many honest men, whose faithfulness,
integrity, honesty and constancy in the truth, has been so well known and
sealed by God, quis tulerit Graechos (I speak not of them all) de seditione
loquentes? if need be it will be easy to discover, or rather to name (for they
are not hidden in the dark, the Prelaticall steps that some have trod these
years last bypast.

REVIEW.
THe first thing which the Author challenges in that passage of the Narrative
of the Protestation is, the Grammar and Logic of it in relation to antecedence
and cons^quence, concerning which he thinks that too great forwardnes to let
out indirectly a blow at honest men, is made, the Protesters somewhat to over
see themselves, but he spares the clearing of it, and not being worth the while
till it b^ c^e^ed, these who see it cannot take with it. In the next place,
albeit he professes himself not to be given to be jealous, yet It is too great
jealousy and prejudice that raises so great a stir about so innocent and
harmless an expression as this. That the fa^thfall Ministers of Jesus Christ
in former times brought the Work of Reformation in Scotland to a great
perfection and near conformity to the Word of God; What mystery is here? have
not the like expressions been used heretofore in the Papers and Books of the
Relaters and Asserters of Reformation and Government of this Church; but (says
the Author) great and near are here diminishing terms, and imports yet something
to be wanting to perfection and conformity to the pattern; and therefore he
thinks the Brethren would do well to tell, and that it were wisdom for every
honest professor to enquire what that is that is yet wanting The brethren do
tell. and all honest Professors may be persuaded to believe, that they had no
will before them that expression, and that they do willingly subscribe to the
testimony of a worthy man in this Church, whose love unto, and estimation of
the Work of Reformation, is above all exception, to wit, that the Church of
Scotland, after the Reformation, did by degrees attain to as great perfection
both in Doctrine and Discipline, as any other R^formed Church in Europe: But it
may be this will not satisfy the Author, because his Logic teaches him that
by saying great perfection and near conformity; they have said less then if
they had said simply, it is come to perfection and conformity. To say nothing,
that the Work of Reformation is capable of a greater grouth in the practical
use of the things that are known and professed, and of a discovery of further
degrees of light and persuasion in these things. Will the Author say, that
nothing at all, no not the least pin or circumstance of perfection and
conformity with the first pattern, was then wanting to the work of reformation
in Scotland, if so we desire him to tell us, what kind of power it is that is
exercised by the Magistrates and Councels of Burghs then they choose
Commissioners to the General Assembly, and what is the extent of the Doctors
Office? I ask not these things to cast any blemish on the Work of Reformation,
which I do willingly acknowledge to be such as may compare with any of the
Reformed Churches, and in some respect (so far as I know) has the
pre-eminence, but to satisfy the Authors needless curiosity, these things
being considered, makes it to appear, that these words even when streached upon
the tenter-hooks of the Authors nicety, do yet bear a convenient and true
meaning, and that none needs thence to fear a serpent lurking in the bush. I
acknowledge that it has been the way of some in these Lands since the Work of
Reformation began in them, to say, that the Work of Reformation in Scotland,
was a good way on, but that there are yet further seize then it was
brought unto; but it was apparent from others of their expressions, and from
the whole tenor of their carriage, that they had therein a bad meaning, to wit,
that we should not hold fast the things which we have already, nor walk by the
same rule, but that we should make an alteration and change thereof; and
therefore there is reason to be jealous over such; but to be jealous over these
whose expressisions and carriage gives no ground for it, is but to torment our
selves with needless fears, and to wrong others. I have already given some
account of the Paper presented to the Meeting at Edinburgh, (which the Author
does here repeat again) and shall now add these few things in answer to some
circumstances of his discourse. First, that Paper was not presented to a
Meeting that either really was or did pretend to be the Commission of the
Church, but only to a Meeting of Ministers and Professors, acting not in the
capacity of any Judicatory real or pretended. Secondly, that all the Ministers
who were there, did testify their dislike of that Paper, and even these whom
the Author and some others do happily most suspect, did seriously dissuade from
the in-giving of it. Thirdly, I know not who is the Joab he means of; but I do
well know, that the men of that Meeting who are most slandered as the plotters
and contrivers of such things, had neither head, nor hand, nor heart in that
Paper; and if I rightly remember, I heard it asserted by the Author of it,
there was no other head nor pen in it but his own; these who know him well, may
think that he has that much ability as to reach the style, contrivance and
concept^ons in these Articles; and therefore whilst the Author speaks these
things by the way, he has gone a little out of the way. That which he would
have chiefly observed in this passage, is, To what purpose in this place are
brought in these unfaithful men the Prelates, who minding th^i^ own things,
etc. and such an inference made thereupon, as tends to bear all in hand that
shall happen to read the Protestation, that the Brethren that have been lately,
and are opposite ^o the Protesters, have been, and are treading the steps of
these unfaithful men the Prelates, and heir mentioned practices and shrewd
suggestions, as he calls them, on which he w^xeth hot in the Vindication of his
Brethren, and in recriminations upon others; but I desire him and others who
read these things in soberness of m^nde, to consider first that the estimation
which the Protesters have of the ability and godliness of sundry of the
Brethren, who have been and are opposite to them in the Public Resolutions, is
above exception and manifest, I hope, to the Consciences of these Brethren
themselves. 2. That this needs not, nor ought not to hinder them to give their
judgment of their way in order to the Public Resolutions, if so be it be done
without personal reflections, so far as is possible. 3. That (as the Author
has distinguished before) there is a difference between men's intention and
their work; men may be treading the steps of defection, as these unfaithful
men the Prelates did, who yet do it not with an unfaithful and prelatical mind,
even as in these same very times of the course of defection that was carried on
by the Prelates, there was sundry able and godly men engaged therein, without
whose help it could not have been so easily, nor unobservedly to many, carried
on by the multitude of carnal and corrupt men, who would have been but a small
credit without these other. 4. That if the Protesters had had to do with these
only whose faithfulness, integrity, honesty and constancy in the truth have
been so well known and sealed by God, they had happily expressed themselves some
other way; but they had to do in this particular with all those who owned the
public Resolutions, and amongst these were many; yea, not a few active leading
men, members of, or assisting unto the Commission in these things, and in the
Meeting at Dundee, who were deeply engaged in the Prelaticall way, as not only
their subscriptions in the Bishops black Book, which is yet extant, and can be
produced if need were, but also the tenor of their carriage for a long time
did witness; and I fear it of not a few, that though they seemed to forsake
these things with the changes of the time, yet have they not repented thereof
unto this day; not that I would fetch all those whose names are in that black
Book, and others the like books, and who were involved in these courses under
that compass; I know that sundry of them have from their very hearts repented
of, and do from their souls abhor that way; I mean even of these who are for
the Public Resolutions, but this Church has been so s^nsible that there is
cause to think otherwise, that she has several times given warning thereof in
her public Papers; and who knows not that throughout all the Land, these who
had been most indifferent, and lukewarm in the Cause of God, greatest
underminers of it, most Prelaticall in the times of the Bishops, most Malignant
in James Grahams time, and in the time of the unlawful Engagement, and most
designing and active to carry on the Treaty with the King, in a wrong way, and
without security to Religion; yea, and such as were scandalous in their life
and conversation were for the most part amongst the most zealous and violent
for the Public Resolutions, and are so still, now the course it self being
evil* and envolving a foundation of defection, owned and countenanced, and
zealously promoted, by all the lukewarm Prelaticall, and Malignant scandalous
men in the Land; was there not doolfull experience of such backsliding in the
time of the Prelates, to be stirred up in our selves, and to Protest and
testify to others against things, though sundry godly men were engaged
therein; nay, the more need there was to speak plainly, least their ability and
godliness should be a snare to any. 5. Whatever the Author is pleased to
allege, the Protesters do not despise any of those who have been honored of
God, to stand constant against Prelates usurpations, and for the Liberties of
Assemblies, they acknowledge that they owe much to such, and though they cannot
but testify against the ill of the Public Resolutions, yet they do retain a
honorable Impression of these persons, and of what is good in them. 6. If it
were fit to compare, sundry of the Protesters are in nothing; yea, in none of
these things which the Author mentioned as praise worthy, behind with the very
chief of these who have appeared for the Public Resolutions, but both of them
are by the grace of God, that that they are. 7. That none of the Protesteers
for any thing that I know, did take unwarrantable orders from the Prelates, and
do more to accept one who has often in private, and in Public acknowledged,
and is still ready to acknowledge the sin of that way in which he was bred up
from his youth, and therefore did it ignorantly through unbelief, who because
of the exceeding riches of the mercy of God, in recovering him out of that
snare holds himself the more bound to be vigilant and zealous against all
desertions for the time to come; this man has forbidden me to say any more to
the Author, in answer to these things; but these words, dignus ego qui patior
indignus tu qui faceres tamen, and to leave the explication to his own
conscience. 8. It had been fairer dealing in the Author, to have discovered or
named the Prelaticall steps that some of the Protesters have trodden these years
past, and not thus to have asserted without any proof or instance, which he
thinks a fault in matters of less moment: The steps that these men have trodden
these years past in their Public Actings (for of these I take the Author to
mean) were for the matter the same that were trodden by himself, and by sundry
leading men in the Public Resolutions, who were also leading men in all these
steps from the highest to the lowest; and I do not think (though not a few be)
he is come that length to condemn these things and for the manner of their
Actings, they acknowledge themselves to be men subject to the like passions
with others, but knows no cause why for these the trading of Prelaticall ste^s
should be changed rather upon them th^n upon others, some in the following of
their duty are more emiss, and others more forward, but as long as they do
straightly and honestly own their duty, it is hard either because of the one or
of the other, to charge them with so heavy impu^ations.

VINDICATION.
WE shall now weigh these reasons whereupon the Protestation is built, and
which have been added lately, as batterages to hold it up; surely the grounds
whereupon men would adventure on such an Act, or others would join in approving
of it, had need to be weighty in themselves and relevant, and also clear in
men's Consciences: To Protest, against ^^r dissent from some particular acts and
constitutions of a Genesis Assembly is a thing which may be done without schism,
and derogation to the Authority and being of Government; but when a Genesis
A^sembly it self is protested against, and declined as unlawful, and having no
authority at all; who sees not how sad the consequences must readily be in hat
Kirk, hardly can it be by any outward means, but turn to a fixed schism,
which thing how have godly, orthodox christian, in all ages of the Kirk,
detested and abhorred, choosing rather ever to tolerate great offenses (which
they did see, but could not mend) rather then to a^vide the Kirk of Christ, and
then it would be seriously considered, if the reasons and grounds of such an
Act be not clear and relevant, how high an attempt it against the Kingly Office
of Christ, to trample under foot his Supreme external Court, in a National
Kirk. Come we then and ponder the Reasons alleged for this Protestation, and
declinature whether they be found weighty or light, vincat veritas.

REVIEW.
I Shall not stand to discuse the relevancy of all that is asserted in this
general discourse, but returns this answer thereunto: It seems the Author does
not deny that it is lawful, and in some cases necessary, to Protest against,
and decline some Genesis Assemblies, and that it would be so in our Hypothesis if
the grounds were clear and relevant, whatsoever will plead for a Protestation
against particular Acts that are wrongthe same and greater reason, will plead
for a Protestation against a wrong constitution, because the error of a wrong
constitution is of greater consequence, as importing more prejudice to the work
and People of God, and being a higher attempt against the Kingly Office of
Jesus Christ, then many wrong acts are, and therefore there is the greater
reason to prevent the same in Jure, where it cannot be done in facto, even as
men by such like Protestations preserve their Rights jure, when by the spate of
a declining Judicatory they are like to be oppressed de facto, and therefore
have Orthodox Christians in all ages born Testimony, and Protested against
corrupt councels as well as corrupt acts; we shall not go far back to seek
instances: It is known what the Protestant Church did against the Council of
Trent, and how often faithful men in the Church since the Reformation from
Popery have born Testimony and protested against unlawful Assemblies, as well
as against unwarrantable acts, neither does it cause schism in the Church, or
derogate any thing from the Authority and being of Government, to Protest
against usurpers, corrupters, or perverters of it, in a false court, but it is
the lawful, and has been the usual mean in this Church, blessed unto her of
the Lord, to prevent and remead schism, and to preserve the Authority and
being of Government, with the purity and Liberty of all the Ordinances, and
whatsoever sad consequences can be imagined to follow upon it, do lie at the
doors of these who by declining from their Principles, carries on, and cleaves
to a corrupt constitution of an Assembly, and not on these who adhering to
sound Principles, do from the conscience of their duty bear Testimony against
the same. It has been often and truly said, that the side wall which falls, and
not the gevill which stands is to blame for the rent and ruin of the House; I
do willingly acknowledge that it is an high attempt against the Kingly Office
of Jesus Christ, to trample under foot his Supreme external Court in a
National Church, but as the Protesters are guilty of this high attempt, if
they have Protested against the Meeting at St. Andrews and Dundee without a
cause, and upon grounds that are not relevant; so if the Authors and abettors
of the Public Resolutions have corrupted this Court in the free and lawful
constitution thereof, and have taken upon themselves to be an Assembly wh^lest
they were none, then will they, and not the other be found guilty of this high
attempt: Let us therefore come to the discussing and clearing of the reasons
that the Protesters plead for themselves.

VINDICATION.
THeir first reason for unfreenesse, and unlawfulness of the Assembly, that
the Election of Commissioners to the same was prelimited and prejudged in the
due liberty thereof, by an Act and Letter of their Commission of the last
Assembly sent to Presbyteries, appointing such Brethren as after Conference
remained unsatisfied with, and continued to oppose Public Resolutions to be
cited to the Genesis Assembly. Thus it is briefly proponed in the Protestation. In
the late larger paper emitted and spread abroad since, wherein as may be
conceived, are mustered all the Forces that could be gathered together against
that Assembly, and many heads have been employed in that one, every man that
reads it decerneth whose Pen has given the form and frame to it; and any
decerning man also may perceive in it something of School, and something of Law
and registers which the former behoved to have from these quarriers. It is put
in a Sy logistick form thus: That it is no free General Assembly, the Election
of whose Commissioners is so prejudged and pre-limited in the due freedom and
liberty thereof, that many Ministers of Presbyteries in a capacity to be
chosen, for their ability and faithfulness are by the Presbyteries at the
order of the Supreme Judicatory past by and set aside in the Election, and
rendered incapable to be members thereof; But the late Meeting is such:
Therefore, etc. We will not follow out foot for foot the tract of many
objections which the contrivers of this Paper have either found some way made
by others, or have formed themselves at their own pleasure against this and
other following reasons, and their replies thereunto. But shall propone such
reasens as we conceive discovers the nullity of these and other reasons, not
omitting the consideration of any thing contained in this Paper which shall
seem to meet with what we shall bring as occasion shall be offered without
tying our selves to the order of this Paper: For answer then to this first
ground. 1. As it lies in the Protestation, it could have no force to prove any
illegality or nullity of the Assembly at the time of the Protestation; suppose
that the Commissioners Act and Letter sent to Presbyteries and indeed contained
under Prelimitation, because this fault of the Commission could not be imputed
to the Assembly to nullify it, while as yet it was to the knowledge of the
Assembly, but an aliedgance not proven, that such under pre-limitation had been
used in the election of Commissioners, and that they had not as yet determined
nor approven the deed of the Commission, nor deed of Presbyteries done
thereupon in elections; at the giving in of this Protestation the Assembly had
not as yet considered the Commissioners Proceedings, neither indeed was it in
their power to cognosce upon exceptions against the Commission, without change
of the Order of proceeding that had been used constantly in all bygone time,
and upon a great debate with the Parliament it self in the Assembly 1648. had
been established by a formal act, as the Protesters themselves well understood
and acknowledged, and therefore it was, that upon this they offered to the
Assembly, before the choosing of a Moderator, a Paper pressing the changing,
and reform the order of proceeding in the General Assembly, which before had
always been in use, as if some of themselves had not been the main maintainers
and procurers of the establishment of that order before, when it made for them.
And as the Assembly as yet but in heap of the matter, and not constitute into a
Judicatory, could have taken into consideration, and have altered the practice
and constitution of former Assemblies. The Assembly therefore did offer to call
in this exception, and to give unto it all due considerations as soon as
possibly they could win at it.

REVIEW.
WHat needs all this wast of words, concerning the gathering and mustering of
forces, and the employing of many heads, and the pen that gave the form, and
some thing of School, and something of Law, and Registers, which the former
behoved to have from these Q^aerees? The truth is, that if it were a purpose to
tell it, there were very few heads employed in that business; happily as few as
about the Vindication, and there was little gathering of forces for it, the
difficulty of correspondence and shortness of time wherein it was penned
admitting of very little communication of thoughts; and the Author is mistaken
when he speaks of two Quaeres, one of School, another of Registers and of Law,
out of which the former behoved to have his materials, and happily also
concerning the pen that gave it the frame, as some others have been before him;
but what though all these things were true which he alleges: Is it any fault
in weak Soldiers to call in their fellows to their help, and to strengthen one
another in maintaining of their ground against many and strong Adversaries; or
does he hunt after commendation and applause, by setting forth the
preparations, and multitude and strength of his opposites, whom yet he by
himself alone supposes to have defeat. It was free for the Author in answering
the reasons contained in the Protestation, and the other Paper relating to it,
to choose such a method as seemed best to him, though it would have seemed to
be more easy for his readers, if he had followed foot for foot what is
contained in these Papers; I do more wonder that he has left many things of
importance unanswered, not so much as once touching them. But let us come to
the answers which he gives, which I shall take as they ly in the Vindication,
upon supposal that the Letter and act sent by the Commission to Presbyteries,
did contain an under-prelimitation; the first ground as it lies in the
Protestation, has force to prove the illegality, or nudity in the Assembly,
notwithstanding of any thing the Author says to the contrary. First, he seems
to lay this ground, that nothing can be of force to prove the illegality, or
nullity of the Assembly, but that which can be imputed to the Assembly it self;
but I fear that this ground which is here hinted at by him, and much made use
of by some others in this particular, shall fail all who lean thereupon: I
suppose that by a Letter and Act of the Commission, and a deed of the
Presbyteries done thereupon, elections had been so pre-limited, that al^ Ruling
Elders had been excluded, and Ministers only chosen, or the one half of the
Ministers excluded, without a just cause from having voice in the elections, or
from being chosen Commissioners; would not these pre-limitations have force to
prove a null Assembly, the same being proponed and rejected as not relevant
exceptions, when the Commissioners did meet to constitute themselves into an
Assembly; it seems by the Authors ground they could not, because they are but
alledgeances not yet proven, and they have not determined therein, no approven
thereof, because it is not in their power to cognosce upon exceptions against
the Commission, without change of the order of Proceedings to the Ass. which
had been constantly used in all time by gone; there may be many things done in
Commissions and Presbyteries in prelimiting and perverting the elections, that
cannot be imputed; yea, which the Assembly may condemn, that may make an
illegal and null Assembly; and therefore upon supposall that the Letter and
Act sent to Presbyteries did contain an under-pre-limitation, it might have
force at the time of the Protestation to prove a null Assembly, though it could
not be imputed to the Assembly it self: But how does he prove that it could not
be imputed to the Assembly? first, it was (says he) to the knowledge of the
Assembly, but an alledgeance not proven; it seems the Author does not question
the relevancie of it in Jure, if the truth of the fact had been proven, but it
being relevant in Jure (as upon his supposall it needs must) and offered to be
proven in facto; yea, the matter of fact, as to the presumption of it, being
manifest to the consciences of many of the Assembly, ought they not before
constituting themselves in an Assembly, either to have tried and discussed the
same, or else to have laid aside the persons against whom it was propounded,
from sitting as Members in the Assembly, until it might have been gotten tried
and discussed; but they did neither of these, and was not this to be imputed to
the Assembly? Next, he says, that the Assembly had not yet determined in, nor
approven the deed of the Commission, nor the deed of Presbyteries done
thereupon in Elections, at the giving in of the Protestation: B^t in this he is
much mistaken, because the Assembly by admitting the Commissioners from
Presbyteries so elected, did as really approve these limited Elections, and so
the deed of the Commission and Presbyteries done thereupon, as ever any
preceding Assem. used to approve the most free Elections; to wit, only by
admitting the Commissioners; yea, the Assemb. rejecting of the exceptions, and
allowing the Commissioners against whom it was propounded, to sit
notwithstanding the propounding thereof, was a real approving of the
Commission, and of what the Presbyteries did thereupon, as we shall afterward
Godwilling clearly show. Thirdly, he says, that the Assembly had not yet
considered the proceedings of the Commission, neither was it in their power to
cognosce upon exceptions against the Commission, without change of the order of
proceedings, which had been used constantly in all time bygone, This is a
pretty fancy to defend an ill cause: the Church of Scotland have found it
necessary in the intervall betwixt General Assemblies, to have her Commission,
whose trust should be to preserve the Liberties of the Church and to take care
of some things of more General concernment committed unto them, and that in all
these things they should keep themselves within the bounds of their Commission,
and proceeding according to the standing Acts of former General Assemblies,
and that in the next ensuing Assembly they shall give an account of their
proceedings during the whole time of their Commission in the beginning of the
Assembly, before any other Cause or matter be handled, and their proceedings to
be allowed or dis-allowed, as the Assembly shall think expedient. Now, says
the Author, this matter of pre-limitation being an exception against the
Commission, could not be taken in consideration, without the change of this
order. I shall not say, that it might have been done without any shadow of
change of order; But I desire to be considered, that it never was the
intention, nor did it ever come into the mind of any free lawful General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, to give power to their Commissioners to
give Laws concerning the constitutng of an Assembly; these are clearly set
down in the Policy and Acts of the Church, according to which, the Commission
ought to walk in all things committed to their trust, not meddling with any
thing not committed unto them, much less meddling with it in a way contrary to
that Policy and these Acts: and therefore did they appoint the proceedings of
these Commissioners to be tried, and allowed or dis-allowed in the next
Assembly, before the doing of any thing else. Now a Commission contrary to
their trust, does meddle with the Constitution of an Assembly, and by their
Letter and Act, and the deed of Presbyteries thereupon, the elections are
prelimited (as the Author is content to suppose) and when the Assembly meets,
and this is proponed as an exception to be taken in consideration against such
Members of the Ass: as was Members of that Commission; he tells us, it cannot be
considered without change of order, being an exception against the
Commissioners proceedings. What a sad case the Church is brought to by this
means, that ^s, to suffer the constitution of her Assemblies to be corrupted by
her own Commission, and that without remedy; or why it must, as to the
Constitution of the Assemb. be taken in consideration before the admitting of
these Commissioners to fit as Members, or else not at all, because if if the
Commissioners be once received, the Members admitted, and the Assemb:
constituted hoc ipso, that these things are done, that prelimitation is
approven; or why the Assem: has already constituted and found themselves a
lawful Assem. with these Commissioners inclusive, notwithstanding of that
exception. That the matter may be yet further cleared, it would be considered,
that against the constitution of Judicatories in their Members, there may be
exceptions of several sorts, some that are more personal or particular,
relating to one or two, or some few upon personal scandals and miscarriages;
Some more common and universal, that concerns all or many; a Judicatory may
proceed to constitute it self, and act as a Judicatory before discussing
^xceptions of the first sort; having laid aside the Members against whom these
exceptions are propounded, till conveniently they may be gotten tried and
discussed, because there is no exception but against a few, and upon particular
and personal s^andals; the far greater part being Members uncontrolable and
rightly qualified, but they cannot proceed to constitute themselves and act as
a Judicatory before discussing of exceptions of the second sort, unless we
would suppose, that after constituting themselves into a Judicatory, or finding
themselves to be a Judicatory, they might again find themselves to be no
Judicatory. Exceptions of a more common and universal influence against causa
causae, of the Constitution of an Assembly, to wit, against Elections, which is
the ground of the Commissions; as the Commissions are of the constitution of
the Assembly, ought to be considered before constitution be declared; for
unfree Elections make null Commissions, and all, or a great many null
Commissions, make a null Assembly. From these things, I trust it is manifest,
that the exceptions against the freedom of Election, because of the Act and
Letters of the Commission, and the deed of the Presbyteries following
thereupon, ought to have been taken in consideration before the Meeting did
constitute themselves in an Assembly, and that the Commissioners whom that
exception did concern, ought not to have been admitted to sit as Members,
before the trying and discussing thereof: as to that of the change of the order
of proceeding, which had been used constantly, upon which the Author seems to
lay so much weight, besides what is answered already, I say, there needed no
change in that Order, in discussing of any thing that was entrusted to the
Commission; for this was not within the compass^ of their power and trust, but
diametrally opposite to the same; and therefore the Commission having so far
exceeded their bounds, as to meddle with Constitutions of the Assembly, by
prelimiting of the Elections; this did unavoidably necessitate the cognition
and consideration of that part of the Commissions proceeding, so far as it did
relate to the Constitution of the Assembly, though not formally, as it did
concern their carriage. I know not to what purpose the Author alleadges, that
that order was on a debate with the Parliament it self in the year 1648.
established by a former Act, as the Protesters themselves well understood;
would he by this insinuate, that there was a debate betwixt the Parliament and
the Assembly, concerning the Commissions pre-limiting of Elections, and that
the Parl. desired this to be considered of before the Assemblies constituting
themselves into a Judicatory, and that the Assembly did refuse it, and
afterward established the Act which he speaks of? O^ that the Parliament did
desire the Commissioners of the former Assembly should be removed from sitting
as Members in the Assembly 1648. until the Exceptions propounded against them,
by them should be taken in consideration and discussed? If he mean any of
these, he is much mistaken, because there was no such debate betwixt the
Parliament and the Assembly, nor betwixt the Assembly and any persons
whatsoever in the year 1648. as we shall afterward convincingly clear: And he
is no less mistaken when he says, that it was acknowledged by the
Protesters, and that upon this they offered to the Assembly at St. Andrews,
before the choosing of a Moderator, a Paper pressing the changing and reforming
the order of proceeding in the General Assembly, which before had always been
in use. The Protesters might happily acknowledge an Act of the Assembly
concerning the trying, and allowing and dis-allowing the proceedings of the
Commission before the handling of any other Cause or matter. If there was any
question about that Act, it could not but be readily acknowledged by the
Protesters, having been so lately revived in the Assem. 1648. but that there
was any such acknowledgment as the Author insinuates, is alleged without all
ground; as also that which he says of their offering a Paper for changing of
their former order; They did never offer any such Paper, nor did they ever pen
or draw up any such Paper; and the Author does wrong them not a little, and
himself more, when he does affirm it: They did indeed offer a Paper to the
Assembly, before the choosing of the Moderator, but there was not one title
therein concerning the changeing and Reforming of the order of proceeding
formerly used by the Assembly; but upon knowledge and conscience of the main
weight that lay against that Meeting, why they could not be a lawful, free
General Assembly; the Protesters did offer a Paper unto them for choosing of
the Moderator, containing a humble desire, and some reasons to persuade them to
adjourn their Meeting, and to forbear to constitute themselves in an Assembly;
the Paper is yet extant under the hands of all the Protesters, and may be seen
by any who please. If the Meeting at that time had been pleased to read and
hearken to the desire of that Paper, many things that have followed since,
might have been prevented; but many, whether from a fear of missing a
ratification of the Public Resolutions, or upon any other ground, themselves
best know, did show themselves so zealous against the very offer of it, that the
Meeting would not so much as read or hear it; and therefore whilst the Author
thought to have reached a great blow to the Protesters, in fastening upon them
the pressing of the changing and reforming the order which themselves not long
ago (as he alleadges) had been the main maintainers and procurers of, to get it
established before, when it made for them, he has quite missed them, and
wounded himself by alleging things that are not true.

VINDICATION.
But come we to the Argument as it lies in its full form and strength in the
later Paper. Passing the first Proposition thereof, let us come to the trial
of the second, or the Assumption. That the election of Commissioners to the
Assembly was prejudged and prelimited in the due freedom thereof: That this
alleadgeance might be verified, it was necessary to have made clearly out;
First, That the Commissioners Act and Letter exclude and discharge many
Ministers to be chosen. Secondly, That the Presbytery in the Election, were
possibly prelimited by the Letter of the Commission, i. e. admitted the
prelimitation of the Commissioners, and did not use their own freedom in
electing, but merely followed the direction of the Commission; let the
Commission be never so guilty, and their brethren never so unduely prelimited,
yet if the Presbyteries who are the only Electors used their own freedom, their
election is free and valid, and nothing can be forced against the Assembly as
unfree and unlegall in the constitution of it, because of any such Act or
Letter of the Commissions, as solicitation active of Judges and Members of any
Judicatory, proves not a Judicatory corrupt, unless it can be evidenced, that
they have excepted and yielded unto the solicitation. Now, does this Paper
prove either of these as it undertakes, and would bear the Reader in hand, when
it says, The second Proposition is proven, etc. good and ingenuous Reader;
consider if it do so. And first for the latter of these particulars what says
it? The second is proven by the Presbyteries proceeding according to the Letter
and Act of the Commission sent unto them about the time of choosing the
Commissioners appointing that such, etc. Answer. Did the Writer of this Paper
at the emitting of it, think, that it should ever come under the consideration
of decerning and impartial judgments, that would try ere they trust; or
rather has he purposed that it should come to none b^t such as were pre
engaged, or pre-inclined to take any thing off his hand for good coin, proof
good enough? For here as to that part of the Assumption on the which we are for
the present, there is nothing but a naked petitio Principii, a naked affirming
of the same which was alleged before in the first ^etting down of the
Assumption; for what is it else that is said, Presbyteries proceeding according
to the Letter and Act of the Commission about the time etc. but the same that
was alleged there, that Presbyteries at the order and appointment of a
Supreme Judicatory passed by. etc. and therefore whatever the writer say
afterward in the pretended proof of that Assumption, concerning things included
in the Commissions Act and Letter, to show that they intended prelimitation of
the election of Commissioners, let all be never so true. It is but words he
gives his Reader in the close of that Section, saying these things do clearly
prove that there was such a prelimitation of Election as is formerly spoken of;
For, let these things be never so clear spoken of the Commissions Act and
Letter, yet for ought that he said as yet, it is not clear, that Presbyteries
proceeded according to these, or were positively prelimited by them, that they
did not use their own liberty in election, and so the second Proposition is not
yet proved.

REVIEW.
Seeing he is pleased to pass the first Proposition of the Argument, as it
lies in the second Paper. I shall also pass it, conceiving that he takes it
for a truth, as indeed it is. To the Assumption he says many things, which I
shall take in order as they lie. Let it be yielded to him, that for
verification of the alleadgeance contained therein, that these two things which
he mentions are to be made out, viz. that the Letter and Act of the Commission
did exclude and discharge many Ministers to be chosen, and that the
Presbyteries did admit of that prelimitation, or were passively prelimited by
that Letter and Act, yet with these animadversions upon that which he speaks in
the explication of his passive prelimitation: First, that he confines his
passive prelimitation within too narrow a bounds, and he will not have it
extended to the Presbyteries, unless they did merely follow the Election of
the Commission in that matter that is as I take his meaning, go quite contrary
to their own inclination and judgment, so as they were but mere patients in
that business, (upon which account a wrangler might happily deny that there is
any prelimitation at all of Elections: for if men be suffered to make any
election, or so patients in it, that if they had been left to themselves, they
would have taken another course: But what if they had some inclinations that
way, yet were not herein fully determined, but were hovering and suspending the
ultimate determination of their judgment, until they should hear the matter
debated in their Presbyteries, or advise and confer with others of their
Brethren abroad, and then the Letter and Act of the Commission comes unto them,
and by the authority hereof, determines that judgment, and shuts out all that
thereafter could be said by any to the contrary. Was there not a passive
prelimitation here, though such persons did not merely follow the direction of
the Commission, but also in some part their own inclination, which I think
indeed was the case of many of the Presbyteries. Next, when he says, that if
the Presbyteries who are the only Electors used their own freedom, their
Election is free and valide. If he meaned as to any prelimitation from without,
it is true; but if he meaned simply, and in all cases wherein they use their
own freedom, I deny that the Election is always free and val^de: If the
Presbyteries had freely and by mutual agreement amongst themselves, or two or
three Presbyteries* or one Presbytery for the plurality of it, have agreed to
exclude all these from voycing in the Elections, or from being elected, who
were for, or those who were against the Public Resolutions, would these
Elections have been free and valid? May not Presbyteries themselves
unwarrantably ^n^ rench upon the freedom of their own Election is, as well as
it may be done by others from without. Th^rdly, I desire that to be taken
notice of, which he says, for illustrating the bu^inesse, that solicitation
active of Judges and Members of a^y Judicatory, proves not a Judicatory
corrupt, unless it can ^e evidenced that they have accepted and yielded to the
solicitation. Well then, if their acceptance and y^elding can be evidenced, it
proves them corrupt by the Authors own grant. Whether the Paper proves either
of these as it under-takes, we shall see anon. For verifying the last of these,
the Paper says, That it is proven by the Presbyteries proceeding, according
to the Act and Letters of the Commission sent to them, about the time of
choosing the Commissioners, appointing that such, etc. Over this probation, the
Author makes a great deal of business upon the Writer. To all which, I say,
that he was not so simple as to entertain himself with such thoughts and
purposes as the Author speak of; he did well enough know that what he said in
this matter, would come under the consideration of decerning, and both
impartial and partia^ judgments, and did expect contradiction either from the
Author, or some other of his mind, and therefore these things need not; but it
is no probation but petitio principii, says he, a naked affirming of the same
which was alleged before, under favor it is not so; It is not the same thing
to say that Presbyteries at the order and appointment of Judicatories passed
by, etc. and to say that Presbyteries proceeded according the Letter and Act of
the Commission; the second specifies what Supreme Judicatory it was, not the
absolutely or firstly Supreme in this Church; to wit, the Assembly but the
Supreme, by delegation in things committed to them; to wit, the Commission, and
it speaks also what order and appointment it was, condescending upon it in
particular, that it was a Letter and Act for this purpose, so that the last
brings clearer light and evidence in both these particulars then the first, and
therefore it is not petitio principii, or a naked affirming of the same thing,
though it be not so full a proof of the whole matter, which the writer thought
not so needful all at once, because he was to speak of it afterward in
answer to the objections which were brought in of purpose, that the whole
business might be cleared and confirmed; but let all be never so true which ^s
said afterward for pro^f of the assumption, the Author wi^ have nothing to be
said or given to the Reader here but words. If it be true which is said
afterward (as I hope it shall after trial be found) it is no great matter
though he be suffered to enjoy his opinion in this.

VINDICATION.
I Affirm and make good that Presbyteries were not positively pre-limited, but
did choose freely: 1. A great part of the Presbyteries, I may say without
overreaching, four parts for five at that time had no opposite to the Public
Resolutions amongst them, and so were not capable by pre-limitation to exclude
whom they had not. 2. Of these Presbyteries who had any opposite to the
Resolutions, the far most part did choose such, and no other for the
Commissioners, some choosed such, and otherwise minded indifferently (as will
appear by the Rolls of the Assembly, and the consideration of the minds of
Presbyteries at that time, and these very few who did pass them by, in their
Election, we readily avow, they did it merely of their own accord, following
the freedom of their own mind, without all pre-limitation by any from without,
the contrary is not proven, and we can instruct the affirmitive of some who did
pass by such ere that Act or Letter came to them, or were made known to them.

REVIEW.
LEt us examine these things upon which the Author is bold to affirm, and
promises to make good, that Presbyteries were not passively prelimited, but did
choice freely: The first is, that a great part of the Presbyteries four parts
of five at that time had no opposite to the Public Resolutions amongst them,
and so were not capable by prelimitation to exclude whom they had not; what
though it were true that as many Presbyteries as he speaks of had no opposite at
that time to the Public Resolutions, yet what if all, or some of these
Presbyteries had in them some few or many, who were as yet indifferent, and not
determined in the business; but were afterward overswayed with the Authority
of the Commissioners Letter and Act; was there not a prelimitation upon them in
their voicing in the election of Commissioners, because overswayed by the
Letter and Act of the Commission to chose these who did approve of the Public
Resolutions, which before the influence that that Letter and Act had upon them,
they were not determined in, but might happily have been determined in the
contrary, upon supposal that many were indifferent at that time in the matter
of the Public Resolutions, as indeed not a few were if we may judge by their
carriage, because they had not declared their judgments for or against them;
who knows but they might before the elections, have been determined against
them? If by the Letter and Act of the Commission that gave evidence of
processing such, they had not been prelimited in their choice, and so there
should have been some opposite to the Public Resolutions in these
Presbyteries, had it not been for that prelimitation. 2. I think he will not
deny, but some Presbyteries had in them opposites to Public Resolutions; Let
us take (as it would seem he would grant it) a fifth part, there might be a
prelimitation upon these, and to prelimite the elections in every fifth
Presbytery of the Church of Scotland, is certainly a great blow to the freedom
of the Assembly. But 3. I affirm and make good, that it is not true that four
parts of five of the Presbyteries at that time had in them no opposite to
Public Resolutions; yea, on the contrary, that the one half of the
Presbyteries in Scotland and above, had in them at that time some opposites to
Public Resolutions. When I did read the confident Preface of the Author to
this assertion of his, in which he says he does not overreach; and the
assertion it self I did suspect, lest I had mistaken the meaning, and therefore
read again and again but the words being plain, I did apprehend, that they
might be w^ong transcribed, and therefore I sought for another Copy, in which I
found it also so written, that it may appear to him and others, how gross an
overreaching there is in that assertion. I desire that it may be considered,
that there be in Scotland of standing Presbyteries 65. or thereabouts, four
parts of which makes 52. none of which 52. by his assertion, had at that time
any opposite to the Public Resolutions, and 13. only do remain, who can be
supposed to have had any such in them, but there were at that time nigh 40.
Presbyteries, who to my knowledge had in them some opposites to the Public
Resolutions, and more, I doubt not to the knowledge of some other men, at least
some other Presbyteries which are not here named; the truth whereof w^ll appear
by the following Table, in which are set down both the names of these
Presbyteries, and names of some one or other in them, who were at that time
opposits to the bublick Resolutions.

Stranrauer, M. Alex. Turnbull. K^lcudor. Mr. Samuel Row. Wigtoun, Mr. Robert
Richison. Air, Mr. Thomas Wily. I^wine, Mr. Math. Mowet. Dumbert. Mr. Hen.
Semple. Pasl^y, Mr. Alex. Dunlop. Glasgow, Mr. Patr. Gillespie. Hammilton, Mr.
Ja. Nesmith. Lenrick, M^. Will. Simervail. Dumfreice, Mr. Hen. Henderson.
Penpont, Mr. Sam. Austine. Loch-maben, Mr. Thomas Henderson. Midebey, Mr. David
Lang. Jedburgh, Mr. Jo. Livingston. Turreffe, Mr. Arthur Mitchel. Gerioch, Mr.
George Tellifer. Kelso, Mr. John Simervail. Aifiltoun, Mr. John Veatch.
Jernsyde, Mr. Thomas Ramsay. Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Trail. Lithgow, Mr. Ephraim
Melvill. Bigger, Mr. Alex. Livingston. Da^keith, M. John Sinclare. Sterline,
Mr. James Guthrie. Auchterardor, Mr. Geo. Murray. Perch, Mr. Alex. Rollock.
Dunke^l, Mr. John Heart. Dumf^r^ne, Mr. Will. Oliphant. Kirkaldie, M. Alex.
Mountcrief. Couper, M. John Maggill. St. Andrews, Mr. Sa. Rutherford. Fo^farre,
Mr. David Lindsay. etc. Arbroth, Mr. Alex. Reynolds. Aberdeen, Mr. Andr. Cant.
K^ncardine, Mr. Alex. Cant. Dear, Mr. Robert Keith. Elegine, Mr. Joseph Brodie.
In^rarey, Mr. Alex. Gordoun. Dundee, Mr. Andr. Oliphant.
THere be some of these Presbyteries, the whole members whereof were at that
time opposite to the Public Resolutions, and others of them, the plurality
whereof were opposite to these Resolutions, and others of them, who had in them
sundry opposites, both Ministers and Ruling Elders; but we have named one
Minister only in every Presbytery, because this was enough to make such an
assertion ashamed, and to hide it self that it might never again be heard
abroad. It may be the Author will question whether all these were opposite at
that time to the Public Resolutions: But I believe the truth of this,
concerning as many of them as will make him after suppu^ation see that he did
far overreach, when he said that four parts of five had at that time no
opposite to the Public Resolutions, is sufficiently known to himself by their
testimony sent to the Commission, or their Letters written to particular
members thereof, or occasional Conference with themselves or their Sermons, or
constant and uncontrolled report of their judgment and carriages; Let it be
true but of 20. of them, it does abundantly confute his assertion; but if he or
any other doubt of what is said, it shall be no difficill matter to get it
attested under their own hands, and the hands of others, that they were at that
time not only dis-satisfied in their judgments with the Public Resolutions,
but also did bear testimony against them. The Coppie which I have in this place
wants some words, and has something wrong written, of which I cannot well make
sense, but these words which I have cited are plainly set down in it. The 2.
thing that he brings that Presbyteries were not positively pre-limited, is,
that of these Presbyteries who had opposites to the Public Resolutions, the
far most part did choose such, and that few did pass by them in the elections,
But this overshuts as far as the other, as will appear by viewing the number of
Presbyteries, in which there were some opposites to the Public Resolutions; and
considering how many of these were, in which there were any chosen who were
against these Resolutions, which I believe shall not be found above 20. or very
little more, if they come to that number; but let us suppose them to be more,
they are not the far most part of the Presbyteries who ^ad in them opposites to
the Public Resolutions, and these who remain will not be few of that number.
The Author does readily avow, that where Presbyteries did pass by such they did
it merely of their own accord, following the freedom of their own mind,
without all pre-limitation from without; if he had so readily avowed it, he
should have brought good proof of it, that men might have been persuaded that
he did avowe a truth; his proof is, that the contrary is not proven: Though it
were so, that it is not good proof of what he avows. Next he says, that he can
instruct the affirmitive of some who did pass by such ere that Act and Letter
came unto them, but how many they are he tells us not, lest the paucity of them
being known, should make little to the purpose, very few elections in Scotland
were past, before that Letter and Act came unto them, it being issued before
the ordinary time of election, and great diligence and care being used in the
dispatch thereof, so that came to the hands of the most remote Presbyteries,
who lay under the feet of the Enemy, such as these of Merse, Tividale,
Dumfriece and Galloway before their elections, that in some few places the
elections was made before it came, is far from proving what he does readily
avow, as the coming of an swallow is far from proving the spring in some
places, some were acquainted that there was such a purpose and design, before
it was jud^c^ally concluded or emitted; and therefore some Ministers of the
Presbytery of Glasgow, before the issuing of that Resolution, did oppose the
election of Commissioners at one diet, and press a delay till another diet,
upon this reason among others, that there were some directions to come from the
Commission of the General Assembly, concerning their Proceedings in the
election of their Commissioners, and that it was fit that they should not
proceed till they got these directions, which though it was not put among the
written reasons of their Protestation, yet can be testified by many living
witnesses who were present. God willing before this debate close, it shall be
made to appear, that notwithstanding of all these evasions, the Letter and Act
of the Commission did in many places pre-limite the Elections, by excluding
those who were for ability and faithfulness in a capacity to be chosen, and if
it was (as the Author says) that a great part of the Presbyteries, four parts
of five had at that time no opposite to the Public Resolutions, and that this
was known to the Commission; to me it is a wonder, and I believe will be so
also to others, that the Commission should have been so imprudent, as to give
so great an advantage against themselves, and so much matter of gainsaying to
the opposites of Public Resolutions, and have laid so great a stumbling in the
way of many who had already stumbled at their Proceedings, which were now to
fall under the examination and judgment of the General Assembly.

VINDICATION.
AGainst the second somewhat may seem to be said in the writers reply to the
third objection he forms, against this objection of the Assemblies nullity;
where, in the objection among other particulars alleged; it is said in the
third, that the Letter and Act had little or no influence in Presbyteries in
the choose of Commissioners, to which is replied by the Writer, that is spoken
against the truth, for proof whereof he gives instances. 1. All the Ministers
who oppose the Public Resolutions are known to be faithful and honest, most
of them such as had wont these years past, because of their integrity and
ability to be chosen Commissioners, but few of them were chosen this year to
the Assembly, and if any such were chosen it was where the whole Presbyteries
was unanimous against the Resolutions, or if the Presbytery was divided in
their judgments, then were there for the most part either two elections, or
dissents, or Protestations against the election of such as were unsatisfied
with the Public Resolutions or else both, as in the elections at Sterline and
Glasgow, of all which no reason can be given, except the Act and Letter of the
Commission. To the matter of this instance, we say these things: 1. It is too
wide a word, All the Ministers who oppose the Public Resolutions are known to
be, etc. And how ever, many of them will not be questioned to be such; yet we
must say some, even of these were not so faithful as they should have been
this last year by past, in the particular of defense of Country and Covenant
in all the sworn Articles thereof; This the Nation feels to day, and the
posterity when this generation is dead and rotten, will give impartial
judgment of it. 2. Be it so, that some were wont to be chosen Commissioners
were not now chosen, yet this is for little purpose to the point, that the
election was carried by influence of the Commissions Letter, that these same
men have wont to be often chosen without intermission to be Commissioners, the
whole Kirk was growing sensible of this thing as dangerous, whereby the whole
power of Public Government was nigh by become settled in the persons of some
particular men, and these but a few as constant Commissioners of the Kirk. If
ever the Lord shall be pleased to grant again to this Kirk the Liberty of a
general Assembly, it were necessary that Presbyteries be pre-limited indeed,
that they make not such an use and wont. 3. That few opposites were chosen; it
is no wonder because they were but few in comparison of the rest of the
Ministry of Scotland. 4. Even where neither whole societies were unanimous
against the Resolutions, nor yet the plurality were opposers, yet some
unsatisfied were chosen Commissioners without a certain election, and without
Protestation (dissenting in the enumeration is idly reckoned up) as is
evident from the Commissioners, both of the Presbytery and university of
Aberdeen. There was indeed a Protestation against the opposing Brother, but it
was taken up and passed from and the election unanimously approven afterward
in the Presbytery, so there is something against the truth clearly. 5. The
writer makes enumeration of elections of Presbyteries divided in judgment, some
doubted, some dissented from, or Protested against, some both ways, but gives
no particular instances of all these sorts but only of two, these of Glasgow,
and Sterline; and I suspect he can give us no more or very few. But sixthly to
the main drift of this instance expressed in the last words thereof, of all
which no reason can be given, except the Act and Letter of the Commission: We
answer, this is a very poor way of proving, that the Letter and Act of the
Commission had much influence upon the election of Commissioners, against a man
denying it, to say no other reason can be given of these elected, and these not
elected, and this or that done against the election of some opposers of the
Public Resolutions, at the Letter and Act of the Commission; What is this but
to beg the question, and when you have affirmed a thing, and taken upon you
to prove it, to do no more for the proof of it, but to say the Adversary cannot
prove the negative, whereas affirmanti incumbit probatio, and yet we say
another reason may be given of these things then what the writer alleges,
see page 19.

REVIEW.
BEcause something seems to the Author to be said again what is now alleged
in the Writer his Reply to the third Objection that he forms against his own
Argument. The Author takes these things in consideration, and gives some
Answers unto them, but let us see what they are. First, he thinks it too wide a
word to say, That all the Ministers who did oppose the Public Resolutions, are
known to be faithful and honest, and he gives an instance in the carriage of
some of them that seems to weaken this testimony, his instance is, that some of
these were not so faithful as they should have been this last year past in the
particular of the Defense of the Country and Covenant: but what is this but a
branch of the thing that is in Controversy? These Ministers are persuaded in
their Consciences before the Lord upon good reason, that it would have been in
them great unfaithfulness to have allowed of that way of the Defense of the
Country and Covenant holden forth in the Public Resolutions, and that besides
all their provocations which are great and many, they would by this also have
been accessory to what the Nation smarts under this day, as the righteous
reward of such revolting from God; and therefore if ye have no more to instance
but this, it does not prove, but that they may all of them be still called
faithful and honest men. Secondly he says, Be it so that some were wont to
be chosen Commissioners, who were not now chosen, yet this is little to the
point, that Elections was carried by influence of the Commissions Letter and
Act. But granting that Presbyteries did upon that Letter and Act, leave their
wonted way these years past in their Election, it is to the point in hand,
because it is praesumptio juris, and de jure; that this change flowed from the
influence that the Letter and Act had upon them, the Author seeing somewhat of
this, intimates another cause that moved that change, to wit, that the whole
Kirk was growing sensible of this thing, as dangerous, whereby the whole power
of Public Government, was near become settled in the persons of some
particular men, and these but a few, as constant Commissioners, in which he
thinks there will be need to pre-limite Presbyteries, that they make not an use
of it. If the Lord shall be pleased again to grant the Liberty of an Assembly.
But to say nothing, that this was the language which was wont to be spoken by
disaffected men these years past, especially disaffected Ministers, who fell
under the censures of the Church, whose pretenses and alleadgeances in this
particular have strength added unto them by the Authors asserting the same
thing: It is non causa pro causa, as will appear by these two things; First,
there were a good many of these who were for the Public Resolutions, who had
wont to be Commissioners these years past, and who had a great, some of them a
greater swey in Government than the other, and yet most, if not all of these
were chosen also the last year. Now, if that was the cause which the Author
speaks of, why did it not bring forth the like effect in regard of both, seeing
both were alike liable to that exception. Next, if the whole Church was so
grown in the sense of that evil, why did they not provide the remedy at the
last Assembly, it being in their power so to have done, and the Commissioners
(as the Authors assertion will import) having such an impression of the same
upon their spirits? If the Author will speak his Conscience, I think he will
not deny, but if these men whom he says to have been excluded upon that
ground, have been for the Public Resolutions, even these amongst them whom
that ground might have been conceived to reach most, would have been chosen and
adm^tted Commissioners as well as others. If the whole Church was growing
sensible of this thing, surely the Meeting at St. Andrews did little regard or
express it, when they choosed one to be their Moderator, who not only had
been Moderator of the former Commission, whose proceedings were then in
question, and to be examined, but also in many preceding Commissions and A^len
bi^es, and who had been a chief A^tor all that while in all these things that
concern Public Government, which I speak not to bear any pa^ticular blame upon
him, or upon his carriage, but to let see that either the whole Church was not
growing sensible of this, as the Author insinuates, or else that her sense of
it in her Representative, was let out, or holden in upon men, according to
their judgment and carriage in the Public Resolutions; and so was not the
cause of the Presbyteries, not, choosing such as they were wont to choose.
Thirdly, Tha^ few opposers were chosen; he thinks it is no wonder, because they
are but few in comparison of the rest of the Ministry of the Land. How few
soever they were in comparison of the rest of the Ministry in the Land, yet
these of them who were formerly wont to be chosen Commissioners, were not few
in respect of the rest of the Commissioners, neither yet were they so few as
the Author reckons them, when he says, that four parts of five of the
Presbyteries, had in them at that time no opposers to the Public Resolutions;
nay, they were and are still a very considerable number; and whenever an
exact calculation shall be made by a particular list of the whole Ministry in
the Land, and of these who were against the Public Resolutions at the time of
the Elections, and of the whole Commissioners of the Assembly at S. Andrews and
Dundee, I believe it shall be found, that the number of Commissioners who were
chosen from among these who were against the Public Resolutions, wa^ no way in
proportion answerable to the number of the other: That some unsatisfied, were
chosen without another Election, and without Protestation, even when neither
whole Societies were unanimous against the Resolutions, not yet the plurality
were opposers, he does affirm it, but does not prove it: for the instances
which he gives of the Commissioners, both of the Presbyte^y and University of
Aberdeen prove nothing less: For the University, the Letter and Act came not
to it, at least, were not read in it, and the plurality there were opposers of
the Public Resolutions: And for the Presbytery, by his own grant, there was a
Protestation against the opposing Brother who was chosen, which was taken up
again with much difficulty, and by earnest dealing of some of the Brethren,
opposite to the Public Resolutions, whose desire was condescended unto, with
condition, that their should be a third Commissioner, it being in the mean
while suggested in private, that he who had first appeared in the Protestation
against the opposers, might be the man, which I relate not upon hearsay, but
upon the subscribed testimony of these who were witnesses to the matter of
fact. So I hope, that nothing against the truth has been asserted by the
Writer in this part of his Answer. The Author says in a Parenthesis, that
dissenting in the enumeration, is idly reckoned up. Why he should say so, I
do not conjecture, unless that it be he thinks dissenting and protesting the
same thing which they are not, as appears clearly from an Act of the Assembly
1644. concerning dissent and Protestations in Presbyteries. He seems
unsatisfied with the Writer, that whilst he makes enumeration of elections of
Presbyteries divided in judgment, some doubted, some dissented from, or
protested against, some both ways, that he gives no particular instances of
all these sorts, but only two, and he tells his Reader, that he suspects he can
give no more, or very few. But he is suspicious without cause, more can be given
and are given by the Writer in that very Paper that the Author is replying to,
and more then all these can yet be given if need be: And though they were but
few, this is no great wonder, because there was but few Presbyteries did choose
any opposite to the Public Resolutions, or according to the Author, could
choose any such, because they had none such amongst them. Whereas he says,
that it is a poor way of proving the Act and Letter of the Commission to have
had much influence upon the Election of Commissioners, to say, that of all
this, no other reason can be given, because it is no more; but when you have
affirmed a thing, to say, that the Adversary cannot prove the negative, whereas
affirme^ti incumbit probatio. If the way of proving be poor, yet ^s candide and
ingenuous, by putting an advantage in the hand of gainsayers, if they can give
another reason, which the Author says may be given, and shall be considered in
this place; But Jurists will tell him, that illi non nobis incumbit probatio,
because we have praesumptionem Juris, and de Jure quae nos relevat ab onere
probandi, and probationem devolvit in adversarium.

VINDICATION.
AS for the elections mentioned here a word of them, and then we pass on to
the next instance; for that of Sterline it is known that the first Protestation
there, was not against the election of opposers of the Resolutions, but against
no opposers when at the Di^t of the Presbytery appointed for election of
Commissioners to the Assembly, the matter was put to voice, and Commissioners
chosen by plurality of votes, some of the Brethren of that Presbytery, the
fewer part in number dissented, and the election held a new Meeting by
themselves without the present Moderator and Clerk, and made a new election of
the opposers of the Resolutions to be Commissioners, was there not reason
enough to Protest against that election (if it was Protested against) beside
the Act and Letter of the Commission. As for that of Glasgow be it so, that the
Letter and Act was a reason that moved some Brethren of that Presbytery to
Protest against the first election, being opposers of the Resolutions, yet it
was not the reason that moved them to Protest; they had sundry other weighty
motives besides that as is known; yea, it was evident, that it had the least
influence in that matter of any; for in the election that these same Brethren
made afterward, they choosed one of these same opposers to be a Commissioner,
notwithstanding of the Act and Letter of the Commission; and I verily think,
that there was none that at that time in Elections passed by any opposers or
dissenters from the Election of any of them; but they would have passed by
these same, and dissented from these same, though there had not at all such a
Letter and Act come from the Commission, they conceived in it self a duty at
that time, and they looked upon the Act and Letter but as a warning, the more
to make them mindful of their duty.

REVIEW.
THe Author does much mis-represent the instance of Sterline in several
important circumstances: First, he says, that the Commissioners in the first
Election were chosen by plurality of votes; There were that day but thirteen
Members of the whole Ministers and Ruling Elders present in the Presbytery, and
but six of these voted to the choice of these Commissioners, and six are not
the plurality of thirteen. Secondly, in that he says, That the fewer part in
number, discontent at the Election, held a new Meeting by themselves, without
the present Moderator and C^e^k. There was no Election at all for which they
could be discontented; neither were they the fewer part in number, neither did
they meet by themselves without the present Moderator and Clerk, but the whole
Presbytery met at the ordinary diet, with the present Moderator and Clerk,
though a long time after the Meeting, the Clerk falling sick, did withdraw;
and whilst the Moderator was present, it was found very clear in the minutes of
the Presbytery, that there had been no Election at the former diet, and the
Presbytery did by plurality of voices, the Moderator and all the friends of the
Public Resolutions of their number being present, concluds, that they should
then proceed to the election of Commissioners, in which votes four only of the
whole number did voice in the Negative; after which, the Moderator and these of
his mind, removed upon a discontent; after whose going, the Presbytery did
proceed to the election of Commissioners. These things as to the truth of them,
needs not to be questioned, because they are agreeable to the Registers of the
Presbytery, which are patent to any who desires to be informed thereof. A^f^r
that of Glasgow, the Author yields, that the Act was a reason that moved some
Brethren in that Presbytery to protest against the first Election, but says,
that it is not the only reason that moved them, they had sundry other weighty
motives besides. If it was a reason, then certainly it had influence upon their
judgments, against the choosing of such as were opposers of the Public
Resolutions, and so here was a pre-limitation by the Act and Letter of the
Commission. That they choosed one of these opposers to be a Commissioner,
notwithstanding of the Act and Letter: That does not make it evident, that the
Act and Letter had the least influence on them in excluding of others; there
might be, and there was another reason of their so doing. As to that person
that made them dispense with the Letter and Act of the Commission: He was
precious and dear to the godly who knew him in all parts of the Land for his
tenderness and piety, and was but lately loosed from the bonds of his
captivity, and if they had rejected him, it would have been a great imputation
upon them, to say nothing that their design had been more open and manifest:
yet the Author cannot but remember, that notwithstanding he was chosen both by
them, and also in the first election, yet was it refused to let him sit in the
Assembly, till that reason should be first discussed, though it was propounded
and urged by a very Honorable Person, a Member of the Assembly; I cannot
subscribe to that which the Author thinks, that there was none at that time,
who in Elections passed by any opposers, or dissented from the Elections of any
of them; but they would have passed by these same, and dissented from these
same, though there had not at all such an Act and Letter come from the
Commission. If there were no more to prove, that such a thought is not well
bottomed, but this one thing, that some in the Presbytery of Dunkel, dissented
from the election of these who were opposite to the Public Resolutions, merely
and only upon the Letter and Act of the Commission, as may be seen in the
reasons of their dissent given unto the Synod, it is enough to do it.

VINDICATION.
THe first Instance to prove the great influence that the Letter and Act had
upon elections, the Presbytery of Dunkel having chosen then Commissioner one of
that number who was a Member of the Commission; having protested against the
Election, because such as were chosen were unsatisfied with the Commissions
proceedings. The Synod of Pearth meeting a little after, and receiving the Act
and Letter of the Commission, did thereupon sustain the dissent and
Protestation of that man in their number, and did appoint the Presbytery of
Dunkel to choose the Commissioners new again. Ans. This is the only Instance
alleged with some color to evidence some influence of the Commissions Letter
and Act; but yet when it is discussed, there will be little to the purpose found
in it; but let it be so, that the Synod sustained the Protestation on that
ground, and appointed a new Election: yet it is known that the Presbytery in
the second Election, still did choose Brethren dis-satisfied with the
Resolutions, and as I believe these same whom they had chosen before, who were
admitted in the Assembly without any question, and reasoned and voted therein
according to their mind, without any restraint or hindrance; so that if there
was any fault here, it might be well in the Synods Act, but not in the
Presbytery, which was the only Act about this business, capable of, and
chargeable with the fault of pre-limitation but this was done with freedom.
This much to the one part of the Assumption, whereby it may appear, that
whatever prelimitations were, or might be in the Commissions Act or Letter: yet
the Elections were free, because Presbyteries therein were not passively
pre-limited, but choosed freely according to their own mind. Were there no
more to be said, this much may make the Protesters bethink themselves better in
their second thoughts of their rash adventuring upon so high an Act as a
Protestation and Declinature of a General Assembly, as unfree and unlawful,
and may make others advise better ere they adjoyn themselves to it by
approbation.

REVIEW.
ALbeit this Instance seem to the Author to be alleged with some color to
evidence some influence of the Commissions Letter and Act; yet he thinks when
it is discussed, there will be found little to the purpose in it, and his reason
is, because it is known that the Presbytery at the second Election still did
choose Brethren dis-satisfied with the Resolutions, and as he believes these
same whom they had chosen before, etc. But notwithstanding of all the Author
says, there is very much to the purpose in it. First, there is this in it to
the purpose, that the judgments and voices of some of the Members of the
Presbytery, viz. of these who did dissent from the first election were
pre-limited by the Letter and Act of the Commission, they giving these only
for the reason of their dissent. Secondly, there is this in it to the purpose,
that the judgment of the whole Synod, which does include five Presbyteries
(except a few who did dissent from, and Protest against the Synod, sustaining
the dissent of these in Dunkel from the Election upon that ground) was by the
same Letter and Act pre-limited to the declaring of that Election void and
null, merely upon this reason, that they had proc^eded contrary to the Letter
and Act of the Commission. Thirdly, there is this to the purpose in it, that
the whole Presbytery was so pre-limited by an Act of the Synod, founded on the
other Act and Letter, as to be necessitate to pass from the first Election
which was lawfully made, and against which no exception was made, but the
Letter and Act; and to make a new Election, that they did again choose persons
opposite to the Public Resolutions, was from the overbearing Conscience of
their duty. That they were admitted in the Assembly without any question, is
not true; their admittence was questioned by a Member of the Commission, then a
Member of the Assembly, a man zealous for the Public Resolutions; and the
Moderator perceiving that others opposite to the Public Resolutions were like
to take advantage by it, he did handsomely wave it. Now, these things being
examined which the Author says to the first part of the Assumption, I leave
it to be judged whether he had cause to say, that whatever pre-limitations were
in the Commissions Act and Letter, yet the Elections were free, because
Presbyteries therein were not passively pre-limited but chosen freely according
to their own mind; and whether he had cause to draw so strong insulting lines
as he subjoyns thereto. If there be no more to say then he has yet said, I
profess ingenuously, I see no cause why the Protesters should bethink
themselves better in their second thoughts of their adventuring on such a high
Act, as to protest against, and decline from that Meeting at St. Andrews, and
Dundee as not being a lawful free General Assembly, or why others should have
advised better, ere they had joined themselves to (...) by approbation; it
seems a little beyond the bounds of modesty for men to drive and vent such
conclusions upon their own reasonings, though happily they might bear them; It
being fit to leave these things to the judicious and unbyassed Readers, to give
judgment as they find cause.

VINDICATION.
IT is true that for proof of the unlawfulness of these pretended Assemblies,
condemned by the Assembly at Glasgow 38. amongst other reasons the want of
freedom in the matter of election of Commissioners is alleged as a main and
principal one, but there the matter was not merely alleged, but clearly
evidenced, that the Commissioners sent to these Meetings were not indeed
elected by Presbyteries, but nominated by the Kings Letters, See Session 12.
Reas. against the pretended Assembly, at Lithgow 1606. and at Glasgow 1610.

REVIEW.
THe Author for taking off of this prejudice, and reason which stood in the way
of the Assembly at Glasgow 38. who prove the unlawfulness of these pretended
Assemblies by the want of freedom in the matter of election of Commissioners
says, that their matter was not merely alleged, but clearly evidenced that
the Commissioners sent to these Meetings were not indeed elected by
Presbyteries, but nominate by the Kings Letters, if he mean that they were not
freely elected by Presbyteries proceeding merely ex proprio motu; It is true
because the King and the Bishops Letters had influence upon them to pre-limite
their elections, but if he mean that they were not all elected by Presbyteries,
nor had any Commission from them, but came merely upon the Kings Letters, it is
not true; because albeit the reason against the pretended Assembly at Lithgow
1606. seems to favor this, yet that against the pretended Assembly at Glasgow
1610. intimateteth that they were chosen and had Commissions, because it says
First, that the elections were not free; an election then there was, but not a
free election; if there had been no election, the Assembly 38. would, no
question, have so expressed it, as importing a reason of nullity more clear and
strong. Next, that the Bishop of St. Andrews required them to send such
Commissioners as the King had nominate, assuring them that no other would be
accepted; If the Presbyteries did send them as their Commissioners, then some
sort of election there behoved to be, as indeed there was, both to that
Assembly at Lithgow 1606. and that of Glasgow 1610. For clearing of which, it
would be remembered, that there is an election material, when persons are
instructed and authorized by us as our Commissioners, though we have not
nominate and formally chosen them for that effect, and an election formal, when
we do formally nominate and choose, an election material there was at Lithgow,
because those who were nominate by the Kings Letter, were instructed and
authorized by the Presbyteries as their Commissioners; and therefore in the 4.
reason for nullifying of that Assembly, there is mention of the power which
these Ministers had, and of the limitation thereof by their Presbyteries; but
there was no formal nomination of these men by the Presbyteries, therefore it
is said in the 2. reason, that they were not at all elected by their
Presbyteries: but at Glasgow 1610. there was both a material and formal
election, though not free but pre-limited, because the King and the Bishops had
designed the persons whom they would have them to send; and let it be
considered, whether upon the matter there be not the like and as realll a
pre-limitation, by the Act and Letter of the Commission: In the year 1606. and
1610. the King and the Bishops nominate who shall come and design, whom the
Presbytery shall send, without leaving them to choose such of their number as
they thought fit, and in the year 1651. the Commission designs who of their
number they shall not send, to wit, none that were opposite to the Public
Resolutions (for this much their Act wherein they require them to be cited to
the Assembly does import, as afterward shall be cleared) not leaving
Presbyteries to their own freedom, choose such of their number as they thought
fit, and is not the one of there a pre-limitation, and hinders a free choice as
well as the other? Does not he pre-limite who says that you shall not choose
such men of your number, as well as he who says you shall choose such men of
your number; in the mean while it is to be observed, that the Assembly 38. has
no such distinction as that of active and passive solicitations, but infers the
last Presumption juris and de jure from and upon the first, and not without
good reason, because none doubt of the influence of commands of Superiors, when
the desire is granted, and the direction is followed by the inferior,
especially when the effect is contrary to the former custom and practice when
they were free: Because the Author has endeavored to darken as much as he can
the pre-limiting of the elections in Presbyteries, by the Letter and Act of the
Commission, by his distinction of active and passive pre-limitation, therefore
upon supposall that the Letter and Act of the Commission, did contain a
pre-limitation of the elections, which shall be afterward cleared; I reason
thus: For proving that Presbyteries were passively pre-limited in their
elections by that Letter and Act; who so in their elections accepts of, and
yields obedience unto a Letter and Act containing a pre-limitation of their
elections; are passively pre-limited in their elections: But the Presbyteries
did accept of, and yield obedience to such a Letter and Act, ergo, etc. The
first Proposition is a clear truth, and agreeable to the Authors own words when
he is explaining passive pre-limitation, active solicitation of Judges and
members of a Judicatory says he, proves not a Judicatory corrupt, unless it
can be evidenced, that they have accepted and yielded unto the solicitation.
The second Proposition to wit, That the Presbyteries did accept of, and yield
obedience unto that Letter and Act, because it was not only received and read
in the most part of Presbyteries before their elections, without any testimony
given against it, but also appointed to be put upon record in their books in
testimony of their approving thereof, and as the ground and order of their
proceedings in the things contained therein, and obedience was given thereto in
most places, by forbearing to choose any such as appears by the Rolls of the
Commissioners, in same places ranversing former elections, and appointing new
ones to be made up on that ground, as appears in the elections of the
Presbytery of Dunkell; in some places opposing the choosing of such as were
opposite to the Public Resolutions, and dissenting from, and Protesting
against their being chosen, as in the Elections of Glasgow, in such places
intimating to such as were choosing in their absence, that they might not admit
them unless they did declare themselves satisfied with the Public
Resolutions, as in the presbytery of Mearnes: for verifying of which, I desire
it to be taken notice of, that that Presbytery having chosen the Lord
Arburthnet to be Ruling Elder to the General Assembly, they did afterward
writ unto him a Letter, and sent by some of their own number, in which Letter
are contained these words: We have sent two of our number who will take your
Lordships Declaration when you accept and give your oath to discharge your
trust faithfully, whether your Lordship is satisfied with the Public
Resolutions; but if you have any hesitation and scrouple therein (as we hope
you have not) we must make choice of another, and in some places refusing upon
that account to subscribe and approve the Commission of these who were sent
from Burghes, as in the Presbytery of Kirkaldie, who after the reading the said
Act and Letter of the Commission, did refuse to subscribe the Commission given
by the Burgh of Bruntiland to Magnus Aitoun. because he compeared not with the
Commission himself to declare his mind anent the Public Resolutions. These
may be instances enough to prove their obedience; If it were needful to take
up time in so clear a business, we could bring sundry more which we now delay,
because they may be subjoyned to the end of this Paper; but to say no more of
this purpose, the Synods and Presbyteries citing of such to the General
Assembly as did oppose the Public Resolutions by the order of the Letter and
Act (which order for citation did by necessary consequence incapacitate them to
be Commissioners) is an undeniable testimony that they accepted of, and yielded
obedience thereunto.

VINDICATION.
But let us prove it further in the discovery of the nullity of the first
reason, and for that purpose consider the other particular thereof, which
concerns the Commissions Act and Letter: As to the matter in General, the
Protesters themselves nor any other judicious or sound Christian will say and
think, that the election of Commissioners in Presbyteries ought to be of such a
lax liberty as is bounded with no limitations at all; this was the loose way
pleaded for by the Arminians at the Synod of Dort, and which would tend to the
subversion of true Religion; certain it is, that Presbyteries are so far
limited in this that they must not choose any to be Commissioners to a General
Assembly, that teaches Doctrine contrary to the word of God, and Constitution
of the Kirk agreeable thereunto, and therefore if a Commission of the Genesis
Assembly, or any other Kirk Judicatory, according to their interest, perceiving
Ministers throughout the Kirk teaching contrary to the truth, or practicing to
the prejudice of the true Religion, should writ to Presbyteries desiring them
not to choose any such Commissioners to a General Assembly, this were no undue
pre-limitation or prejudging their Liberty in election, but a necessary and
lawful warning puttting them in mind of, and stirring them to a duty
whereunto they were bound, though no such direction were sent to them; This
laid down in general, as to that Act and Letter of the late Commission sent to
Presbyteries, we say first, That the Commission did nothing therein but that
which other Kirk-Meetings and Commissions had done before them in the same
matter, in relation to the election of Commissioners to the General Assembly,
all which must fall unto the ground as null, unfree and unlall, if the late
General Assembly be unfree and unlawful in its constitutions; Upon this
account We must look back to the General Assembly at Glasgow 38. it self, what
directions were sent from the Tables then at Edinburgh in relation to electing
Commissioners thereunto. Next, we must refer also to the Letters sent to
Presbyteries by the Kirk Commission annis 1639. 40. 41. concerning Commissions
to Brethren to these General Assemblies, all which are yet extant in
Presbytery Books, but we shall content our selves to hold near hand; the late
Commission did nothing but what the Commission did in the year 48. wherein the
chief Protesters had a chief hand, and yet maintain the lawfulness of that
deed, and the freedom and lawfulness of the constitution of that Assembly
that followed thereupon; To this the writer of the large Paper replyeth sundry
things in answer to Objection 1. But nothing to take away the force thereof:
First, he hints at two differences between the one and the other, as he would
have the reader think he might make use of, but passes by, as having to say
beside; To say nothing (says he) of the difference of reference and citation,
neither yet of the difference of a Letter and Act importing that there is a
considerable difference between these things, and that the Commission 48.
appointed persons dissentient from them only to be referred, and did send a
letter only; whereas, the Commission 50. made an Act also, and appointed
Persons also to be cited to the General Assembly; to which we oppone first,
the difference between a citation and a reference, when the reference of a
person to be tried and judged on a fault, and the person is present at the
reference is just nothing, see Assembly 1643. Session 2. Aug. 3. Overtures
anent Bills, etc. And I desire the Writer to say if it was not the purpose of
the Commission 48. when they did require Presbyteries to refer such to the Genesis
Assembly, that there should be laid on them an obligation legal to compear
personally before the Genesis Assembly for trial and sentence upon them, and what
else is the end of a citation and summonds, nor yet is the more difference
betwixt the Act of the Commission and persons to be referred or cited by
Presbyteries, and a Letter requiring it to be done, for is there not an Act for
such a Letter, and the matter of it, and has the Letter it self the force of
an Act; would not the refusing of what is desired be counted disobedience to
the Commission? But it seems the Writers memory has failed here; behold an
Act in terminis, as it stands registrate in the Commission book the 5. of June
1648. The Commission of the General Assembly recommends earnestly to
Presbyteries to take special notice of every Brothers carriage in the Publict
business that if any be found that do not declare themselves aagainst the
present Malignant course, nor join with their Brethren in the Common
Resolutions thereof, they be referred to the next General Assembly, and if any
of them have already declared for it, that they be presently censured, fic sub.
Andrew Ker. This may make us doubt the more of alledgances of this kind,
afterward in matters of fact, when we see not clear and circumstantiat
testimonies of Registers brought forth.

REVIEW.
IN answer to what is here said by the Author, I acknowledge that the elections
of Commissioners in Presbyteries ought not to be such as is bounded with no
limitations, and that if any Commission of a General Assembly, or any other
Church Judicatory, according to their interest, perceiving Ministers throughout
the Church teach^ng contrary, or practicing to the prejudice of the Truth
should write to Presbyteries desi^ing not to choose any such Commissioners to a
General Assembly, this were no undue pre-limitation or prejudging their
liberty in election; I believe that none of the Protesters will differ from the
Author in this: That Presbyteries ought not to choose any to be Commissioners
that teaches doctrine contrary to the word of God, and Constitutions of the
Kirk agreeable thereto, and if the Commission in their Letter and Act had
terminated themselves within these bounds, no Protester would have controverted
with them about it, and I think neither will he controvert with them in this,
that if a Commission, or any other Kirk Judicatory teach doctrine contrary to
the word of God, and to the constitution of the Church agreeable thereunto, and
write to Presbyteries to choose none to be Commissioners to the General
Assembly who does oppose such doctrine, that this is a pre-limiting and
prejudging of Presbyteries in the liberty of their elections, according to
these condescentions. The Commission in the 51. having sent to Presbyteries a
Letter and Act before their elections relating thereto; It seems unavoidably to
follow, that some limitation and direction there was in that Letter and Act
concerning the elections: But all the question is, whether it was a limitation
warrantable or unwarrantable: Now if so, why has the Author so cautiously, and
so much wrastled to deny that that letter and Act had any influence upon the
elections in Presbyteries; if it was nothing but a necessary and lawful
warning, putting them in mind of, and stirring them up to a duty whereto they
were bound, though no such direction had been sent unto them, then there was no
cause to be afraid of the loosing of any ground by acknowledging of its
influence, the Authors long wrangling about that, does either seem to say that
he is suspicious of the limitation contained therein, as not being warrantable,
or else that he has too great goodwil to dispute, seeing this would have been a
short and satisfying answer. The Commission in their Letter and Act did put no
bonds on Presbyteries in the election of Commissioners, but such as are well
warranted by the word of God, and Acts and Constitutions of this Church, and
therefore as the one did nothing but their duty in holding forth the same, so
the other did nothing but their duty in accepting thereof, and giving obedience
thereto. His long and operous disputation gives his readers occasion to think,
that he is jealous of so open and plain a defense: His next and great refuge
is, that the Commission did nothing therein but what other Commissions and
meetings had done before them in the same matter, in relation to the election
of Commissioners, which I do confidently deny, for the instances which he names
in the years 1638. 39. 40. and 41. Because he does but name them without
condescending upon any particular, which it is like he would have done, if he
had found them much to his purpose; I pass them with these considerations,
that what was done in 38. was no authoritative direction, but a friendly
information and advice, and that not in a Church adhering to Reformation, but
in a Church that had made defection therefrom, and what was done 39. 40. and
41. was agreeable to the Word of God, and constitutions of the Church: But what
was done in the 51. was an authoritative direction in a Church now reformed
from corruptions, and was contrary to the word of God, and constitutions of
this Church. As to the instance of the Commission 1648. which he makes his
great refuge, and the things which he says thereof: First, I do not know who
are the chief Protesters, they are all joined as yoak-fellows in one and the
same duty, and I think he does as little know who had a chief hand in that of
the 48. but I believe, all of the Protesters do own it, and maintain both the
lawfulness of that deed, and the freedom and lawfulness of the Constitution
of that Assembly, and yet do no ways thereby hold themselves bound to maintain
the deed of the Commission 1651. or the freedom and lawfulness of the Assembly
of that year, because of the great differences betwixt these two deeds, which
does still yet stand unreconciled, notwithstanding all the pains the Author
has taken to make them speak the same thing. As to pre-limitation, I shall not
wrangle with him about the difference of a Reference and a Citation, whether it
be considerable or not; only this, the Reference in the 48. was not a
Reference of particular concernment, (of which sort only the Assembly 1643.
Sess. 2. Aug. 3. speaks, making it equivalent to a Citation if the person be
present) or in order to a sentence upon the persons, and therefore requires no
Citation in case of their absence, but of general concernment, that the
Assembly might after hearing such of themselves as did appear before them,
advise what course to prescribe to Presbyteries anent them; and if a Reference
and a Citation (as he states it) be alone, why did the Commission of the 51
require them not only to be referred, but also to be cited. If he say, because
they might happen to be absent from the Presbytery, then either the Commission
in the 48 and their Clerk, did not understand these Legalities, or else they
meaned not to have them cited, in case of their absence from the Presbytery. As
to his desire to the Writer, I have spoken with him concerning his knowledge of
the purpose of the Commission in the year 1648. when they did desire
Presbyteries to refer such to the General Assembly, and he desires me to
return the Author this answer, That to the best of his knowledge, and so far as
he does remember, the Commission had not that purpose, that there should be
laid on these who were referred, an obligation legal, to compeare personally
before the General Assembly, for trial and sentence upon them; and he seems
to me therein to speak truth: First, because there is no mention in the Act of
using any Citation to those who shall be absent from the Presbyteries, without
which there could be in that case no obligation upon them to compear. Secondly,
because they lay no legal obligation upon the Presbyteries, either to cite or
refer them, but recommends only to refer them; and I do not see how any
Presbyteries refusing what was desired, could have been sentenced for
disobedience. I know that when any Judicatory writes a Letter, there is an Act
for it, and for the matter of it; but the Author is a little wide in his
Critics, when he says, That the Letter it self has the force of an Act. If
he mean it of every Letter from a Judicatory, wherein any thing is recommended
or desired to be done, and of an Act laying on a legal obligation; but behold
(says the Author) an Act in terminis, as it stands registrate in the
Commission-Books the 5. of June, 1648. The Commission of the General Assembly
recommends earnestly to Presbyteries, to take special notice of every Brothers
carriage in the Public business, that if any be found that do not declare
themselves against the present Malignant course, nor join with their Brethren
in the common Resolutions thereof, they be referred to the next General
Assembly; and if any of them have already, declared for it, that they be
presently censured, sic subscribitur Andrew Ker. For all the Authors
exclamation, here is yet no Act, I mean nothing authoritative and importing a
legal obligation, but a mere recommendation; whio so peruses the Commissions
Books, will find their Acts by which they mean to lay on legal obligations upon
these whom they concern, casten in another mould, they do ordain, appoint or
require, as is evident from the Letters and Acts from the Commission 51
relating to the opposits of the Public Resolutions. And albeit the Authors
memory has failed him in a word, in calling it a Letter, yet it has failed
him nothing upon the matter, seeing it is clear, that his meaning was, that it
was nothing authoritative for laying on a legal obligation; but a Letter, or
such a thing as a Letter, that usually does only recommend or desire, and
therefore this so small a mistake, needs not make any to doubt the more of
alleadgeances of this kind afterward in matters of fact, though happily clear
and circumstantiall testimonies of Registers be not brought forth; and if the
Author will be content to be weighed in his own balance, there shall upon this
ground be just occasion to doubt of many things which he says, because he
does oft-times in matters of fact, assert things that never had a being, let be
to mistake the name of a Paper, by calling it a Letter, when it is an Act. From
what has been said, it appears that there is a considerable difference
betwixt what was done in the Commission 48, and the Commission 51. In the 48
there is no more but a mere recommendation to refer to the Assembly, which
does not lay any legal obligations upon the Presbyteries to do it; nor upon
the persons to compeare incase of their absence from the Presbytery, and not
being cited: But in the 51 there is a formal authoritative Act, requiring them
to be referred and cited.

VINDICATION.
NOw to our present purpose; if ye will compare this Act of the Commission 48,
with the Act and Letter of the Commission 51 not in question. The Letter will
be found much more moderate and sparing; for first, the Act and Letter of the
Commission 51, does not require the Presbyteries to censure any at all for
opposing Public Resolutions, but only requires them to be referred and cited
to the General Assembly, whereas the other 48 requires, that all who did
declare in the least against the Resolutions, be censured presently, sundry
being deposed, namely for speaking some few words against the Commissions
Declarat. against the engagement. 2. the Act and Letter of the Commission,
requires not (as the other duty) any to be referred for mere silence, nor all
that professed themselves unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, though
after conference they remained unsatisfied, but only such as make opposition to
the Public Resolutions. Yea, only such as continued in their opposition
obstinate, all due means of satisfaction being offered and refused) to the
hindering people from going forth to the present and necessary defense of the
Land, and not drawing others from it, which at that time was a most evident
exposing of the Land without resistance to the power of the Enemy. This much to
the second Difference hinted at, and professed to be past by.

REVIEW.
I Desire that in making of this comparison, it may be taken notice of, that
the Commission in the year 1651. had long before the sending of that Letter and
Act now upon debate sent to Presbyteries, not only Public Warnings, wherein
the opposits of Public Resolutions are characterized as Malignants, and holden
forth upon the matter, as the betrayers of the Cause and Country, and
animating the Civil Magistrate to use Civil Censures against them (as shall be
afterward proved from the Papers themselves) but also a Letter and Act
requiring them to censure such, the tenor hereof follows: Reverend and
Welbeloved Brethren, finding that notwithstanding of our faithful Warnings and
great pains taken to satisfy all men to concur in their places for furthering
of the Leavies, for defense of Religion, King and Kingdom, and all other our
dearest Interests, many are so far from concurring, that they do very
vehemently go about to obstruct the Work, by writing, preaching and persuading
to the contrary: We do therefore require you, that you carefully enquire in
your Presbyteries, what Ministers do preach, or otherwise persuade, contrary to
our present public and published Resolutions; and that you proceed to censure
such as are in your own number; and if any Minister that travels among you,
transgress in that kind, let him not be permitted to preach in your bonnds;
Sic subscribitur Pearth, March 20. 1651. It is not then to much purpose to tell
us, that the Act and Letter of the Commission does not require the Presbyteries
to censure any at all for opposing of Public Resolutions, seeing they had
expressly done it long before that time in another Letter and Act sent for
that purpose; and the second thing wherein he compares them, will also be found
no ways considerable, if we shall remember that these Warnings of which we
spok, has no distinction of such as profess themselves unsatisfied with
Public Resolutions, and such as do oppose them, but takes in both the one and
the other; yea, and these who are silent too, and applys the Acts of former
General Assemblies against them, as is evident from the Warning issued from
Pearth, March 20, 1651. I wish the Author had told us how he differences such
as profess themselves unsatisfied, and such as oppose. Can a man profess
himself unsatisfied, and even after conference profess himself so, and yet be
silent, and say nothing to the contrary? I believe he means not opposition by
force; but a Ministers declaring his judgment, and bearing testimony against
the course in his station and calling, and how a man should profess himself
unsatisfied, and not to do this, I cannot tell, unless he should become
neutrall and indifferent in the matter of his duty. He asserts sundry to have
been deposed in the 48. namely, for speaking some few words against the
Commissions Declaration against the Engagement, but does not let his Reader
know who these were, and by whom and when they were deposed; I do not remember
of any (neither yet do others who were much employed about these matters) that
were deposed by the Commission for speaking against their Declaration against
the Engagement before the Assembly 1648. and if he mean it after the Assembly,
it is not to the purpose. Which things make it appear, that the Author has not
found the Commission 48 so rigide and severe, that he has any cause to
prefer the Commission of the 51 unto them for moderation and sparingnesse,
though there were no difference upon the matter, and in regard of the persons
with whom they had to do.

VINDICATION.
NOw to the rest insisted on; First, says the Paper in the year 48, when a
little before the election of Commissioners to the General Assembly, it was
moved by some of the Commission, that something might be written to
Presbyteries, requiring them to choose none but such as were against the
Engagement; it was opposed and refused by the Commission, as favoring a way of
pre-limitation of the Assembly, and all that was there done was a Letter
written to Presbyteries, giving them account of their proceedings, and
exhorting them to their duty, to choose able and faithful men. Answer. That
more was done in the preceding General Assembly, we have made it evident. But
what is all this said here to what was alleged, that the late Commission had
done nothing but what the Commission 48 had done before them? Did the
Commission 51write to Presbyteries, requiring them not to choose any against,
or opposite to their resolutions, to be Commissioners, not one word more or
less of this? Or did not the Commissions Act 48, bear and import as much as
the Act and Letter of the Commission 51, yea, as much and more both extensive
and intensive, as was cleared in the preceding. But you will say (as it is in
the Paper) in the Commission 48, about that time that a motion was made, that
something should be written to require Presbyteries, not to choose any but
such, etc. and was opposed and refused, as favoring pre-limittation. Answer. I
will not say who made the motion; but I say, this is to little purpose; for,
what if I shall say the like motion was made in the Commission 51, and opposed
and refused too; But further I prove by the Writer of this Paper his grounds
what the Commission 48 did upon the matter; that which they did, was really to
pre-limitat Presbyteries, that they should choose none but such, as if they had
written as much to them in formal express terms; for their Commission required
Presbyteries either to refer (or upon the matter to cite) to General
Assemblies, or to censure presently these who were otherwise disposed without
leaving any of them; First now such as were under any censure clear, could not
be chosen Commissioners, and the writer himself says in answer to the 3
Objection, branch 2, That it cannot be denied, that a citation in matter of
scandal in doctrine or manners, will or ought to exclude a man from being a
Commissioner. Therefore upon the matter that the Commission did require, that
Presbyteries should choose none but such as were against the Engagement, the
Act and Letter of the Commission 51, if it did import exclusion of any from
being Commissioners, was not so wide by far; It required not all unsatisfied,
but such as continued to oppose to be cited; and there were many unsatisfied at
that time, who made no opposition, and therefore might have been, for ought
that can be any ways drawn from the Act and Letter, chosen to be
Commissioners, as sundry were de facto. Second consideration presented in
answer to the former alleadgeance, is, that that Letter of the Commission 48,
was not written by the Commission, as we remember, until most part, if not all
elections in Presbyteries were passed, as will be cleared in the date thereof.
Ans. So were many of the elections of Presbyteries past before the Letter of
the late Commission came to them; but that all, or most part of elections were
past before that Letter was written 48 to Presbyteries, we cannot upon a naked
assertion believe. The Writer would have done well here to express the date of
the Letter; for I doubt not but he might have had it out of some near
Presbytery Book; I cannot give a double of it for the present, but I shall give
an evident presumption that it was otherwise then it is said here. First, in
some Presbyteries, I will take upon me to prove, that some Presbytery, days,
ere they began to think on the Election of Commissioners some of their Members
were upon that Letter of silence in the Public business, referred and cited to
the Genesis Assembly. Next, look to the date of the Act of that Commission
formerly set down here, it is upon the 5. of June. Now, it is evident, that
this Act has been made in order to that Letter, if it self was not also sent
with it, and the Assembly did sit that year upon the 12. of July; so that
betwixt the appointment of the Letter and the date of it could not be much
after it, and the down-sitting of the Assembly, there interveened full five
weeks. Now, allowing eight days for the dispatch thereof unto Presbyteries (to
the most part to what Presbyteries it might sooner come) it might have been at
Presbyteries twenty or twenty five days before the Assembly. Now, it is well
known, that few Presbyteries, except it be such as are farthest distant,
chooses their Commissioners so long before the Assembly.

REVIEW.
THat no more was done in the Commission of the 48, then writing of that Letter
which gave the Presbyteries an account of their proceedings etc. is not
asserted by the Writer; yea, he tells plainly enough, that more was done; for
the thing which he says, is, that no more was then done, h. e. when that
motion was made, and within two or three lines he subjoyns, that that Letter
which is mentioned in the objection, was not written by the Commission, until
most part, if not all the elections in Presbyteries were past, and therefore
the Author does wrong when he leaves out the circumstance of time, which the
writer put in, and expounds him so to his reader, as if he had said that there
was no more done at any time, neither then nor thereafter; but he cannot
understand what all that is said of this is, to that which was alleged that
the late Commission had done nothing, but that which the Commission in the 48.
had done before them. It is to that which was alleged, because it contributes
for clearing of the Commission of the 48. as to the matter of pre-limitation,
because they did reject all motions tending that way. It is true that the Act
and Letter of the 51. did not expressly, and in the words bear that none who did
oppose the Public Resolutions should be chosen Commissioners; but it did by
good and clear consequence import no less, and what ever the Author be pleased
to say of the recommendation that was sent to Presbyteries in the 48. that it
does contain as much and more then the Letter and Act of the 1651. yet has he
not proven it. The Author tells us, that he will not say who made the motion in
the Commission in the 48. for writing to Presbyteries to choose none but such
as were against the engagement; And withal, what if he shall say that the like
motion was made in the Commission 51. and opposed and refused; I believe as he
will not say so, so he cannot say who made the motion, and the men whom happily
by such hints he would render suspected, were not the makers, but the opposers
of it. If the like motion was made and opposed in the Commission 51. why did he
not speak it out? but conceiving these things to little purpose, he falls upon
proving by the writers own grounds, that the Commission 48. did upon the matter
that that did, as really pre-limitate Presbyteries, that they should choose
none, but such as did oppose the engagement, as if they had written as much to
them in formal express terms. His proof of this point as he lays it down,
may be thus drawn in form: Whosoever requires Presbyteries either to refer to
the General Assembly, or to censure presently these who are otherwise
disposed, they do by the writers grounds pre-limitate the Presbyteries in their
elections: But the Commission of the General Assembly 1648. did so, ergo, etc.
The first Proposition he makes out thus: Such as were under a clear censure
could not be chosen Commissioners, and the writer himself says in answer to
the third Objection, 2. branch, that it cannot be denied that a citation in
matter of scandal, in doctrine or manners will or ought to exclude a man from
being a Commissioner. I shall not in answer to this yield unto him all that he
alleges, though it all might be yielded without any prejudice to the Cause;
because on supposall that there had been a limitation in that which was done by
the Commission in the 48. it being a limitation agreeable to the Word of God,
and constitutions of this Church, it was due and warrantable, which the other
in the 51. was not; but leaving this to fall in its own place. I return answer
first to the first Proposition, by distinguishing of the times when such a
thing is done, whosoever before or in the time of elections requires this
thing, it is true of them that they do pre-limite elections; but who so
requires not this til the elections be first made; it is not true of these, and
this was the case in the year 48. the elections being past in most places
before it was done, and might be justly presumed to have been past in all, as
shall afterward be more fully cleared; but it was not so in the 51. what was
then done, being previous to the elections. Next, I give clear answer by
denying the minor, because the Commission did not require such a thing, the
most that they did was to recommend it, which is far from requiring, and
therefore by the writers grounds the Author has proven nothing at all. To the
second consideration, that the Letter and Act of the Commission 48. was not
written until most part, or all elections in Presbyteries was past, he makes
answer that so were many of the elections of Presbyteries before the Letter and
Act of the Commission 51. came unto them: But that is not true, if we take the
Authors own ground, to wit, that few Presbyteries, except it be such as are
farthest distant chooses their Commissioners 20. or 25. days before the
Assembly, and allowing 8. days for dispatch to Presbyteries, and take withal
the date of the Letter and Act of the Commission 1651. which is the 28. day of
May, and compare it with the day of the down sitting of the Assembly, which was
the 16. day of July, the untruth of this will appear, because between the date
of the Act, and the diet of the Assembly are 48. days, of which deducing 8.
for the dispatch, there do remain 40. days till the Assembly, which do far
exceed the time spoken of by the Author, for the other part of it, that most
part of the elections 48. were past before the Letter and Act of the Commission
came unto them; I do appeal to the Presbytery Books. There is little or no
weight in the presumptions that the Author gives to the contrary. 1. He takes
upon him to prove, that some Presbyteries did upon that Letter and Act refer
and cite some of their members to the General Assembly, some Presbytery days
before they began to think upon the election of Commissioners but he has named
none, and comprises them under the word some, happily lest it should be known how
few there were, probably but one, that is, St. Andrews, in the matter of one of
their university men, who was also a Minister. Next he makes a supputation but
of 8. days for the dispatch of the Letter to Presbyteries, and that to the
most part of Presbyteries, it might have soon come, and but of 20. or 25. days
interveening betwixt the diet of the Assembly and the elections in most parts
of Presbyteries; If the custom of dispatch had been by pasts hired, and
dispatched to several parts immediately, after the writing of the Letter, and
making of the Act, it might have come to the most part of Presbyteries in 8.
days, but so it was not, neither in the 48. nor 51. but by occasional
bearers, and therefore would take more time, and I think it is said gratis,
that few Presbyteries do make their elections 20. or 25. days before the
Assembly; but there is no sure way of determining these differences about
circumstances of time, when neither the one nor the other Letter came to
Presbyteries, but from the Presbytery books, and therefore to these I do appeal
to stand or fall in this matter, at their sentence, only remembering this, that
it is clear that the date of the Letter and Act of the Commission 48. is but
five weeks before the Assembly, whereas the date of the other is 7. weeks
before the Assembly.

VINDICATION.
THe third Consideration presented by the writer of this Paper, is, that before
the writing of that Letter (by the Commission 48.) the whole Kirk of Scotland
almost in all the Presbyteries and Synods thereof had declared themselves in
conscience unsatisfied with the engagement, excepting a very few Ministers
scattered here and there in Presbyteries, which few were also known to be
opposites to the work of God, or neutralls and indifferent therein from the
beginning. Answer 1. If by the Kirk of Scotland be here understood, the
collective Kirk, I cannot see how it is true that is said here, that the whole
Kirk of Scotland for the most part, except a few Ministers had declared
themselves unsatisfied with the engagement; certain it is, and too certain,
that very many in the Kirk of Scotland in this sense of all ranks, in all
quarters almost, were too evidently too active for it, as the censure civil
and Ecclesiastical which thereupon followed do witness; if the Ministerial
Kirk be understood, it is true that the far greater part were dis-satisfied,
but yet they were not so few Ministers that were of a contrary mind, they were
too many, and in some places the greater part of whole Presbyteries. It may
well be remembered what a sum they were like to have accounted to, at the time
of the General Assembly, and it seems to me too much, that all of them were
either opposers of the work (whether hereby be understood the outward work of
Reformation, or the power of Religion) or neutrals, or indifferent from the
beginning, the contrary is known of some of them; and I would not say so much
of all them that were censured, though I acknowledge their censure was just. 2.
A great part of the Kirk of Scotland, before the writing of the late
Commissions Letter, had declared themselves satisfied with the Commissions
Resolutions, and dissatisfied with the course of the opposers thereof; and
count when the writer will, he shall find that the dissenters from the
Commission 48. were not fewer; yea, not so few as the dissenters from the
Commission 51. we know that the number of these amounted to at their greatest
Meeting, at (...) of late, and howsoever more of these then of the first be
godly men, and had been more faithful in the Cause formerly; yet their present
course at that time being not faithfulness to the Cause, but prejudicial to it,
and the whole Kirk and Country both; they might justly have been referred and
called before the Genesis Assembly, to give an account of their way as well as the
former were, though they be more tenderly dealt with, as to themselves was
evidently seen in the whole progress with them, and was also really apparent in
the very Act and Letter of the Commission.

REVIEW.
I Think the Author did well enough know, that in setting down of the third
Difference, the Writer did not mean of the Collective, but of the Ministerial
Church, of which not only the greater part, but almost all had declared
themselves unsatisfied in Conscience with the Engagement, excepting a few
Ministers scattered here and there in Presbyteries, who were known either to be
opposers of the Work of God, or neutrall and indifferent therein from the
beginning; it is true, they were too many in regard of the evil course they
were engaged into; yet were they but few in number who did not at that time in
some outward way, at least, give some testimony against that Engagement, though
(alas) some of these in these late Resolutions, have now dissembled it in their
words, and more have betrayed it in their actions, that what they then did in
condemning the Engagement, and afterward approving the solemn Public
Confession of sins, and engagement to duties, was against their hearts; when
the Author has streatched their number to the utmost, the most he dare say of
it, is the great part of whole Presbyteries in some places; But these some
places that he speaks of were so few, that it will be found they will come to a
very poor account when they shall be named, they were so far from being like to
amount to any number at the General Assembly. If he mean of these who were
Members of the Assembly, that there were few (if any at all) who did not join
in approving the Declaration of the Assembly against the Engagement: If he mean
of these who subscribed the divisive Supplication, these were so few, that they
did not all of them being put together, amount to the twentieth part of the
Ministry of Scotland, and sundry even of these, did before the Elections, join
with their Presbyteries and Synods, in bearing testimony against the
Engagement; I will not blame him for his charity to some of these men: The
Writer did not say, that all of them were known to be opposers, or neutrall, or
indifferent in the Work of God from the beginning, but spoke indefinitly,
meaning (as I take it) of the bulk and generality of them; and I believe the
Author himself being judge, but few instances to the contrary can be given; It
is true that a great part of the Church of Scotland before the writing of the
late Commissions Letter, had declared themselves satisfied with the Commissions
Resolutions, and dissatisfied with the course of the opposers thereof: But it
is also true that there was a great part of the Church of Scotland, who had not
declared themselves satisfied with these Resolutions; yea, a great part who had
declared themselves dis-satisfied therewith; and it is a wonder to me that the
Author should say, that count when the Writer will, he shall find that the
dissenters from the Commission 1648. were not fewer; yea, not so few as
dissenters from the Commission 1651. I hope he is speaking of the Ministerial
Church in regard of both, the question now being of pre-limiting the elections,
and it being to no purpose to speak of any other, in regard of these; let him
name if he can, any Synod, Presbytery, or Kirk-Session in Scotland that did
give any testimony or evidence of their dissent from the proceedings of the
Commission against the engagement 1648. If he will believe the testimony of the
General Assembly 1650. the whole Ministry and body of the People in the Land
did join in their Prayers and Supplications in private and in Public against
the engagement, and the Ministers every where in their Sermons did bear clear
testimony against it, and all the Church Judicatories, Synods, Presbyteries and
Sessions did petition the Parliament against it, and another declaration of the
same Assembly, within a few days thereafter, in answer to a passage of the
Declaration of the English Army, tells him somewhat to the same purpose; we do
not remember, say they, that any of the Ministers did preach and cry up a war
against England, and as we know that the body of the Ministry were unanimous,
and zealous in bearing a joint testimony, both in their Sermons and otherwise,
against that war, so these few that were silent have been censured for their
silence; and the Committee of Estates at the same time in their Declaration
testify thus: Did not all the Judicatories of the Kirk unanimously oppose and
declare against it? Did not the Ministers faithfully Preach and Pray against
it, and generally all that feared God in the Land Petition against it, and many
such Passages are to be found in our Public Papers, from the time of carrying
on the engagement; yet the Author is so zealous to weaken every thing, that the
writer says, for differencing that which was done by the Commission 1648. and
the Commission 1651. that he had rather retrench upon that which has been
often and truly declared by this Church of their being free of any accession to
the unlawful engagement then not to do it; this deserves his second thoughts;
but upon the other hand, beside the generality of these in the land who are of
known approven godliness and piety, and are dis-satisfied with the Public
Resolutions, as will, I trust, be acknowledged by godly men of a contrary mind,
speaking soberly, and without the heat of dispute: It is easy to give him some
instances of some Synods, and of many Prerbyteries, besides many particular
members in Presbyteries throughout all the corners of the Counrry, who were not
only silent in speaking for the Public Resolutions, but who did bear
testimony and speak openly against them: A thing so well known that I need not
stay to name the particulars, but they must still be few in his catologue; we
know says he what the number of these amounted to at their greatest Meeting at
Edinburgh of late; If he mean that all the Ministers of the Land who are of
that judgment were at that Meeting, he is much mistaken, and if not so, it is
not much to the purpose, there are many Ministers in the Land of that
judgment, who were not at that Meeting, and yet there were very near a hundred
Ministers at that Meeting who are approven in the Consciences of the godly
throughout the Land. He acknowledges that many more of these then of the first
were godly men, and had been faithful formerly, but their present course at
that time being not faithfulness to the Cause, but prejudicial to it, and the
whole Kirk and Country as he thinks, they might justly be referred and called
before the Assembly as well as the other. It is well that they were godly, and
such as had been formerly faithful; as for their unfaithfulness at that time,
it is the point in question betwixt them and the Authors and abbettots of the
Public Resolutions, they are persuaded in their Consciences and have clearly
holden forth the same unto others, that they were keeping the ground on which
the Church of Scotland did run these many years past, for defending the Country
and Cause against the enemies thereof; and if others did forsake their ground,
they were not to be esteemed unfaithful, nor to be charged with that crime,
because they would not leave their Masters Colors; I shall not insist upon what
he speaks of the tender dealing which they met with, because there may be
opportunity to speak to this afterward, what is apparent in the Letter and Act
of the Commission is already spoken unto.

VINDICATION.
THe fourth consideration proponed by the Writer, is, that the Resolutions then
( viz. 48) were agreeable to the Covenant, Acts and Constitution of former
General Assemblies, whereas the Resolutions of the late Commission were point
blank contrary to the Covenant, and the former Acts and Constitutions of this
Kirk. Answer, this is the only material difference between the two Acts
taken, to wit, from the matter that the Commissions Resolutions 48. were right,
but the other 51. wrong, and upon this alleadgance, that the Resolutions of the
late Commission were contrary to the Covenant and Constitutions of this Kirk
hangs the strength of the most part of the rest of the arguments, brought to
prove the unlawfulness of the late Assembly; I will not challenge the Writer
that alleging the error if these Resolutions, he so often mentions, only
the Covenant, and Acts and Constitutions of Assemblies, and seldom the Word of
God or Scripture: For my part in speaking of the truth or error of an opinion,
in mattrrs of Conscience, or of the sinfulness or lawfulness of a course, I
would not mention, regulas regulatas sine regula regulante, the subordinate
rules without the Supreme and Sovereign rules. But to the point 1. That the
Resolutions of the late Commission were such as the writer says, is as easily
denied as he affirms it, the greatest part of the Land Ministers, and others
als intelligent in Religion as he, did, and do this day judge otherwise of them
then he, and he shall never be able to prove what he affirms, and the late
Commissioners were, and yet are content that their late Resolutions be
examined, tried and judged by the Kirk of Scotland, or all the Orthodox
Christian Churches of the world, by the Word of God, Covenant, and
Constitutions of this Kirk.

REVIEW.
I Shall not contend whether the difference taken from the matter, be the only
material difference, it is certainly the mainly material difference, though
the other differences of the time, and of Presbyteries and Synods, having
declared themselves, and that taken from the nature of the thing be also
important. It is true, that much of the strength of several other of the
Arguments hangs on this Alleadgeance, that the Resolutions of the late
Commission, were contrary to the Covenant and Resolutions of this Church, and
(I hope) that this Aleadgeance will bear the strength of all the Arguments that
are founded thereupon. These worthy Assemblies 1638, and 1639, joined the
matter with the form in the reasons brought for nullifying of former unlawful
Assemblies. Before the Author gives answer to the difference, he taxes the
Writer, that alleging the error of these Resolutions, he so often mentions
only the Covenant, Acts and Constitutions of the Assemblies, but seldom the
Word of God or Scripture, and tells us for his part in speaking of the truth or
error of an opinion in matters of Conscience, he would not mention regulatas
sine regula regulante. Well, it seems some of the Protesters (if the Writer of
this Paper be of that number) has respect enough to the Acts and Constitutions
of the Assembly; for the want of which, the Author challenged one of them not
long ago, as saying, that he was not to be pressed with them in matters of
Conscience; and it also seems that in matters of Conscience, the Author likes
not the maintaining, much less the pressing of these without the Word of God;
and some will perhaps think* that a man of that mind might bear with his
brother, saying, Press me not with humane Constitutions in matters of
Conscience; sed multum interest quid loquatur. The reason why the Writer does
often mention only the Covenant, Acts and Constitutions of Assemblies, is,
because when we speak of a defection in resolutions and actings from former
Principles, it is the more near and convincing way to mention the former Acts
and Constitutions of that Church, which immediately must decide whether a
delegated Commission, which is only entrusted to execute former Acts, and has
no power to make new ones, has walked according to their trust, yea, or not:
and a second Reason is, because the Writer took it for uncontroverted, as being
acknowledged by all the Kirk of Scotland, that the Covenant and Acts and
Constitutions of this Church, did presuppose and include the first and supreme
rule, the Word of God; And the Author cannot but know, that though the Writer
had not mentioned the Word of God further then it is included in the Covenant,
and Acts and Constitutions of the Church, he has great Patrons for his so
doing, to wit, the Assembly at Glasgow 1638. which in their great Acts against
Episcopacy, Five Articles of Pearth, Service Book, etc. do state, vote and
print the Questions anent them, merely upon their contrariety to the National
Covenant, and Acts and Constitutions of this Church, without mentioning Regulam
Regulantem, that being presupposed by all as being included in Regula regulata.
But to the point. First, the Author deny^s, that the Resolutions of the late
Commission, were contrary to the Covenant and Constitutions of this Kirk, and
says, that the greatest part of the Land, Ministers and others, as intelligent
in Religion as the Writer is, did, and does this day judge otherwise of them
then he, and that he shall never be able to prove it. There has been more said
for the proof of it, then for ought I know has been answered to this day, or
can be answered, if men deal fairly and ingenuously; and therefore I shall not
here stay, to repeat and resume these things, I shall only ask the Author a
very few plain Questions, and desire a down-tight and plain Answer to them in
order to this point: First, whether in the judgment of many of these who were
by the Public Resolutions of the Commission, 1651. admitted to trust in the
Army and State, the Solemn League and Covenant, and former Acts and
Constitutions of this Church, were not opposite to these Resolutions. Secondly,
whether in the judgment of many of the godly in the Land, these Resolutions and
proceedings were not opposite to the Solemn League and Covenant, and the former
Acts and Constitutions of this Church, and could not be reconciled therewith?
Thirdly, whether it was not thought and spoken by no mean men, Members of the
Commission 1651, and others who carried on the Public Resolutions, that these
who had hand in the penning of the Public Papers of the Kirk these years past,
had in reference to the matter then in debate foisted in many sentences and
expressions in these Papers contrary to the true intent and meaning of the
Judicatories of the Church, which they then made use of for their own ends. 4.
whether the sin of employing many Malignant and disaffected men in our Armies,
which is confessed in the solemn Public Confession of sins, be not comprehensive
of employing of such in our defensive war against James Grahame. Fifthly,
whether the Solemn Engagement in the 48, do not bind us to avoid all the sins
that we acknowledged in the Solemn Confession, and all the snares and
temptations that led thereunto, and to endeavor all the contrary duties?
Sixthly, whether the General Assembly and their Commission, after the coming
of the English Army to invade this Land, did not positively, and oftener then
once, determine and warn against the employing and intrusting Malignant and
disaffected men in our Armies, even in the case of scarcity of men for the
Lands defense? Seventhly, whether at the time of the Commission its giving
their answer to the Parliaments Quere, there was not a very numerous Party of
Malignant and disaffected men in the Land, who did adhere to their former
principles? Eighthly, whether the Answer to the Quere, or any thing contained
in the Public Resolutions do acknowledge it, or hold it forth as sinful and
unlawful to employ and entrust Malignant and disaffected men in the defense
of the Cause and Kingdom? Or whether that Answer and these Resolutions, do
acknowledge and hold it forth to be lawful to employ and entrust such?
Ninthly, whether there be any Act, or Constitution, or Warning, or Declaration
of this Church, or any Public Evidence of her judgment before the Answer to
the Quere, that speaks for the warranting and allowing the Public Resolutions?
or what it is, or where we may find it? Tenthly, that the Commissioners are
yet content to have their late Resolutions tried and judged by the Church of
Scotland, is no great matter, when they have first pre-limited an Assembly,
excluding many of these who were of a contrary mind, and constituting it mostly
of these who are of their own judgment, and have made Acts for censuring of all
who shall not acknowledge the Constitution of that Assembly, and after
conference, submit to the obedience of these Acts; but if the Author would take
the collective Church of Scotland to sit as Judges upon the late Resolutions of
the Commission; and state the question thus, whether are the late Resolutions
of the Commission, agreeable to the Solemn League and Covenant, and to former
Acts, Constitutions, Warnings and Declarations of this Church, I fear the
determination should be in the negative; ye^, if the whole Ministerial Church
should speak their hearts of that Question as before the Lord, I still fear it
should be in the negative, all the Orthodox Churches in the World is a broad
word, and I say no more of it, but that men well skilled in their doctrine, and
to whom (I believe) the Author himself in this respect, and for piety and
learning will not deny an honorable testimony, do teach us otherwise. The
matter is already pleaded by the Word of God, and Acts and Constitutions of
this Church, and I shall now speak no more thereof.

VINDICATION.
But secondly, whatever be to be said to the nature of these Resolutions, yet
the matter was at least alike to the General Assembly at the time of the
constitution of the Assembly, and the Protestation against the same; for the
resolutions and proceedings of the Commission 48. were no less quarrelled by
an opposite Party, then were the resolutions of the Commission 51. the Party
quarrelling 48, being no less then the Parliament, and in this only few
Ministers, and the reasons of the former were a great deal stronger and harder
to be loosed; the General Assembly was here Judge to both, as in the first
quarrel, the Commission would not be absolved from the accusation charged upon
them until all was heard and tried, so the Commission 51, could not be
condemned for the exceptions and alleadgeances of a few Brethren, before that
any of them were or could be cognosced upon. By all this which has been
spoken, that what the Writer says, shutting up the same, that these things
being put together, make up a wide difference between that which was then done
48, and that 51 was but a groundless assertion; we have evidently showen that
there is no difference betwixt the one deed and the other (so that if the one
was guilty of pre-limitation of election of Commissioners, so was the other no
less) except that the deed of the Commission 51, was a great deal more sparing
and moderate. So we have vindicated that particular answer to the first reason
against the freedom and lawfulness of the late Assembly, alleging
pre-limitation of the election of Commissioners, viz. that the Commission did
nothing therein but what was done by the Commission 48, whose deed the
Protesters maintains with us.

REVIEW.
IT is easy to give sundry material differences: 1. These Resolutions at the
time of the Constitution of the Assembly, and the giving in of the
Protestation; besides that, they were against the clear Letter of Acts of
former Assemblies. So were sundry standing up in the Assembly, and offering
instantly to verify that it was so; but in the 48, the proceedings were
agreeable to the Acts of the Assembly; and albeit there were some who desired
that these proceedings might not be approven till they were heard; yet none did
offer instantly, or at all to verify, thathey had carried on a course of
defection, contrary to the Covenant, and Acts and Constitutions of the Church.
Secondly, in the 48, the proceedings of the Commission were not testified
against, by Presbyteries and Synods, much less dissented from, and protested
against by many in the Commission it self: but so it was in the 51, not only
did Presbyteries and Synods bear testimony against these things, but a great
part of the Commission; yea, so great a part, that whosoever shall reckon, I
believe, shall find them very near, if not equal the one half of the number,
to whom the trust of these things were committed by the General Assembly.
Thirdly, in the 48, there was no exception at all proponed from the unfreedome
of Elections, or from persons under scandal, because of defection and
backsliding from former principles; but so it was in the 51. These things
evidence a very great difference between the one and the other at the time of
the Constitution of the Assembly, and the Protestation against the same, and to
take off any thing that the Author says, for proving them to be alike, I do
desire it further to be considered, That as in the 48, it was not the
Parliament who was the party quarrelling the Commission before the Assembly,
the Parliament being risen a good while before the Assembly sat down: So, in
all this business of the quarrelling that was made against the Commission in the
Assembly 48, is much mis-taken and mis-represened by the Author all alongs his
Vindication, as shall in its proper place be cleared. Secondly, that it was not
desired (as the Author does insinuate) that the Commission 51, should be
condemned for the exceptions and alleadgeances of a few brethren before that
any of these Resolutions were or could be cognosced upon, but only that they
should not be admitted to sit as Members of the Assembly, until the exceptions
proponed against them were tried and discussed. Thirdly, that in the 48, as the
party quarrelling did not either at the time of the Constitution of the
Assembly, or afterward before the trying and approving of the Proceedings of
the Commision, offer any reasons to the Assembly against these Proceedings; so
the reasons which they did afterward offer, were not very strong nor hard to
be loosed, much less stronger and harder to be loosed, then the reasons
offered in the 51, by these Ministers, the last being founded upon the Word of
God and the Covenant, and the clear Acts and Constitutions of this Church, and
the other not so; These things being thus discussed, it still appears that the
Writer had good reason to say, that there is a wide difference betwixt that
which was done by the Commission 1648, and that which was done by the
Commission 1651. as to the pre-limiting of the Assembly, and that the
Protesters have reason to condemn the last, though they maintain the first.

VINDICATION.
WE shall add some further considerations in answer to the first Reason; But
ere we proceed, a word upon what the Writer of the 2. Paper has upon the 2.
Objection, which either he has formed to himself, or found I know not where,
viz. That it was in the Commissions power, not only to appoint these who
opposed the Public Resolutions to be cited to the General Assembly, but also
to have censured them by virtue of a clause contained in the Commission; and
that therefore having kept themselves far within the bounds of the
Commission, etc. The Writer of this Paper for clearing of this business, runs
out in a discourse concerning the nature of delegated Judicatories, that they
are and must be from the light of nature and common reason, limited to a
certain rule in all their administrations, to wit, to standing Laws of the
Incorporations to which they do belong, and to a certain end, viz. the good and
preservation of the whole body, and in application unto, or accusation against
the late Commissioners of the General Assembly their Resolutions: He affirms,
they were not only without the warrant of an Act of the Assembly (which should
have been their rule) and not only not contributive for the preserving and
advancing of the Work of Reformation, but expressly contrary to the clear letter
of the Covenant, and multitudes of Acts, and destructive to the Work; and that
therefore assuming to themselves a power to censure or cite such as did oppose
them; they did not only go beyond the bounds of their Commission, but
destroyed the very end of it, viz. the preservation of the Liberties of the
Kirk, in bringing General Assemblies to bondage, by excluding all such as
would not consent to the course of defection, a dangerous and damnable
preparative, laying a foundation for the total overthrow of Discipline, yea
of Doctrine and Worship; yea, the Commission being once corrupted, the
introducing of Prelacie, Service Book, Popes supremacy, the whole body of
Popery. Here certainly, the Writer has filled his Pen nigrae succo fuliginis,
to render the Commissioners odious and detestable to all. But to these briefly:
First, if it was another man that proponed the Objection then the Writer
himself. I verily think, he did not mean that the Commissioners had power by
their Commission to cite and censure opposers of any Resolutions made by
themselves, right or wrong (neither does the Objection as set down by the
Writer himself import any such thing) but opposers only of their just and right
resolutions, such as (I doubt not) he took the late resolutions to be, and
therefore all the Writers running out upon the nature of a delegated
Judicatory, etc. as to that Objection, is but a fighting against his own
shadow. Secondly, we know and acknowledge, that delegated Judicatories are
limited to a certain end, and a certain rule; yea, we think further, that
Judicatories not delegated, but having power originally in themselves humane
are so limited too. But that the late Commissioners did in their Resolutions
carry on a course of defection, contrary to the express letter of the Covenant
and multitude of Acts of this Kirk, and destructive to the Work of Reformation,
and that they destroyed the Liberties of the Kirk, brought the General
Assembly to bondage, is said, but was never, nor will never be proven; and so
but a foul calumny and false accusation of the Brethren, of which that
uncharitable expression, calling what the Commissioners did, damnable, (which
being used for aggravation here, cannot simply mean only, that the thing done
was worthy to be condemned, as every error even the least is but also damnable
to the doers) I pray the Lord give the Writer repentance and forgiveness.

REVIEW.
TO all this I return, That albeit the maker of the Obejection concerning the
Commissions power took their Resolutions to be right and just, yet does not the
Writer fight with his own shadow, because the objector and the Commission both
in the matter of these Public Resolutions takes wrong for right, and unjust
for just, and upon this mistake conceives them to have power where they have
none, which mistake the Author discovers by holding forth the discordance of
these Resolutions, with the rule according to which they were bound to proceed,
both upon the matter, and by virtue of their Commission which the Author is
pleased to call a foul calumny, and uncharitable accusation of the Brethren,
that never was, nor never shall be able to be proven: But I desire him soberly
to remember 1. That neither he, nor any of his judgment to this day have so
far befriended their own cause, or satisfied these who stumble and gainsay, as
to bring forth any Act of this Church prior to these Resolutions for justifying
thereof, though it often has been called for. 2. That many Acts of this Church
has been brought forth, speaking plainly against these Resolutions, to which
all the answers which has been returned may (as I take it) be comprehended in
one of these two, Either denying that the Malignant party were joined with,
about the defense of which denial the Author and others may exercise their
ingines, but shall never be able to satisfy the consciences of the godly in
it, and I fear nor their own fully; or else in telling us that it was a new
case, which we never before had to do with, or occasion to detemine, to wit,
the case of the defense of Cause and Kingdom against a foreign invasion; but it
has been often told him and others (and I wish they would once consider of it)
that even in the case of the Cause and Kingdoms defense against foreign
invasion, the unlawfulness in joining with the Malignant party; has been
often determined by this Church; yea, in that very case which is the present
question, and in the highest advantage they can have in the stateing of it,
that is the case of scarceness of men as to his great exception against the
word damnable; I cannot think that the Writer meant it of bringing with it
damnation to the Writer; he cannot be so gross as to take it for the sin
against the holy Ghost; yea, he will, I believe, allow as much in the matter of
Salvation to some of these as to any others, and desires to think charitably of
all men; I dare say, all his meaning was, that it was a thing worthy to be
condemned but so (says the Author) is every error, even the least; and I
would ask him, is not every error even the least damnable, both in it self,
and if mercy prevent not, also to the doers, though some be more damnable then
others: If I understand any thing of common language, the meaning of that
phrase, a damnable preparative is ordinarily this, it is a preparative worthy
to be condemned; and I think the Writer might think himself in no ill
condition, if he had no more to repent of then the calling of that practice of
the Commission such.

VINDICATION.
NOw further in answer to that first reason against the late Assembly as not
free, and unlawful, grounded upon the Commissioners Act and Letter sent to
Presbyteries; Consider in the next place, first what we touched at before, that
the Act and Letter did not require Presbyteries to press all who were
unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, nor yet who after Conference remained
unsatisfied, and continued to oppose, to wit, in their Public Doctrine and
active practicing, to the hindering of people from going forth unto, or
withdrawing them from the present just and necessary defense of the Land, so
that for any thing that could be imported in that Act and Letter; yet whoever
were unsatisfied in their judgments with the Public Resolutions, but did
abstain from opposition and acting against the execution of, might been chosen
Commssioners to the Assembly, and many such were in the Land, who wisely and
Christianly considering the integrity of the Commission in the end they had
before them, conceived the difference about the means resolved upon, not to be
such for which they should any way hinder the present necessary defense of the
Land, and sundry such Minister were chosen Commissioners, and did sit and vote
in the Assembly freely according to their judgment. 2. That the main end of
the Commissioners Act and Letter sent to Presbyteries was mere tenderness
toward some men, who have given an evil requittall for it. The Commission
upon some prior Papers, finding some Presbyteries ready enough to have put
sharp censures upon some, who has been too busy sticklers against Church and
State, to stop them and take them off, sent that Act and Letter for referring
all their questions to the General Assembly; But as for pre limiting the
elections, not a word more or less in them. 3. Is not only sundry unsatisfied
with the Public Resolutions who were not within the compass of that Order for
citation contained in the Letter, but also some were constant continuing
opposers, who were chosen Commissioners to the Assembly. 4. There was not so
much as one man's Commission excepted against, let be rejected in the Assembly
for being unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions; yea, on the contrary,
sundry most eminent opposers were not only admitted to be members without any
quarrel, but sat Moderators and Clerks of Committees, so long as they were
pleased to stay.

REVIEW.
TO these things I do join first, That the Author for straining of the
Commissions Act, to make it comprehensive of as few he can, confines opposing
to Public Preaching, and active practicing, to the hindering of people from
going forth unto, or withdrawing them from the present just and necessary
defense of the Land; but are there no more kinds of opposing but these two?
What if a man after Conference had continued to pray against the Public
Resolutions, as a course of defection, or in private discourse holden forth the
sinfulness of them, or written to the Presbytery or Commission that he was no
more satisfied then at the beginning, and before the Conference; would not the
Act have reached these, and such as these, though they had not been Public
Preachers, or active practisers against the Public Resolutions; we see not why
the Author should draw it so narrow, (...) distinguend (...) est, ^^ilex non
distinguit: the Act speaks indefinitely of all who after Conference remain
unsatisfied, and continue to oppose, how then can he restrict it to two sorts
of opposers only, when there may be, and I know are several other sorts. 2.
Taking the Act as he expounds it, it does at least as to these include a
pre-limitation, by excluding them in the elections, and these might have been
many, because there were very few who did once profess dissatisfaction with
the Public Resolutions, that by Conferences, or other means then used by
Presbyteries, and Synods, came to be satisfied; yea, there were not a few; who
before the elections were conferred with, and yet did still continue to oppose.
3. I desire that it may be marked, That the Author grants that there were many
in the Land who were unsatisfied in their judgments with the Public
Resolutions, beside these who did oppose and Act against the execution of them;
by which many, he must mean many members of Presbyteries, and such as were in a
capacity to be elected Commissioners to the General Assembly, otherwise it
were not to the purpose; it is after wards cleared by himself, when he says
sundry such Ministers were chosen Commissioners, and sat and voted in the
Assembly; and if there were many unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, who
did abstain from opposing (as he himself afterteth) and many who did oppose, by
testifying Publicly against them, as (we have proven) it seems that the number
who did approve of them were not so great, and that Presbyteries and Synods
were not so harmonious about them as is often given out. 4. That there is not
so much as probability, let be good evidence for that which the Author asserts,
that the main end of the Commissions Act and Letter sent to Presbyteries, was
mere tenderness to keep Presbyteries from censuring of some who had been too
busy sticklers against Church and State: I give these probable evidences to
the contrary: 1. These too busy sticklers against Church and State, by the
Authors account, were very few, and in very few Presbyteries, but that Letter
and Act was sent to all the Presbyteries in the Land, if it be true which the
Author said before, that at that time there were four parts of five of
Presbyteries that had no opposite to the Public resolutions, there was no
hazard of untender dealing there against too busy sticklers, nor could that be
the scope and end that the Commission did propone to themselves, in sending
their Letter and Act to these. 2. Albeit I know that there were some in the
Commission who did tenderly affect the opposers of Public Resolutions, and did
study to keep strokes off them, yet to make it appear that the plurality in
their actings toward these who were unsatisfied with, and did oppose the
Public Resolutions were not led with any such tender spirit, as the Author
here and elsewhere hints; I shall set down some Acts and orders of the
Commission which are hinted at by the Author himself, under the name of some
prior Papers: 1. In a Letter written from Perth, Jan. 16. 1651. They gave this
Order, And further we do hereby require and exhort you to take notice of them,
of whatsoever place or station, who do obstruct, speak against, disswe^e,
privately or Publicly from the present Leavy, or who having a calling to speak
for it, are silent therein, and to make report thereof at the next Meeting of
our Commission at St. Andrews, Jan. 21. and in their warning from Perth March
the 20. after they have applied many of the Characters of the old Malignants
which are set down in former Public Papers of the Church, to these who were
unsatisfied with and did oppose the Public Resolutions, and cited sundry of
the Acts made for censuring them, they close thus: Therefore for execution of
the foresaid Acts of Assemblies, etc. We do in the Name of God inhibit and
discharge all Ministers to Preach, and all Ministers and Professors to detract,
write, or speak against the late Public Resolutions, and Papers of the
Commission of the General Assembly, in order to the calling forth of the
people; and we do seriously recommend to Presbyteries, that with all vigilance
they take special notice, and trial of such persons within their bounds,
whether such as have station there, or such as in this troublesome time, have
their present residence, Ministers or others, and impartially to proceed
against them as they will be answerable; and least this should not be effectual
enough, as being but a recommendation, though yet with a certificate, therefore
at the same time, they did send this particular following order to
Presbyteries. Reverend, and welbeloved Brethren, finding that notwithstanding
of our faithful Warnings, and great pains taken to satisfy all men to concur
in their places, for furthering of the Leavies, for defense of Religion, King
and Kingdom, and all other our dearest Interests: many are so far from
concurring, that they do very vehemently go about by Preaching, Writing, and
persuading to the contrary to obstruct the Work; we do therefore require you,
that you carefully enquire in your Presbyteries what Ministers does Preach, or
otherwise persuade, contrary to our present Public and published Resolutions,
and that you proceed to censure such as are in your own number, and if any
Ministers that travel among you, transgress in that kind, let them not be
permitted to Preach in your bounds; here is no great tenderness, that would
not spare so much as these gracious Ministers of Ireland, who were driven from
their stations, and forced to retire to this Land, and some other faithful men
among our selves, who were also necessitate to retire from their charges at
that time; these were the travelers who could not be permitted to Preach,
sundry of them being then Preaching in vacant Congregations in the West, and
some in Fife, neither was the Commission satisfied with these things, but did
also stir up the Civil Magistrate against them, as afterward shall be made to
appear from their own Warning and Remonstances. 3. consider the thing in it
self; is it tender dealing to be taken out of the hands of a Presbytery, and to
be brought before the highest and most public Judicatory of the Church; the
Apostle lays weight upon being reboked by many. Next, as the Author tells us
that the end of the Commissions Act and Letter, was tenderness to some men, so
also he tells us that there was not one word more or less in them for
pre-limiting the elections: But what though the words be in them, yet if they
do infer the thing by good and necessary consequence, is not the matter there?
It is not much to the purpose, that sundry unsatisfied with the Public
Resolutions who were not within the compass of that order for citation, and
also some who were constant continuing opposers, were chosen Commissioners to
the Assembly, because some such were chosen in Presbyteries, which were wholly
opposite to the Public Resolutions, and some in Presbyteries where the greater
part were opposite, yet not without dissents or Protestations, or double
elections. The Author does not well to say, that no man's Commission was
excepted against, because of the Public Resolutions; I told him before that
the Commission of the Presbytery of Dunkell was excepted against upon that
account, and that the Commission of the first election in Glasgow was not only
upon that account excepted against; but after long and serious debate until
the Commissions Proceedings should be first tried, which not only refuteth what
the Author says, but does also prove another thing, which all along he seems
to deny, to wit, that the Letter and Act of the Commission concerning citation,
did import these men's being excluded from being Commissioners to the Assembly,
otherwise let them render a reason, why the objecting against them, upon the
Letter and Act to cite them, should have enforced the laying of them aside,
until the Commissions Proceedings should be first tried, if the Assembly had
taken it for granted, that it did not import this, they could not have admitted
this as a reason to exclude them for an hour; That sundry most eminent
opposers were admitted to be members without any quarrelling, and to be
Moderators and Clerks of Committees, the Writer gave the reason of it to be
Policy, and I shall take in consideration in its own place what the Author
answers thereunto: But suppose all this to be true, will this make a free
Assembly, or Vindicate the elections from pre-limitation? The pre-limitation
which is now in question is, that of the elections in Presbyteries, which would
still have been a pre-limitation of the Assembly, as to its constituent members,
though the Assembly had condemned it, much more was it so when they did approve
and allow of it; but of the ground of this mistake I spoke before.

VINDICATION.
TO the two latter particulars something may seem to be said in that latter
Paper; to the former that which is upon the second branch of the third
Objection, though every citation does not exclude a man from being chosen a
Commissioner, or sitting as a member in a General Assembly, yet we think it
will not be denied that a citation in matter of scandal, in doctrine or
manners, will or ought to exclude a man from being a Commissioner, or sitting
as a member in an Assembly, and such was the citation appointed by the late
Commissioners, viz. in matter of scandal more then ordinary (in the judgment
of the Commission) both in Doctrine and manners; Besides, it is unquestionable
that all citations do exclude men from being judges in the matter for which
they are cited, therefore though they might have sitten in the Assembly as
judges in other matters, yet not in this; Therefore it follows, that as to
this particular which was the main, if not all to be handled, the Assembly was
prelimited. Answer 1. To the latter part of this reply, I profess not much
skill in the matter of legal exceptions, and constitution of Judicatories: but
so far as common sense and reason can lead me. It seems to me a strange
assertion that some few persons having opposed themselves to a course taken by
a Judicatory, entrusted with the Public affairs of the Kirk consisting of men
to that time judged faithful, and still professing faithfulness therein, as in
the sight of God, and accusing this Judicatory for that course they have taken,
as guilty of defection, and destroyers of the Cause of Religion, if I say,
these few men being cited to be tried by a General Assembly, and consequently
excluded from judging in that particular matter which is in controversy; the
Assembly is in this to be judged pre-limited in that matter, although there be
besides these excluded a competent number of members lawfully authorized: (For
such we may suppose all the rest, to be for any thing that is said in this
particular that we are upon the answer of) to make up a competent Judicatory,
to cognosce, and judge upon the matter in controversy, according to the rule
of Gods Word, and the Constitutions of the Kirk, which they are bound by their
Commissions and oaths to judge by; I desire no proof of this, for it is
principal clear and evident, exterminis, and the Writers assertion is no war
and to receive it for an unquestionable truth; I doubt not, but if the Writer
shall assay to prove this, that he shall fall upon that same exception which
the Remonstrants made against the Synod of Dort, that the most part of the
Synod were their adverse party; having declared their judgment contrary to
their doctrine; which was rejected as a null exception by all Orthodox Divines
in that Synod.

REVIEW.
BEfore the Author come directly to speak to what is alleged by the Writer,
he seems first to answer by denying that there was any pre-limitation of the
Assembly, even upon supposall that these men were by that Citation excluded
from sitting Members thereof; But let us consider the Reasons of his denial.
The first is, that there were but some few persons opposing themselves to a
course taken by a Judicatory entrusted with the Public Affairs of the Church,
consisting of men (till that time) judged faithful, and still professing
faithfulness therein, as in the sight of God, and accusing that Judicatory for
that course they had taken, as guilty of defection, etc. although they had been
but few, yet their Testimony against the proceedings of that Judicatory, as
against the course of defection, notwithstanding of any thing that that
Judicatory had formerly been, and was then professing, being true and clearly
consonant to the doctrine and determinations of this Church, it was a
pre-limitation of the Assembly, because of that Testimony to exclude them: But
I have often told him, and made it to appear, that they were not few, but many.
It is true, that the Commission till that time had been judged faithful; but
it is also true, that a great part of these to whom that Testimony was due, did
withdraw from the Commission upon occasion of that defection, and gave open
testimony against the same. And though some eminent men did abide with them,
yet the plurality were such who had not been much conversant in, nor well
acquainted with the Public Affairs of the Church. The other part of his Answer
is, that there were besides these excluded, a competent number of Members
lawfully authorized (for such as he supposes the rest to be for any thing that
is said in this particular, that he is now upon the answer of) to make up a
competent Judicatory, to cognosce and judge upon that matter and controversy,
according to the rule of Gods Word, and the Constitution of the Kirk, which
they are bound by their Commissions and oath to judge by. Yielding all this,
yet may there still be a pre-limitation, incase others no less in capacity to
be chosen to sit as Judges, be excluded. If the Presbyteries by order of the
Commission, shall exclude a great many of their Members in a capacity to be
chosen from being Commissioners, though they send a competent number of others,
is not the Assembly pre-limited in the election of its constituent Members,
even as if the Barrons and Burghs should exclude from their Elections many of
their number, in a capacity of being chosen Commissioners to the Parliament,
and yet send the ordinary number of Commissioners, would not the Parliament
because of this thing be pre-limited in the election of its constituent
Members? But in order to that which he says of a competent Judicatory to
cognosce and judge upon the matter, according to the rules of Gods Word and
Constitutions of the Kirk, and of the exceptions of the Remonstrants made
against the Synod of Dort: I desire him to consider first, of that which is
said of Mr. David Catherwood, a witness that deserved well of the Kirk of
Scotland, and whom (I believe) he will not except in this matter on his
nullities against Pearth Assembly, and in his Tractate against confused
Communions, concerning competent Judges in a time of defection, and of what is
said of the same purpose, by the reforming Party in their Public Papers in the
year 1637. and 1638. to whose judgments, I believe, the Protesters will submit
in the matter of a competent Judge. Secondly, that if the exception of the
Remonstrants of the Synod of Dort had been this, that the Members constituent
of that Synod had declared their judgments not only contrary to the doctrine
of the Remonstrants, but contrary to the Word of God, and to the clear doctrine
and constitution of the Belgic Churches, it would in jure have been a relevant
exception, and being true in facto, had sustained as well against that Synod,
as the like exception against the Council of Trent, which is to this day
counted valid by all the Protestant Divines. Thirdly, let us suppose hac eadem
via, ac modo and methodo, that the Commission had brought in the Prelaticall or
Popish Party, as they did the Malignant Party, and had by-Presbyteries obeying
their order there anent, excluded all such from being Members of the Assembly
as did bear testimony against them, whose number we shall also suppose to be as
few as the opposers of Public Resolutions, and the number of the other as many
as these who are for them; whether would this have been a pre-limited Assembly,
yea or not, and a Competent Judicatory to judge that matter according to the
Word of God and Constitutions of the Church? All these things being put
together, make it to appear that the Writer has brought in no such straits in
the business, as the Author supposes.

VINDICATION.
SEcondly, To the former part of the Reply, I confess that it is probable,
that a man being cited to the General Assembly upon a scandal in doctrine and
manners where the scandal is uncontroverted, and already particularly
determined quoad jus, or in point of Law, and the question is only about the
fact, ought not to be chosen Commissioner to the Assembly, at least not to sit
and vote until he be tried and judged; for I doubt, if he may not be chosen
Commissioner, if there be not some probable presumptions of the fact. But if
the scandal be yet controversi and indeterminati juris, controverted, and as
yet not a determined case in point of Law by the doctrine of the Kirk, I see
not but a man cited upon such a ground, may be chosen a Commissioner to the
Assembly, and sit and vote as a Member in other matters, except that thereupon
he was cited; and do remember well, that upon this very ground anno 48, upon
the putting off of some from the List to be Commissioners to the Assembly, who
had been referred and cited to the Assembly for silence at that time, according
to the direction of the then Commission, exception was made by some, that such
persons could not be chosen Commissioners, and consequently could not be upon a
List. This motion was rejected by some judicious and pious, affirming indeed,
that such persons could not well vote in the Assembly, until their matter was
tried, but that that reference could not hinder them to be upon a List for
elections, and consequently not from being elected to be Commissioners. Now,
such was the case of the Citation in hand, it was upon alleadgeance of
scandal, as yet controversi juris, as to any particular determination
thereanent by the public judgment of the Kirk, and therefore both the persons
cited, and these that ordained them to be cited, were to be tried and judged by
the Assembly, and for that removed in that particular, not only about the fact,
but also about the matter Juris of Law. However if this please not the Writer,
let him answer what he will for clearing the order of the Commission 48, and it
will serve as well the order of the Commission 51. As to any illegality
relating to the Constitution of the Assembly; for upon the form clearly both
were alike, except in what will make for the advantage of the later, and as for
the matter in both it was alike, as to the General Assemblies judgment at the
time of the Protestation, and also in reipsa, which we take upon us to make
good.

REVIEW.
ALbeit this be more then probable, as appears from the constant tenor of the
proceedings of Assemblies in the matter of Commissioners, which was intimated
by the Writer, yet I am content to take what the Author gives. He distinguishes
betwixt a scandal, which as to the ground of it is controversi juris, and a
scandal which is determinati juris, and makes the scandal of opposing the
Public Resolutions to have been only controversi juris, as to any particular
determination thereof by the public judgment of the Kirk, and thence infers,
that the opposers of Public Resolutions might have been chosen, this
notwithstanding, and admitted to sit as Judges in the Assembly, though not in
this particular; and I offer these particulars hereanent: First, That by the
Authors own grant, they are still excluded from sitting as Judges in that
particular, and therefore as to a competent Judge in this particular, which was
the main, if not the all of the Assembly, the Assembly was pre-limited.
Secondly, That this was not a business which was controversi juris, but as
clearly determinati juris as any thing could be; I mean, that the opposing of
the Public Resolutions, was no fault, but a duty clearly determined by the
Church of Scotland; I confess, men may question any thing, even the clearest
truths, but there is no case oftener or more clearly determined by this Kirk,
then that of the unwarrantablenesse of joining in Counsel or Arms with the
Malignant Party, for the defense of the Cause and Kingdom, and of the
obligation that lies upon Ministers, especially to bear testimony against the
same; and therefore a notable injury was done, and a gross pre-limitation
committed, by citing them upon that account. Thirdly, suppose it had not yet
been determinati juris as to the public judgment of the Church in an Assembly;
yet as to the judgment of the Commission and Presbyteries who did hear and obey
them, it was determinati juris, and men were excluded from Elections, and cited
to the Assembly there-upon, as upon a thing that was determinati juris:
Therefore as there was thereby a pre-limitation in regard of these, who though
they were chosen, yet could not sit in that particular, because of the
Citation; so also in regard of others, who were thereby excluded from being
chosen. 4. If this scandal was not ( Determinati Juris) by the Public Judgment
of the Church, the Author would let us know why the Commission in their
Warnings at Perth, March 20 by applying many former Acts and Remonstrances of
Genesis Assemblies against it, do define it to be so: And what Warrant the
Commission had by their trust from the Genesis Assembly, not only to declare the
opposers of their Resolutions to be guilty of practices leading to encourage
the hearts, and strenthen the hands of Enemies, in prosecuting their wicked
purposes to make faint the hearts, and feeble the hands of Gods People, and to
seduce their minds with devisive and separating Counsels and Principles, and
thereupon, not only to require Presbyteries to censure them, but also to stir
up the Civil Magistrate against them. Surely, if the Commission did all this
without any Public Judgment of the Kirk (that is of former General Assemblies
defining these things to be scandal) they did as to these things act without a
Commission, and without Authority, and were beyond their bounds, and led with
no spirit of tenderness. The Author did a little while ago seem to say, That
the Commission had no power to cite or to censure the opposers of any
Resolutions made by themselves; and yet here he tells, that these things, as to
the Public Judgment of the Kirk, were controversi juris: And if so, they were
as yet but Resolutions of their own, and they had no power to cite or censure
any, or to give Order to cite or censure any for opposing thereof. That the
Public Resolutions were controversi, and not determinati juris by the public
judgment of the Kirk: That the Commission had no power for citing or censuring
any Opposing Resolutions made by themselves; That they gave Order to
Presbyteries to censure and cite the opposers of Public Resolutions, are
things that I cannot reconcile. I will not say but the Authors ingyne may find a
shift, but if he extricate these things to the clear capacity of plain and
ordinary understandings, is more then at present my weak eyes do see. As for
that he tells us concerning the rejecting the motion of putting off of some
from the List to be Commissioners, who had been referred and cited to the
Assembly in the year 1648. I can say little to it, as not knowing it nor the
circumstances thereof. I believe it be an instance of a particular person in a
Presbytery giving his judgment anent the listing of another, but when it is all
granted it yields a great part of the cause, to wit, That these persons could
not sit in the Assembly as Judges in that particular; And if I be not mistaken
in my conjecture about the persons, I think I may say, if that judicious and
pious man who rejected that motion had been in any fear that these persons
would be chosen, belike he would have holden his peace, and sufferred the
motion to pass uncontrolled. But the Author (if this please not the writer)
desires him to answer what he will for clearing of the Order of the Commission
48. and it will serve as well the Order of the Commission 51. as to any
illegality relating to the Constitution of the Assembly; because, says he,
upon the form both clearly were alike, excepting what will make for the
advantage of the latter; and as for the matter in both it was alike, as to the
General Assemblies Judgment at the time of the Protestation, and also in
reipsa, as he takes upon him to make good. It seems that it does not please the
Author himself very well, and I think it will please the Writer much worse,
because of the things which I have mentioned, and other things as weighty which
may occur to him, as to that of the 48. I have already given clear answers for
the writer, or rather vindicated his own, that there was a vast difference both
in the form as also in the matter; and that both, as the Assemblies judgment
at the time of the Protestation (unless they were not to admit the judgment of
former Assemblies in these particulars) as also in reipsa, and he shall but
lose his labor, and not be able to make good what he undertakes.

VINDICATION.
THat which may seem to say somewhat against the other Particular ( viz. That
no man's Commission was rejected, nor any man chosen to be a Commissioner was
refused to have vote in the Assembly upon that account, that he was unsatisfied
with the Resolutions) is in the Answer to the 3. Objection, Branch 4. First,
(beside something that has been answered already) he says, Policy taught the
Assembly so to do: The votes of so few a number not being likely to prove so
great disadvantage to the business, as the professed denying to them a vote
would have done. Answer, If the Writer had used so much modesty and respect to
the Assembly as to have said, That possibly Policy might have taught them to do
this, or it may be probably thought it was thus, it had been somewhat
tolerable: But I must say it is too much boldness thus to have said,
positively, That Policy did teach them it. Good Sir, did you see into the
hearts of men in the Assembly, to see this political design moving them to do
this? Or can you bring a demonstration from any evidence without, that their
doing of it, did arise from no other principle or motive but this? But if it be
so that they did it upon a political motive and end: yet if it was so really as
none was rejected or refused, to have vote upon the account of dissatisfaction,
that exception is to no purpose to the point. We are upon the freedom of the
Assembly, which is to be measured by the acts done about the Constitution and
managing of it, considered according to the Matter of them, and not according
to the Intentions and Moral Motives whereupon men does them. But the Writer
does add two things further for Answer. 1. That the discussing and judging of
the Commissions of these in Glasgow and Sterling, who were unsatisfied with the
public resolutions, were laid aside; because Mr. Rob Ramsay his Protestation
against the Election, taken from their Dissatisfaction, could not be discussed,
until these Resolutions were either condemned, or approven, which was in effect
to exclude them from voting, because of not approving the Public Resolutions;
and this is so much the stronger, considering that it was refused to lay aside
the Commissions of these that carried on the Resolutions until their
proceedings should be tried and approven. Answ. 1. Besides that Mr. R. Ramsay
his Protestation was not against these of Sterling at all, so that it is
impertinent to say, that their Commission was laid aside because of that
Protestation: And besides, that the Commissions of others controverting with
them, and pretending by as probable reasons their Commission as these, was laid
aside also. It follows not hence that they were simply excluded from voting,
but suspended from voting for a time, and had not vote in that particular which
might well had been without imputation of pre-limitation on the Assembly, as
has been shown before. 2. The Consideration added for confirmation is very
inconsiderable; because the Commissions of these of Glasgow and Sterling were
controverted in the very Election, and therefore their Commission could not but
be laid aside until the grounds of the Controversy should be discussed, that
it might be seen whether they were orderly elected, or not; but these others
had their Commission by Elections orderly and uncontroverted in the
Presbyteries that sent them; yet neither were they to have vote in the matter
of the Resolutions. What is said from the Exception made against their
Admission to vote at all, given in to the Assembly, shall be answered
afterward. Secondly (says he) it is to be considered, That the Assembly did
sustain and approve the Letter and Act of the Commission for citing such as
were unsatisfied, which was a real excluding of all these upon their
dissatisfaction, at least from being Judges in that particular. Answ. 1. The
Writer does here, as all along this Paper, bear his Reader in hand, that the
Commission has given order for citing such as were unsatisfied indefinitly,
which is contrary to the truth; for only such (as all means used, do continue
in opposing) were to be cited, as is evident by the Act and Letter. 2 It is
true, after trial and examination of the Commissions proceedings, they did
approve that Act and Letter: But did not the Assembly, 48. do the same in
relation to the Letter and Act of the then Commission of the like nature? But
yet further, Did not all Commissioners from Presbyteries, who were unsatisfied
(excepting such only whose Commissions were controverted in the very Election)
were yet undiscussed, and were pleased to stay in the Assembly, sit and vote in
that same very particular; I mean the Resolutions of the Commission, how then
could they be really excluded from being Judges in that particular wherein they
really did sit Judges; or were any of them excluded after the Act and Letter
was approven? If it be said, That the approving of that Act and Letter did
import, that they ought in the judgment of the Assembly to have been excluded.
I answer, 1. Yet though this may say somewhat, that the Assemblies
determination in this point de jure did not agree well with that pre-ceding fact
in admitting such Members to judge in that particular, yet it says nothing to
the point in hand, seeing these Members of whom we speak did really and
actually without any Letter or exception made against them Judge, not only in
other matters, but also in that very particular. Thus much in answer to the
first Reason against the late Assembly, and what is brought in that Paper for
confirming and upholding of it: If it have any force Malignants may think
themselves obliged to the Protesters for teaching them, if ever they shall have
power again, how to call in question and condemn their Assembly 48. yea, and if
they find it make for their purpose, even other Assemblies too, even that
Solemn Assembly 38. as unfree and unlawful, because of pre limitation in the
election of Commissioners.

REVIEW.
THe Author here passing by a great and material part of the Writers Answer, to
wit, That albeit all that were true, yet it does not make void what is said for
prelimiting the Elections by the Letter and Act of the Commission, because
these were prelimited in Presbyteries, by barring sundry from being chosen, who
otherwise were in a capacity to be chosen, falls upon sharp censuring of him,
for saying, That Policy taught the Assembly so to do. But I conceive that
though the writer did not see into the hearts of men in the Assembly, yet he
had reason thus to speak, because their admitting some of them to sit, was not
consonant nor homogenious neither to the Letter and Act for citing of them,
which by the Authors own grant did infer the barring of them from sitting til
their matters should be tried; nor yet to the Assemblies aproving of the Letter
and Act which did exclude them, which the Author also confesses; it was either
great policy, or great simplicity that did lead them in so contrary and
discordant parts; But as the Author els-where speaks, they were no children;
neither was it so really that none were rejected or refused to have vote upon
the account of dis-satisfaction, because as some of them were rejected de
facto, to wit, the Commissioners of the first Election in Glasgow; so all of
them were rejected de jure as we shall hear anon. It could not but flow from
some strange principle, and be matter of wonder to the beholders, That at the
same time, in the same Judicatory, some should be standing at the Bar, as rei,
and cited to be tried and judged, and others no less guilty of the same Crime
should be admitted to sit upon the Bench as Judges of that very particular. I
believe the Author shall not find many presidents nor paralels of such a
practice as this in any well constitute and rightly proceeding Judicatory Civil
or Ecclesiastic; so that measuring the freedom of the Assembly by the Acts
done about the constitution and managing of it according to the matter of it,
and not according to the intentions or moral motives upon which men did them:
There is still reason to say, that it was not free, notwithstanding that some
were admitted to sit and vote, who were unsatisfied with, and opposite to the
public resolutions. As to that which he says in Answer to the other two
particulars: To the first of them I desire it to be considered. 1. That the
impertinency is on his own side, when he says, that Mr. Rob. Ramsay his
Protestation was not against these of Sterling at all* because the Writer did
not at all say in writ that it was so, or that the Commission of Sterling was
laid aside, because of that Protestation; if he found it so written in any
Copy, it had savoured a little more of cha^iry to impute to the inadvertence of
the Transcriber, seeing no man belike of common sense would bring in Mr. Rob.
Ramsay a Member of another Presbytery, and in another Province, protesting
against the Election of Sterling. 2. Not to fall on the debate of the laying of
the other Commissions aside, which were controverted with them, not upon the
probableness, nor improbableness of the reasons they pretended, as not
belonging much to the business which we are now upon. The Author does yield much
of the cause when he says, It follows not hence that they were simply
excluded from voting, but suspended from voting for a time, and had not vote in
that particular; because he yields these two things: 1. That they had not, nor
were not to have ( de jure) any vote at all in the particular of the Public
Resolutions. 2. That ( de facto) they had not, nor were not to have a vote in
any particular till that exception should be discussed, and so are they
excluded for a long time, and from many particulars. But when the exception is
discussed and sustained, are they not wholly excluded, both de jure, and de
facto, and cannot at all be admitted, unless we will bring in the Assembly
going over the belly of what she has presently found just and reasonable;
neither is it so inconsiderable as the Author would make it, which is added by
the Writer for Confirmation, but is very considerable to evince the
pre-limiting of the Assembly. That which was added is this, and this is so much
the stronger, if we shall consider that it was refused to lay aside the
Commissions of these who had carried on these Resolutions in the Commission of
the Assembly, until their proceedings should be tried and approven. To which
the Authors Answer is, That it is not considerable, because the Commission of
the one was controverted in the Election, but so was not the other; and because
they were not to have vote in the matter of the Resolutions; but this does not
at all loose the difficulty. One of the grounds upon which the Commission of
the one was controverted in the Elections, was, because the persons elected
were opposers of the Public Resolutions, and that ground as well as others, did
to themwards sustain as a relevant exception in jure to keep them from sitting
and voting in the Assembly, not only in that, but also in any particular else,
until it should be discussed; yea, some of the Commissioners were suspended
from having a vote in any thing till that should be discussed, merely and
allenerly upon that ground, to wit, That Brother who was nominated in both the
Elections; Now was not to be the Author or Abetter of the Public Resolutions,
involving a course of defection, being objected at the down-sitting of the
Assembly, an exception as relevant in jure to bar those who were chosen by
their Presbytery, without any controversy in the Presbytery it self, from
sitting and voting in the Assembly in any particular until that Exception
should be tried as the other was, though objected in the Presbytery at the time
of the Election. Let us take the Authors ground (to wit) That the matter was
controversi, and not determinati juris, and let him or any man else vindicate
it from partiality and pre-limitation, that exceptions being propounded hinc
inde, he who carries on Public Resolutions shall be admitted to sit in all
other particulars, except in the trying and judging of these, and he who
opposes them shall be suspended from sitting in any particular til these be
tried and Judged. On what he says to the second particular I offer, ^. That
the Writer does not all along this Paper bear his Reader in hand (as the Author
alleadges) that the Commission had given order for citing such as were
unsatisfied indefinitly, because the very first time that he mentions the
Letter and Act of the Commission he says, That it was a Letter and Act
appointing, That such as after conference should remain unsatisfied with, and
continue to oppose the Public Resolutions, should be cited; and having thus
once set down the true nature and extent of it, it was needless as often as he
spoke of it to repeat the same words, and was enough qualicunque modo to
circumscribe it; therefore the Author does more harm to himself then the
Writer, when he taxes him as speaking contrary to the truth in this. 2. That
it helps him not to say, That as the Assembly 51. did ratify the Letter and Act
of the Commission, so also did the Assembly 48. because of the many differences
already established betwixt the one and the other. To which I shall now add
this as to the point of Ratification, That the Act and Letter 48. was not
controverted by any, nor any Elections because of it, nor any Exception
proponed thereupon against the freedom of the Assembly; nor indeed well could
be, it being clothed with such circumstances as we have formerly spoken of
which needs not now to be repeated; but in 51. it was controverted, and
Elections thereupon were questioned, and Exceptions thereupon proponed against
the freedom of the General Assembly, which were rejected, notwithstanding of
contrary circumstances wherewith the Letter and Act were clothed. 3. That the
Author by yielding, that the Assemblies approving of the Letter and Act of the
Commission (which he is necessitate to yield because it was so) does import,
that notwithstanding Opposers did sit^ yet they ought in the Judgment of the
Assembly to have been excluded; puts himself to the disadvantage many ways. 1.
Because the Assemblies approving simul and semel all the Acts, Warnings,
Declarations and Remonstrances of the Commission against Opposers of the
Public Resolutions, did not only judge, that such by that Letter and Act ought
ab initio to have been debarred from sitt^ng in the Assembly in that
particular, but also in all other particulars, yea not at all to have been
chosen. 2. This goes far to nullify the Assembly another way, because it
acknowledges that de facto they allowed many scandalous men to sit as Members
thereof, who de Jure and by a Law approven of themselves, ought to have been
removed. 3. It holds forth a gross contradiction betwixt the Assemblies
Principle and their Practice, and so makes more then probable what the Writer
said for admitting some to sit upon Policy and designs. 4. It holds forth a
great solicism in the matter of Justice; that is; Socij criminis, to sit as
Judges to give sentence on their accomplices, to wit, other opposers of the
Public Resolutions, who were cited, and now standing as rei before the General
Assembly. All these things which the Author has brought in Answer to the first
Reason against the late Assembly, and what is set down for confirming and
upholding of it in the other Paper, being now fully discussed, I leave it to
the Reader to judge, whether that Reason of the Protestation does not still
stand strong against the freedom and lawfulness of that Assembly, and how
little cause he has to say, That if it have any force, Malignants may think
themselves obliged to the Protesters for teaching them, if ever they shall have
power again, how to call in question and condemn the Assembly 1648. yea, and if
they find it move for their purpose, even other Assembles too, even that solemn
Assembly 1638. as unfree and unlawful, because of the pre-limitation of
Election of Commissioners thereto. The Malignants are in themselves prone
enough to evil inventions though they be not taught them by others, but I
believe (themselves being Judges) they had rather, as to the matter of
constitution of Assemblies, and the interpretation of their Acts, be Disciples
to the Authors and Abetters of the Public Resolutions then to the Protesters;
for they have there in a little time learned the way how (notwithstanding of
all former Acts excluding them) to be admitted to all the privileges of the
Church, and to be employed both in the Army and Judicatories, and by complying
with the Commission to get an Assembly after their own mind for ratifying and
approving all these things which would never have been taught unto them by the
Protesters, who studies to hold fast the Acts of Assemblies in reference to
Malignants in the genuine and litteral sense and meaning thereof, and to
prevent and oppose all corrupt constitutions of Assemblies, and that they may
be composed of such as do adhere to former Principles, which being attained,
there is no cause to fear that Malignants shall easily ranverse either the
Assembly 48. or the Assembly 38. or any other lawful free General Assembly of
this Church. I shall close this whole business annent the pre limiting of the
Elections, and the excluding of those who opposed the Public Resolutions, with
one sentence of the Britane Divines in the Synod of Dort, who in answer to the
Protestation of the Remonstrants speak thus, Quae ratio reddi potest cur
suffragiorum Jure priventur omnes illi Pastores, qui ex officio receptam
Ecclesiae Doctrinam propugnantes, secus docentibus adversati sunt, si hoc
obtinere nova dogmata spargentibus nemo obsisteret ne ipso facto jus omne post
modum de illis controversiis judicandi amitteret.

VINDICATION.
WE go on now to the second in order of the Protestation, which is this;
Because of the absence of Commissioners of many Burghs, as wanting free access
because of the motions of the Enemy, in the order of the late Paper, wherein
other reasons are added to these in the Protestation, this is set down in the
5. place and is cast in (...) with some addition to the matter, because as
first proponed it has not seemed fast enough thus: That cannot be a free
Assembly, to which there is no free access and recess, but there was no free
access to the Assembly by reason of two Armies interjacent between the place
of the meeting and the dwelling of many of the Commissioners, and being
pursuing one another very hotely, having their parties coming abroad every
where at the time they should had come to the Assembly, and therefore many were
absent about the one half of the Burghs, many Presbyteries to the number of 9.
or 10. neither was there free recess from it, not only because of the former
reason, but because the King and Committee of Estates did detain and keep under
a kind of confinement, several numbers thereof, at their returning to their
own homes, having nothing, nor alleging any thing to challenge them for, but
their carriage at the Assembly. Answer, I must profess ingenuously, when at
first I did read the Protestation, I wondered much how men, especially Ministers
of the Gospel, making so solemn and high profession and attestation as they do
in this Protestation, viz. That they made one of the grounds contained therein,
as being desirous to be faithful in the day of tentation, and to exoner their
consciences as in the sight of the LORD, could alleadg this as ground to
disclaim the late Assembly, as not a free and lawful Assembly of this Kirk. I
confess my wondering is not a whit abated, but increased by this second
propounding Argumentation of it. For first, As to the proposal of it in the
Protestation, suppose that a good many Commissioners of Broughs and
Presbyteries had been absent then: this might have been alleged with some
appearance of reason to show that the Assembly was not so full in partibus
integralibus, so numerous as could have been wished, yet with no color could
it be alleged, that it was not free, legal (...) essential requisite for the
constitution thereof, unles it could be demonstrat either that their absence was
for want of timous advertisment concerning the time and place of it, which
cannot be alleged (the time being known by the preceding Assembly, and
advertisment concerning the place having been given timously by the Commission)
or that there was some appearance that some in the Assembly might have been
inclined to act favorably for the enemy, or that the enemy might have some
influence on the Assembly to corrupt or pervert it, which I conceive the
Protestors will not say. I know that the absence of many Commissioners is
alleged as one ground anulling this pretended Assembly condemned at Glasgow
38. but it is as well known that the absence of Commissioners was caused by
untimous indiction and advertisment or some other internal cause, having
influence upon the corruption of this Assembly. 2. It had been requisite the
Writer of the last Paper had condescended namely upon these 9. or 10.
Presbyteries absent; which had he done, I doubt but it would have been found
that some of them were absent, because they had none to send, or were not
Presbyteries existing at all at that time, as Orknay and Caithness. 2. It
should be found that some of these Commissioners of Presbyteries came within
short space to the place where the Assembly was sitting, and would not come
forward to it, as for instance these of Hambleton. 3. Commissioners came to the
Assembly, between whom and the place of the Assembly the Armies were as
interjacent, as to those that came not; for did not Commissioners from
Presbyteries of Mer^e and Tevidale, Galloway, Glasgow, West Country; yea, the
Commissioners of the Presbyteries of farthest parts off lying that way were
present, and that others came not it may seem to have proceeded out of
negligence, rather then from a necessity: Why then should the Assembly be
counted null, for the absence of such; it is known that Commissioners came not
from Burghs, and yet Ministers came out of these same Burghs. So, if because of
the absence of some Commissioners, for fear of the motions of the Enemy, or
because of lying of Armies through the Country, the late Assembly be judged
unfree and unlawful; Then, by as good reason must the Assembly in the time of
James Graham his reigning and raging through the Country, be holden unfree;
for as many, if not m^e Commissioners were upon that occasion absent from the
same Assembly; then see here again how good friends our Brethren proves to the
former Assembly, by devising arguments against the late Assembly, whereby they
plainly teach Malignants who were censured by this Assembly, how to cast them
as null upon grounds of conscience. Sixthly, let the Rols of this Assembly, be
compared with the Rolls of former unquestioned Assemblies, and it shall be
found to have been more numerous and full, then sundries of them; yea, we know,
that at the Assembly of Aberdeen 1650. there were but about twenty persons
present, which notwithstanding is owned by the Kirk of Scotland as a free and
lawful General Assembly, and it cannot be said, that any such excuse as this
was made in that Assembly for the absence of any, and granting that the motions
of the Enemy had hindered some, yet here being so inconsiderable a number in
comparison of this Assembly, these who were conveened, should not, nor could
not lawfully be holden an Assembly, and gone about their duties. Seventhly, as
for what was said about the want of freedom of recess, the first part is
certain and clear in common sense, that if any Assembly may sit, or do sit out
its time, and conclude freely, though there be danger to the Members in their
recess, this cannot in any way reflect upon the constitution of the Assembly,
how many Members of the Assembly in James Grahames time were there that had not
safe recess to their own homes. For the other part of these Members spoken of
here, had protested against, and declined the Assembly, and deserted (which the
Writer wisely passes in silence, and says only they were returning to their
own homes: as if for sooth the Assembly had been closed, or that they had taken
fair leave before the close) And might not the King and the Committee do all
this? They say unto them, until they had been informed upon what ground they
had come away so untimously without any imputation to the freedom and
lawfulness of the Assembly: Did not the Commissioners of the States at the
Assembly of Dort when the Remonstrants proceeded against, and declined that
Synod, presently confined and charged them to bide within that City until they
should answer unto the Assembly, without any imputation to the freedom of that
Assembly. But again, the truth is this, upon the Protesters deserting of the
Assembly, and going through the Army toward the West, the report was, That
they had made a broil in the Assembly, and were come to trouble the Army, and
hinder the Levies appointed in the said places, whither they were going:
hereupon the King and the Committee required some to keep their Chambers til
their carriage in the Assembly might be known. But so soon as the Assembly
heard of this, they dispatched unto the King, who presently sent them all to
their own homes, excepting that they did require such of them as were cited to
the Assembly to return to it, and answer for themselves (which yet I cannot say,
was certainly done) without one cross word given to them. These things being
considered, impartial judicial Readers will acknowledge that there has not bin
much ingenuity or conscience either in alleging this reason for annulling the
late Assembly, and cannot but think the alleadgers themselves will blush that
here have propounded it for justifying their own protesting, and hold it forth
to others to induce them to join with them as a ground of conscience whereof
they could not but exoner their conscience.

REVIEW.
THe Author ushers in and closes his Answer to this reason with a great deal of
wondering, and many exclamations against the want of ingenuity and conscience
in the Protesters, because of alleging this reason against the freedom and
lawfulness of the Assembly; and he is so confident as to think, when his
Answers are considered, not only will his Readers be of one mind with him in
this, but that the Protesters themselves will blush that they have proponed it:
We have a proverb, That great words flies bairns; and so we may also say,
Great words persuades women and children, but men of reason and understanding
will ponder what is said. Albeit the Protesters did not lay all, nor most of
the weight of their Protestation against the Assembly upon this, yet they did
ingenuously and conscientiously conceive, that there was weight in it, and do
think so still, notwithstanding of all the Authors great words: I wish he had
taken the Propositions of the Arguments as they lay, and answered them
severally and distinctly; he does not (so far as my weak decerning can reach)
tell us his mind plainly and directly, either of the first or second
Proposition of the Argument, but speaks directly only to these things that are
brought by the Writer, for confirmation of the second Proposition; and to that
part of the first Proposition that relates to freedom of recesse; I shall
first speak a little to the first Proposition of the Argument, and then to the
application of it. The medium is none of the Protesters inventing, but has
been generally received and made use of by Divines, to prove the unfreedome of
Councels where there was truth in it; as to the matter of fact, as appears
first from the learned Review of the Council of Trent, in which this Argument
is cleared and confirmed at large. Secondly, In the Book entitled Adversus
Synodi Tridentini restitutionem seu continuationem a Pio Quarto Pontifice
indictam opposita gravamina quibus causae necessariae and gravissimae
exponuntur, quare ea Electoribus caeterisque Imperii Principibus and Ordinibus
Augustanae Confessionis neque agnoscenda neque a^eunda fuerit. Which Book I do
the rather cite, because it does contain the joint judgment of many choice and
famous Divines and Lawyers of that time. Whosoever shall be pleased to look either
upon the Review of the Council of Trent, or upon these gravamina, as they are
cleared and confirmed by these Divines and Lawyers, shall find this Argument
cleared and confirmed at large, and so much said of it, as would be tedious to
transcribe. Thirdly, the Divines of Breme in the Council of Dort answering to
the Protestation of the Remonstrance, think it not enough to say, nullae hic
vel insidiae struuntur, vel ullum periculum intenditur; but also adds, Quinimo
securitas publica omnibus ad accessum commorationem and recessum prostatur. As
to the Assumption, I shall only add to what is said in the Protestation and
the other Paper for verify^ng of it; That several Presbyteries, because of the
tumults of these times, could not meet within their own bounds to choose
Commissioners, but made their Elections in places far remote, as these of the
Presbyteries of Edinburgh and Hadingtoun. Secondly, That many Ministers thought
it not safe to stay with their own flocks, and therefore retired Northwards,
some to one place, some to another. Thirdly, None could at that time travel
safely on the South Side of Forth without a Pass from the English, which was
not easy to be purchased, and could not be taken without suspicion; and
therefore though sundry did hazard to steal through, yet some were taken
prisoners and sent back, as sundry Ministers in the Presbytery of Lithgow. 4.
To say nothing of these many reproaches that were cast upon, and many
threatenings that were used against sundry of the opposers of Public
Resolutions, by the Soldiers in their journey to St. Andrews, and in the
place, and in their returning from it, all of them were before that time
declared Enemies both to Church and Kingdom, and Laws made by the Parliament,
and Acts issued by the Commission to proceed against them with punishments and
censures; and does not the Author in this his Vindication tell us, that
therefore the Clerks Papers which he sent to the Assembly, were not read, least
they should have inferred hazard and danger to him; if then he had been there
personally, and spoken the same things in the Assembly that he wrote unto it,
which no doubt if he had been present, he would have thought himself bound in
Conscience to do, he could not have done it with safety, and yet these were
things relating to the Public Resolutions. All these things being put
together, do make it to appear, that access to the Assembly was not safe, but
full of hazard and danger. But I come to the Author his Answers, and in order
thereto, desire it to be considered: First, That as the want of integrant parts
sometimes may be so great, that it does destroy the very being of the body; so,
when a considerable number of integrant parts are wanting, it renders the body
weak in its functions and operations, and draws along with it many other
inconveniences. I doubt not but the Author will grant, that the number of
Commissioners coming to an Assembly, may be so few, that they cannot make a
lawful and free Assembly; as upon the other side I shall willingly yield, that
it is not every want of Members constituent, that makes an unfree or unlawful
Assembly, if either the one or the other should be denied: As two or three
Commissioners might make an Assembly, so the want of two or three might unmake
it. I think he will also grant that when many Commissioners are absent,
especially not negligently, but upon relevant causes that it is not fit to
adjourn it till another time, then to proceed to constitute themselves or act
as an Assembly. So our Worthy Reformers adjourned the Assembly 1568. from
December. 25. to Feb. 25. because many were absent by reason of the troubles of
the time: and upon the same ground the Assembly 1569. was adjourned from
February to March, from Sterling to Edinburgh. And if the Meeting at S. Andrews
had been pleased to read and condescend unto the Supplication that was offered
to them under the Hands of many Brethren for an adjournment before their
Constitution, there had been no cause for these Debates. 2. It seems to be
yielded by the Author, that where it can be demonstrated that a good many
Commissioners are absent, for want of timous advertisment, concerning the time
and place of the Assembly, there is cause upon that ground to except against
the Assembly, as not free and lawful. And the Assembly at Glasgow did put it
above question for anulling the pretended Assemb. at Lithgo 1606 and that at
Aberdeen 1616. And is it not equivalent to this, if by reason of external force
Presbyteries after advertisment given unto them cannot meet and choos their
Commissioners, or if those who are chosen cannot come because of force keeping
them back, What is the cause why undue advertisment of many Presbyteries and
Bu^ges makes a null Assembly? Is it not because many of these who are in a
capacity to send Commissioners, are by an invincible impediment kept back from
doing of it; and has not this also place in the other case? If Presbyteries
neglect to choose Commissioners, or if they being chosen shall neglect to come,
that alters the case and puts the fault wholly upon them who neglect their
duty, but if they be k^pt back by violence from without ^t is equal to their
not being advertised at all, or their not being timously advertised; or if they
cannot choose, or being chosen cannot come, to what purpose is the advertisment,
or how can it put them in a worse case then if they had not been advertised, or
not timously advertised. Though the Presbyteries of Orknay and Caithness be
deduced, and others too which are wanting and have no Commissioners to send:
yet if the Author shall be pleased to consult the Rolls of the Assembly, it
happily may be still found that nine or ten Presbyteries were absent, and thirty
Buroughs if not above: for these of Hamelton who came afterward to the place
where the Assembly was siting, and would not come forward, as they came thither
with hazard and difficulty, so did they not think it a duty to come forward,
being convinced of the nullity of the Assembly, which made them send their
testimony against it; It is true that Commissioners came to the Assembly,
betwixt whom and the place of the Assembly the Armies were interjacent, and
from several parts besouth Forth; but it is as true, that some coming from
these places were taken prisoners, and that others offered not to come from
home as being hopeless to pass thorough the danger, bring so apparent and
real, which it seems the Author has been somewhat convinced of, when he
speaks so mincingly as to say that it might have seemed to have proceeded of
negligence, rather then of any necessity: He tells us that Commissioners came
not from Burghes, and yet Ministers came from the same Burghs, but that proves
not that there was free access to the Commissioners of Burghs who stayed away;
to say nothing that there was few Burghs whose Commissioners were absent, whose
Ministers were Commissioners and came to the Assembly; I know not any Assembly
so impeded and endangered in Ja. Grahams time; there was no Assembly that sat
from the time of his invading the Land by the Irishes till the time of his
defeat except one, and that sat in Jan. at which time he was not reigning or
raging thorough much of the Country, but was forced to keep himself in the
Highlands, and in the places of the Country less inhabited, whence few
Commissioners were come: If the Author prove it, by bringing forth the Rolls ot
both Assemblies, that as many were absent from that Assembly if not more, then
it shall appear that he had just cause so to assert; but until that time he
will give us leave to suspend our assent to the truth of this. He will still
have the Protesters to be unfriends to former Assemblies, and to be teachers of
Malignants how to cast them as null upon grounds of Conscience; but the
Protesters do disclaim them for Scollers, and so do they the Protesters for
masters or teachers; and as there is nothing taught by the Protesters that can
give them any just ground upon which to quarrel or cast the censures of that
Assembly, so were it superfluous for them now to be at the pains to learn it,
seeing the Authors and abbettors of the Public Resolutions has eased them of
the pain of this censure already, albeit the Rolls of this Assembly were more
numerous then the Roll of some unquestionable Assemblies that would not much
help him, because absents from this Assembly in many was not voluntary, but by
want of free access, but so does it not appear to have been in other
Assemblies, and whatever the Author talks of the Roll of this Assembly; yet I
believe before they come to the ratifying of the Public Resolutions which was
their great business, they were but a thin Meeting, many of their number
having left them, some out of discontent and dissatisfaction with their
proceedings, and others fearing to be surprised by parties of the English: As
to the Assembly at Aberdeen, in which there was but twenty persons present
which notwithstanding is owned by the Church of Scotland as a free and lawful
General Assembly; it is so owned as that these who met being lawfully
Commissionated from their Presbyteries, and having met at the time and place
appointed for holding the Assembly, are accounted sufficient to adjourn the
Assembly, and to preserve and Vindicate the Liberties of the Church against the
encroachments that then were made upon them by the King and his Commissioners:
So I believe the Author will not say that these twenty could have proceeded to
make Acts of General concernment to the whole Church of Scotland, or that if
they had so done, these acts would have been authoritative and binding. What
the Writer speaks of want of freedom, in regard of recesse is not upon any
emergent after the down-sitting or close of the Assembly, but upon causes
known at the time when the Commissioners should have come from home, and
therefore he does not urge it as a relevant Argument apart by it self, but
joins it with the want of freedom of access, and it is very agreeable to
common sense for men to think that Assembly not free, to which there is no
freedom in coming to exoner their Consciences; nor any freedom in going after
they have done it. He justifies the confinement of the Ministers of Sterline.
In this particular at Sterline 1. He challenges the Writers passing in
silence, these Ministers Protesting against the Assembly, but though the Author
think this wisdom yet I hardly believe that the Writer did it upon
deliberation, the thing being so manifestly known, there was no need to mention
it; The Author asks the question, whether the King might not have confined
these men, without any imputation to the freedom of the Assembly, until he
had been informed upon what ground they came away so untimeously. It seems that
as the case was circumstantiat, it could not well be done without an imputation
of the freedom of the Assembly; may the King and Committee confine every one
who comes away untimeously, until they be informed upon what ground they come
away, illud possumus quod Jure possumus: But where is there such law, for
censuring these by confinement that come away untimeously from the Assembly;
but it seems they were informed of the cause of their coming away, otherwise
his instance of the Commissioners of the Estates at the Assembly of Dort, their
confining of the Remonstrants, and charging them to bide within the City till
they should answer to the Assembly, after they had Protested against, and
declined the same, will not make much to the purpose to justify the
confinement at Sterline, because that at Dort was not but upon certain
knowledge and information of the fact, and if the King or Committee did know
that these Ministers had Protested, how does the Author insinuate that it was
done until they should learn upon what ground these Ministers came away, or
whence had they their information, he tells us the truth is this: Upon the
Protesters deserting the Assembly, and going thorough the Army toward the
West, the report was, that they had made a br^^l in the Assembly, and were come
to trouble the Army, and hinder the Leavy in these places whether they were
going: But to say nothing that he either wisely or carelessly passes over this,
that they were going to their own homes, they having their charges and stations
in the West: will he be answerable to his Readers, that what he has told in
this is truth, and nackedly told; I doubt he can, and that it be but a devised
fancy, the very terms whereof seems to discover he vanity of it, and that he
had told more of the truth, if he had said the information came from the place
where the Assembly sat, and from persons who had an oversweying hand in it; I
shall not contradict in what he says: That so soon as the Assembly heard of
this they dispatched to the King, who presently sent them to their own homes,
excepting that they had required such of them as had deserted the Assembly to
return to it, and answer for themselves; which yet he cannot say was certainly
done, till he may inform himself about it; I will tell him somewhat in this
particular that was certainly done, that I doubt he will be able to Vindicate
from being some imputation upon the freedom of the Assembly, to wit, that
whilst these Ministers were thus confined at Sterline, the Assemb. did cite
several of them to compear before them at Dundee, and that notwithstanding that
their confinment was not taken off, til the very day of their appearance; and
that there was 40. miles distance between the place of their confinement, and
the place where the Assembly sat; yet that same day did the Assembly, to whom
(by the Authors own confession) their confinement was known, proceed against
them, and sentence them, some with deposition, and others with suspension from
their Ministry; he may remember that they were cited to the (...) day of (...)
being Tuesday; the same day did the King and his Army depart from Sterline, and
not till a little before his departure did he take off that confinement as can
be testified by many witnesses; as to the Authors instance of the Commissioners
of the Estates confining the Remonstrants at Dort, it does not meet with the
present case. First, because to say nothing that the Remonstrants of Dort had
Protested against, and declined a lawful Assembly, which the Protesters at St.
Andrews had not done; neither yet to say any thing, that I can find no such
confinement in charge as the Author speaks of, put upon the Remonstrants in the
Printed Records of that Synod; these Commissioners had certain knowledge and
information of the matter of fact, but so had not the King and Committee of
Estates. Secondly, because the Protestation and declinature at Dort was now
judged, and found ir-relevant, and the Commissioners themselves being present,
but not so in the other.

VINDICATION.
THe third Reason according to the order of the Protestation, and secondly in
the order of the late Paper is this in sum: that the late Assembly cannot be
counted a free lawful General Assembly; because relevant exceptions being
timeously proponed and offered to be instructed and verified against many of
the members thereof; viz. Such of the late Commission as had hand in the
Public Resolutions, that they should not be permitted to sit and Vote in the
Assembly, as being under a scandal, and guilty of promoting a course of
defection, and until such time as they should be tried, yet it was refused to
take any such exceptions into consideration, until they should be tried and
discussed. For clearing and confirming this argument, the Writer undertaks upon
him to show 2. things: 1. That it was a thing incumbent in duty to the Assembly
to have removed from their Meeting all persons under scandal (though some
being known to them) until they were purged thereof. 2. That the persons
objected against were under such scandal as is alleged, for the former he
alleges first: That it is without controversy, and next he brings four
things for the proof of it. 1. The light of nature, and the Word of God, but
names not one passage of it. 2. Some clauses of both Covenants, the desires of
the Commission 48 and of the solemn engagment that same year, and all the
Remonstrances for purging of the Armies and Judicatories, even the late Papers
given by this same Commission to the Parliament at Sterline, about the Act of
Classes, for removing of scandalous persons from being members of the
Judicatories (It is good that the Writer yet even in this heat against the
Commission finds something right in their Papers, but he tells not all the truth
that he might have done here, in their Papers they held forth not only
scandalous, but positively all such as were not qualified should be debarred
from being members of Judicatories. 3. A rule and order set down in the
Assembly 1562. to be found also in the Assembly 1575. 1580. 1581. and exactly
kept for above 20. Assemblies, and 20. years to order; viz. at the entry of
every Assembly: The first work is to be about purging the members thereof, and
other men appointed be charged to declare their consciences, touching their
Doctrine and life, and execution of their Office, if therein they be
scandalous, and it is appointed, that any to whose charge any thing is said
ought to be removed out of the Assembly, until his cause be tried, and if he
be convict he can have no vote until the Kirk find satisfaction. 4. That all
the Assemblies since the late Reformation began 38. have upon the objection of
scandal against any of the members in the time of the constitution of the
Meeeing, removed these members until it was tried and discussed; yet in this
sam^ Meeting at St. Andrews upon the objection that the scandal of Blaketers,
and others accessions to the unlawful engagement was not sufficiently purged by
notification and approbation of their repentante in the Assembly, they were
removed from being members, and the Writer magno h^atu bids any man in the
world bring a reason why some upon such exceptions have been removed, and
others against whom were as relevant exceptions admitted; for the other
particular that the persons objected against were under a scandal of carrying
on a c^urse of defection, he says that it is manifest, not only from common
report, the first whereof is made Deuteronomy, 13.12. A ground of search, and the
other a ground of proceeding against the incestuous person: 1 Cor. 5. we may
see by this what doom the late Commissioners likely might have gotten, had the
Writer of this Paper been judge, excommunication summary from this Church, and
destruction by the sword from the Civil Magistrate, such considering the crime
he charges on them, and the place cited is not only hinted at (but blessed be
GOD that so illwilled a Cow had so short horns) But also from those four. 1.
The stumbling and sad complaints of the godly against their Proceedings. 2. The
testimonies and Letters of many Presbyteteries bearing their stumbling and
dissatisfaction with the same. 3, The clear standing Acts, Remonstrances and
Declarations of former Assemblies, unto which these were diametrally opposite.
4. The testimony of sundry Brethren in the Assembly offering to prove it.

REVIEW.
BEfore I come to the discus^^^g of the Authors Answers to this reason, I
cannot but take notice of a few interlud^s of his in repeating of these things
which the Writer brings in for clearing and con^^rming of it: First, these
words of h^s for the former, he alleadges first, that it is without
controversy; and next he brings four things for the proof of it, the light of
Nature, and the Word of God, but names not one passage of it. The Writer said
not, that it was without controversy; but his words be these; albeit (as we
conceive) no great controversy will be about it: And although he had said,
that it is without controversy, was it a fault to bring something for
strengthening assent to the truth of it. That he named no passage of the Word
of God was, because he took it to be lippis and tonsoribus notum amongst
Christians, that an Elder should be blameless, and of good report. A second
is, That it is good that the writer, yea even in this heat of disputation,
finds something right in the Commissioners Papers, out that he tells not all
the truth. The Writer desires not at any time to be so hot against the
Commission, as not to acknowledge and commend what is right in their Papers and
actings; and why should it be made a matter of challenge against him, that he
tells not all the truth, seeing he had not to do with any more then he tells;
his point was to tell, that the persons under scandal, ought to be removed
from the Assembly, and not the positive qualifications to be required in these
who are to be admitted to fit a Members. If the Author think that that can
contribute any thing either for strengthening what the Writer intends to prove,
or for clearing of the Commission, he does well allow it to be told. Thirdly,
These words of his, The Writer magno hiatu bids any man in the world bring a
reason: his magno hiatu are not words very beseeming that soberness and
gravity that becomes a man of his place and parts, he may remember that he
uses the like expressions himself; all the world (says he in a certain place
of his Vindication shall not be able to clear this from usurpation; and is
there not need of as wide a mouth for the one of these as for the other. But
that which is most observable, is the strange inference which he draws from
the Writer, citing Deuteronomy. 13.12. to prove that common report is made a ground of
search: 1 Cor. 5. to prove that it is made a ground of proceedings, we may see
by this what doom the late Commiss. likely might have gotten, had the Writer,
of this been Judge, Excommunication summarly from ^his Church and destruction
by the Sword from the Civil Magistrate, considering the crime he charges on
them, and the place cited is not only hinted at, (but blessed be God that so
ill-willed a Cow had so short horns) but also from the 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. The
Author told us above, that he is not given to be jealous, but this favors too
too much of jealousy, and of the want of Charity, which thinks not evil. I
would fain know from what Topic he will (from all that the Writer has said)
frame a probable argument, that it is like, that if the Writer were Judge, the
Commissioners doom would be summar Excommunication from this Church, and
destruction by the Sword from the Civil Magistrate: I know him to be a man
that has good ability in argumentation, but it will surpass all his ingyne,
by any probable consequence, to infer this conclusion from the Writers citing
of these places of Scripture, to prove that common report is made a ground of
search and proceeding; and I am confident, that as he shall not be able to
bring any probable evidence of what he has alleged, so also that it did
never enter into the Writers heart to have such a thought.

VINDICATION.
THus far the Writer; So we have now before us at one view this Argument so
operous and large, as full and strong as it could be made, to which a very
short answer might be made; for all hangs upon this, that the late
Commissioners were under a scandal of carrying on a course of defection, and
this hangs necessarily upon the third particular last mentioned, which the
Writer only dictats magisterially we deny, which alone lays the whole
argument in the hollow, and suspends assent to the conclusion thereof, until
the Writer shall in a new Edition follow out his Argument, and make that
particular good, which he shall never be able to do: But for clearer
satisfaction to all honest Christians about this matter, we present this
consideration in answer to this argument. 1. The very like accusation and
exception came into the Assem. 48, from the very Parliament, against the
Members of their Commissioners, who were Commissioners to the Assembly, and yet
after a long and serious debate, it was found (by none more then our present
Protesters, and concluded that none of them could be removed from sitting in
the Assembly, and voting in other matters until their proceedings were first
heard and tried, when the Writer, shall shape an answer to justify the
Constitution of that Assembly, notwithstanding this that was ^one, then we
doubt not but it shall (...) the late Assembly; so we see that it is contrary
to the truth which the Writer alleges in answer to the first Objection
against this Argument, when he says, that though it be true, that the Members
of the Commission have been allowed to sit until their Proceedings were tried
and judged, yet that is as true, that such Objections and exceptions being
proponed, was never rejected. We have given a fresh and recent instance to the
contrary what he adds there, viz. that since the late Reformation, there was
no cause to propone such thing; the Commissioners til this year, having carried
themselves faithfully, we grant the former did carry themselves faithfully, and
that there was no just cause of proponing that exception against the Commission
48; and we affirm, that the Commission 51, carried themselves faithfully, and
that there was no just cause of proponing that exception against them which the
Protesters made, but whether it was so or otherwise in reipsa in the very deed
it self, since both exceptions at the time they were made, were alike to the
Assembly, and therefore (to borrow the word of the Writer we desire any man in
the world to bring a reason why the one Assembly should be condemned for
rejecting such an exception before the proceeding of the persons excepted
against, were tried and judged when as the other Assembly which rejected the
like exception is maintained. But good Reader, look forward upon the Writers
following of his Answer to the Objection mentioned, and see a mystery, and
judge thou, if it be not of iniquity against all the late General Assemblyes
of this Kirk; he tells us of an Act made anno 1601, and renewed 1648, and
says, that it does necessarily infer, that the Commissioners of a former
Assembly, should not be admitted as Members in the succeeding Assembly,
although there be no scandal or exception proponed upon their proceedings
until they be tried, much less when a scandal or exception is proponed. This
is a fair blow, by one str^ak given to the late Constitutions of all the
Assemblies of this Kirk, posterior to that Assembly at Glasgow, without
exception, and most of all to the Assembly 48, for in all of them,
Commissioners of the preceding Assemblies respective have been admitted to sit
as Members, before their proceedings were tried and judged, and in that
Assembly 48, they were admitted to sit, notwithstanding exception being made
against their sitting by the supreme Civil Power of the Land. This is
remarkable, that the Writer, to the effect he might pull down the late Assembly
51, he would put down all the rest with it. But the truth is, the Writer is
somewhat rash in his assertion concerning the consequences of that Act
mentioned, look the tenor of it as it is extant in the Assembly 48, Sess. 6. It
says only this much, That the Commissioners of former Assemblies shall give an
account of their proceedings in the beginning of the Assembly, before any other
matter or cause be handled, and their proceedings to be allowed or dis-allowed,
etc. from which I confess, this much may be inferred by one sticking precisely
to the letter of the word, that after the Assembly is constitute, the handling
of all other matters should be suspended, until the Commissioners proceedings
should be tried and put to a point, during which trial, the Commissioners that
are members vi materiae, must be removed, because the same persons cannot try
their own proceedings, but that they may not be admitted in any ways to be
Members of the Assembly, not so much as to vote in the Election of a Moderator,
(which was the thing required by the Protesters) cannot be inferred from
thence, if it were other ways it seems strange to me, that that same Assembly
48, which did renew that Act, did at the same very time, admit the
Commissioners of the preceding Assembly (sundry of the present Protesters, and
amongst the rest, none more then the Writer of this Paper, and the suggester to
him of this consideration, being chief actors in the business) to sit as Members
of the Astembly, before their proceedings were tried; yea, and to vote in
sundry other matters during the time of their trial; and that whenas there was
exception made against them, but beside this retortion of the Argument, which
the Protesters are obliged to answer.

REVIEW.
ALbeit the Author is pleased to say, That the Writer shall never be able to
make good, that the Public Resolutions were diametrally opposite to clear
standing Acts, Remonstrances, and Declarations of former Assemblies, yet he, or
some others in his room has often made this good, out of these Acts,
Remonstrances, Declarations, etc. wherein the very contradictory of the Public
Resolutions, is clearly set down upon the very circumstantiat case of defending
the Cause and Country against foreign Invasion; and therefore though there
were no more to uphold the Argument but this, the conclusion thereof may safely
be assented to, without any new Edition of the Writers in following his
Argument: I am glad that the Author is brought to acknowledge, that all hangs
upon this, and doubts that some of his friends who quarrel at sundry former
Acts, Remonstrances and Declarations, as not knowing how to reconcile them with
Public Resolutions, approve him in this. He would remember, and others would
be informed, that in the beginning of the Meeting at St. Andrews, this point
was offered to be instantly verified out of the Records of the Church under the
Clerks hand, who is general^y acknowledged to know them best of a^y, and was
bound by his place and particular Acts of Assemblies, to offer them unto them,
and yet they could not be heard; and the exception being relevant in it self
(as is acknowledged by the Author) and rejected when offered to be instructed:
as to the matter of fact it is alike as if it had been proven, for it stands
for proven in Law, as to the Judge who refuses to admit probation to be
instantly produced ex actis suis. To his first particular answer I reply.
First, That no like accusation nor exception came into the Assembly 1648, from
the very Parliament (or any other) against the Members of the Commission who
were Commissioners to the Assembly; neither after a long and serious debate was
it found (either by our present Protesters or any others) and concluded that
none of them could be removed from sitting in the Assembly, and voting in other
matters, until their proceedings were first heard and tried. There was in the
Assembly 1648. no such accusation nor exception, nor debate, nor conclusion,
which is a short and clear answer for justifying that Assembly, and for
vindicating the truth of that which is alleged by the Writer in answer to the
first Objection, to wit, That such exceptions being propounded, were never
rejected; and does withal give a clear reason why the one Assembly should be
condemned, though the other be justified; because the one Assembly rejected so
releuant an exception, which the other did not, it being never propounded unto
them. In all this business the Author is greatly mistaken, and (whether through
misinformation, or how I know not) does assert that for a truth which never
had a being, and therefore all his defenses built upon it do at one instant
fall to the ground. The story which as it seems he hints at in the 48. was
briefly this* In the year 1648. the Assembly being met and constituted without
any exception propounded or mentioned by any person or party whatsoever,
against these who had been Members of the former Commission, and were now
Members of the Assembly, after they had sitten five or six days, as is evident
from comparing the date of their first Session with the date of the Papers
after mentioned, the Committee of Estates (for the Parliament was adjourned a
good while ere then, as is evident from the printed Acts thereof) hearing that
the Assembly were now gone a good length in the trial of the proceedings of the
Commission, sent in the Earl of G^encarn the Treasurer-Depute, and Archibald
Sydeserf to the Assembly with a Paper wherein they did desire, 1. That the
Assembly would be pleased to appoint some of their number to meet with such as
should be appointed by the Committee of Estates, for composing of
mis-understandings betwixt Kirk and State, and for clearing the Marches betwixt
the Civil and the Eclesiastick Power, and these Questions which had been
debated betwixt the PARLIAMENT and the COMMISSIONERS of the GENESIS ASSEMBLY. 2.
That they would be pleased to forbear the emitting of any Declaration, either
to this Kingdom, or the Kingdom of England, relating to the then Engagement and
proceedings. 3. That before the General Assembly did proceed to any approbation
of the actions of the Commissioners of the former Assemblies, that in these
things which might relate to the then Engagement, and to these Questions that
had been debated betwixt the Parliament and them, they might be first heard. In
order to these desires there passed several Papers betwixt the General
Assembly, and the Committee of Estates: But in none of these is there any
Exception propounded by the Committee of Estates against any of the
Commissioners of the former Assemblies, nor any desire thereupon, that they
might be removed until these Exceptions should be tried and discussed: But all
the Objections and Exceptions they speak of, is, Objections and Exceptions
against the proceedings of the Commission in reference to the Engagement, which
though they were a good while waited for, and again and again desired, yet did
not the Committee of Estates offer one tittle of particular Objection or
Exception against the proceedings of the Commission in the matter of the
Engagement, before the trial and approbation of these proceedings by the
General Assembly, much less did they offer any Objection or Exception against
the Members of the Commission, who were Members of the Assembly. The Committee
of Estates did afterward print and publish very sharp and reflecting Papers
against that Assembly, and their Declaration, wherein as was probably
conceived, they had the help or some very able Ministers and Lawyers, and yet
in all these they do not so much as once insinuate any thing of this kind that
they did propound such an Exception against the Members of the Commission, who
were Members of that Assembly, which doubtless they would not have omitted if
any such thing had been: But if the Author will not trust none of these things,
which if need were can be attested by many who were eye and ear witnesses
thereto. To the effect that there be no place for gainsaying in this matter, I
have set down after the close of this Review, the true Copy of the Papers that
past betwixt the Committee of Estates and the General Assembly at that time in
that business, extracted faithfully out of the Registers of the Committee of
Estates; against which no flying report that he has heard, and taken
impression from, can bear any weight. That Mystery of Iniquity which the Author
supposes to have found against all the late Genesis Assemblies of this Church, is
but a Mystery of his own very groundless and uncharitable fancy, wherein he
may happily please himself, but brings no edification to his Readers, nor
advantage to his Cause thereby: It were better for him to be exercised in
discovering true Mysteries of Iniquity, which are nearer home, and as yet a
vail to his eyes, then thus to stretch his ingyne and spend his time to find a
knot in a Rush. But what is that Mystery? The Writer tells us, says he of one
Act made anno, 1601. and renewed anno, 1648. and says, That it does
necessarily infer, that the Commissioners of a former Assembly should not be
admitted as Members of a succeeding Assembly, though there be no scandal nor
exception propounded upon their proceedings until they be tried; much less when
a scandal or except on is propounded. This says the Author, is a fair blow by
one stroke given to the late constitutions of all the Assemblies of this Church
Posterior to that Assembly at Glasgow without exception, and most of all to the
Assembly 48. for in all of them Commissioners of the preceding Assemblies
respective have been admitted to sit as Members, before their proceeeings were
tried and judged; and in that Assembly 1648. they were admitted to sit,
notwithstanding exceptions being made against their sitting, by the Supreme
Civil Power of the Land. But if this be candid and concludent reasoning, I
desire leave of him to discover another Mystery of Iniquity in his own words,
before he close this purpose that gives as great a blow to all the late
Constitutions of all the Assemblies of this Church since the 38. none excepted;
his words are these, I confess that thus much may be inserted by one sticking
precisely to the Letter of the Act, That after the Assembly is constituted, the
handling all other matters should be suspended until the Commissioners
proceedings be tried and put to a point, during which trial the Commissioners
that are Members vi materiae must be removed; because the same persons cannot
try their own proceedings. But so it is, that though the Letter of the Act and
vis materiae do infer these things, yet after the constituting of the Assembly,
Commissioners of all the preceding Assemblies respective since the 38. have
been admitted to sit as Members of the Assembly, before the trial and
discussing of their proceedings: Therefore there is one Mystery of Iniquity in
the Authors words, which pulls down all these Assemblies of the Church. What
Mystery of Iniquity imaginable that reaches unto the pulling down of the
Assemblies can be found in the Writers words, but this, That these Acts 1601.
and 1648. do cross the ordinary practice of all these Assemblies in this
particular, concerning the trying and discussing of the proceedings of the
Commissioners, or that the proceeding of all these Assemblies in this
particular have not been agreeable unto, but dissonant from the Rule holden
forth in these Acts: And does not the Author yield, That both by the Letter of
the Act, and vi materiae, that they ought to have been removed? But so have
they not been in any of these Assemblies before the judging of their
proceedings: Does not then that Mystery of Iniquity work in him, as well as in
the Writer? But he tells us, that it cannot be inferred from thence that they
may not be admitted in any ways to be Members of the Assembly, not so much as
to vote in the Election of a Moderator, which was the thing required by the
Protesters (if he had dealt fairly he should have said, which is the thing
inferred by the Writer; but perhaps he saw some disadvantage in that) be it so,
That that inference cannot be made from thence, yet may this inference well be
made from thence, That after the choosing of the Moderater they cannot be
admitted to sit and vote in any business in the Assembly before their
proceedings be allowed or disallowed, and that if they be admitted before that
time, these Acts of the Assembly are clearly crossed and contradicted, which
being done by all these Assemblies since 38. they are to be pulled down as
null. When the Author shall extricate himself and his Readers out of this
Mystery of Iniquity, he shall also help the Writer how to clear himself of the
other. The truth is, though there has been some crossing between these
Assemblies and the practice of the Assembly since the 38. both the one way and
the other, by the sitting of the Commissioners of the former Assembly, not only
till the Assembly was constitute and in the choice of a Moderator, but also
afterward in the debating and voting of other business before the allowing or
disallowing of their proceedings; yet does not this reach any blow to the
constitutions of these Assmblies, because the Act of the Assembly 1601. till
the year 1648. was almost inter non cognita, and non apparentia; yea, there was
no cause to urge it, the Commissioners of all these Assemblies carrying
themselves faithfully, and not being under any scandal or any exception
thereupon proponed against them. And albeit things belonging to former order
being propounded and urged (especially in cases of consequence upon the matter)
cannot be past by, unless they be formally repealed; yet if through
inadvertency or custom they come to be omitted, there being no particular
emergent giving occasion to urge them, yet does not this give any blow to the
Judicatory wherein these forms should be used; neither does he, who says, that
their own Laws prescribes such a form, prove guilty of any Mystery or Iniquity.
But the Author insists, That the Assembly 48. which did renew that Act, did at
the very same time admit the Commissioners of the preceding Assembly, sundry of
the present Protesters, and amongst the rest none more then the Writer of this
Paper, and the Suggester to him of this Consideration, being chief actors in
the business, to sit as Members of the Assembly, before their proceedings were
tried: yea, and to vote in sundry other matters during the time of their trial,
and that whereas there was exception made against them. I pass his rubbing upon
the Writer of the Paper, and I know not that Suggester to him of that
consideration, as being a thing ordinary to him in all this Debate, and yet
little either for his own honor, or for the edification of others: I think
these now are not ashamed to give their mutual help and asistance one to
another either by suggesting or digesting as God has gifted them, what may
contribute for the defense of the Truth. But sure I am, though he may speak his
fancy, and vent his reflecting conjectures that he neither knows who writ the
Paper, or if any, or who suggested that consideration to him, or what their
acting was in that business in the Assembly 48. If he shall take into
consideration the circumstances of proceedings in the Assembly 48. which
revived the act of the Assembly 1601. he will not need to think it strange that
they did admit the Commissioners of the former Assembly to sit and vote in
other matters before their proceedings were tried and judged, because the
motion of reviving that act was not made till a very little time before the
report of their proceedings by the Committee of the Assembly, to whom the
inspection of the Commission-Book was committed: any who looks upon the acts of
the Assembly will find, that the act 1601. was revived, and the Commissions
proceedings approven both in one day, the one in the fore-noon, and the other
in the afternoon; and I believe that he shall not find that in the interval
betwixt these two Acts, any thing was voted in the Assembly. He insinuates, as
if at that time there had been a debate about the removing of the
Commissioners, upon exception made against them; but in this he is mistaken
still: There was no exception made against them, nor any debate thereupon, as
we have already cleared. If it be asked, what then was the reason of reviving
the Act 1601. the reason was, because the Committee of Estates did the day
before the report made of the proceedings of the Commission) desire that the
Assembly would not proceed to the approbation of these proceedings before they
might be heard in these things that did relate to the Engagement (as we have
already shown) And the Assembly knowing that this was but a shift to gain time,
and to devide the Assembly, as they thought fit to call the Committee, if they
had any new Objections against the proceedings of the Commission, or only the
same Objections made by the Parliament or their Committees before; and upon the
Reply of the Committee of Estates, that they had just and material Exceptions,
besides any formerly made, to continue til the next day at 10. hours, and to
appoint that time for hearing these Exceptions; so for preventing of the like
inconveniences for time to come they thought fit to renew the Act 1601. But it
wonders me that in all the Authors Answer to this point, he does not so much as
once touch upon the parity of the reason brought by the Writer for making of
the Act in the Assembly 1601. and urging it in the Assembly 1651. there being
in both these Assemblies a scandal of defection upon the Commissioners of the
Kirk; upon the first, for taking upon them to give in Petitions to the Parl.
for votes in Parliament to the Ministers that should be provided to
Presbyteries, as representing the true Church of God, and being the Third
Estate of the Realm; upon the latter, for taking upon them to bring in the
Malignant party, which did not fall out (nor the like in any of the Assemblies
since the 38.) and therefore there is no reason to question the Constitution of
these Assemblies, for not proceeding according to that Rule, it neither being
urged, nor there being any cause to urge the same.

VINDICATION.
IN the next place to come to a more direct Answer: It is certain, That every
propounding of Exceptions or Alleadgance of scandals against persons, and
offering to prove them, is not sufficient to deprive them from being Members
of, or sitting in the General Assembly: for were it so, perverse and bold men
might return and disappoint the Church of all Genesis Assemblies for ever: this
the Writer of the late Paper acknowledges in answer to Objection 3. against the
present Argument and therefore he proceeds to qualify the Exception which may
be sufficient for that effect, by setting down three Conditions requisite in it,
wherein ^e speaks not altogether amiss, of which we shall make our use (we
hope) for our advantage, having added a little before for further clearing.
First then we humbly conceive, that as to the admitting to, or removing from
sitting in the General Assembly: of necessity there must be difference
acknowledged betwixt Exceptions made in Presbyteries or societies, by whom
Commissioners are chosen to a General Assembly, against the election of such or
such persons, nominated to be Commissioners, and the Exceptions made in the
Assembly it self against such as have been chosen by Societies from whence they
came without, question, exception or contradiction, and have a formal and
regular Commission; the former^l confess being followed, and being presented,
does suspend persons from being admitted to sit as Members in the Assembly,
until the exceptions be tried, because it is as yet under question whether they
be elected and commissionated, which must be known before they sit as men
clothed with authority, clothed to judge, but the other cannot always: I grant
it may and ought when (as the writer qualifies) first the exception for the
matter prima front appears to be relevant in Law, an evident, and undoubted
fault. Secondly, that for the truth of the fact in application to the persons
against whom it is made there be a scandal of some presumptions for it if
either of these be wanting (I cannot in any ways accord with the Writer in that
alternative which he adds in the second condition, or some offering to
instruct and make it out; suppose the matter be relevant clearly in Law; for
grant that, and still the abused consequence follows of a ready way made for
perverse and bold persons to disappoint the Kirk of all-Assemblies for ever) if
either (I say) of these be wanting, the exception is not relevant to remove
persons from sitting as Members in the Assembly before the Exception be tried
and judged; though it be true, that the Assembly being constitute, the
exception and grounds thereof ought to be tried with all convenient diligence
and expedition which was offered to the Protesters in the present case and
debate.

REVIEW.
I Do humbly conceive that the Author by distinguishing and differencing of
exceptions made in the Presbytery, and exceptions made in the Genesis Assembly,
and granting that the first does exclude from sitting in the Assembly, but not
the last, except where the exceptions prima front, at least are relevant in
Law, and that for the matter of fact, theirs being a scandal of some
presumptions, does but darken a clear business, because if we shall take the
same exceptions, and in the same case they have always ai^ke force to exclude
persons nominate to be Commissioners, whether they be first proponed in the
Presbytery at the time of the election, and afterward followed in the General
Assembly, or not at all proponed till it come to the Assembly: All exceptions
against Commissioners whether made in Presbyteries, or in the Assembly, may
conveniently be reduced to that compass, as to lie in somewhat that concerns
the Commission, as not being formal and regular, as the Author speaks; for if
we take a formal and regular Commission in all the causes and requisits of it,
it does comprehend all these things against which any exception does ly; but
for the better understanding of the business, it is to be considered, That
almost all exceptions against Commissioners ly in one of these, either because
they are Commissionated by these who have no power, or because the elections
was not free, or because the Commission does not contain its due powers; or
because the persons chosen are not capable to be Commissionated; now let us
take exceptions of any of these kinds, or of any other kind that may be
instanced besides these: have they not the same weight, being proponed primo
instanti, in the Assembly, as if they had been at first proponed in the
Presbytery, and afterward followed in the Assembly? Has not every member of
the Assembly liberty before the Constitution of the Assembly to propone
exceptions of all or any of these kinds, as well as any person in the
Presbytery, or coming from the Presbytery, and is not the Assembly without
reference, or appeal, or dissent, or Protestation made in the Presbytery primo
instanti a judge competent to take in and judge these exceptions being
proponed; The Author gives a difference, to wit, because exceptions of the
first kind being followed and presented, put under question whether they be
elected and commissionated, which must be known before they fit as men clothed
with Authority; but to pass that, it seems to be insinuate that the election
cannot be questioned in the Assembly, if it has not been que^tioned in the
Presbytery, do not exceptions of the last kind put in question whether they be
men capable of authority, and is it not as relevant to exclude a man from being
a judge, that he is not capable to receive authority, as that no authority has
been given him: That he is not capable to be elected, as that he is not
elected, that he is not rightly Commissionated, as that he is not
Commissionated at all; notwithstanding of this distinction made by the Author
(which for my part I see little or no less of in this matter) yet he grants
that exceptions, at least prima front do appear to be relevant in Law, and
concerning which there are scandalls of presumption as to the matter of fact,
are relevant to exclude persons from sitting in the Assembly, till they be
first tried and judged, and only denies the third branch, to wit, That it is
enough if there be some persons offering to make out what is alleged; in
order to which, I would first ask, whether upon supposall that at the time of
the election, some persons of the Presbytery offered to instruct, and because
of their not being heard there, had afterward come and offered it to the
Assembly before their constitution, would it then be a relevant exception to
exclude them from sitting till it should be first tried and judged? If he say
it would, then say I, it would also have been relevant, though it had not been
proponed until the Assembly, and if it be denied? I would know the reason of
the difference, if he say it would not have been relevant, then I desire it to
be considered, whether the offer of some persons undertaking instantly to
verify what they do allege; be not of as great weight as some presumptions
of the fact, let be a scandal of some presumptions of the fact, which is
granted by the Author to be sufficient, if the matter be relevant in Law: But
granting this, he cannot see but still the abused consequence follows, to wit,
the making a ready way for perverse and bold persons to disappoint the Church
of all Assemblies for ever. Upon supposall that there were some occasion given
hereby to fear such a thing, yet if another as evil a consequence do more
probably follow upon denying this: That is remeadiless corrupting of Assemblies
in their constitution; what shall be done in that case? That this consequence
will follow, especially where the exceptions do concern many, and leading
menare, is of a more common and universal influence, appears, because if these
persons be admitted to sit as members after the proponing of these exceptions,
before trial of them, there can be no regress to the removing of them
afterward upon that ground, unless we say that the Assembly may afterward
undo that which formerly they did approve, in for^ contradictorio, and that
those that were once found members, notwithstanding of these exceptions, yet
afterward by the same exceptions may be found no members; that the one
consequence does more probably follow then the other, appears not only from
this, that it is not ordinary for men of common sense and reason, not almost
for the most perverse and irrational men, to offer that to a Judicatory,
against their constituent members, which they have no probable hope to verify;
but also from the doolfull experience of this Church. When did it ever fall out
in the Church of Scotland, that a General Assembly was disappointed by
perverse and bold men, offering to prove exceptions relevant in Law, but falls
in fact against the constituent members thereof? who can give any instance
thereof, unless men will bring the Assembly 51. (which is to bring the thing in
question) for an instance: But upon the other hand, the admitting of men to sit
against whom such exceptions were, or might have been proponed, has been one
of the main causes of corruptions of Assemblies, and defection in this Church,
as is known in the time of the Prelates, and it is the duty of wise men to
provide most against that which ut plurimum is their danger: But as I do not
see how the last consequence by the Authors way, can be prevented, so I do not
see how the first consequence does follow, because these perverse and bold
persons who propones the exceptions, and offers to verify them instantly, does
not suppose that all the Meeting to whom they offer the exceptions are guilty;
for if they did suppose that they could not propone any exceptions to be tried
by them, but behoved primo instanti to decline them all as judges, reserving
the verification of their alleadgances to a judge competent. Now if they do
thus, the Assembly is not disappointed by perverse and bold persons, offering
to verify exceptions, because in this case they do not make any offer of
verification of any exception, before that Meeting; upon the other hand, if
they do acknowledge a part of them as persons competent, and fitly qualified to
try and discuss these exceptions which they offer to verify, then the persons
against whom they except being removed, and the exceptions taken in, and
cognosced upon, according to the verification offered, they are found either
true or false; if they be found false, the Assembly is not disappointed, but
may proceed to its Constitution, having found their members blameless, and
having stopped these men's mouths. If the exceptions be found true of such a
number, without whom the rest cannot make an Assembly, there is a great
advantage in stead of a feared disadvantage, that is the prevention of a
corrupt Meeting, constituting themselves in an Assembly; if but a fewer number,
the corrupt are removed, and the blameless are admitted, and the Assembly goes
on: Besides all this, it may by way of Commission, without any disadvantage to
the Protesters cause be yielded to the Author; that it is to be looked to that
the Persons offering to verify these exceptions be not perverse persons, but
men of a good report, and such as are known to walk honestly, and not to act
upon a Principle of malice or il-will against the persons whom the exceptions
do concern, all which was true in the Protesters cas^, they being sundry of
them members of that Meeting, to whom it was incumbent ex officio to propone
any exception consisting in their knowledge, and allowed to sit as Members of
the Assembly (a privilege not belonging to pervers men) and all of them men of
good report, and of a blameless conversation, and such as are known to be so
far from malinging the Commissioners, against whom they did except, that they
then had and still have them in estimation, and do love them as brethren. The
Author yields that the Assembly being constitute, the exception and grounds
thereof are to be tried with all convenient diligence and expedition, and
alleadges that this was offered to the Protesters in the present case and
debate. That such an offer was made, I shall not contradict; I believe it was
so, but to pass by that, even this which he himself thinks reasonable, though
offered, yet was not well performed, because most of the time that the Assembly
sat, was past before that exception and the grounds thereof were tried, these
men all the while, and for a good many days, sitting and voycing in all things
that past in the Assembly, even in these things that did concern the proponers
of the exception: The Protesters could not accept of this offer, not only
because it did suppose their sitting in the Assembly as members before the
trying of the exception, but also because the exception was not an exception
against one or some few particular persons in the case of some particular or
personal scandals, but an exception of common concernment to many in things
relating to the discharge of their trust in the Cause.

VINDICATION.
But says the writer in hand (both these were clear in the present case, to
wit, the exception made against the late Commissioners, it was relevant in
jure, if there be any relevancie why a man should not sit in the General
Assembly, this certainly is one that he has betrayed his former trust, has
made defection from the Covenant and Cause, and being isntrumental to carry on
a course of defection throughout the Kirk and Kingdom, and as to the truth of
the fact, in reference against whom the exception was made, all these did
concur a flagrant scandal, pregnant presumptions and persons in the
Judicatory, offering to instruct and verify what was alleged) by this the
Writer believes that he has cleared as with a Sun beam, and gained his point,
but we hope it shall be made to appear, that he has left the matter yet in the
mist, and gained never a white. Its true indeed that for Commissioners to
betray their trust, to make defection from the Covenant and Cause, etc. is in
jure a relevant cause to exclude any man from sitting in the General Assembly
as a member, and deserves more (as I doubt not but the Writer, and some others
intended the challenge of it against the Commissioners for more) but that the
Commissioners for the matter of fact had betrayed their trust, etc. There might
have been and was indeed by some spread a flagrant scandal, but there was no
flagrant scandal (these same who afterward accused them in the Assembly) I
mean presumptions objective by any thing they did though there was presumptions
enough in some men against them, and as for some persons offering to instruct
it, that is to little purpose to argue them scandallous, but the great sophism
in this whole discourse (whereinto I will not determine, whether out of
inanimadvertency or willingly the Writer has run) lies in this, that the main
and principal question de jure, which should have been cleared to the effect
that scandal might been justly charged upon the Commissioners, was not the
General or thesis, whether betraying of trust or making defection from the
Covenant and Cause, if it be such a fault as deserves exclusion from sitting
as a Member in a General Assembly, but this particular hypothesis, whether the
resolving that all persons in the land, excepting such as are notoriously etc.
maybe admitted to join in Arms for just and necessary defense of the Kingdom,
when otherwise there cannot be Forces had otherways in warrantable prudence
for defense of it, item resolving that the time of civil censures inflicted by
the Parliament upon persons accessory to former malignant courses, as the
sinful Engagement, might be dispensed with and taken off by the Parliament,
with this provision, that none should be admitted to places of power and trust,
but such as are qualified positively according to the rules of the Word of God,
in that case held in our Solemn Engagement, item ordaining Presbyteries to
proceed with persons formerly guilty of malignant courses, for admission of
them unto public repentance, in a way conform to the rules set down by the
General Assembly, for admitting of such upon testimonials from Presbyteries,
bearing satisfaction given by them conform to these rules; whether these things
(I say) contains defection from the Covenant and Cause, and consequently does
import betraying of trust in a Commission entrusted with the care of preserving
the Covenant and Cause; this is a question in jure, that the Writer should have
alleged to have been clear, I mean in the affirmative of it, ere he alleged
that there was upon the late Commissioners, a scandal of some presumptions,
that they had betrayed their trust, made defection from the Covenant and Cause;
but the Writer passes by this in silence. Now, though we might say, and are
able in the Lords strength to make it good, that these things contained not any
defection from the Covenant and Cause, yet now we shall say but this, that this
was not at the time of the Protestation clear to the Assembly, because as yet
there was not any particular determination thereanent in former General
Assemblies, wherefore for further clearing of this matter that we are upon, the
excluding the persons chosen by their Presbyteries without contradiction, to be
Commissioners from sitting as Members in the Assembly upon alledgance of
scandal against them, it should be observed by all honest and ingenuous
Readers, that when the imputation of scandal upon them depends upon a
particular hypothesis, which at least is questionable, and the very point of
controversy betwixt them and their accusers, is against all reason and equity
that they should be holden to be under a presumption of scandal, until that
hypothesis should be discussed and cleared, and therefore until that be done,
the Adversaries alleadgeance of scandal against them is to be held but a mere
alleadgeance, which by the Writers own confession is not a sufficient ground
whereupon to exclude persons from being admitted to sit as Members in a
General Assembly, until their cause be tried and judged.

REVIEW.
I Shall pass the Authors interludes, of the Writers believing that he has
cleared as with a Sun beam, and gained his point; and of that he doubts not but
that the Writer and some others did intend to challenge for more; and that
there was a flagrant slander spread by some; and that there was presumption
enough in some men; and come unto the discussing of that Sophisme (as he is
pleased to call it) whereinto he will not determine, whether out of
inanimadvertencie or willingly the Writer (as he alleadges) has run. But let
us hear what this Sophisme is; The main and principal question de jure (which
should have been cleared (says he) to the effect that scandal might have been
justly charged upon the Commissioners, was not the General or Thesis whether
betraying of trust, and making defection from the Covenant, etc. be such a
fault as deserves exclusion from sitting as a Member in a General Assembly;
but this particular Hypothesis, whether the resolving that all persons,
excepting such as are notoriously profane, etc. may be admitted to join in
Arms for just and necessary defense of the Kingdom, when otherwise there cannot
be Forces had in warrantable prudence, sufficient for the defense of it, etc.
If the right stating of the Hypothesis were the thing now directly in question,
it were needful to consider more largely of the Authors stating of it; but
because it comes in on the by, I shall only desire these few things to be
taken notice of in the state of the question which he gives; first, That it
does suppose something untrue, to wit, That Forces (in warrantable prudence)
sufficient for defense of the Kingdom, could not otherwise be had, unless all
persons in the Land (excepting these included in the exceptions set down in the
answer to the Quaere) were brought forth. If we may suppose, that Forces equal
in number to those who were invading the Land, were Forces sufficient in
warrantable prudence to defend the Land, that number, yea the double of it were
to be found be North Forth, (to speak nothing of other parts in the Land, out
of which there were also Leavies made both of Horse and Foot) though all the
persons in question for their Malignancie and dis-affection to the Cause, had
been laid aside. The Forces which by these Resolutions was leavied, were by the
acknowledgment of all who knew both the Armies as numerous, if not more
numerous than the Forces of the Adversaries, and yet the Leavies in many places
was but the fourth Fensible man, and in few or no places beyond the third;
whence it will follow, that either the two part of the persons in these places
where the Leavies were made, were such as did fall within the exceptions
contained in the Commissions Answer to the Quaere, or else that there was no
such necessity of an universal coming forth, as was allowed in that Answer,
and that therefore the necessity that was alleged for employing of these men
who were formerly excluded, was but merely pretended. Secondly, That there were
no such Items (as he adds) in the Commissions answer to the Quaere, which was
the foundation of the Public Resolutions, and the main thing in debate betwixt
the Commission and the opposites of these Public Resolutions; The first Item
resolving, that the time of Civil censures inflicted by the Parliament upon
persons accessorie to former Malignant courses, as the sinful Engagement might
be dispensed with and taken off by the Parliament, with this provision, That
none should be admitted to places of power and trust but such as are qualified
positively according to the rule of the Word of God in that case holden forth
in our Solemn Engagement, (To pass by the way of carrying of it, which was
palpable and obvious to the whole Land) was not added until the Forces were
almost completely leavied, and the bulk of the Malignant Party brought into
employment, and places of power and trust in the Army. The second Item,
ordaining Presbyteries to proceed with persons formerly guilty of malignant
courses, for admission of them into Public repentance, in a way conform to the
rules set down by the General Assembly, for admitting such upon testimonies
from Presbyteries, bearing satisfaction given by then, conform to these rules,
was not at all included in the Commissions answer, neither was there so much of
it as one word in that large Warning of the 7. of Jan. 1651. emitted by the
Commission for strengthening of that Answer, and when anything of that kind in
latter Warnings, Acts and Letters came to be added, was always holden forth
but as expedient, in order to the employing of these men, but never was pressed
in any of these Papers as a necessary duty to exclude all these from being
employed for defense of the Cause and Kingdom, who did not give evidence of
their repentance, according to the Acts of the General Assembly; nay, it could
not be so pressed, unless they had destroyed the foundation which they had
laid in their answer to the Quaere, and in that Warning. The truth is, what was
done in the matter of repentance, in order to the employing these men, was upon
the stumbling and out-crying of many against the Public Resolutions, as they
came first forth, and yet so as the first ground was always holden fast as to
the matter of judgment; and for practice, the business was hereby rather made
worse before the Lord, and to the point of guiltiness, then it was before; The
Commission not only ranversing former Acts made by themselves for excluding
these from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper who were in the rebellion after
Dumbar, till the next General Assembly, and making new Acts for receiving of
them; but receiving promiscuously such as came unto them, and by their example
teaching Presbyteries to do the like, by which was produced a fearful mocking
of the Ordinance of God in public Repentance, which no doubt has been one of
the provoking causes of the Lords wrath, to draw on these dreadful strokes
wherewith he has again smitten our Armies and our whole Land. But to the
hypothesis it self, granting to the Author that which he alleadges, that this
hypothesis was not clear at the time of the Protestation, because as yet there
was not any particular determination thereanent in former General Assemblies.
First, I doubt of that assertion of his, That when an imputation of scandal
depends upon a particular hypothesis which at least is questionable, and the
very point in controversy betwixt them and their accusers, it is against all
reason and equity, that they should be holden to be under a presumption of
scandal, until that particular hypothesis be discussed and cleared, and
therefore until that be done, the adversaries alleadgeance against them, is to
be held but as a mere alleadgeance, upon which they are not to be excluded from
sitting as Members in the Assembly, until their cause be judged and tried. I
suppose that some Commissioners to the Assembly should object against other
Commissioners that had committed murder, and should offer instantly to verify
the same, and desire that the persons against whom it is propounded should be
removed from sitting as Members until it migbt be tried; and they in the mean
time should say, that it was true, they had taken the life of such persons, but
in their own just and necessary defense, and therefore they could not be holden
under a scandal of murder, nor be thereupon removed from sitting in the
Assembly, till that particular Hypothesis were first determined: Would the
Author think it a wrong done to these persons, or rather a duty in reference to
the constitution of the Assembly to remove them t^^l the matter should be
cognosced upon? 2. I do affirm, That not only former Assemblies, but the
Assembly 1651. did remove Commissioners upon Exceptions propounded against
them, the grounds whereof was not yet clearly determined in Law; for instance,
The Commissioners of the first Election of the Presbytery of GLASGOVV, who
were laid aside (as for other Reasons, so also for this as one, in foro
controdictorio, sustained to be relevant) because of the Exception of the
opposing of Public Resolutions propounded against them. Next, Mr. Robert
Cauden Commissioner from the Presbytery of Dunce, was removed upon the
propounding of this exception, that there were but three or four Ministers in
that Presbytery to choose Commissioners, all the rest of the Churches thereof
being vacant; and can any Determination of this Kirk be produced, that three or
four Ministers in a Presbytery, where the rest of the Churches of that
Presbytery are vacant, cannot choose Commissioners to the General Assembly. 3. I
do upon the ground which the Author himself lays down, prove the carriage of
the Commissioners to have been scandalous, and such as did minister just ground
of excepting against them, why they should not sit as Members in the General
Assembly, till their carriage should be first tried: my Argument is this,
Whosoever Commissioners of the General Assembly being in their trust and
carriage in the Public Affairs of the Kirk limited and tied to proceed
according to Acts of former General Assemblies, does upon the account of the
discharge of their trust, declare many godly Ministers in the Church of
Scotland (till then of unquestionable integrity and faithfulness in the work of
GOD) to be Malignants and unfaithful in the cause, etc. and requires
Presbyteries to censure them, and to refer and cite them to the General
Assembly, because of their opposing of Resolutions taken and issued by them,
concerning which there is no particular Determination in any former Assembly:
They give scandal and offense in the discharge of their trust, and may justly
because thereof be excepted against, as not fit to sit in the General Assembly
as Members thereof, before their carriage be tried: But the Commissioners of
the Assembly 1651. who were Members of the Commission, were such; Ergo, etc.
The assumption is clear, the matters of fact contained therein being evident
from their own Papers, and that they were not warranted by any Act of the
Assembly so to do; is the Authors own ground. The first Proposition I prove
thus: Whosoever so far transgresses the bounds of their Commission, as upon the
account thereof, to declare many formerly faithful, to be Malignants,
unfaithful, and ordains them to be censured and cited, when they have no
warrant thereby so to do, gives scandal and offense in the discharge of their
trust: But the Commissioners by so doing did so far transgress the bounds of
their Commission, etc. Ergo what the Author will here answer I do not well
know; But I would feign have him to tell a reason why the Commission dealt so
sharply with many godly men, as to issue such Declarations and Warnings against
them, and to appoint them to be censured and cited, and to stir up the Civil
Magistrate against them, because of their opposing of Public Resolutions;
whilst, by his own acknowledgment, there was, as yet, no determination of the
Church in favors of these Resolutions, or against the opposers of them: I
thought it had been his mind that the Commission could not censure any, or
ordain any to be censured for opposing Resolutions of their own, not yet
determined nor approven in a General Assembly; and I would have him to give a
reason, why he accounts it against all equity that when the imputation of
scandal against the Commissioners depends upon a particular hypothesis, which
at least is questionable, and the very point of controversy betwixt them and
their accusers (as he calls them, though unjustly, because they, as Members of
the Assembly, were doing of that duty which is common and competent to every
Member of the Assembly, that is, to object what they know of scandal against
any other Member, that the Assembly might be constituted of persons rightly
qualified) they should be holden to be under a presumption of scandal until
that hypothesis be discussed and cleared, and why it should be agreeable to
equity and reason, that upon such a particular hypothesis, which at the least
is questionable, and the very point in controversy betwixt the Commission, and
many faithful men, and some Synods, and not a few Presbyteries in the Land,
should be holden not only to be under a presumption of scandal, but also such
as did deserve to be publicly declared against as Malignant and unfaithful,
and appointed to be censured and cited: It seems that whilst the Author reasons
thus about his hypothesis, that what he gains one way he loses another. I see
not how by his questionable hypothesis he can defend the equity of the
Commissions proceedings in their Warnings, Remonstrances, and Acts against
these who were unsatisfied with, and did oppose the Public Resolutions; and
when he shall do it, I hope his own grounds shall help the Protesters to prove
the equity and reason of removing Commissioners, even upon supposal that it was
but a questionable hypothesis. 4. I desire to know of the Author, by what
power, or in what capacity the Commission did look upon them, to determine this
questionable hypothesis: as a Commission they could not do it, because there is
no clause in their Commission that gives them power or warrant to determine any
point of Doctrine not formerly determined by the Church of Scotland; but their
Commission ties them in all things to walk according to former Determinations,
Acts and Constitutions of General Assemblies; and I think he will not say that
by virtue of any other power or capacity they either did it, or could do it.
The Author has by his own confession and ground, brought the Commission a
greater length in the exercise of their power, then ever the Genesis Assembly did
give to them, or (for any thing I know) did mean to give unto them, that is, To
determine points of Doctrine of great importance and consequence; as to the
security of Religion, and of the Cause and Covenant, not formerly determined by
this Church in any of her Genesis Assemblies, and upon these Determinations to
declare such as are unsatisfied with, and do oppose the same, not only to be
censurable, but also appoint them to be censured: I thought if any thing had
been the proper work of a Genesis Assembly this had been it. But more directly to
the point: I do affirm that this Hypothesis, the Public Resolutions determined
by the Commission of the General Assembly 1650. and issued to this Kirk in
their Public Warnings, Letters, Remonstrances etc. do contain and involve a
course of defection, was at the time of the Protestation clearly determined in
former General Assemblies, because the General Assemblies of this Kirk had
often before that time determined an association in Council and Arms with the
Malignant party, even in the ca^e of the defense of the Kingdom against
foreign invasion; to be sinful and unlawful, as will appear to any who shall
be pleased to read the Declarations, Warnings and causes of Humiliations, and
Public Papers of this Church these years past; and particularly the Solemn
Public Confession of Sins, and Engagement to Duties; and the Declarations and
Warnings issued by the General Assembly 1650 upon the English invading of this
Land: But these Resolution did involve such a Conjunction, because they did
involve a Conjunction with all the Subjects in the Land, excepting these few
included in the Exceptions contained in the Answer to the Quaere; but amongst
these was the very body and bulk of the Malignant party, who are by these
Resolutions allowed to be taken in and employed in the defense of the Kingdom,
without any repentance or forsaking of their malignant ways, as a thing
necessarily previous to the employing of them, and without which they could not
be employed. These were the things which the Protesters alleged and offered
to verify, not only the general, that the Commissioners had made defection
from the Cause and Covenant; but that these particular Resolutions concluded
and carried on by them, did involve a defection from the Cause and Covenant;
this (I say) they offered to instruct from former Acts of Assemblies speaking
clearly and positively there anent; which yet were refused to be heard by the
Meeting until they first should constitute themselves in an Assembly including
these Members, against which the Exception was propounded, a greater imputation
upon their freedom then they will easily wipe off.

VINDICATION.
IT is known that the Belgic Remonstrance in the Protestation against the
Synod of Dort alleged a matter of Scandal against the most part of the
Members thereof, viz. That they had made a Schism, and were Schismatic; The
point de jure in thesi, That Schism was a foul scandal, and such as made them
unfit to sit in that Judicatory as Members, I suppose was clear, and the
Remonstrants brought many plausible Presumptions that they were guilty of it
more plausible a great deal then this Writer alleadges against the late
Commissioners, they bring Particular instances of Facts, as keeping separated
Congregations and Presbyteries from the Remonstrant refusing to join in Prayers
or Sacraments with them: whereas our Writer alleadges nothing but Generals,
offense of many godly, pregnant presumptions, men undertaking to instruct, etc.
But here was a Question in Hypothesi, Whether it be a schism to keep separated
Congregations and Presbytries from, and to refuse to join in Prayers and
Sacraments with men that had departed in their doctrine from such and such
Articles of the Doctrine of that Reformed Kirk as the Remonstrants had done? And
therefore these Ministers accused by them, could not be held as under scandal
of Schism, or Presumption thereof, until the Points in Controversy were tried,
Whether the Remonstrants Tenants were Erroneous, and of what consequence and
importance they were; and until then, the Remonstrants Challenge of Schism
against them could not be reputed but a mere Alleadgance. I know other things
were Answered to this Reason of that Protestation by the foreign Divines from
the Members themselves in Controversy betwixt the one and the other; but it
may be evidently perceived in sundry of their judgments upon that Protestation
that they had all one Eye to this that we have said. Hence is it that of the
judicious Britain Divines in the second Branch of their Answer to that
Accusation, Constat haec Synodus ex personis nulla censura Ecclesiastica
notatis nullo publico aut legitimo judicio de Scismate convictis unquam aut
condemnatis Protestatio autem Remonstrantium facta in contrarium vim, latae
sententiae habere non debet. And that of the Nas^ean Divines Est veneranda and
sancta haec Synodus Congregata in eum finem ut doctrinam Remonstranium
propositam defensamque audiat, ad Dei verbum probe examinet de ejus veritate
vel falsitate pronunciet eousque igitur sententiam de scismate ejusque
authoribus suspendendam esse sentiamus. So say we, The many business of the
late General Assembly was to Hear, Try, and Examine the Proceedings and
Resolutions of the late Commissioners whether they were conform to the Word of
God, the Covenant, and Constitutions of this Kirk, and what could be said for,
or against them; and therefore until then was the matter of Defection objected
against them to be suspended. From all this that has be said, it is evident,
That seeing the Assembly was to go about the Trial of the Commissions
proceedings with all convenient expedition, it is no ways a relevant exception
against the Freedom and Constitution of the Assembly that they were admitted to
sit as Members notwithstanding the Exception that was alleged against their
sitting: And as for the same Objection, it was so far from sticking upon the
Protesters themselves at first, That Mr. Andrew Cant with the good-liking of
all of them, so far as could be perceived, did put Mr. Robert Blair, and Mr.
William Ret upon the List of Moderation; and sundry of them gave their Vote to
Mr. Robert Blair To be Moderator, Let be to fit as an ordinary Member of the
Assembly.

REVIEW.
THis Instance which the Author gives of the Belgic Remonstrance in their
Protestation against the Synod of Dort, is quite differing from our case in
several respects; First, The hypothesis that was in question betwixt the
Remonstrants and the Anti-Remonstrants, whom they desired to be removed out of
the Synod, as they were determined in the Confessions and Catechismes of the
Belgic and other Reformed Churches; So did the Anti-Remonstrants which were
Members of that Synod, adhere to these determinations, and were willing that
their Doctrine should be judged thereby; whereas the Remonstrances did decline
the Doctrine of the Belgic and Reformed Churches in their Catechismes and
Confessions, and do require it as one of the Conditions of the Synod, that
every man should give his oath, that he should have no regard in this business
to Confession or Catechism, but only to the Word of God, as appears from
their own words, which be these; Ideoque quisque sub fide juramenti coram Deo
sancte praestandi promittat se non respecturum in hoc negotio ad Confessionem
Catechismum aut ullum aliud humanae authoritis scriptum scriptoremque, sed ad
solam Scripturam quae pro sola fidei norma haebetur. But the Commissioners of
the General Assembly, as they do deny their resolutions to have been formerly
determined by this Church, and so upon the matter do handsomely decline to be
judged in these things by the Acts thereof, as not being quadrant to their
case: So do they cry out upon the opposers of Public Resolutions, for citing
these Acts so often against them, and for insisting so little upon the Word of
God, which they call for as the only rule whereby they will be judged in these
things, to be determined by former Assemblies, so were they most willing and
desirous, that they and the Commissioners in their judgments and actings upon
these things, should be judged thereby. Secondly, The Remonstrants did accuse
the Anti-Remonstrants of Schism, and as Schismatics most unjustly, of which
we shall give the reason in the words of the Britain Divines then in the
Synod; Quia ipsi remonstrantes recedendo a doctrina^ cemmuniter recepta,
initium and causatio hujus separationis extiterum, nam veritas habetur, quod a
primordio in Ecclesia aliqua traditum and receptum fuerit, erpor reputatur quod
postea inducitur, donec habito legitimo examine and Judicio contrarium
concludatur, quo etiam accedit quod illi dici non possunt a doctrina
Remonstrantium recessisse (quod in schismate praesupponendum est) qui illam
nunquam receperint sed ab initio sibi propositam rejecerint and condemnarint,
(words worthy of observation in order to the whole debate upon the Public
Resolutions) but these who did except against the sitting of the Commissioners
in the General Assembly, upon their making defection from the Cause and
Covenant, did it justly, because of their departing from the received Doctrine
of this Church, and the bringing in of new and strange Doctrine in that point
which the other offered to verify. Thirdly, The thing which the Remonstrants
did desire, was, That the Anti-Remonstrants should be removed wholly out of the
Synod, and be set to the Bar to answer as guilty of Schism, and as Parties
against the Remonstrants in this business; and hence are these sentencet of the
Britain and of the other Divines which are cited by the Author, But the thing
desired by these who excepted against the Commissioners, was not that they
should be removed wholly from the Assembly, or holden as guilty before trial,
but that their sitting in the Assembly might be suspended until it were tried
whether they were guilty, yea or not, and therefore the Author in citing and
expounding these sentences as he does, has not only done wrong to the
Protesters, but also to the constant received Order of this Church in the
constitution of her Assemblies, because if these sentences be exponed not only
against the removing wholly out of the Assembly, but also against the removing
of them for a time till they be tried, then have all the Assemblies of this
Church followed a wrong method, who did ordinarily upon exceptions proponed,
remove sundry of their number, though they were not as yet convicti nor
condemnati; and though they did suspend their sentence about removing of them
wholly, yet did they not suspend their sentence about removing them for a time,
until the exception should be tried, this being the very way established, and
constantly followed in all the free and lawful Assemblies of this Kirk for
keeping of her Assemblies pure. If the Author will not admit of the removing of
any till he be convict, and will have those Divines at Dort so to be exponed,
then let him tell us how he will reconcile them and our Church in this
particular; But it is easy by the answer which we have given, so to do; yea,
it is manifest from the whole scope of the business at Dort, that these Divines
speak in order to a total removal, which was never desired by the Protesters
in reference to the Commissioners. But let us turn the Schene a little, and
suppose that the Belgic Churches had chosen and sent to the Synod of Dort the
Remonstrants as their Commissioners, and that the Anti-Remonstrants had been
cited before the Synod, and had proponed as an exception against the
Remonstrants sitting in the Synod, that they were under a scandal of erroneous
and corrupt doctrine, which they did offer instanily to prove by comparing
their Doctrine with the Doctrine of the Belgic and Reformed Churches in their
Confessions and Catechismes, and thereupon desired that they might be removed
from sitting as Members in the Synod, until this exception were tried: Does
the Author think that the rest of the Synod, would or could in reason have
refused to grant this desire. From all these things I hope it does appear, that
notwithstanding of any thing answered by the Author, it is a relevant exception
against the freedom and right constitution of the Assembly, that they did
before trying of the Commissioners proceedings admit them to sit as Members of
the Assembly, notwithstanding of the exception of scandal upon them timeously
proponed and offered to be instructed. As for that which the Author says of
the Protesters suffering Mr. Andrew Cant with good liking of all of them so far
as could be perceived, to put Mr. Robert Blair and Mr. William Reate upon the
List to be Moderator, and that sundry of them gave their vote to Mr. Robert
Blair to be Moderator, let be to sit as an ordinary Member of the Assembly: I
answer, There were many of the Protesters who had no place to speak in making
of the L^st, as not being Members of the Meeting, and I believe, that these did
give no token either of their good or ill liking of what Mr. Andrew Cant did in
that particular: These who voted, though they would not refuse to vote in the
election of a Moderator, as they did afterward for some time in other
particulars, not yet despairing of some reasonable satisfaction to their desire
of adjourning the Assembly, and that they voted to Mr. Rob. Blair, as one of
the most pious, prudent, and peaceable of that way, there being none else upon
the List, yet did they vote with a Protestation; and though they had made no
Protestation, the most that it would prove, were this, that from loathnesse to
be heard, and hopes of satisfaction in a peaceable way, they went further with
the Assembly, then adhering strictly to their right they should have done, and
(I believe) a passionate desire of peace did also move Mr. Andrew Cant to put
these men upon the List, though afterward when it could not be obtained
without prejudice to the truth, he saw good cause to Protest against the
Assembly, as not free, and as unlawful.

VINDICATION.
AS for the particulars contained in the Writers large prosecution of this
Argument, we shall not need to insist much upon them, nor yet will we follow
him in Answers to his Objections, only somewhat briefly to some particulars;
and first what is alleged from the Assembly 1562, 80, 81. First it had been
good the Writer had set down the very Acts, related in their full and formar
words, that we might have seen, (for every one of us are not keepers of the
Registers, nor have Copies of them beside us) whether they meaned all persons
against whom any scandal was alleged, should be removed even before the
Assembly be constitute into a Judicatory, which was the thing pretended by the
Protesters, and because not done, was the ground of the quarrel; for we see
not this by any thing that is brought here. Secondly, we suppose it could not
be the mind of these Assemblies, that alleadgeance of scandals against
persons, should be a cause to remove them from sitting in that Assembly as
Members altogether, unless the scandal were clear and unquestionable, for the
point de jure, and so their appointment comes not home to our present case.
Next, for the grounds brought to prove, that the Commissioners were under
scandal of defection; first we grant that hearing of a common report may be a
ground of enquiry concerning a matter of scandal; but this was not refused
about the present case in question. Secondly, As for that cited from the 1.
Cor. 5, 1. that proceeding ordered there, was an order to present c^nsure; so
we may see that the Brother that writes this, is of that mind, that the
Commissioners upon that common report which he alleges to have been passing
upon them, should have been without more ado sentenced to censure, Good Sir,
hold your hand, for my part I cannot wonder enough that he should have
alleged from the Apostles words so generally without any qualification, that
common report may be a ground of present sentence against persons, as he does
here certainly this ought to have been well qualified and limited, otherwise a
wide door is opened to injustice and undoing the innocent and guiltless men;
for, cannot one or two, or some few ill tongues spread an ill report of very
honest men, and how easily shall that report become common, if that of the Poet
be true, as it is most certainly, Fama malum quo non aliud velocius ullum,
Mobilitate viget, v^resque acquirit eundo.


Therefore a common report that may be ground of so short and summary
proceeding, must be such as first is of a matter that in point de jure is clear
and unquestionably a scandal. Secondly, For the fact in a manner universal,
uncontrolled either by the party, or any that has best and nearest notice of
his actions, both were in that matter of the Corinthian, the matter was in jure
clearly a heinous crime, Incest, viz. having his fathers wife, and for the
fact, the Report that had come to Paul was such as we have said, omnino
anditur, as the Arab interpreter marked by Beza has it, passim and in tota
achaia; and another interpreter on the same place in Marlorat q.d. Sine
negatione sine tergiversatione non dubious est rumor sed res manifesta, passim
cum magno offendiculo publicata. In the present case in hand, both conditions
were wanting, the matter was not clear de jure in the main question of it; its
report was not so common as the contradiction thereof. 3. the offense and
stumbling of the godly, at the Proceeding of the Commissioners might have been,
and was indeed not given by these Proceedings of themselves, but caused and
born upon them by the information, and mis-representation of them, by some of
the same persons who are the alleadgers and accusers, and will be made good
before any impartial judge in the world, by a right information and discovery
of the Proceedings themselves, and of the practisings of the accusers against
them, and therefore this can be no argument of the Commissiones being under
scandal. 4. There were more testimonies by very far from Presbyteries and
Synods for them then against them, and these testimonies given against them
were really and in themselves scandals, tending most evidently to the exposing
of the Kingdom and Cause to the power of the invaders, whereof the invaders
themselves were very sensible, and for that cause were some of the testimonies
sooner put in their hands then communicate to the Commissioners, and they in
thankfulness was very careful to cause Print them. The third particular is a
poor man's argument, the begging of the very principal Question, and this very
begged Question is the only main sum of this whole Paper repeated over and
over again, this the Assembly was to try and examine, and till it was tried, a
nay-say was good enough answer to this Affirmative. 6. The Brethren who in the
Assembly offered to prove the alleadgance, were some of the same who had been
chief in spreading the testimonies, and bearing the offense upon the godly, and
had defamed the Commissioners, and were interessed to have had them noted as
under scandal; its against all equity that for the accusation of such they
should have been reputed scandalous, It was a word of Justice uttered by Haman
otherwise wicked: Julian the Appostate, Quis innocens esse poterit si accusare
sufficat.

REVIEW.
THe Author does handsomely wave many things in the Writers Paper that are of
importance, and I think his Readers will do him no wrong to take for granted in
that Paper, what he does not answer nor contradict: What is there set down
clearly and at large by the writer out of the Acts of the Genesis Assembly, he
turns off with a few words. 1. He tells us it had been good that the writer had
set down the very Acts which are cited in their full and formal words (because
every one are not keepers of the Registers, nor have not Coppies of them beside
them) that it might have been seen whether they mean that all persons against
whom any scandal is alleged, should be removed even before the Assembly be
Constitute into a Judicatory: To which I Reply, that these Acts even in the
full and formal words thereof were offered unto him and others at the Meeting
at S. Andrews under the Clerks hand, and they would not do so much as daigne
themselves to hear them, or to read them, or to collation them with the
Principle Registers which they then had in their power, but are now delivered
into the hands of the English, or dispersed, I know not whether. But are not
the citations for the matter clear and home to the point? If the Author think
there is wrong done in any of them; I believe if he will call to the Clerk of
the Assembly, he may yet find the means to get him the double of the very words
of the Acts asserted under his hand; It is true that every one is not a keeper
of the Registers, nor has Copies of them besides us: But shall they not
therefore be trusted who are keepers of them? or have Copies; It had been
belike good for the Church of Scotland, that the Author and some others who
have been so actively instrumental for the Public Resolutions had been keepers
of the Regi^ters, or ha^ had Copies of them beside them, then happily knowing
these things more perfectly they should not have walked so cross thereto in
their late Proceedings, nor have questioned them when they are cited. It is
certainly a thing blame worthy in not a few Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland,
that they are too great strange^s to the Acts of Assemblies of the Kirk, which
is a fault so much the greater, because there was no lack of opportunities
these 14. years to have acquainted themselves therewith, and to have had Copies
of them besides them: The Acts are veiled with no such mist as the Author would
cast upon them, either in the first particular which he mentions, whether they
mean all persons against whom any scandal is alleged should be removed even
before the Assembly be constitute; or in the second, that it cannot be meaned
by them that alleadgance of scandals against persons should be cause to remove,
unless the scandal were clear and unquestionable, for the point de jure, they
speak clear and home, that at the entry of every Assembly their first work shall
be the trying and purging of all their Members, and men are appointed to be
charged in Gods behalf to declare their Conscience tonthing their Doctrine,
life and execution of then Officers, if therein they be scandalous; and that
any to whose charge any thing is laid ought to be removed out of the Assembly,
ti^l this cause be tried, and that if he be convict, he may have no voice
until the Kirk receive satisfaction. Here is no distinction of questionable
hypothesis, nor allowance to him to sit before the trial of his cause, but
when any other of the Commissioners to the Assembly charges him with any thing,
in his Doctrine, life, or execution of his Office, he is to be removed till it
be tried: But says the Author, it is not clear that this is to be done before
the Assembly be constitute into a Judicatory, which was the thing pretended by
the Protesters, and because not done, was the cause of this quarrel. This is
clear that they are to be removed immediately after they are charged with any
thing, until they be tried, which was the thing refused by the Assembly) and
therefore if the objection be moved before the constitution, they are to remove
before the constitution of the Assembly. 2. It is clear that this is appointed
to be their first work, at the entry of every Assembly, and if any would say,
That the Assembly must first enter by being constitute, I give these two things
for clearing, that it is meaned before the constitution: First, because this
Act and practice which concerns the purging of the Assembly from scandalous
persons is previous in time to the Act and practice of choosing a Moderator, as
will be obvious to any who looks upon the Records: 2. Because it has been the
constant practice in all the Assemblies of this Kirk from the very first
Reformation, to propone exceptions of scandal, and to remove persons upon
proponing thereof, before the choice of a Moderator, as also obvious in the
mind^s almost of every Assembly, and cannot but be known to the Author, and all
such as have been frequenting our Assemblies, and observing the order thereof,
and therefore the Author does but seek out inventions to darken clear and
manifest truths: To the answer which he brings to the grounds of proof brought
by the Writer, as to the matter of scandal, I return these replies: That by
granting that the hearing of a common report may be a ground of enquiry, if he
deal heartily therein, according to the meaning of the place cited by the
Author, Deuteronomy. 13.14. It must be of diligent enquiry, for so it is expressed
there, Chapter 17. v. 4. and 19.18. which imports that it should be an enquiry
without delay, but this was refused about the present case in question, and
notwithstanding of this common report, and objecting the scandal thereof in
the Assembly, the enquiry was delayed until the Assembly was constitute, and
no more diligence was used in it, then if there had been no such report at all;
he does injury to the Writer, by laboring to bear upon him, and upon others,
that he is of that mind, that the Commission upon that common report which he
alleadges to have been passing upon them, should have been without more ado
sentenced to censure. The utmost that the Writer all along has pleaded in this
has been, that the Commissioners ought to have been removed till their
carriage were tried: But two grounds he lays to prove this to have been the
Writers mind: 1. That the Proceeding ordered, 1 Cor. 5. 5. was in order to
present censure, 2. That he alleges the Apostles words so general, without
any qualification, I shall not stand upon the first, but the Writer not being
upon the handling of that point, what common report, or how qualified, was
needful to be a ground of sentence, but only showing that sometimes common
report may be so; he thought it enough to cite the Apostles words without
qualifying of them, and if the Author will make this a ground of challenge
against the Writer, he may make it against the Apostle himself, for he sets
down the words generally, without any such qualification, and the Writer does
not extend them to any other case then that of which the Apostle is treating:
He only says that common report is made a ground of proceeding against the
incestuous Corinthian, without making any application of it to the Commissions
case, or saying that it should also be a ground of proceeding against them; if
it be asked to what purpose then it was cited, the answer is very obvious and
clear from the whole drift of the Writers discourse, which is to show that the
persons objected against, were under a scandal, and this he does: 1. By
showing that there was a hearsay and common report of it, upon which the
Scriptures lays so much weight, as sometimes to make it a ground of trial: As
Deuteronomy. 13. Sometimes a ground of proceeding, as 1 Cor. 5. It is true that the
Scriptures does not make every hearsay and common report a ground to account
men under a scandal, or to proceed against them, otherwise honest men indeed
might be in an ill condition, but the qualification of these things are to be
drawn from the circumstances of the facts whereunto they are applied, and of
these we have spoken in the fact of the Commissioners, and therefore the Author
in this particular does but trouble himself and others without cause, yet must
I say, that though for any thing I know or can be collected from the writers
words, the utmost that he pleads for being a delay of their admission to be
members of the Assembly, which could not be accounted a sentence against them,
more than against others, who were delayed upon exceptions to be admitted, that
his meaning was not, That the common report that past upon the Commissioners,
was sufficient to be a ground of present sentence against them, yet when the
Author has streached himself to the utmost, h^ ha^h proven no good advocate
for the Commissioners to exeem them from present censures: He tells us that a
common report that may be a ground of so short and summary proceeding, must be
such as first is of a matter that ^n point de jure is clea^y and unquestionably
a scandal. 2. For the fact in a manner universal^y uncontrolled, e^^her by the
p^^ty, or any that has best or nearest notice of his actions; in the present
case (says he) both ^hese cases were wanting, the matter was not clear de jure
in the main question of it, its report was not so common as the contradiction
of it; But I say, the matter was clear de jure in the main question of it
determined verbatim in former Acts of Assemblies; and the fact was not at all
controverted or controlled by any, but taken with both by the party, and known
and acknowledged by these that had best and nearest notice of their actions:
The quality of the fact might be controverted, whether right or wrong, which is
a point belonging to the jus of it, but the fact it self was not contradicted,
either by the Commissioners, or any other, and his omnino auditur; and passim
and in tota achaia etc. and res manifesta passim cum magno offenaiculo
publicata, as to the matter of fact was true of that which the Commissione^s
had done; the offense and stumbling of the godly was not causeless and born
upon them by the misinformation and mis-representation of the Commissioners
proceedings, by some of the same persons who are the alleadgers; the Author
there does a double wrong to the godly in Scotland: 1. That he makes them to
have stumbled without a cause, whereas there was very real causes of stumbling
given unto them, both in regard of that which was done, and for the manner of
doing. That which was done was, employing of the whole Body of the Land
promiscuously (a very few persons being excepted) amongst whom were many
Malignant and disaffected men, who had been formerly excluded, and with whom
the Lords people in the Land had learned from the Word of God, and from the
constant tenor of the doctrine of all the faithful Ministers of this Church,
to keep a distance as to employing them in the defense of the Cause and
Kingdom; As this was a main occasion of contriving the League and Covenant, so
is there a special Article therein relating thereto; the breach whereof was
one of the special and main sins confessed in the Solemn acknowledgment of
(...), and the contrary duty, one of the main things to which we engage our
selves in our solemn Engagement. It is true, that the Commission having done
this, and finding many to stumble, did afterward find out some evasions and
distinctions to save their own credit: but the contradiction between their
resolutions and former principles and proceedings, was prima front so palpable
and obvious, that men of all sorts, both well-affected and ill-affected, did
see it so, as the one did rejoice, and the other mourn; the Godly did not more
stumble then the Malignant and profane were glad, and both the one and the
other as to the generality of them, did then, and do at this day agree in this,
That the public Resolutions are not agreeable to former principles and
proceedings. There was cause of stumbling given also to the Godly in regard of
the Commissioners their manner of proceeding, because a Quorum very few more of
the Commission did lay the foundation of these resolutions, not only without
the rest of their number, but also without advertising a great many of them:
And so many being absent and not advertised, they did in a day or two determine
that most grave case, which had often before that time been determined in the
negative, and sent abroad their Determinations to Presbyteries, requiring
obedience, and upon men's offering the grounds of their dis-satisfaction, and
professing their adherence thereto, till satisfaction should be given, did
issue such Warnings and Acts as we have formerly spoken of. I appeal the Author
himself, whether at the time of the giving of the Answer to the Quaere, it was
not known to the Commission, that many godly and faithful Ministers and
Professors in the Land, were averse from employing these men in the Army, and
had great scruples about it; and that many Members of the Commission, who were
not to be despised, had often professed their dislike of it; albeit the matter
had been lawful, surely there was great precipitancy and rashness in the first
Resolution, which is acknowledged by sober men, even of the same judgment; but
such was the zeal and forwardness of the Court, and of some Parliament men on
the one hand, and the readiness of sundry of the Commission (who had before
that time declared themselves for that way) on the other hand to hearken unto
them, and the faintness of any that were present to oppose it, that hold was
taken of the opportunity to do it quovis modo, whereby real offense was given
to the godly in the Land; Si quid importuna levitate, aut lascivia, aut
temeritate non ordine nec suo loco facias quo imperiti imbecillesque
offendantur, scandalum abs te datum dicetur, quoniam tua culpa factum fuit; ut
ejusmodi offensio suscitaretur, ac omnino scandalum in re aliqua datum dicitur
cujus culpa ab Autore rei ipsus profecta est: are the words of a great Divine,
speaking of scandals very applicable to this case. Next he does a wrong in
making them so ignorant, simple and facile as in these things to be led away,
with the mis-representations and mis-informations of others: Many of the most
judicious decerning Christians in the Land were stumbled at the Commissions
proceedings, upon the first hearing of them; and before the Protesters did make
either right or wrong Representations of them: I will not say but they were
confirmed in the dislike of these proceedings, by conference with the
Protesters and other Ministers of that judgment, as they also were mutually
edified and confirmed by them, but that all the stumbling and dislike did arise
from the suggestions and practisings of some or all of the same persons, whom
the Author calls the Alleadgers and Accusers, is not true; yea, I dare say,
that albeit all the Protesters, and all the Ministers in Scotland had been of
one mind with the Commission in the matter the Public Resolutions, yet many of
the godly in Scotland would have stumbled thereat: It would have been in this
case as in the business of the Treaty, wherewith many of the godly in Scotland
were dissatisfied, notwithstanding that there seemed to be a harmony and
consent amongst the Ministry there anent. That there were more Testimonies for
the Commissioners from Presbeteries and Synods then were against them is no
great wonder; multitudes commonly inclining to the worst side in the day of
tentation, and they being but few who keep their garments pure: yet did not the
strength of the Testimonies upon the one hand or on the other ly in the number
of the Witnesses, but upon the truth and clearness of their Evidence: what was
testified by the opposers of the Commission was confirmed by clear Evidence
from the constant Doctrine of this Church grounded upon the Word of God, and
set down in the Covenant and Solemn Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to
Duties, and Public Warnings, Declarations, Remonstrances, etc. but not so much
as a tittle of these for Evidence on the other side. It is acknowledged by the
Author himself, That the Public Resolutions was a case not formerly determined
by any Public Judgment of this Kirk, and if so there could no evidence be
brought from the Doctrine of this Church for clearing and confirming of these
Resolutions. The Author is pleased to call the Testimonies given against the
Public Resolutions, really and in themselves Scandals, tending most evidently
to the exposing of the Kingdom and of the Cause to the power of the Invaders:
He was pleased a little above to call them Slanders, and so all the godly in
Scotland who speak against these Resolutions are upon his account Slanderers.
But these Testimonies, were neither Slanders, nor Scandals, they did contain
real Truths, and were Duties to which the givers of them were obliged in a
backsliding time for delivering of their own souls, and preserving the Cause of
God from being overborn with a spate of defection; and though in many things
they acknowledge themselves to be amongst the most sinful, yet in this they
were so far from exposing of the Kingdom and Cause to the power of the
Invaders, that they hold themselves bound to bless the Lord while they live who
gave them mercy to be kept free from that carnal sinful course that did provoke
the Lord to give so great a stroke to the Kingdom and the Cause, in those
dreadful Rods wherewith he has smitten us since these Resolutions. What was
the sense that the Invaders themselves had of this, I do not well know, but
this it is like enough they rejoiced in our Divisions: But it was not the
opposing of the Public Resolutions wherein they did directly rejoice: Nothing
from usward would have been matter of so great terror to them, as to have seen
us unanimous in separating from, and opposing of all Malignant Interests: As it
was upon the other hand, the matter of their confidence and joy, that their
former quarrel seemed to be justified by the Public Resolutions, which did so
much strengthen and promove Malignant Interests, if we may believe their own
Expressions and Letters, written from some of the Chief of them to the Higher
Powers in England. He tells us, That for that cause some of the Testimonies were
sooner put into their hands, then communicated to the Commissioners; and they
in thankfulness were very thankful, to cause print them. This is a crimination
of no small consequence to the Name and Fame of these of whom the Author speaks;
and therefore if he had dealt heartily and spoken truth upon persuasion and
evidence, he should have told us of what Testimonies he meaned, and who it was
that put them into their hands, that these men might have been noted and known.
I doubt not but if he could have done it, he would have done it, seeing he
spares not to put Imputations upon men by Name and Surname, when he conceives
himself to have any ground for it, and that it will bring any advantage to his
cause. But whilst he would fain render some of the opposers of the Public
Resolutions, odious, and yet has not ground upon which he can confidently do
it: He speaks so indefinitly some of the Testimonies were put etc. neither
telling us what Testimonies, nor by whom they were put in their hands, that if
he be challenged for it, he may have a shift to make his retreit. But I doubt
that this way of defaming his neighbors will be found straight before God. If I
may conjecture of what Testimonies he speaks, it seems to be the Letter of the
Presbytery of Sterling, for that, so far as I know, was the only Testimony
printed by the English; and if he mean of that, he speaks untruly, when he
says, that it was sooner put into their hands, then sent unto the
Commissioners; I can confidently assure him, and all others, that it was sent
unto the Commissioners, before any copy of it was given, or sent to any who
were not Members of the Presbytery; and I can as confidently say, That none of
these had any hand directly or indirectly in conveying that Letter to the
English: The man amongst them who was most slandered has given me warrant to
say, (and I trust that he will abide by it) That his conscience does bear him
record, that he was inocent of that, as of all things of that kind; and that to
this day he knows not how that Letter was put into their hands, unless it was
by occasion of intercepting the Copy thereof by the English, with Mr. Andrew
Ker the Clerk of the Commission; his Servant who was sent over the Water to
some of his friends unto Edinburgh from Perth immediately after that Meeting of
the Commission, to which the Letter of the Presbytery of Sterling was sent.
That the English did print these Testimonies is no great wonder: it is very
like that they would print any thing that did hold forth our defection, and
owning of the Malignant Interest. The Third Particular is in the Authors
Judgment, a poor man's Argument: But poor men, through mercy, oft-times obtains
more sollid discoveries of Divine Truths in a day of tentation, then the
Learned and the Rich do: Neither is it yet a begging of the principal Question,
because what was offerred in this, was offered to be instructed out of the
Registers; and they who made the offer were Members of the Assembly, who in
conscience and duty, and by the Acts of the Assembly which relate to the
Constitution thereof (as we have already shown) were bound to declare their
conscience, touching others who were called to be Constituent Members thereof
in their Doctrine, Life and execution of their Office; and for the point of
that Interest it is the same thing that was objected by the Remonstrants
against the Anti-remonstrants at the Synod of Dort; and by the Prelates in their
Declinator 1638. To which we return no other Answer, but that of the Brittane
Divines at Dort, Veritas communis Ecclesiae Thesaurus est, nec potest ullo
pacto fieri peculium, singularum personarum, Dei and Ecclesiae Publica causa
est non sua cujusque quae in Synodis agitur. In the close of this discourse, as
all along, he speaks of these who moved this Exception, as of the Commissioners
Accusers, and cites that of Julian, Si accusasse sufficiat quis inocens erit.
But that they weee not Accusers, neither yet to be called so, I have already
showed. Why should they be esteemed, or called Accusers more then others,
propounding Exceptions against Constituent Members of the Assembly? neither was
it ever desired that the propounding of the Exception should be taken for a
verification of it; or to speak in the Authors language, That the accusing of
them should be the holding of them for guilty; but only that the Commissioners
should be removed from sitting as Members in the Assembly, till the Exception
were tried; and therefore that of Julian can have no place in this case.

VINDICATION.
IT is alleged by the Writer, That the same Assembly at St. Andrews upon the
like exception and objection, others were removed from sitting as Members, as
Blacketer and others, because the scandal of their accession to the unlawful
Engagement was not sufficiently purged, etc. and he would have any man in the
world give a reason why these were excluded, and not others, against whom were
as relevant, yea more revelant exception. Answer. I think any man in the world
that has common sense informed of both Cases may give a reason, and may
perceive that the Writer has been rash when he has wrote these words upon the
like Exception and as relevant, yea more relevant Exception: For Blacketer and
others: 1. Their scandal was clear in the Law. 2. They had been convicted of
the fact. yea, 3. They had been actually censured, and were yet lying under the
Censure. 4. A part of their censure was exclusion from being members of Kirk
Judicatories. 5. There was one express Act of a Genesis Assembly, That they
should not be liberat from that censure, nor be capable to be members of any
inferior Kirk-Judicature until their satisfaction should be first notified
unto, and approven by a Genesis Assembly. Now let any man in the world tell me if
the exception against the one and the other was alike, or if there was more
relevancy in the exception against the Commissioners, then in the exception
against these for their Exclusion from being Members: the matter of Exception
might happily (considered in abstracto,) be of greater importance, but we speak
now of the exception in relation to Persons and Circumstances as it is to have
effect or not, to have effect upon the Judge for Censuring and Noting, or not
Censuring and Noting the Persons.

REVIEW.
THe Author in Answering the Instance concerning Blacketer, seems to himself to
have gotten a great advantage of the Writer his rashness; but though his
advantage were as great as he takes it to be, in that particular, it would not
better his Cause, because multitudes of Instances can be given from time to
time in the Genesis Assembly of this Church, of removing persons upon exceptions
of scandal before any conviction of the Fact, or censure for the same; yea, in
the same Assembly 1651 several persons were laid aside upon exceptions before
any legal conviction or sentence past upon the Fact, as the Commissioners of
some Presbyteries, who were protested against because of opposing public
Resolutions: And the Commissioners of the presbytery of Dunse, whose Case was
not clear in Law, neither yet legally found true as to the matter of Fact. But
let us see what it is that he has gained in the Instance concerning Blaketer.
It is agreed on al hands, That Blaketer upon proponing of one Exception against
him, was removed: the matter then is, To give a Reason why he was excluded, and
the Commissioners admitted notwithstanding of exceptions proponed also against
them. The Writer says, No man in the world can give a Reason of it, seeing the
exceptions on the one hand were as relevant (if not more relevant) then the
other. This the Author opposes, That they were not so relevant: and he brings
5. Differences for proving of it, which may be all reduced to these Two, 1 That
the scandal of the one Case was clear in Law, but so was not the other. 2 That
for matter of Fact, there was Conviction and Censure put upon it; but to pass
that the Assembly did not give any the least intimation or hint that in
excluding the one, and admitting the other, they found these Differences of
which the Author speaks. I Answer, The scandal of the Commissioners Case was
also clear in Law, unless we will deny that the same Laws which condemned
conjunction with, and employing of Malignants for the time past, do also
condemn them for the time to come, Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis:
But Duties commanded by God, and Covenanted by us; and Sins prohibited by God,
and engaged against by us, are the same in the year 1648, and in the year 1651.
As to the matter of Fact, if Blaketer was before that time particularly
convicted and censured, this is indeed eatenus, a difference betwixt the one
Case and the other: but the Author has alleged that, without bringing any
evidence of the truth of it, and I believe it shall be hard for him to do it.
Some who are Members of that Presbytery, whom I have enquired cocerning this
business, do profess, That they do not remember of any formal censure past
upon him for his subscribing the band 1648, neither did the Assembly at St.
Andrews at the time of the proponing of that Exception, give any intimation
that they did remove him, because he had been already convicted and censured
for that Fact: But the Exception being relevant in Law, and the Fact as to his
particular concernment therein being alleged by one of the Meeting, the
Assembly did lay him aside until it should be tried, without further enquiring
of the business at that time.

VINDICATION.
WE said we would not follow the several Objections wherewith the Writer meets,
nor need we; only there is something in the Answer to the Fourth Objection,
whereto we shall speak a word: It being Objected by the Writer himself, or some
other (it matters not by whom) That the Exception could not be taken into
consideration until the Judicatory was first constituted, and a Moderator
chosen, and that therefore it was not against the freedom of the Assembly, that
they did refuse to fall upon it before that was done: He Replies so, as he
would seem to fasten sundry points of iniquity upon the Assemblies carriage in
this matter; if says he, the Assembly had immediately upon the choosing of the
Moderator fallen upon the trial of that exception, and removed these excepted
against, it would not have loosed, though it might have lessened the strength
of the Argument, but even after that they were allowed to sit as Members, and
to be Judges in every thing else, many days together, before the Judging of
that Exception: nay, which is more, before their proceedings were approven,
they sat as Judges to give vote and sentence upon the very Exception proponed
against themselves, the same being one of the principal reasons of the
Protestation which were condemned before these prcoeedings were approven: yet
that would not, says he, loosed the difficulty, because the thing desired was
not the trial and discussing of the exception instantly before the choosing of
the Moderator, but that (as it was done to other Members excepted against) so
these should be laid aside until the Assembly were constituted and take the
same into Consideration: This the Assembly peremptorily refused, and permitted
them to vote which was in effect to reject the exception, either as not
relevant, or as false both which were absurd, the former would have been to
contradict clear light of Reason: the latter had been to approve the
proceedings before their trial or hearing what was to be said for verifying the
exception: Answer, we stay not much upon the objection, but especially what is
said here to render the proceedings of the Assembly odious like in this matter.
1. The Assemb. immediately after the choosing of the Moderator, did fall upon the
trial of that exception, having set a part a Comittee for that very purpose to
go about it with all diligence, and that the Comissioners did in the mean time
sit and vote in the Assem. in other matters for sundry days, was, because the
Assembly could not adjourn and be idle all the time that that Committee was to
be upon that business, and it had been the constant practice of the preceding
Assemblies since 38. to admit the preceding Commissioners to sit and vote in
other matters during the time that their proceedings were under trial and
examination: yea, even when exception has been made against them as is evident
in the Assembly 48. Secondly in that which is brought in as an absurdity with a
quod majus est, that before their proceedings was allowed, the Commissioners
did sit as Judges upon the very Objection proponed against themselves, it being
the principal reason of the Protestation, that contains a a gross Paralogism
which can beguile none but such as are too simple, and too willing to be
beguiled, since in judging the Protestation (whereof a reason was the exception
against the Commissioners sitting in the Genesis Assembly before the trial of
their Proceedings, Judgment was not given upon the truth or falsehood of the
thing contained in it, whether the proceedings of the Commissioners were right
or wrong, contained in them a course of defection or not: but only, Whether the
Assembly refusing to remove the Commissioners when it was alleged against
them in the way that it was alleged, and before the alleadgance was tried did
any thing contrary to the duty and freedom of the Assembly, or if the
Protesters did wrong the Assembly in declyning it upon that ground, now for the
Commissioners sitting and voting as Judges in this matter, was no irregularity,
or else the Assembly 48. also was irregular, wherein as the Protesters may well
remember, the Commissioners voted as well as other Members upon the relevancy
of the exception given in by the Parliament against themselves; and the truth
is, Their voting in that matter of the Protestation, being no other thing but
that which we have said was no prejudice for their advantage in the matter of
their proceedings for their alleadgance of their carrying on in their
proceedings a course of defection at the time and in the manner that it was
alleged, might have been found a non-relevant exception, for their removal
from being members before the trial of their proceedings, and consequently the
refusing to admit it as an Exception to that effect a non-relevant ground of
Protesting against the Assembly, and yet happily afterward their proceedings
might be judged to be such indeed as they were alleged to be, without any
crossing and contradiction between the one Act and the other.

REVIEW.
THE Author studies in this place to take off some things alleged by the
Writer in order to the proceedings of the Assembly, but let us see how he does
it: 1. It is yielded that notwithstanding of the Exception proponed against the
Commissioners, they were not only admitted to sit and Vote in the choice of a
Moderator, but also afterward in every thing that came before the Assembly for
many days together before the trying of their proceedings; yea, that before
that trial they sat as Judges to give vote and sentence upon the Protestation,
one Reason whereof was the Assemblies refusing to remove them, till the
Exception proponed against them should be discussed; for the defense whereof he
alleadges, 1 That the Assembly immediately after the choice of the Moderator,
did fall upon the trial of that Exception: but as that was not enough, because
by the Acts of the Assembly already cited, and constant practice of Assemblies
in the matter of Exceptions; Persons excepted against, are immediately to be
laid aside till the matter be tried: So was it also defective in this, That
during the time of the trial, the Commissioners did sit and Vote in the
Assembly. 2 He says, That the Assembly could not adjourn and be idle all the
time that the Committee was to be on that business: but could not the Assembly
have sitten, and be employed about business, unless these who were Members of
the Commission did sit and vote in such business as came before them? were they
Members sine quibus non? 3. He alleadges, That it had been the practice of the
preceding Assemblies since 38. But neither does that loose the difficulty,
because in none of these Assemblies was there any Exception proponed against
the Commissioners, nor was there cause for it: He is mistaken in his Instance
in the Assembly 48, as we have already cleared, and therefore he must seek for
another Defense. But in that which follows, he plays the acurate Logician, and
finds the Writer in a gross Paralogism, which he thinks can beguile none but
these, who are too simple, and too willing to be beguiled. I would not
willingly be beguiled, yet I must profess my self so simple, that when I have
put on the Authors Spectacles, and looked throw them as attentively as I can, I
cannot discover the Paralogism nor the Sophistry thereof, but to me it still
seems to be a plain and convincing Argument. The Writer alleadges, That the
Members of the Commission sat as Judges to give Vote and Sentence upon the
Exception proponed against themselves before the Assembly did judge of their
proceedings; and he brings this for proof of his alleadgance, That before any
Judgment given anent their proceedings, they sat as Judges upon the
Protestation, whereof the rejecting of that Exception was a special Reason. To
this the Author Answers, That it is a Paralogism because the thing which was
judged, was not the truth or falsehood of the thing contained in it; to wit,
Whether the Commissioners proceedings were right, or wrong; but only whether
the Assembly refusing to remove the Commissioners when this Exception was
alleged against them, in the way that it was alleged, and before the
alleadgance was tried, did any thing contrary to the freedom and duty of the
Assembly, or if the Protesters did wrong the Assembly in declining it upon that
ground, I shall not now trouble my self to prove that by judging of that Reason
of the Protestation they did judge of the proceedings of the Commissioners
right or wrong, because this will fall in afterward, more directly in the last
Argument; but taking what the Author grants, I Reason thus, Who so judges of
the relevancy, or non-relevancy of one Exception in order to their own sitting,
or not sitting Judges of one Exception against themselves: But the
Commissioners before the approving of their proceedings did judge of the
relevancy, or etc. Ergo, the First Proposition is clear, and may be illustrated
by Instances. I suppose the Author in one assembly should object against some
men that they cannot sit as Members till they be tried, because they are
Papists, or Murderers, or Adulterers, which he offers to instruct, and when
the Assembly comes to judge upon the point and exception relevant or not
relevant to remove these men, if these men themselves should sit and Vote in
this question, were not this to admit them to be Judges of one Exception
proponed against themselves. The Second Proposition is the Authors own grant,
for besides other things to that purpose, he says, The Commissioners sitting
and Voting as Judges in this matter was no irregularity, or else the Assembly
48 was also irregular, wherein the Protesters may well remember the
Commissioners voted as well as other Members upon the relevancy of the
Exception given in by the Parliament against themselves: Well then, the
Commissioners in the Assembly, 51. did Vote upon the relevancy of the Exception
given in against themselves. If any would deny it, it is easy to prove it
thus, Who so were admitted to judge of the relevancy or non-relevancy of the
grounds of the Protestation were admitted to judge of the relevancy or
non-relevancy of that Exception, because it was one of the main grounds of the
Protestation: But the Members of the Commission, etc. Ergo. The Author, or some
others, will happily think, What need all this? it is granted that it was so, and
the thing that is denied is, That they did not sit as Judges to give sentence
of the right or wrong of their own proceedings: Perhaps ere all be done, we
shall also find them doing that, but if it be granted, That they did judge of
the relevancy of that Exception, all is granted that was alleged by the
Writer, to wit, That they sat as Judges to give Vote and Sentence upon the
very Exception proponed against themselves; and so he has committed no
Paralogism, but by the Authors own concession which he cannot get avoided: It
is proved that the writer did allege which was not that they did judge of the
right or wrong contained in the exception (though that also might have been
alleged) but that they did judge of the Exception proponed against
themselves, before any judgment given by the Assembly upon their proceedings;
and now its granted that they did judge of the relevancy thereof, as to their
sitting or not sitting; and was not this to be both Judge and Party? who then
is guilty of the Paralogism the Writer or the Author? The Writer says, They
were admitted to judge of the Exception proponed against themselves; and this
by the Authors grant has a real truth in it, because they were admitted to
judge the relevancy or irrelevancy of it as to their sitting or not sitting
(yea the Commissioners did oftener then once judge this before their proceedings
were judged by the Assembly. First, They judged it at the first proponing and
rejecting thereof by the Assembly before the choice of the Moderator, for none
of them were then removed, neither was less weight laid upon what was spoken by
them, as to the rejecting of that Exception then upon what was spoken by any
other Member of the Assembly who was not questioned. 2 They judged it in
judging of the Protestaion, at which time they did approve of what the Assembly
had formerly done in rejecting of it, and did condemn the Proposers of it, as
doing wrong to urge it, and to decline the Assembly thereupon. The Author
says, They were not admitted to sit as Judges in that Exception, because they
did not judge of the right or wrong of the things contained therein; and this is
a non-sequitur, because they were admitted to judge of the relevancy thereof
which did as well concern them, the exception being proponed against
themselves, as the right or wrong of the things contained therein. But he
alleges, 1 That this was no irregularity, or else the Assembly 48. was as
irregular. He does often make his retreat upon that Assembly when he is
straited, but it will allow him no help in this particular, because there was no
such exception proponed nor judged in that Assembly. 2 He alleadges, That their
Voting in that matter of the Protestation, being no other thing then that which
he has said, was no prejudice or advantage in the matter of their proceedings,
because the alleadgance of their carrying on in their proceedings a course of
defection at the time, and in the manner that it was alleged might have been
found one un-relevant exception for their removal from being Members before the
trial of their proceedings, and consequently the refusing to admit it as one
exception to that effect an un-relevant ground of Exception against the
Assembly, and yet happily afterward their proceedings might have been judged to
be such as they were alleged to be without any Crossing or Contradiction
betwixt the one Act and the other. I suppose that all were true which is here
spoken of, yet what is this to prove that they did not at all judge of the
exceptions proponed against themselves: It is already yielded, That they did
judge of it as to the irrelevancy of it for removing of them before trial. But
that the determining of the one, did prejudice the determination of the other:
Yea, go far to determine it, I prove First thus, If so be the exception as to
the relevancy thereof did include many Points de Jure, the clearing and
discussing whereof did belong most intimately and essentially to the verifying
or falsifying of the exception upon the matter itself; then did the determining
of the one, bring a prejudice to the determination of the other, if not go far
to determine: But the First is true, and agreeable to the Authors own words in
the next Page of his Vindication. Ergo, also the last, The Conexion seems clear
because the determining of the relevancy or irrelevancy of the exception did
also determine these point^ de Jure, which did belong most intimatly and
essentially to the verifying or falsifying of the exception upon the matter; as
for Instance, the Assemblies determining that the Protesters objecting against
the Commissioners that their Resolutions did involve a course of defection was
not a relevant exception whereupon to remove them, was also a determining of
this Point de jure, that these Resolutions did not involve a course of
defection, this did indeed belong most intimately and essentially to the
falsifying of the exception upon the matter, and so to the prejudging of the
determination; yea, to the determining of the other question: Or more clearly
thus, If so be the exception could not be determined as relevant or irrelevant
till the questionable hypothesis of the public Resolutions was first
determined, then did the determining of the relevancy or irrelevancy of the
exception involve a determination of the right or wrong of their Resolutions:
But the First is manifest from the Authors own words, where he says, That the
main and principal question de jure which should have been cleared that that
scandal might have been charged upon the Commissioners was the particular
hypothesis, if this scandal could not be charged upon the Commissioners, but by
clearing of this hypothesis: How could the Commissioners be cleared of that
scandal, and found such as were fit to sit in the Assembly notwithstanding of
the exception thereof proponed against them without clearing that hypothesis.
In these things I deal fairly and heartily so far as my light reaches, without
detaining the truth in unrighteousness, or seeking to darken or pervert the
same so far as my understanding does reach; and I think I may refer it to the
Consciences of these who Condemn the Protestation, and that exception as
irrelevant if they would have so done but upon persuasion that the
Commissioners proceedings were right, and if after the Vote of Condemning the
Protestation, they could notwithstanding thereof have also condemned their
Proceedings.

VINDICATION.
THirdly, Howsoever it be true, that the thing which was desired by the
Protesters in the entry of the Assembly, before the choice of the Moderator was
not expressly and formally the trial and discussion of the Exception given
against the Commissioners, as to the truth alleged therein, 1. Whether the
Commissioners indeed had carried on a course of defection from the Covenant and
Cause, but that the Commissioners should have been laid aside until the
Assembly had been constituted to take that into consideration; yet certain it
is that they having been chosen to have been Commissioners unquestionably by
the Society they came from (and that some of them by the express vote and
consent of some of the Protesters themselves, as Mr. Robert Blaire in the
Presbytery, and Mr. James Wood in the University of St. Andrews, by Mr. Samuel
Rutherford) and having a formal Commission, and so the Exception being personal
(as in relation to that Assembly) and not propounded against their being
Commissioners: But now in the Assembly conveened of necessity, the Exception
behoved to have been tried and discussed and judged, as to the relevancy of it,
for their present removing, and laid aside until it should be tried and
discussed as to the truth of the thing contained in it; for the Writer himself
confesses, that every Exception upon alleadgance of Scandal is not a sufficient
and relevant ground to that effect: Now there was a great Question about that
Exception, namely, concerning a Question de jure belonging to it, as we have
before cleared. Now tell me, if the Assembly before the Election of the
Moderator, and before it was constitute into a Judicatory, could try, discuss,
and judge that Question (which of necessity it behoved to do, ere it could be
clear about the relevancy of their exception for their removing, because, as
the Writer grants, the exception relevant to remove persons, must be prima
front, clear in the Law) Certainly it could not, and therefore of necessity
they could not upon that exception be removed before the election of the
Moderator, and constitution of the Judicatory; As for their Members excepted
against, and thereupon removed, there was a wide difference, the exceptions
against them were, as to the relevancy for their removing, in cases every way
clear and determined before, in so far as was requisite for that, to wit,
Protestations in Presbyteries against their election, standing censures
excluding them from all Kirk Judicatories unrepealed. So we see the exception
wherewith the Writer meets here, may stand good with a little exception, viz.
That no Exception questionable could be discussed until the Judicatory were
first constitute, and the Moderator chosen; and therefore it makes nothing
against the freedom of the late Assembly, that before it was constitute, and
the Moderator chosen, the Commissioners were not removed upon the Exception
made against them, because the relevancy of the Exception was questionable in
many points de jure belonging thereunto, being controverted, at least not prima
front: The clearing and discussing thereof did belong most intimatly and
essentially to the verifying or falsifying of the Exception upon the matter it
self, wherewith a meeting not constitute into a Judicatory could not meddle. 4.
As to the Writers Dilemma in the end, That the refusing to remove the
Commissioners upon the Exception made against them, was to determine, either
that the Exception was not relevant or that it was false, and both were absurd.
We Answer, it was indeed to be determined that it was not relevant in that
circumstance of time when it was proponed for removing them off the Assembly;
and whereas he says this were to contradict clear reason, this is but a naked
assertion, and we have cleared the contrary.

REVIEW.
FIrst, I desire it to be considered, That he yields that the thing which was
desired by the Protesters at the entry of the Assembly, before the choice of
the Moderator, was not expressly and formally (yea, nor implicitly nor
materially) the trial and discussing of the Exception, as to the truth
alleged therein; but that the Commissioners should have been laid aside until
the Assembly had been constitute to take the same into consideration, which
clears 2. things formerly asserted, 1. That it was not desired that any
sentence should be past upon the Commissioners by the Assembly, before the
constitution thereof. 2. That the Commissioners (before the judging of their
proceedings by the Assembly) did judge and give sentence upon the relevancy of
a desire made against themselves, to wit, That they might be removed till their
proceedings should be first judged. 3. I deny not but this Exception behoved to
have been tried and discussed, as to the relevancy of it, so far as was needful
for laying aside of the Commissioners till further trial: and to that which the
Author says, That it could not be done because it did involve a great Question
de jure, which was yet questionable, and not clear; whereas it is yielded by
the Writer, that the Exception ought to be relevant in Law, at least such as
prima front seems relevant. I answer. That that Question was ( prima front)
relevant in Law, because prima front agreeable to the very letter of the Law.
I may appeal to himself, if the Public Resolutions do not prima front seem to
be contrary to many things formerly expressed in the Acts, Constitutions and
Public Papers of this Church; and though he would deny it, yet sure I am all
indifferent men will acknowledge it, that whatsoever may be in the matter it
self, yet there is at least a seeming contrariety betwixt these: I shall
remember him of the speech of a judicious and godly man (whose words are cited
by himself in his Vindication in another case) who in a Conference at St.
Andrews about the Public Resolutions, when the Acts, Warnings and Declarations
of the Assembly was objected against these Resolutions, said, I confess that
you have the Sough of the Assemblies for you: yea, in this thing that prima
front it seems to be so, we have the universal consent almost of the whole
Land, as well these who are for the Public Resolutions, as those who are
against them; else what meant that which was so frequent in the mouths of some
of the Commission, and many others the last year, who when Acts of Assemblies
and Public Papers were objected, said, That some men who had hand in the
penning of these Papers had upon design foisted in many things in them, which
they now made use of against the Public Resolutions; and that which was then,
and is still frequenaly spoken by the generality of malignant and disaffected
men in the Land, to wit, The Church is now come to us, and we are not gone to
them. These things are more palpable and better known then that they can with
any color of truth be denied. But 3. Was not the Exception propounded by the
Protesters against the Commissioners discussed by the Assembly, as to the
relevancy thereof, before the election of the Moderator? Did they not, after
the propounding of it, suffer the Commissioners to sit? which they could not
have done unless they had rejected it: And how could they reject it, unless
they had found it irrelevant? Was not the allowing of the Commissioners to sit,
after propounding of, and debate upon that Exception, as real a judging of the
irrelevancy thereof, as the removing of other Commissioners upon Exceptions
propounded against them, was a judging of those Exceptions to be relevant? yea,
does not he himself expressly say in answer to the Writers Dilemma, That it was
indeed to be determined, that it was not relevant in that circumstance of time?
4. I see not to what purpose it is, that he tells us, That the election of
Commissioners was not questioned in their Presbyteries, that some of the
Protesters voted and consented to the choosing of them: That they had a formal
Commission, and that the Exception was personal as to that Assembly, and not
propounded against their being Commissioners, but now in the Assembly
conveened: What is all this as to the keeping of the Assembly from considering
and discussing of the same? Were there not others who had a formal and
uncontroverted Commission, not objected against in the Presbytery, who yet upon
personal exceptions propounded in the Assembly, were removed til these
exceptions should be discussed and tried? And was it not as free to propound
personal exceptions in the Assembly as in the Presbytery? and being propounded
there, were they not of as great weight as if propounded els-where? And ought
not the Assembly to have taken them in consideration? Were they not primo
instanti, the proper Judges of them, as well as the Presbytery? That some of
the Commissioners were chosen by express vote and consent of some of the
Protesters themselves, as Mr. Robert Blaire in the Presbytery of St. Andrews,
Mr. James Wood in the University of St. Andrews by Mr. Sam. Rutherford; it may
be true, Mr. Sam. Rutherford his desire of Peace and testifying of respect to
these men being such as it is, together with the hopes that he had of their
being instrumental to accommodate things in a right way at the Assembly: but
that hinders not why the Protesters might not warrantably propound the
Exception at the Assembly. Another branch is, That the Assembly had not as yet
chosen their Moderator, and was not yet constitute, and therefore could not
discuss that question, etc. But not to repeat that they did discuss the
relevancy of other Exceptions, yea, of that same that was propounded against
the Commissioners, as to their sitting, or not sitting till the matter should
be further tried: It is to be considered, that if controverted Commissions and
Members, upon Exceptions propounded against them, be laid aside till trial,
which has always been the custom of the Assemblies of this Church. It is not
so very material whether the full discussing of the Exception be before the
choosing of the Moderator or after it; there are practices and instances of both
ways; some Assemblies first discussing the controverted Commissions and
Members, and then choosing the Moderator; others laying aside these things til
the Moderator be first chosen; and then immediately before the doing of any
thing else, falling upon the discussing of them; though it seems the most
regular way, that the controverted Commissions and Members be laid aside, the
uncontroverted ones being a competent number, should proceed to the choice of a
Moderator, and thereafter, before the doing of any thing else, put that to a
point which concerns the rest of their constituent Members. In the case now in
question both were desired, either to discuss the Exception, as to the truth or
falsehood of the alleadgance before the choosing of a Moderator; or else, to lay
aside the Commissioners, and to do it immediately thereafter: but both were
refused, which was the more considerable, because the Exception propounded
against them, was but merely personal, or upon personal or particular scandals,
but of more common concernment, and in things relating to the Cause, as breach
of Public Trust, defection from the Cause and Covenant, which did require
consideration before the admitting these persons. I would ask the Author this
one Question: Upon supposal that the Assembly after the Commissioners sitting
and voting therein many days; yea, even in the condemning of the Protestation,
and citing of the Protesters; should have found their proceedings to involve a
course of defection from the Cause and Covenant, and thereupon have removed and
censured them: Could Beholders have looked upon this as a handsome way of
proceeding, that they would not take into consideration an Exception deserving
such things, when it was first propounded unto them, and offered to be
instructed; but would judge the Exception irrelevant, censure others for
protesting, because of refusing to accept of it: admit the Commisioners to be
fellow-Judges in condemning that Protestation and after all this find these
Commisioners guilty of the thing alleged in that same very Exception when
ffrst proponed, and remove and censure them upon it; Are things handsome? or do
they well cohere? or can a tender eye look upon them without offense? How much
fairer had it been, first to remove them, and presently or immediately after
the choice of the Moderator, to discuss the Exception? There is more danger to
the Cause, and offense to God and his People in rash admiting such as are
guilty, then in cautious delaying even of innocent persons when legally
challenged: If innocent, they may afterward be admitted with more honor and
respect; but if guilty, either they shall be continued Members with much
detriment to the cause, or else shall be casten out with more shame both to
themselves and to the Assembly, who at first refused to lay them aside till they
were tried. Because the Author saw that an objection might be moved against
what he has said from the Assemblies removing of other Members who were
excepted against before the choice of the Moderator; therefore for preventing
of it he tells us, that there was a wide difference, because the exceptions
against them, were as to their relevancie for their removing, in cases every
way clear and determined before, in so far as was requisite for that, to wit,
Protestations in Presbyteries against their election, standing censures,
excluding them from all Church-Judicatories unrepealed: To which I return these
particulars; First, Some even before the choice of the Moderator were removed
upon exceptions against whose elections there was no Protestation, and who were
under no standing censure either of one kind or another, to wit, Mr. Robert
Canden Commissioner from the Presbytery of Dunce, who was removed upon this
exception, that that Presbytery could not choose Commissioners, being so few in
number as they were; here was no Protestation, the man under no censure, yea
nor the ground of the exception clear and unquestionable in Law as to any act
of any former Assembly, only prima front, it seemed relevant that two or
three could not choose; therefore was be thereupon removed, though afterward,
(if my information hold) he was again (as seems upon not finding the exception
not relevant) admitted. Secondly, Neither was a Protestation against the
election, sufficient to make it clear upon the Authors grounds. I suppose that
it had been alleged, that the ground of the Protestation was not clear, but
questionable; as to the relevancy of it by his ground such a Protestation
against the election, would not have been enough to lay the Commissioners
aside, till the matter had been tried. To come nearer the case, let us suppose
that some of the opposers of Public Resolutions had in the Presbytery or in
the Universite of St. Andrews protested against the election of the
Commissioners there, upon this ground, that these who were elected, were
isntrumental in the Public Resolutions, will the Author, say, this had been
sufficient to lay these Commissioners aside, from sitting as Members of the
Assembly, till the matter had been tried: If so, why then was not the proponing
of that exception in the Assembly against all these who were Members of the
Commission, and had hand in these Resolutions, sufficient to lay them aside:
Os, if that be denied, I would desire to know a reason of the difference, if it
be said, that all the Commissions which were laid aside, because of
Protestations against them, were such as were protested against upon clear and
unquestionable grounds. I answer, that it was not so, as appears by the
instance already given, to which I add another, to let see what partiality of
proceeding there was in these things even upon the Authors own grounds: Did not
the Assembly lay aside the Commission of these who were first chosen by the
Presbytery of Glasgow upon this ground, that the Commissioners were opposers of
the Public Resolutions, which (if we may believe the Author) was yet a
questionable hypothesis in jure. Thirdly, I suppose that in these cases which
(he says) were clear, any persons interested should have objected, that the
Protestation was false and fictitious; or that their being uoder censure, was a
mere alleadgance, or that the ground of the Protestation and censure was an
hypothesis not yet determined in jure. I ask him, whether the Assembly in these
cases, was to admit the persons, or to lay aside the Commissions, and remove
the persons, till the matter should be tried? If he say, they were not to be
admitted, then they behoved to refuse to hear all Parties interessed, and to
take a questionable case for clear and granted, before they hear and try which
seems to be absurd. If he say, that they were to fall upon the discussing of
questions and objections hinc inde, then I pray you, why not one questionable
exception as well as another? Why not the questionable exception proponed
against the Commissioners, as well as the questionable exception contained in
the Protestation against the election in Presbyteries? And if he say, that it
was not absurd to lay aside the persons, notwithstanding of their alleging
that the Protestation was false and fictitious, etc. but that the matter being
questionable, they were to be laid aside till it should be tried and cleared;
then why not also the Commissioners upon the exception of a scandal of
defection proponed against them notwithstanding of their denying thereof, and
asserting the contrary, seeing (by his own ground) the matter was not yet clear
to the Assembly, either upon the one hand or the other. By these things we may
see what will come of the Authors conclusion, to wit, that no exception
questionable could be discussed, until the Judicatory were first constituted,
and the Moderator chosen; and that therefore it makes nothing against the
freedom of the late Assembly, that before it was constituted, and the Moderator
chosen, that the Commissioners were not removed upon the exception made against
them, because the relevancy of the exception was questionable in many things de
jure, belonging thereunto, being controverted at least, and not prima front
clear; the clearing and discussing whereof, did belong most intimately and
essentially to the verifying or falsifying of the exception upon the matter it
self; whereupon the Meeting not constitute into a Judicatory could not meddle;
upon which Conclusion I ask these questions. First, If no exception
questionable could be discussed until the Judicatory were constitute, and the
Moderator chosen, then, how did the Meeting at St. Andrews before the
constituting of the Judicatory, and choosing of the Moderator, reject the
exception proponed by the Protesters against the Commissioners, as not relevant
to remove them, was not that to discuss an exception questionable, as to the
relevancie of being a ground of removing or not removing. Secondly, I ask how
it came to pass that they removed the Commissioners of Glasgow upon the
exception of their opposing the Public Resolutions, was not that also to
discuss an exception questionable, as to the relevancie of being a ground, as
before. Thirdly, If the relevancy of the exceptions was questionable in many
points De jure belonging thereunto, the clearing and discussing whereof, did
belong most intimatly and essentially to the verifying or falsifying of the
matter it self, how could it be judged and discussed as to the relevancy
thereof, and yet this be no prejudice to a judgment upon the matter contained
therein? or how could the exception be found non-relevant, and the
Commissioners proceedings be also found to involve a course of defection.
Fourthly, If the clearing and discussing of that exception had such connection
with the matter of the Commissioners proceedings that first when it was
proponed, it could not be judged before the judging of the questionable
hypothesis of their proceedings, how came it to pass that the Assembly
afterward did judge it, and admitted the Commissioners themselves to sit as
judges therein before the judging of that hypothesis. Fifthly, If the exception
was so questionable in jure, how could the Assembly before the discussing of
the Commissioners proceedings, so severely reprove the dissenters for proponing
of it, and condemn the Protestation founded thereupon. These things to my weak
understanding seems inconsistent, and such as ordinary Readers cannot
reconcile. In the last place he labors to give answer to the writers Dilemma,
to wit, at the refusing to remove the Commissioners upon the exception proponed
against them, was to determine either that the exception was not relevant, or
it was false, but both were absurd. His answer is, That it was indeed to be
determined, that it was not relevant in that circumstance of time when it was
proponed for removing of them from the Assembly, and this he denies to have
been absurd or to contradict clear reason, and tells us, that he has cleared
the contrary. When I had read these words again and again, I could not with any
persuasion, fall upon the Authors meaning, his way of expression being dubious,
he says, it was to be determined, which makes me suspect that he may happily
point at the determination which was afterward made by the Assembly, when the
relevancy of that exception was condemned in the Protestation: If that be his
meaning, he has but covered himself with fig tree leaves, because the
rejecting of it was the actual determining of the irrelevancy of it, as to the
being a ground of removing the Commissioners out of the Assembly; but if he
mean that it was determined not relevant when proponed; I would know why it was
not relevant in that circumstance of time, whether because of the matter
contained therein, as not being relevant in jure, or because the Assembly could
not judge thereof, the Moderator not being yet chosen, nor the Assembly
constituted? If he say, not relevant upon the matter at that circumstance of
time, then this non-relevancie was either because the exception was founded
upon things done by the Commissioners agreeable to the Law, and so no matter of
exception, but matter or commendation, or else because founded upon things
questionable, and yet not determined in jure: Not the first, because that had
been to determine the Commissioners proceedings to be agreeable to the Law
before the trying of them: Not the last, because that had been to determine,
that the proceedings of the Commissioners were not yet determined by the
doctrine of the Church of Scotland, before the trying and judging of these
proceedings. The truth is, the Assembly gave no such judgment upon that
exception, nor no such reason of their rejecting of it; but the only reason
that was spoken of, and did carry the business in the Assembly was, that the
Assembly could not fall upon the trial of it, the Moderator not yet being
chosen, and the Assembly not constituted; and if this be the Authors meaning,
when he says it waa indeed to be determined not relevant in that circumstance
of time when it was proponed. It is no answer at all; First, Because the
Assembly could have judged thereof before the choosing of the Moderator, other
Assemblies several times having so done; and this same Assembly did judge the
relevancy of sundry exceptions, as to the laying aside of the Commissioners;
yea the irrelevancy of this same exception by the Authors own concession in
these very words; by what authority they could judge the relevancy of one
exception, by the same authority they might have judged the relevancy of
another, and by what authority they could reject it as irrelevant, by the same
authority they could have discussed it relevant or not relevant. Secondly,
Because it was also urged after the choosing of the Moderator, but was not then
condescended unto; but the Commissioners against whom it was proponed, were
still allowed to sit as Members of the Assembly, without having any regard to
that exception, which gave probable grounds to think, that the rejecting of it
before the choice of a Moderator upon that pretext, was but a mere pretext:
because a Moderator now being chosen, it was still rejected; and therefore
rejected as simpliciter irrelevant, without reference to any circumstance of
time, as appears by condemning it in the Protestation. But it may happily be
said, That by the circumstance of time when it was proponed, he means all the
intervall of time that was between the proponing of it, and the judging of the
Commissioners proceedings. If so it was relevant in no circumstance of time, it
being proponed merely in order to their removal for that intervall of time,
when their proceedings were now approven and condemned, it would have been very
impertinent and useless to propone any such exception. He would let his
Readers know in what circumstance of time it was relevant. As to the removing
of the Commissioners before judging of their proceedings; for if any
circumstance of that time it was relevant, the Assembly did wrong in not
finding it to be so; and if in no circumstance of that time it was relevant as
to that effect, he does but triffle with his Readers in telling them that it
was not relevant in that circumstance of time it was proponed, it had been
candide and fair dealing to have told them that it was relevant in no
circumstance of that time, or not relevant at all, but this would not have been
well digested.

VINDICATION.
SO we shall now pass to the next ground of the Protestation, what is
contained in the Writer of the second Paper his replies to the first objection;
or other Objections is either nothing to the infringing of our answer, or
cleared by what has been said already, only this much I add, These men who he
says has fallen from their steadfastness, and made defection, at which others
could not wink, because of their former integrity; some of them have been
steadfast in the truth and Cause of God, when others that accuses them knew it
not: some of them we doubt not will by Gods grace give testimony of their
steadfastness in it in their suffering condition, when some that accuses them
may be will be found, or already are tampering about and devising glosses how
they may with some color shuffell themselves loose from Articles of the
Covenant; And the Writer shall never be able to instance that they have made
defection in their late Resolutions, either from any Article of the Covenant,
or from the truth of Religion in any head thereof, Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government received and established in this Kirk, or from
practicing according to that truth, I mean by any Public allowed practice or
course contrary thereunto, for as for person all failings add short commings in
particular duties, they know themselves to be but men compassed with a body of
death, and we doubt not but they are as far from Pharisaicall justifying of
themselves as others. As to the other partculars mentioned in the Protestation
'that they stirred up the Civil Magistrate against such as were unsatisfied
with their Proceedings; Its contrary to truth as shall be cleared afterward,
there alleged prelimitating of the Assembly, is cleared before, as it formed
and enlarged in the second Paper. The Meeting at St. Andrews had no liberty nor
freedom to vote in matters agitated and debated therein, which is alleged to
be manifest from the particulars, that the Commission had in their
Remonstrances and Papers stirred up the Civil Magistrate against such as did
differ from them in their Resolutions and Proceedings, and accordingly the
Magistrate had confined some Ministers; viz. those of Sterline upon that
account, and had made Laws and Acts of Parliament ordaining all such to be
proceeded against as enemies to Religion and the Kingdom. 2. The Commissioners
had by their Warnings and Papers to Presbyteries, stirred up the Presbyteries
to censure such, and cite them to the General Assembly, and accordingly the
Presbyteries did cite many of them. 3. The Kings Majesty wrote to the Assembly
a Letter moving and stirring them up to punish and censure those who differed
from the Public Resolutions, and the Commissioner did second the same by his
speech to the Assembly, intimating, that he hoped such a course should be taken
with them, that all others may be deterred from the like thereafter, none of
these things that Meeeing did resent, but were silent thereat, and afterward
did approve. I Answer, To the first particular, it is contrary to the truth
that the Commission had in their Papers stirred up the Civil Magistrate
against such as did differ from them about their Resolutions and Proceedings;
the Writer if he would have dealt ingenuously and faithfully, either with the
Commissioners, or with such as was to read this Paper, he should have instanced
or produced some, at least one or two (for he speaks as if this had been done
in sundry Papers) passages out of their Papers bearing this. 2. That the Civil
Magistrate did confine (as the Writer terms, their requiring them to stay at
Perth for a space, until their business should be cognosced) the Ministers of
Sterlin being stirred up thereunto by the Commissioners, and that he confined
them upon that account, viz. That they differed from the Public Resolutions,
both are affirmed wrongfully and contrary to the truth, the real story of that
business was this in sum: The Committee being informed that the Ministers of
Sterlin were in their public Doctrine, and otherwise practicing the hindering
of the Leavies, according to Public Resolutions, and moving sundry persons in
the Garrison of Sterlin to quite and desert their charge, which tended to the
endangering of the whole Land, and particularly that Garrison, the only Bulwark
of the whole land under God, the Committee represented the matter to the
Commission of the General Assembly, showing them that they could not permit
that Garrison to be endangered, yet in regard they were Ministers, they desired
the Commission to take a dealing with them first, and required the Commission
to make report to them what effect their dealing with their brethren should
take. The Commissioners accordingly having met at St. Andrews, and having had a
Conference with these Brethren, and having found by their own acknowledgment
that in Public they had practiced against Public Resolutions, and in private
had given to some persons as they said, asking their advice, resolution that it
was not lawful to continue in that service being in such a conjunction as the
Resolutions carried: First they labored to give them satisfaction about their
resolutions, but having effectuated nothing therein, at last they dealt with
them in most earnestness and tenderness, both publicly and privately to give
assurance that they would not proceed to do or speak any thing in their Public
Doctrine, or in private to the hindering and obstructing of the Leavies which
were going on, according to the Resolutions; or might tend to the moving of any
of the Garrison to quite their charge, which they refused peremptorily to do,
and so departed home from the Conference: The Commission having sent a mere
report and narration; rei gestae, without more or less to the Committee of
Estates, according as they were required; the Committee required these Brethren
by Letter to come to Perth, that some course might be taken in relation to them
for securing the Garrison of Sterlin from danger. The Brethren having come to
Perth, but not at the first Diet appointed to them, the Committee required them
to attend at Perth, or at Dundee, until the Kings return from Aberdeen, that
there might be a more full Meeting of the Committee, a great part of the most
considerable members thereof being with him, after the Kings return, a Paper
being sent in by the Committee of Estates to the Commission of the Kirk,
requiring the Commissions advice as about other Passages that had passed
between them and these Brethren, what should be done with these Brethren in
relation to securing of the Garrison of Sterline, the Commission declared in
their answer as to this, they could not take upon them to determine, the matter
being merely Civil, but that they desired and expected that the Committee would
deal with them in tenderness and respect, as being Ministers of the Gospel;
this is the truth of the business in sum, so it does appear evidently, that
the Civil Magistrate did confine them (as they are so pleased to term it)
neither being stirred up thereunto by the Commissioners, nor yet upon their
account of mere difference from the Commission, and Public Resolutions, but
upon the account of their active opposing of their Resolutions to the
obstruction of the Leavies, and endangering the Garrison, and their refusing to
desist from that opposition; but neither must it be forgotten here what was the
time of that confinment (as the Writer terms it) and compearing of these
Brethren before the Committee: If the Writer be ignorant of it, let him know it
was this, Mr. Robert Douglas, and Mr. James Wood being dealt with by some of
these Brethrens intimate friends, to interceed with the Parliament that was
then conveened to pass from calling them further, did readily undertake it and
obtained their desire, so that they were dismissed presently, and then one of
these Brethren came and acknowledged to these two their kindness done in their
behalf, yet now in the Protestation, and in this second Paper it is requited
with a slander, that they with other Commissioners stirred up the Civil
Magistrate against them for differing from Public Resolutions.

REVIEW.
BEfore the Author come to answer the next ground of the Protestation; he takes
notice of somethings, and but of somethings, (passing by many others) spoken of
by the Writer in his answer concerning the Commissioners, their steadfastness
and falling off from it. To which I reply, that though it may be true that some
of them have been steadfast in the Truth and Cause of God, when others whom he
calls their accusers knew it not, that will neither justify the one nor
condemn the other; In the things of God it does sometimes fall out, that the
first are last, and the last first; though yet if he make an impartial
reckoning, I believe that neither he nor his party have reason to prefer
themselves before the Protesters for men of integrity, and old standing in the
Cause of God, nor yet to boast themselves, as though there were none among them
who had but lately come to know the Cause of God; I hope no Protester does, or
shall envy some of these men's giving testimony of their steadfastness for the
time to come in their sufferings. The Lord fit them and all his people so to
do: But it is not enough for the Author to speak thus promisingly of them,
unles upon his may bees he do also prognosticat evil of others: He tells us,
that when some of these accusers it may be will be found tampering, or already
are tampering about or devising glosses how they may with some color shufle
themselves loose from Articles of the Covenant, some of them will give testimony
of their stedfastnes in it. This measure wherewith the Author repayeth the
Protesters, is more then an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; they did
not except against the Commissioners upon may bees, but upon things really and
already done, and to his may be, I say: That though this be a hour of
temptation, wherein many turn aside both to the left hand and to the right; yet
I hope that by the Lords grace, the generality of those who have born testimony
against the Public Resolutions, shall be found among the most steadfast in the
Land in the Covenant and Cause of God: What if I should tell him that it may be
when opposers of Public Resolutions are keeping their integrity, and cleaving
to the Covenant, some men of no small note who have been, and still are zealous
for these Resolutions, will be licking up the vomit of Malignancy and Prelacy,
or if that be to fish too far before the net; I am content to appeal to himself
who are the greatest tamperers of this time, whether the followers of the
Public Resolutions or the opposers of them. I do not resolve to deny an
honorable testimony to not a few of these who are for the Public Resolutions,
in their love unto, and stedfastnes in, and zeal for the truth in other things,
nor yet to justify the turnings aside of others who have been opposers of the
Public Resolutions; yet I think it will not be questioned that the generality
of these who have given up the Interests both of Church and State into the
hands of strangers, are such as were affectionatly zealous for the public
resolutions, which is too probable an evidence that their professions of
Repentance the last year, and of zeal for the Covenant and work of Reformation,
and of love to the King, and of desire to preserve our Liberties were not
straight and upright; and that the Commission of the Church who after so many
experiences of their turning aside, did trust them, and were isntrumental to
employ them in defense of the Cause and Kingdom, has cause to think that they
were a little too credulous. I shall not insist upon what the Author says of
the Writers never being able to prove what he asserts anent the Commissioners
their making defection; This as to the matter of the Public Resolutions, has
been sufficiently proven either by him or others, and needs not here to be
repeated; Therefore I come to what he brings in answer to these things which
are brought by the (...) that there was not liberty of free voting in the
Assembly. The Writer for proving this, alleadges, that the Commission had
stirred up the civil Magistrate against such as did differ from them in the
Public Resolutions in their Warnings and Remonstrances; This the Author denies
as being contrary to truth and calls for proof of it out of these Warnings and
Remonstrances; These Warnings and Remonstrances being Public and common, I
conceive that the Writer thought it not needful to cite the places, nor to
insist much upon proof of the business other ways then in instancing the real
effects of it; but because he desires evidence from these Papers he shall have
it: 1. The Commission in their short exhortation to the Ministers and
Professors of this Kirk, March 20. 1651. express themselves thus in order to
these who are unsatisfied with, or do oppose the Public Resolutions; The
Conscience of our duty (according to the trust committed to us, and the
carriage of some who either oppressed with a lethargy ly still or seized upon by a
benumming coldness move slowly, or carried about with the wind of strange
Doctrine, as children are tossed to and fro and move contrarily) does constrain
us to lift up our voices, and from the watch tower whereon we are set to give
Warning to the Professors and Ministers throughout the Land, and to wacken them
up to their duty, as they would avoid the displeasure of the Almighty, and
escape the deserved punishments and censures which may be inflicted by
Judicatories Civil and Ecclesiastic respective upon dificients in, and
Delinquents against duty, according to the degree of their offense, and again
in the same Warning, having applied the charecter of Malignants to such as
through dissatisfaction with Public Resolutions, were silent or did oppose;
they use these words, we wish it may be the care of all to shun the ways that
may bring them under these foul charecters, and whereby they may run themselves
under the hazard of the displeasure of God, and the censures of the Church, and
no doubt of civil punishments also to be inflicted by the State; From these
passages these two things are manifest: 1. That in the judgment of the
Commission, deficiency in the Public Resolutions, by not moving at all, or
slow moving, or contrary moving, was deservably liable to punishment by the
Civil Magistrate. 2. That they did make no doubt but that civil punishment
would be inflicted by the State: To these two things add, That this
exhortation and Warning is directed to all the Ministers and Professors of this
Kirk, and so to the civil Magistrate among others in their place and station;
yea, no doubt before the emitting thereof, it was by way of correspondencie,
according to the constant custom kept in these things communicated unto the
State; let any indifferent man then judge whether this be not a stirring up of
the Civil Magistrate against them, when it is declared to the Civil
Magistrate in a public exhortation and Warning to duty, that punishment from
the Civil Magistrate is by these men deserved, and that the State will no doubt
inflict that civil punishment in answering the instances of the Civil
Magistrate his Proceeding accordingly: The one of them, to wit, their making of
Laws and Acts of Parliament, appointing such to be proceeded against as
enemies to Religion, and to the Kingdom, he does not so much as once touch, and
the other concerning the confining the Ministers of Sterline, he does in many
things mince and pervert, therefore for informing of the Readers, and
justifying of what is said by the Writer in this particular; I shall shortly and
truly set down the matter of fact so far as is needful, and make some remarks
upon what the Author says in this busin^sse; First to the matter of fact, it
was thus: After that the Ministers of Sterline did return to their stations
from the Conference with the Commission at St. Andrews, the Committee of
Estates being informed by the Commission of the result of that Conference, and
hearing that the Ministers of Sterline did continue to Preach against the
Public Resolutions, did resolve upon a Letter containing a citation, to come
to Perth to be written from the Committee to these Ministers, which being past
and approven in the Committee, was immediately thereafter by some of their
number communicated to the Commission of the Kirk, to whom it was publicly
read, without so much as the least signification made by them of their dislike
thereof, which did clearly enough import their approbation of the same, because
it was the custom of the Commission these years past, when any thing was
communicated unto them by the Parliament or Committee of Estates, with which
they were not satisfied, either to represent their dissatisfaction in a humble
way by Writing, or else to desire a Conference thereupon, and when they were
silent, it was always exponed to import their satisfaction; This Letter being
dispatched from Perth where the Committee of Estates then sat, to the
Ministers of Sterline, it came not to their hands before the Tuesday at night,
notwithstanding that it had been written a good many days before, and that it
did require them to compear before the Committee the next day after recept
thereof: The one of the Ministers being somewhat sickly, answer was returned
from both to the Lord Chancellor President of the Committee, that by reason of
his weakness, they could not well keep the Diet mentioned in the Letter, but
that in the case of his being able to travel, both of them should be at Perth
that week, or that if he could not travel, the other should come without fail,
and entreating the Lord Chancellor to make their excuse to the Committee, and
that it might not be interpreted as any sign of dis-respect, or disobedience,
that they did not come instantly upon the recept of the Letter, seeing the one
of them was not at that time able to travel: This Letter being communicated by
the Lord Chancellor to the Committee upon the Thursday, they were pleased
notwithstanding thereof, and before the coming or hearing of these Ministers,
to order another Letter to be sent unto them, ordaining them to come to Perth
before the next Saturnday at night, and to stay there, or at Dundee til the
Kings return from Aberdeen, whether he was then going; before this second
Letter came to their hands, these Ministers came to Perth upon the Friday at
night upon the first Letter, and making application to the Committee of Estates
on the Saturday morning, did (after Protestation that they did not acknowledge
them as judges in the matter of their doctrine) professed themselves willing and
ready to hear and to answer what the Committee of Estates had to challenge them
of, upon which the Committee did intimate unto them the order contained in
their second Letter, and caused the Clerk deliver the same unto them; the
Ministers of Sterlin after hearing the order contained therein, did earnestly
beseech the Committee of Estates that (upon surety to compear when they should
be called for) they might have liberty to return to their Charges, which being
denied, they did in the next place desire, that seeing they had no purpose to go
unto Dundee, they might be permitted to go 3. or 4. miles without Perth for
refreshing of themselves, which favor was at first granted, and within a
little space thereafter, they being gone to their lodgings, was recalled, and
they were sent for to come back to the Committee of Estates; and when they came
it was intimated unto them, that the Committee could not take it upon them to
allow them that liberty; therefore were they constrained either to be
transgressors of the Committees order, or else to abide within the Town of
Pearth, which they did for some weeks, until the King and others of the
Committee, having returned from Aberdeen upon the Friday afternoon, and a
report being made in the Committee of Estates what had past concerning the
Ministers or Sterline, they did that same night appoint another order to be
sent unto them, ordaining them to stay in the Town till the Commission of the
Church should meet, and that it might be thought upon, what course was to be
taken in these things, which was accordingly done, and the Parliament meeting
at Perth the next week thereafter, they did send unto these Ministers two
Massers, commanding them to stay that week; which being expired, they sent unto
them another person, commanding them to stay their further order. During this
time the Commission of the Church met at Pearth, to whom all that had past
betwixt the Committee of Estates and these Ministers, was communicated first by
these Ministers themselves, and afterward by the Parliament, who desired to
know the Commissions judgment of two Protestations given in to the Committee of
Estates by these Ministers, the sum whereof was, that their compearing before
them to answer in these things that did relate to their Doctrine and discharge
of their Ministerial function, might not import that they did acknowledge them
to be competent Judges thereof; and that incroachment was made upon the due
liberty of the Subject, by a sentence of Confinement past upon them, without
hearing them after they were called to be heard; Which Protestations being
taken in consideration by the Commission, they did give their judgment thereof
in a large Paper condemning the same, without so much as calling these
Ministers, to ask a reason of their judgment anent the things contained
therein, notwithstanding that they were in Town, and had communicated the same
unto them, and all that past betwixt the Committee of Estates and them, by this
narration, which can be verified from the Registers and Papers themselves, as
to the substance and most of the Circumstances of it, and (which cannot be
justly contradicted in any circumstance thereof, for if it should, can be
attested by witnesses) it appears that there was a legal sentence of
Confinement past, and often renewed upon these Ministers, before hearing of the
Party, and that this Confinement was for a Months time, and that with was done
therein (as to the substance of it) was done with the knowledge and connivance,
if not direct approbation and allowance of the Commission. The Author in his
Relation first carps at the word of Confinement. But I would know of him what
was here wanting of a Confinement, properly so called, was there not a Judicial
Sentence, tying those Ministers to such a place, for such a time and,
restraining them in the use of their liberty from going to their own homes and
stations, or to any place else, except these places mentioned in the Order of
the Committee of Estates. 2. He alleadges, that it is affirmed wrongfully and
contrary to the truth, that the Commissioners stirred up the Civil Magistrate
against the Ministers of Sterline, or that they were confined upon the account
of their differing from the public Resolutions. The Writer did not speak of
any particular instigation coming from the Commissioners to the civil
Magistrate in the particular of these Ministers, but gives one Instance therein
of the Magistrates proceedings according to the general warnings of the
Commission wherein they do declare their Judgment of the desert of such things,
and that the state will no doubt inflict civil punishment upon them, though yet
besides any thing that is already spoken that the Commission was acquainted
with these things; and did in every bodies construction allow thereof: Somewhat
more could be told him concerning some leading men in the Commission, which I
am now content to suppress. When I read the other particular, to wit, his
affirming it to be contrary to truth, that they were confined upon account of
differing from the public Resolutions: I did somewhat wonder what could make
him write so, were they not Confined, because of their public Preaching and
expressing their dissatisfaction in public and private with these Resolutions.
The Author calls it, Their opposing and practicing against public Resolutions,
and their active disposing of their Resolutions to the obstructing of the
Leavies, and indangering of the Garrison, and their refusing to desist from
that Opposition, let him give it as many names as he will, and aggravate it by
all the Circumstances that he can, it is still upon the account of their
differing from the public Resolutions, does he (when he has strained himself
to the utmost) give instance of any other thing, or of any thing that they did
in this, that was not suitable for Ministers to do in the discharge of their
ministerial Function. Upon supposal that these Resolutions were wrong, they
write publicly to the Commission against the Public Resolutions, they
Preached publicly against them, they gave their advice to such as asked it,
they refused to de^st; what was in all this that would have been blamed in a
Minister in the unlawful Engagement in the 48. and this is all that is
alleged. As for their indangering of the Garrison, which he is pleased to
call the only Bulwark of the whole Land under God: I wish that it may be
remembered, and laid to heart, That the Lord was graciously pleased (as long as
these Ministers were there) to preserve that Garrison without any appearance of
danger or hazard, and that after they were driven away it was first abandoned
by our Army, when men were among them who preached according to their heart;
and afterward, whithout any opposition, given up to the hands of the English
by these who had slandered these Ministers, as compliers with them, and had
been instrumental upon the account of their opposing the Public Resolutions to
drive them from their stations. 3. To pass by that which he says, that they
found by their own acknowledgement, that they had given Resolution to some
persons, seeking advice, that it was not lawful for them to continue in that
service, being in such a conjunction as the Public Resolutions carried: I take
notice of what he sets down, that the Brethren came not to Perth at the first
Diet appointed to them; and afterward the Committee required them to attend at
Perth or Dundee, until the Kings return from Aberdeen that there might be a
more full Meeting of the Committee, a great part of the most considerable
Members of it being with him, how could they come at the first Diet? the
advertisment being so exceedingly short, from the time of their receipt of the
Letter, to that time of their comperance; and the one of them being somewhat
sickly and not able to travel. The Committees appointment for them to stay at
Perth, was before their coming, and before the Kings departure, when the
Committee was full and numerous, though he does insinuate it to have been
otherways; and there was a Quorum of the Committee of Estates still at Perth
after the Kings departure, who yet would not meddle in that business, and said,
They could not. The truth was, the men who were the great sticklers in it (whom
the Author calls the most considerable Members of the Committee) were absent,
and they had before their departure taken such course that the business should
not be meddled with, till the Kings return from Aberdeen. 4. I take notice of
that which he says, That when the Committee of Estates did require the
Commissions advice what should be done with these Brethren, in relation to the
securing of the Garrison of Sterling, That as to this they could not take on
them to determine the matter, being merely Civil; but that they desired and
expected that the Committee would deal with them in tenderness, as being
Ministers of the Gospel, was the business, as to the interest of their carriage
in it, and the ground upon which they were cited, merely Civil; Was it any
other thing then the discharge of their consciences in their Ministerial
functions, as Ministers of the Congregation of Sterling? It is true, that there
was such a desire of tenderness in the close of the Commissions Paper, but
there was so much said in the body of it for exaggerating their carriage, that
a greater punishment then a continued confinement might have been thought
tender dealing to such men. That Paper was of such a nature, that not a few of
these to whom it was given in, who were none of the greatest friends to the
Ministers of Sterling, were not well satisfied therewith, if it may be believed
what was then confidently reported to these Ministers at Perth, by some who did
profess to know it. 5. I take notice of that which he speaks upon their
dimission, what dealing there was by some of their intimate friends with Mr.
Rob. Douglas and Mr. James Wood, to intercede with the Parliament, to pass from
calling them further. I do not know unless he mean of Mr. James Durham (who had
from the beginning been against such away of proceeding with them) his dealing
with these two, that the Parliament might not meddle further with these
Ministers, but suffer them to go to their Charges; and though they do willingly
own him as a friend, yet what he did in that particular, was not only out of
respect to them, but also from respect to the Commission, and to the
Parliament, conceiving it not to be for their advantage to meddle with these
Ministers in such a way; and though these Ministers did not affect to come to a
Public Hearing before the Parl. yet would they have chused that and more too,
rather then to wrong their consciences in the thing whereof they were
challenged: and as at their first appearing before the Committee of Estates
they showed themselves ready and willing to give an account of their Doctrine
and carriage in that particular, so (the Lord assisting them) they would have
been neither ashamed nor afraid to have done it before the Parliament, if they
had been called thereunto. That Mr. Robert Douglas and Mr. James Wood did so
readily obtain their desire, it was a token that they had power in that
particular. That one of these Brethren came and acknowledged to these two
kindness done in their behalf, is more then that Brother does take with. He
says, that he came indeed to Mr. Rob. Douglas and said to him, that he hoped
to have no cause to repent of what he had done: but what, suppose both of them
had come to both and done so? That which is less then justice and equity, to
wit, a breaking off of oppression and iniquity may be acknowledged by the
oppressed for courtesy and kindness without hypocrisy and dissimulation, and
it makes no bad requital nor slander afterward to tell the truth how far men
were accessory to the oppressing and afflicting of them.

VINDICATION.
TO the Second particular, the Commission in their Act and last Letter to
Presbyteries, did restrain Presbyteries from Censuring any of them; they did
not so much as desire any of them to be refered or cited to the General
Assembly for differing from them in their Resolutions, but only such as
continued to oppose, Presbyteries cited but few, and some of them as will be
found by the Registers of the Assembly, were chosen Commissioners to the
Assembly, but was there not far more done in 48. did not the Commission stir up
all Presbyteries to cite all that were in the meanest degree of differing from
them: Such viz. as were only guilty for silence and not speaking with them, and
to censure forthwith all that opposed: will the Writer therefore say that
voycing in these matters was not free in that Assembly; if not, why then does
he use double weights?

REVIEW.
WHat though it were true that the Commission in their Act and last Letter to
Presbytries, did restrain Presbytries from censuring any of them, yet what is
that to contradict or refute what is alleged by the Writer, That the
Commission did in their Warnings and Papers stir up Presbyteries to censure
such, and cite them to the Genesis Assembly: these are more evident truths then
can be denied, and even that Act and last Letter does verify that point of the
Alleadgance concerning the citing of them to the Assembly; which Citation as it
did exclude these who were cited, from a Vote at least in that particular; so
was it (in the nature of it) apt to obstruct the freedom of others in voicing.
He tells us, they were but few who were cited: well then, some there were, yea
many were cited; the Synod of Perth did at one Diet, upon the account of that
Letter, cite, not a few of their number who were present, and did direct
Summons to others who were absent; the Presbytry of Jeaburgh did cite three of
their number; sundry also in the Presbytery of Glasgow, Chyrnside and
elsewhere were cited. He repeats again his distinction of such as differed
from Public Resolutions, and such as continued to oppose them; the last
whereof only, as he insinuates, were cited. But to pass by the distinction it
self, (which seems to teach men a way that does not seem well to become the
Ministers of the Gospel, h. e. to differ in such things as concerns the
judgment and practice of the people committed to their charge, in matters of
special interest to the cause of God, and yet to be silent and cease to give
testimony thereof, either for their own exoneration, or information of their
People (which was one of the desires and overtures pressed upon the Ministers of
Sterling at St. Andrews) Who so will look upon the Commissions Paper March 20.
will find that in reference to censure, it takes in, not only such as continue
to oppose and move contrarily, but also such as move not at all or move slowly;
as well these who are indifferent and neutral, as these who oppose, see Page 2.
and 5. thereof. That some of them were chosen to the Assembly, we have already
cleared, how it was done, as also that which was done in the year 48. betwixt
which, and that which was done in the year 51. there are many real and
important differences formerly spoken of and cleared, and therefore does the
Writer use no double weights.

VINDICATION.
TO the Third Particular, concerning the Kings Letter, and the Commissioners
Speech to the Assembly, there was not one word in them more or less for
Punishing or Censuring any that Differed from the public Resolutions, but if
any thing of that kind was desired it was for opposing and weakening of the
hands of the kingdom and strengthening the hands of the Enemy joined with
expressions of earnest desire to endeavor by all fair means to gain all that
differed, to unity: did this take away the freedom and liberty of voycing
especially considering this which was desired was proponed by way of mere
desire, without any threatening or alurement to be biased by men's voting, but
that the honest Reader may be able the better to give his Judgment of this
matter, he may read the Commissioners Speech (the Coppie of the Kings Letter I
have not, but both were to one purpose on the matter) set down at the end of
this Paper faithfully as it was delivered, always whatever was in the Letter,
I dare affirm, that in that Assembly, there was as great freedom and liberty in
Speaking and Voting about these Resolutions in debate, as well as in any other,
as well contra as pro, as was in any Assembly these years bypast, yea, more
then was in some of them, wherein it was well known, that oftentimes to the
grief of men in the Kirk, most eminent for Grace, Gifts, Gravity, and
Experience, some who now unadvisedly accuses this Assembly of want of freedom
and liberty, have endeavored to carry matters with a strong hand, cutting down
with sharp reflections, and flouting such as any ways dared to speak and vote
in a different way from them, which (if report may be believed, some of them
has acknowledged in their late Confessions.) The Writer after the propounding
of the Argument, meets with one Objection against it; We shall not stand upon
the discussing of his Reply as it relates unto that Objection, but shall speak
one word to that which he charge upon the Kings Letter as inorderly and
irregular. viz. That when as the Assembly had not yet meddled with the public
Resolutions, to condemn and reprove them, he should have stirred up the
Assembly to Censure such as differed from them. Answ. Besides that as has been
already said, the Assembly was not desired to Censure any for differing from
the public Resolutions simply. First, It was not desired that the Assembly
should censure them without any trying or approving of their resolutions, nor
was it desired that the Assembly should approve without due trial, but the King
supposing them to be right and just in themselves, and that the Assembly upon
due trial finds them to be such, desired, that such as had opposed them
(howbeit it could not be but to the prejudice of the defense of the Cause and
Kingdom) might be dealt with to be reclaimed, or if that could not be obtained,
Censured. Secondly, Consider what a case he was in then, he was obleidged by
Treaty to follow the Advice of the Commission of the Kirk in the intervals of
Assemblies in matters Ecclesiastic, he had sought and gotten then Advice in
these matters questioned, and no men in Scotland were more earnest to have that
Condition in the Articles of the Treaty then they who accuses him here: But it
may be he should have used his judgment of discretion upon any resolutions
given by the Commission. I confess that is true, yet any man may perceave that
the words in that Article of the Treaty are very peremtory and general in the
later, for no more is said, but that he should follow the Advice of the
Commission; and it was well known when it was mentioned, that it should be
expressly added, Agreeable to the Word of God, and Doctrine, and Constitutions
of this Kirk: The Motion was opposed and stopped by some of the Accusers: This
I speak not to say that he was bound to give blind obedience, but to show that
he was in a right ticklish case here: But leaving this, the civil Magistrate
being convinced in his Conscience, upon good, true, and solid grounds of the
Error of some Doctrine, or Practice of some Ministers which has not been
particularly determined in hypothesi by the constitution of the Kirk, and of
evil that they have done to the Public in following it, may he not exhort one
general Assembly being conveened even in the entry thereof, to Censure such
without praelimitation, or encroching upon the liberty and freedom of the
Assembly in judging and voting upon it? I doubt if he may not, but suppose he
cannot without encroaching and praelimitation active upon his part, yet sure
these can not prove the Assembly not free in Voting and Judging, unless there
can be some evidence given of the impression and effect of it on the Members in
their Voting and Judging. A Judge may be tempted and solicited, and yet may be
unquestionable, uncorrupted and free in his judging.

REVIEW.
THe Author does not deny, and I believe he cannot, but that the Kings Letter,
and the Commissioners Speech, did contain somewhat relating to Punishment and
Censure; but seeks a shift by telling us, That if any thing of that kind was,
it was for Opposing the Leavies, and weakening the hands of the Kingdom, and
strengthening the hands of the Enemy. If either the Letter or the Speech had
been exhibited, they had spoken best for themselves; none of them is subjoyned
to that Copy of his Vindication, which is come to my hands. But upon supposal
that it was as he says (of which yet he seems not to be very confident, and
therefore afterward helps himself with his wonted word, That it was not for
differing from the public resolutions simply or merely) what better is it then
it was? Did not all the Assembly to whom that Letter was written and that
Speech spoken know, that the opposing of Leavies, and weakening the hands of the
Kingdom, and strengthening the hands of the Enemy which was meant of, was
Preaching and bearing Testimony against the public Resolutions, neither does
it take off the difficulty. That it was joined with expressions of earnest
desire to endeavor by all fair means to gain them: These desires could very
well stand with incitations to Censures, and that whatever was the way of
proponing, whether by way of mere desire (as the Author alleadges) or
otherwise, yet was it not without threatening speeches, upon the matter of
which, I am content that Judgment may be given by the Letter and Speech
themselves: He dare affirm, That in Speaking and Voting about these Resolutions
there was as great Freedom and Liberty as was in Assemblies these years past,
yea, more then was in some of them, but in this he is too daring: Was there any
Assembly these years past, that had so many bonds and restraints upon them (as
we have already instanced) all that he instances is, That some of these who
accuses this Assembly of the want of Freedom and Liberty, have in other
Assemblies endeavored to carry matters with strong hand, calling down with
sharp reflections, and flouting such as any way dared to speak and vote in a
different way from them: For proof of this, he gives us, It is well known: and
the acknowledgment of some of themselves in their late Confessions. I think
indeed that it is well known that too often in most of our Kirk Judicatories,
there was in most men that sat therein, too much of a carnal Spirit, and too
little of the sober, holy, grave, spiritual, meek way of the holy Ghost: And
some of these men have, as to their own carriage in Judicatories, acknowledged
this, and are indeed convinced of it, before the Lord, desiring mercy in his
sight, and grace, That if ever it shall be again allowed them to sit in
Judicatories, there may be more of the beauty and image of the Lord upon them,
and their way. But that they cried down such with sharp reflections, and
flouting as dared to speak or vote otherwise then they did, is that which no
man is able to make good, and which (I t^ow) their own consciences does not
accuse them of: happily some would have expected that the Author would have
spared to have reflected upon these persons in their confessions, seeing he is
a man subject to the like Passions that others be; and I doubt not to the same
convictions and confessions upon them His defense of the Kings Letter is such,
that I fear shall satisfy few. 1. He repeats, that it was not therein desired
to censure any for differing from the public resolutions simply, to what I
have spoken already. Next it is but a subterfuge, which he says, That it was
not desired that the Assembly should censure them without trying or approving
their resolutions; but the King supposing them to be right and just in
themselves, and after the Assembly should after due trial find them to be
such, desired that such as had opposed them (howbeit it could not be but to the
prejudice of the defense of the Cause and Kingdom) might be dealt with to be
reclaimed, or if that could not be obtained, censured. There is nothing here
for answering what is alleged by the Writer, to wit, that the Assembly
whilst they had not yet meddled with the public resolutions, and had not found
them right, were stirred up to censure these that could not be reclaimed from
them; and taking it as the Author does allege, That the King did suppose them
to be right, and withal, that he spoke nothing to the Assembly to allow a fair
hearing to these of a contrary mind, or to search whither they were right or
wrong. It says that the Kings Letter did contain a clear intimation of his
mind to the Assembly, not only in order to these who should continue to
oppose, or could not be reclaimed, but also in order to these who should vote
pro or contra in the Assembly; that Letter and that Speech were but an express
of the Commissions Warnings and Acts, and Acts of Parliament made there anent,
in order to the furthering the execution thereof, by getting them backed with a
new Act of the Assembly to the same purpose as afterward they were: I cannot
well decern whither the parenthesis cast in by the Author in these words;
howbeit it could not be but to the prejudice of the defense of the Cause and
Kingdom, be cited by him as the Kings words, or interlined as his own, and
therefore shall not give judgment of them. 2. His next defense, That the King
was bound by the Treaty to follow the advice of the Commission of the Kirk, in
matters Ecclesiastic, in intervalls of Assemblies; which he loses himself by
acknowledging that he should have used his judgment of discretion upon any
resolutions given him by the Commission; but because the Author interlaces in
order to this, several particulars; therefore in answer to what he says in
this part of his defense, I offer these things. First, That there is nothing
here spoken by the Author that makes for the vindication of the Kings Letter;
It speaks indeed to the vindicating, at least to the excusing of the King
himself in writing such a Letter, because he was advised by the Commissions, as
to the public Resolutions, but that does not say, that the Letter did not
contain such things as were apt to hinder liberty of voting in the Assembly.
Secondly, I acknowledge that the King was indeed in a right ticklish condition;
But who had put him in that condition, but the Authors and Abettors of the
Public Resolutions, who after an express Article of the Treaty for removing
of Malignants from him, and express desires from the General Assembly and
their Commission renewed again and again, and express Answers to the Quaere
proponed by himself, of bringing in the Malignant Party; In the negative did
advise him to employ and bring in that Party for his own defense, and the
defense of the Cause and Kingdom. Thirdly, As to the peremptorinesse of some to
have in that condition in the Articles of the Treaty; I know it not, but though
it was so, it was no more then his Predecessors was used to be tied unto before
the Reformation in the old Oath of Coronation, and which his own Father had
condescended unto in the Treaty at the Bricks, as appears in the Acts of the
Assemblies, and the Acts of Parliament 1639, and 1640. Forthly, As to the
Authors quarrelling of the words of the Article as peremptory and general in
the Letter, because no more is said, but that He should follow the advice of
the Commission; and his quarrelling some for opposing and stopping of a motion
made by others, that it should be expressly added, agreeable to the Word of God,
and Doctrine and Constitutions of this Church: He should have told the
circumstances of time and place, and persons; For my part I profess
ingenuously, I remember no such things, and others also who may be presumed to
know it, say the same. But let it be so, they did in this but adhere to the
former way, which (as also this Article) did suppose that addition which the
Author speaks of, though neither Kirk nor State thought fit to express it,
lest occasion of jangling should have been given thereby. But the Author by
this his carping shows, that when he pleases, he can quarrel with some things
in the Treaty, and with the Acts of Assemblies thereanent, as well as others;
and I believe, he would think it hard measure to have it inferred from this,
that he does vilify the Acts of the Assembly, and that his professions to the
Government, Discipline and Constitutions of this Kirk, are not straight nor
upright: I shall not charge him with unfaithfulness, but if he was one of those
who was instructed by this Church in the Treaty at the Hague, he has (by that
which is fallen from his Pen) here furnished some occasion to his Readers to
think that he has some hand in, or some way winked at the first model of the
Treaty, as it was first settled and transacted between the King and the
Commissioners; wherein notwithstanding that there was an express instruction,
that his Majesty should not only consent and agree, that all matters
Ecclesiastical should be determined by the General Assemblies, and such as in
the intervalls of Assemblies should be authorized by them; but that his Majesty
in things Ecclesiastic, should follow the advice of the Genesis Assem. of this
Kirk, and such as should be authorized by them; yet the matter was so
transacted, as that these 2 clauses of the Kings following the advice of the
Assembly, and such as should be authorized by them, and of his being content
that in the Intervals betwixt Assemblies, things Ecclesiastic should be
determined by such as should be authorized by them, were wholly left out: And
if he had any hand in, or did wink at the omitting of this Article of the
Treaty at the Kings Coronation: That it should not be pressed upon the King to
declare according thereto, albeit by the Treaty he was expressly bound so to do,
he would either forbear to press the Treaty so much upon others; or learn to be
more tender thereof himself. Fourthly, as to his Question, what a Civil
Magistrate may do in a point of doctrine wherein he himself is convinced in
Conscience upon good grounds, of the error of some doctrine and practice of
some Ministers, which has not been particularly determined in h^pothesi by the
Constitution of the Kirk, whether he may not exhort a General Assembly being
conveened, to censure such without prelimitation, for encroaching on the
liberty and freedom of the Assembly in judging and voting in it? I shall not
debate, it seems that he himself doubts of it; but this was not our question,
the point was determined by the Constitutions of this Kirk, and this answer was
once given to the King by the Commission of the Kirk, upon his moving the
question; and they did exceedingly wrong him, who by contrary Answers did draw
him in many snares, and put him upon many rocks. Fifthly, as to his great
answer of active and passive prelimitation, it will not serve him much stead in
this particular, because the Assembly did really vote, act and censure
according to the desire of that Letter, which is evidence sufficient to prove,
that the prelimitation was both active and passive. It is not evidence enough
to prove, that a desire has impression upon me that I grant the same, and do
accordingly; what other proof does the Assembly at Glasgow 1638, bring to
verify the passive prelimiting of the Assembly at Glasgow 1610, and at Pearth
1618, by the King his threatening Letters and Commandments; but this, that the
Letters came to the Assembly, and that the Assembly did proceed according to
the desire thereof; will the Author admit of no proof of passive prelimitation,
unless evidence can be brought from a man's own breast. That this very thing,
and nothing else was the thing that weighed with him for approving the Public
Resolutions, censuring the Protesters, and laying a foundation for censuring
all, both Ministers and Professors, that should continue to oppose these
Resolutions. I close this purpose with the words of these Divines and Lawyers,
cited before in the book containing their gravamina against the Council of
Trent: Manifestimum est Tridentinam hanc Synodum nequaquam esse aut dici posse
liberum Concilium, sed servum potius and multis nominibus durissime obstrictum
atque captivum. Liberum etenim dicitur, quod metu omni and coactione caret, ubi
Concilia omnia omnesqueres non ex aliena vel voluntate vel gratia, vel etiam ex
permissu alterius aut imperio pendent, sed ab his omnibus expeditae sunt and
integrae, nec cujusquam aut odium aut invidia, aut minae extimescendae sunt,
nec res ulla sit quae plus polleat apud eum qui dicit sententiam, quod ipsius
honesta voluntas and judicium minime coactum. Denique ubi quae salutaria
quisque and veritati consentanea esse, intus, and apud animum intelligit, eadem
etiam sine ullius periculi metu in medium proponere libere and in faciem cuivis
modeste dicere liceat, cujus rei praeclarum exemplum in Paulo Apostolo nobis
propositum est, qui (ut ad Gal. 2. ipse scribit) Petro Apostolo in faciem
oblocutus erroris eum in Antiochensi Synodo public arguit.

VINDICATION.
THe next Argument proper to the second Paper is, because in the Assembly at
St. Andrews, persons allowed by the Acts and Policy of this Kirk, to speak
their Consciences were denied liberty so to do, and to prove this, the Author
takes much pains to show from eight old Assemblies of this Kirk, that not
only persons Ecclesiastic having calling power to vote, but others also are
allowed to propone and reason, yea to present their thoughts in Writing to the
Assembly, but he needed not to have been at so much pains in casting over so
many Assemblies for this purpose; the point is generally confessed in all
Orthodox Kirks, and knows to all who have read the Common head De Conciliis in
their Systems. Secondly he says, that Sir Archibald Johnstone (whom he
mentions with many Encomia, to make the matter he has to speak more bulksome)
having written his mind to the Meeting, not able to come himself, about the
matters to be agitated in the Assembly, holding forth much clear light from
Scripture and Acts of former Assemblies in these particulars, (if it was much
light he herd forth in some of these same particulart in conference at Pearth,
it was but very little, and no much to be feared by any of the contrary mind)
also the Letter was publicly delivered and required to be read by him that
presented it; the Moderator having broken it up, promised to cause read it, and
many Members did at sundry occasions press the reading of it, yet it could
never be obtained, but was smothered together with a Protestation contained
therein, against a Paper of the Commissioners to the Parliam. approving what
was done by the King and Committee of Estates to the Ministers of Sterlin.
Answer. Here is much want of ingenuity, and nothing of the truth of the matter
making against the freedom of the Assembly; the Assembly never refused to have
it read: Most part of the whole Assembly was earnestly desirous to have it
read, and now more then the most part of these whom the Reader would insinuate
to be Readers unacquainted with the business, to have been the opposers of the
reading of it, and smotherers of it, as being of a different judgment from Sir
Archibald, and feared for the pith of his Papers. The truth of the business was
this, as I doubt not but the Writer knows in his Conscience, had he been so
ingenuous as to tell it to some persons in the Assembly, hearing much respect
and tenderness to Sir Archibald, partly because of intimate friendship with him,
partly because of many former good services, did plead for a delay, alleging
that it was unreasonable that the Assemblies precious time whereof they knew
not how short liberty they might have, should be spent in reading any
particular man's Letters, whereas the Committees were not as yet nominated and
constituted, and the proceeding of the Commission which (by the appointment of
former Assemblies) ought to be the first business taken to consideration, were
not so much as once looked upon, and indeed the Papers which were sent and
desired to be read concerning his mind, amounted to such a volume, as the
reading thereof might have taken up all the time that the Assembly could
probably expect for sitting, though never any other business had been touched.
There was (if my memory fail me not) a Letter of four or five sheets of thick
Writ, and other Papers with it, required to be read before the Assembly did
enter upon the first Action, the appointing of Committees, amounting to an
hundred sheets at least, and must it be such a crime as for which the Assembly
must be judged null, that such a motion was referred and delayed to a more
convenient time, which was the only thing the Assembly did, and that not of
their own inclination, but upon much entreaty and pleading of some of his best
wel-wishers in the Assembly, who although they alleged the cause we have only
mentioned in public, yet had another cause of their pleading so earnestly for
this which they did in a private way communicate to some who were desirous they
should be read, whereby they moved them to desist from urging so earnestly the
reading of them, not out of fear to his Papers, or dis-respect to his Lordship,
but out of mere kindness and respect, because viz. they did perceive by looking
on them (I believe) in private sundry high reflections against the Supreme
Powers of the Kingdom, both King and Estates, which could not but have brought
him in present trouble. This is the true story of that business, judge thou now
(ingenuous Reader) impartially, if this was a conscientious or relevant
argument, to nullify that Assemb. but add to that other in the Assembly 48 or
49. (I did not distinctly remember which, but the thing is certain, and the
Writer will remember better) a Paper then, concerning matters then in debate
given to the Assembly, and desired to be read, was publicly laid aside and
refused to be read, and yet the lawfulnes of that Assembly, is not questioned.
The Writer in the close of this argument, would insinuate to his Reader, that
the Commissioners had been Authors of smothering these Papers of Sir Archibald
Johnstons, because of a Protestation therein contained, against a Paper of
theirs, approving what was done by the King and Committee to the Ministers of
Sterlin; but if he means so, it is a wrongful slandering of them, the
Commissioners were far from desiring them to be smothered, though one or two
out of tender respect to his Lordship, were unwilling that he should be brought
in trouble by them, nor feared they his Protestation against that Paper of
theirs, against which, neither he, nor any for him, could have any just ground
of challenge; the sum and substance whereof was nothing else but a clearing
of the Committees calling before them the Ministers of Sterlin (after they had
been dealt with by the Commission of the Kirk about their preaching and
practizing to the obstructing of the Leavies according to Public Resolutions,
and occasioning some to relinquish their charge in the Garrison of Sterlin, and
they refused to desist) that some convenient course might be taken in relation
to them, in securing the Garrison from danger from the guilt of encroaching
upon the Liberties of the Kirk charged upon them by a Protestation of these
Ministers of a very high strain, and together approving these Brethrens
protesting in so far as it was provisionall for the Liberties and Privileges
of the Kirk, and expriming that these Brethren might be dealt with by the King
and Committee in a tender and respectfull way as Ministers of the Gospel.

REVIEW.
SOmetimes the Author offends when pains is not taken to prove things that are
generally confessed, as for instance to prove from the Word of God, that all
scandalous persons ought to have been removed from the General Assembly, and
here he seems to carp at his taking pains to prove from the policy and Acts of
this Kirk, that not only persons Ecclesiastic having calling and power to
vote, but others also are allowed to propone, hear, read and debate; yea, to
present their thoughts in Writing to the Assembly: But albeit the point be
generally confessed by all Orthodox Churches, and known to all who have read the
head de Conciliis yet was it to purpose for the Writer to take pains to prove
it from the Acts of the Assemblies of this Kirk, because he had to do not only
with these who are acquainted with the head de Conciliis but also with others
who are not well acquainted with that head, I mean sundry Professors in the
Land, who had need to have the ground and relevancy of this Argument cleared
unto them, and it was a nearer and more convincing way to clear it from the
received Doctrine of our own Church, then from the Doctrine of other Churches.
Does not Sir Archibald Johnstone by the testimony of unquestionable witnesses
deserve all the commendation that is given him? Why then should it be carped
at, if the things that are said of him be true (as they are) they do indeed
make the Argument more bulksome; the Author does once and again undervalue the
light held forth by him, and pith of his Papers: I shall not deny the Author
the testimony of Learning and ability, and wishes that the Lord may more and
more increase, and more and more sanctify it unto him, that it may be improven
for the Edification of many; But there is much of a Thrasonick spirit that as a
vein runs through all this Vindication; the man whose light and pith he does
set so low has (by the Grace of God) been isntrumental to hold forth very
much light to the Kirk of God in Scotland, in things relating to the work of
Reformation, and his pith (by the power of the Lord) has been acknowledged in
both Nations. The Writer in relating of the business of the smothering of Sir
Archibald Johnstons Letter, is challenged by the Author of much want of
ingenuity, and speaking nothing of the truth; But let us see how this great
challenge is made out? 1. He says the Assembly never refused to have it read;
but was it ever read? Was not the Assembly often desired to cause read it? Was
there not often much debate about the reading of it? And was it not for a long
time waved from diet to diet, and at last buried? I fear not but this in the
account of ingenuous men will amount to a refusal: But says the Author, most
part of the whole Assembly were earnestly desirous to have it read; if it was
so, then were there some few who did carry it otherwise, notwithstanding of the
earnest desires of the most part of the Assembly, and it argues no great
freedom, when the earnest desires of the most part cannot prevail to gain the
reading of a Letter, because of the opposition of some few, who are otherwise
minded. He does withal intimate unto us, That none were more desirous to have
it read then the most part of these whom the Writer would insi^uae (to be
Readers unacquainted with the business) to have been opposers of the Reading
of it; I would ask him who were the opposers of the reading of it? men for the
Public Resolutions, or men against them; I believe he will not deny but all
the opposers of the Public Resolutions who were in the Assembly did earnestly
seek to have it read, and that all the men who opposed the reading of it were
such as were for the Public Resolutions, and some of them such as did belong
to the Commission, and had hand in the contriving and carrying on these
Resolutions; this seems not to be denied, but for taking off the weight off it,
he comes to tell us that which he calls the truth, which he doubts not but the
Writer knew in his Conscience, had he been so ingenuous as to tell it; But I
can answer him by warrant from the Writer, that he concealed nothing concerning
which he had any persuasion in his Conscience, as to the truth of it, in that
which the Author speaks of: The matter alleged by him, is that all this was
from tenderness and respect to Sir Archibald Johnston, by some of his friends
in the Assembly who did perceive by looking on his Papers sundry high
reflections against the Supreme powers of the Kingdom, both King and Estates,
which could not but have brought him in present trouble. This necessitates the
telling more of the truth, which the Writer formerly spared to his own
disadvantage: The Letter was delivered to the Moderator Publicly, in the face
of the Assembly, in the forenoon, a little after the sitting down of the
Assembly; upon the delivery thereof, the Moderator promised that it should be
read, and brack it open (being open in the hand of him that was Clerk to the
Public Resolutions, and was now Clerk to the Assembly, opportunity was given
to him, and sundry of these who were for the Public Resolutions, and were the
men who opposed the reading of it in the Assembly to read it in private) after
which it was pressed to be read with much earnestness and importunity at
several Diets of the Assembly, and much debate there was to and fro at
several occasions about the reading of it, but the result was always carried
to a delay, until at last the Protesters leaving the Assembly, there was
little or no more heard of it. That this was done out of mere kindness, and
respect to my Lord Wariston from whom the Letter came is not likely: 1. Because
not only did he himself in the very bosom of it earnestly beseech; yea,
obtest and adjure in the Name of Christ, that what he wrote to the Assembly
might be read and considered, but the nearest and most intimate friends he has
in the world, who were like to be tender of his danger (if any) did press the
reading of it, I mean not only these in the Assembly who were of his intimate
acquaintance, and intimatly engaged with him in the defense of the same Cause;
but also his own wife who came to St. Andrews of purpose with that Letter; and
that notwithstanding she was dealt with by sundry of these who were for the
Public Resolutions to take it up, and not to press the reading of it (that
there might be some handsome shift for the not reading of it) refused to do it,
and Women are known to be as tender of their husbands dangers as others. 2. The
Lord Waristons Judgment and expressions in all these things were well enough
known before that time, to the King and to the Committee of Estates, and the
reading might well have been a confirmation of the same thing, but would have
furnished little or no new matter of ditty 3. There were no reflections in that
Letter against the King and Committee of Estats, but in order to a conjunction
with the Malignant party, and if the reading of these in the Assembly would
have brought him present trouble, then surely it was not free nor safe for men
who were of that opinion that the Public Resolutions did involve such a
conjunction, to speak their judgment freely in the Assembly upon these
Resolutions, seeing his freedom of writing in these things would by the
Authors own concession have brought him to present trouble. 4. This was not the
way to keep off the danger, but rather to fetch it on, because it was the way
to fill the Country with the noise of the Lord Waristons writing such a Letter
to the Assembly, which some that loved him after the delivery thereof,
Publicly did smother and keep back from being read, notwithstanding it was
earnestly pressed by most part of the Assembly, which report coming to the King,
and to the Commissioners, would in all appearance have occasioned them to call
for the letter, which could not have been denied nor put out of the way, being
now publicly delivered, and so much debate made thereupon in the Assembly: But
upon supposall that it was friendship and tender respect of some (which yet
upon the former considerations may be justly doubted of, at least it was all,
or their most weighty reason) to the Lord Wariston; yet to say nothing of their
being more moved with the fear of his danger, then the prejudice of the public
Cause, which could not but suffer two ways by smothering of the Letters and
Papers therewith sent, both by the want of the light held forth therein, and by
the imputation of smothering of it; I wonder that the Assembly should have been
so easily moved with these alleadgances which he speaks of, to wit, that the
Assemblies precious time, whereof they knew not how short liberty they might
have, should be spent in reading a particular man's Letter, whereas the
Committees were not yet nominate, nor the Commissions Proceedings which is the
first business that ought to be tried, yet looked upon, and that the Papers
offered to be read did amount to a volume which would have taken up all the
Assemblies time, though there had been no other business, they being of a
hundredth Sheets, and the Letter being of four or five sheets of thick Write.
There was more time spent upon the debate of reading of the Letter, then it
would have been read in to, it being not above the half of these sheets which
the Author speaks of; if his testimony who wrote it may be believed; neither
was the Assembly so much straightened with time, else they were no good husbands
of it, because the first day they refused to read the Letter, they spent a
great part of a Session more then would have served for reading of the Letter,
debating about a Ministers man's and his gleeb, as many honest witnesses can
testify; and the Letter was urged and pressed to be read, not only before, but
also after the nominating and settling all the Committees, both that which
concerned the proceedings of the Commission, and all others. It was not a
particular man's Letter, if by a particular man he mean a private person writing
of businesses of his own; but it was the Letter of a public servant of the
Assembly, writing of the public businesses of the Assembly; I mean the Clerk
who was by his place bound to offer unto the Assemb. from their Acts and
Records what he knew to be contributive for clearing of their proceedings,
especially in businesses of common concernment of the Church; and this Letter
did contain only purpose and business of that nature, and nothing at all of
private or personal concernments: Amongst other things, there was therewith
sent an Extract of many Acts of former Assemblies extracted out of the
Registers of the Kirk, contradicting the Public Resolutions. For the length of
the other Papers, they were not so long, but they might have been read in a day
or two at most, or if the Assembly would not have read them, they might have
committed them to some of their number to take inspection if there was any
thing therein that might contribut to give light to the Assembly in the matter
of the Public Resolutions. It is somewhat strange, that the Assembly being
upon the consideration and debate of these Resolutions, whether they were
agreeable to the Word of God, the solemn League and Covenant, the solemn
engagement to Duties, and other Acts and Constitutions of the Kirk, that they
should have refused to take in consideration, or to read what was timeously
offered to them in the contrary, by their own Clerk; and it is more strange,
that notwithstanding of this, they will in the Act wherein they approve these
Resolutions Preface thus, after due examination, long and much debate and
mature deliberation, but must it (says the Author) be such a crime for which
the Assembly must be judged null, that such a motion was referred and delayed
to a more convenient time. It was not a delay to a more convenient time, but a
delay altogether; let the Author tell us, if he can, when that convenient time
came, or whether the Letter was not wholly laid aside, though not by a positive
and formal resolution, yet waved from Diet to Diet, and never read, which is
the more considerable, that the reading of it before the Protestation being so
much urged, and the Protestation containing reasons against the unlawfulness
of the Assembly, because of the want of freedom; yet even after that the
Assembly went on, and approved the Commissioners Proceedings, without reading
of that Letter, whatever the Author make of it; I doubt all circumstances being
considered, if such an instance can be given in any free Assembly, the refusing
to read former Acts and constitutions of Assemblies, and other things timeously
offered unto them from the word of God, and the Covenant and Public Papers of
the Kirk by their own Clerk out of their own Registers for clearing of the
Commissions proceedings which were now in debate, and if the term of refusal
please not the Author, the Assemblies proceeding to ratify the procedings of
the Commission, without reading or taking in consideration these things offered
unto them by their own Clerk, out of the Word of God, and their own Registers
for clearing of these proceedings, notwithstanding that the same was timeously
offered, and earnestly pressed by many members of the Assembly, and promised by
the Moderator to be read; I believe common reason teaches, and these who treat
of the nullity of Judicatories, and sentences tell us that it is a relevant
ground of a declinator, or appeal, if the judge give sentence, without hearing
what is timeously offered unto him out of his own Acts; and the Laws by which
he is bound to judge, for clearing of the cause. As to that instance given by
the Author of a Paper laid aside in the Assembly 48. or 49. The Writer says,
that he is so far from remembering it well, that he does not remember it at all;
neither yet does others whose memories are better then his; Its strange that
the Author should know it for certain, and yet should neither know what
Assembly it was, not what the business was, nor who the persons were; yet
because he affirms it for certain, I shall not deny it, nor say that it is
untrue, but till he tell us the particular circumstantiat case, and make it to
appear that it is a parallel of the case now in question; I think he will allow us
not to lay weight upon it. Before he close his Answer to this Argument, he
labors to Vindicate the Commissioners from being Authors of smothering a Paper
of Sir Archibald Jonstons, because of a Protestation therein contained, against
a Paper of theirs, approving what was done by the King and Committee or Estates
against the Ministers of Sterline, and tells if the Writer meant so, it is a
wrongful slandering of them: The Writer has said nothing that may import that
which the Author calls a slander: He thinks that it is insinuate; but I think he
has more insinuated it himself, whilst he says the Commissioners were far
from desiring them to be smothered, though one or two out of tender respect to
his Lordship were unwilling that he should be brought to trouble. But was there
any thing in that Protestation that would have brought him in trouble? I think
it will not be alleged; why then should that have been smothered, where even
the reason which is alleged to have been the true reason of smothering these
Papers did fail? What ground of challenge there was against the Commissions
Paper does not properly belong to this debate, and I shall not now meddle much
with it, but leave it to the Ministers of Sterlin whom it does concern; yet did
some judicious men, even some of those of the Civil Judicatory to whom it was
given in, think that the Commission had gone too far therein, to give wound to
the liberties of the Kirk in these things, which many worthy faithful
Ministers of this Kirk have been zealous to maintain and suffer for; I mean
refusing to subject Minister Doctrine to the Civil Magistrate as the proper
and immediate judge thereof; He gives the sum of that Paper in some
particulars: The first is the clearing of the Committees calling before them
the Ministers of Sterlin; he should have said the Committees citing and
confining of them because of their Preaching against the Public Resolutions;
and that before they were cited and sentenced, by any other Judicatories of the
Kirk; yea, before there was (by the Authors confession) any determination of
the Church in that particular case; yea, when there was clear and positive
determinations of the Church upon their side, and Acts binding them (under the
pain of censure) not to be silent, nor to speak ambiguously, but to bear
testimony against such courses, which also by the Oath of God in the Covenant,
they were bound to reveal and make known. As to that practicing of the
obstructing of the Leavies, which he so frequently mentions, he would tell what
it was beyond the bounds of their Calling, left his Readers think that he would
fain have them to believe somewhat of these Ministers, that did not become the
Ministers of the Gospel, but cannot tell what it is. He says, that the end why
they were called, was, That some convenient course might be taken in relation
to them, and securing the Garrison from danger, but has not told us what that
convenient course was, or could have been; neither (I think) can he tell us,
but by justifying the course that was taken, that is, the detaining of these
Ministers from their charges by Confinement. What convenient course could the
Committee of Estates take in order to these Ministers, in an orderly way for
preventing any pretended or apprehended danger that was like to come to the
Garrison by their preaching, they having now declared themselves that they
could not, but for the discharging of their consciences, continue to give
warning against the sinfulnes of these resolutions; they could not sentence
them with any Ecclesiastic censure, and to confine or imprison upon points of
their doctrine and Miniestriall Calling, without any Ecclesiastic process
going before in a Kirk settled in her Judicatories, Government and Discipline.
I know not if the Author will justify it as orderly, The next thing done in
the Paper was, to vindicate the Committee from the guilt of encroaching on the
Liberties of the Church, charged upon them by a Protestation of these
Ministers, which (as he alleadges) was of a very high strain. I confess that
the Commission was concerned to endeavor the vindication of the Committee,
because they were accessory to what was done, as we have showed before; but how
they have acquitted themselves in that Vindication, shall not now be insisted
upon, neither yet the strain of the Protestation, which is no higher then the
truth will bear; but to make up all that Paper, did also approve these
Brethrens Protesting, in so far as it was provisionall for the Liberties and
the express desires that these Brethren might be respectfully used as
Ministers of the Gospel. To which I shall say nothing, but leave to these that
can have opportunity to read that Paper, and then they will be best able to
judge what that approbation was, and what arguments are used in the body of the
Paper for enforcing the desire in the Conclusion concerning their usage.

VINDICATION.
THe last Argument is, that it cannot be a lawful free Assembly in which
persons under trial are admitted to sit as judges in the same thing for which
they are under trial: But the Meeting at St. Andrews and Dundee was such, the
Commissioners therein were admitted to sit as judges in the self same things
for which they were under trial: This is absolutely denied, but the Writer goes
about to prove it by the instance of some particulars: 1. Because the
Commissioners before the approbation of their Proceedidgs, did sit as judges of
the Protestation, a part whereof was, that their Proceedings should not be
ratified, because they did involve a conjunction with the Malignant party,
contrary to, etc. 2. They did also before the approbation of their Proceedings
judge the persons who had given it in, and did give their votes amongst others,
who of them should be cited in order to censure. 3. Nay the Committee wherein
that business relating to the Protestation and in giving of advice was
handled, was for the most part of it made up of Members of the Commission,
which thing will be acknowledged we believe (says he) by indifferent men very
unsuitable and unconsistent with the liberty of a free General Assembly, and
then he adds, that neither would he have others, nor do they themselves lay
much weight upon this argument, unless two points of fact upon which it is
grounded be found true: First, that the Protestation was judged, and the five
Members (it is yet questionable whether they were Members or not; their
Commission being controverted, unless he thinks them essentially members) were
appointed to be cited before the approving of the Commission of the Kirk.
Secondly, that the members of the Commission had voice in these things,
insinuating, that if these matters of fact be clear, as they were informed; the
Argument is voted to batter down that Assembly, as not free, and as null.
Answer: It is true these five persons were appointed to be cited before the
approbation of the Proceedings of the Commission, but not in relation to
censure, absolutely and peremptorily; but to answer for their deed of
Protesting, and in case they should not justify it, or pass from it to be
censured; whether the Protestation it self was judged before the approbation of
the Commission, my memory serves me not to say positively, I suppose it was,
yet let it be cleared by the Minutes of the Assembly; but give me leave to say
it humbly, that granting both these matters of fact, yet the argument will be
found by any indifferent judicious man in the world, able to bear little
weight, and in effect but a mere paralogisme in the whole probation of the
Assumption, viz. that the Commissioners did fit Judges in the very thing in
which they were under trial: For as to the first particular, might not the
Assembly have judged the Protestation before the approbation of the Commission,
and yet in judging of it, not have judged the matter wherein the Commissioners
were yet under trial: yea verily they might; for why? they might as to that
part of it, that is alleged in this argument, viz. that the Commissioners
proceedings should not be ratified, have judged that they should go on to try
them, and if they did find them right and agreeable to the Word of God, and the
Constitutions of this Kirk in that case to ratify them; and I dare take it
upon me, that if they did judge the Protestation before the approbation of the
Commission, they did no other thing in relation to that particular. Now to
judge that they should go on in the trial of the proceedings of the Commission
to approve them as it should be found, as said is, and to judge in the thing
wherein the Commission was under trial, to judge upon the proceedings, whether
they were agreeable, as said is, or not, in themselves, are not the same but
very different things, as any that has half an eye may see and decern. And did
not the Members of the Commission 48. judge and vote with others, that that
Assembly should go on in trying the proceedings, ratify them if they should be
found right and yet will he not say for that, nor can it in truth be said, that
they judged and voted in that thing wherein they were under trial; and
therefore it is evident, the Commissioners might sit as Judges of the
Protestation, even before the approbation of their proceedings, and yet it no
ways follows they did as Judges in the same thing wherein they were under
trial, whether the Writer has reasoned thus loosely out of mistake, or on
purpose, I cannot tell, I can hardly suppose the former of them, considering
that this Paper evidences he is no child, if the latter be true, he has sure
promised himself very undecerning Readers, and his carriage is the more foul.
To the second, the Commissioners might also have given vote with others, who of
the Protesters should be cited and judged them also, and that before the
approbation of their own proceedings, and yet so as it could follow no ways
that they had sitten as judges in the same, wherein they were under trial,
i.e. their own proceedings: for why they might have voted with others, and they
did in no other manner of ways vote in the matter of these persons citation, but
that they should be cited to answer and be tried upon the grounds of the
Protestation, and they might also with others judge the grounds of the
Protestation, and found them not relevant, and thereupon sentenced them for
protesting and declining the General Assembly upon such grounds, and yet the
Assembly might have found upon trial the proceedings of the Commission
afterward wrong and censurable without any contradiction. There is not a ground
of the Protestation, but it might have been found non-relevant for protesting
against the Assembly, before the trial of the Commissions proceedings, and yet
nothing being thereby imported more for approbation then for condemnation of
the proceedings of the Commission. As to the third particular, the force of it
falls to the ground with the two former, for it contains no new grounds, but
only a seeming aggravation of them, if they might sit in the Assembly in plena
Curia, and judge decisive, they might as well in a Committee both deliberative
and praeparatorie, In these matters, viz. upon the Protestation and Protesters,
and yet not judge any thing in the thing wherein themselves were under trial,
nor yet done any thing therein that could be any prejudice for approving or
dis-approving of their own proceedings. Nay, I dare affirm it, that neither the
Writer, nor any that was in the Assembly, shall be able to instance, that any
of the Commissioners did judge or vote either in the Assembly, or any Committee
of the Assembly, or any Act of it importing either formally, or by way of
consequence, approbation or continuance of their own proceedings. I shall here
but add one word that any of the Commissioners did vote in the Assembly in the
matter relating to the persons of the Protesters, or were on any Committee for
that purpose: It was not their prejudice or to their advantage, but being a
thing well known, I believe, to their own consciences, that some of these
Commissioners were persons most tenderly affected toward them of any, and so
did carry themselves. Now I leave it to the impartial understanding Reader to
be judged if this last Argument against the Assembly is able to bear much
weight, give it all the props the Writer requires to sustain it.

REVIEW.
THe Author in his Answer to this Argument, does not deny any of these two
particulars in the matter of fact, the truth whereof was acknowledged as
necessary by the Writer for laying weight on the Argument, to wit, that the
Protestation was judged and condemned, and the five Member, appointed to be
cited before the approving of the Commission-Book; and that the Members of the
Commission had vote in these things; But yielding both, he does justify what
was done as just and orderly; For my part, I wonder of the Commissions modesty,
and of the Assemblies wisdom in it, that needlessly would put themselves upon
these rocks, which have so uncomely a fronticepiece, that I doubt exceedingly
if either the Author, or any man else when they have exercised their ingines to
the utmost, shall ever be able to vindicate it from the appearance of evil, to
say no more. But let us hear his answer to the particulars instanced by the
Writer. It is true (says he) that these five Members were appointed to be
cited, before the approbation of the proceedings of the Commission, but not in
relation to censure absolutely and peremptorily; but to answer for their deed
of protesting, and in case they should not justify it, or pass from it, to be
censured. To which I return first; 1. To pass by the debates that were previous
to the citation concerning summar Excommunication, wherein (I believe) the
Commissioners sa^e as Judges as well as others. The citation was in relation to
censure absolutely, as appeared not only from the tenor of the summonds, which
has no such caveats and provisoes in it, as the Author speaks of, but also
from this, that the Protestation was judged and condemned to be a crime before
issuing of the summonds; and therefore the Author has through inadvertence or
willingly mistaken, when he insinuates, that there was place left for defending
or justifying of their deed when they should compear. It were a strange method
of proceeding, if the Commission should first condemn their deed, before
hearing of what they had to say for justifying of it, and afterward cite them
in order to censure, yet with this proviso, that they would hear them to
justify their deed; and it is little to purpose that they might pass from it,
their passing from it did not ex^em them from censure, unless it had been ex
gratia, and by the mercy of their Judge; But upon supposall that the summonds
had not been peremptory for censure, what is that to the purpose to refute what
is alleged by the Writer, that the Commissioners were not Judges of the
Protesters, before the approving of their proceedings. Is it not ejusdem citare
and sententiam far? And did not their voice in the citation of the persons of
whatsoever nature it was irrefragably say, that they might warrantably be
Judges of their censure. It seems the Author saw somewhat of this, and therefore
afterward he answers, that the Commissioners might have given vote with
others, who of the Protesters should be cited, and judged them also; and that
before the approbation of their own proceedings, and yet so as it could follow
in no ways, That they had sitten as Judges in the same thing wherein they were
under trial, i. e. their own proceedings; for why (says he) they might have
voted with others, (and they did no other manner of way vote in the matter of
these persons citation) but that they should be cited to answer and be tried
upon the grounds of the Protestation, and found them not relevant, and
thereupon sentenced them for protesting and declining the General Assembly
upon such grounds, and yet the Assembly might have found upon trial, the
proceedings of the Commission afterward wrong and censurable, without any
contradiction: for why, if we will believe the Author, there is not one ground
of the Protestation, but it might have been found not relevant for protesting
against the Assembly, before the trial of the Commissions proceedings, and yet
nothing been thereby imported, more for approbation then for condemnation of
the proceedings of the Commission. To these things I have answered before; but
because the Author is pleased to repeat them, I shall first offer an argument
for proving that the Commisioners by judging of the Protestation, were Judges
of their own proceedings, and then another Argument for proving that the
condemning of their Protestation could not well stand with the condemning of
their proceedings. The First Argument is, who so judges upon the irrelevancy of
the Exceptions grounded upon their own proceedings; Judges of their own
proceedings: But the Commissioners in judging of the Protestation, did judge of
the irrelevancy of Exceptions grounded upon their own proceedings, Ergo. in
judging of the Protestation they judged of their own proceedings. The Second
Proposition, I hope, will not be denied, because the Protestation could not be
judged irrelevant but by judging of the Exceptions propounded against the
Commissioners irrelevant, as the Author himself did formerly acknowledge; and
that these Exceptions were grounded upon these proceedings is manifest: the
exception of prelimiting of the Assembly being grounded upon their Letter and
Act sent to Presbytries which was a part of their proceedings; and the
Exception of their being scandalous being grounded upon the public Resolutions
which was another part of their proceedings. The first Proposition seems to be
clear from the intimat connection, that is, betwixt the one and the other of
which the Author himself gave a hint before: But I prove it thus, Who so
judges of the irrelevancy of Exceptions grounded on their own proceedings must
find these exceptions irrelevant, either because they have no weight in law as
not being contrary but consonant to the law, or not as yet being determined by
the law, or else because they are not true, or the truth of them, not being yet
made to appear, but they cannot judge of any of these without judging of their
own proceedings, Ergo, etc. The business shall be clear by applying it to the
things in hand: There is one exception proponed in the Assembly against the
Commissioners, That they are scandalous, because of carrying on a course of
Defection in public Resolutions: This exception is by the Commissioners
themselves together with the rest of the Assembly judged irrelevant; now I
desire to know upon what ground, either because to carry on such a course in
the public Resolutions is no relevant ground to make men scandalous; and if
so, either because these proceedings are not contrary to the Law, or else
because they are not yet determined in law, or if they judge it irrelevant in
reference to the Fact, it must be either because they judge the Fact false, or
else because they judge it not yet proven; so that take it what way we will, it
still follows that they passed judgment upon these proceedings after that
judgment, these proceedings are not contrary to the Law: or thus, these
proceedings are not yet determined by the Law: or thus, these proceedings are
false in fact: or thus, these proceedings are not yet proven to be true in
fact, and therefore the Exception founded upon them is not relevant to look
upon the Commissioners as under a scandal, so also in application to that
exception proponed against them because of the prelimiting of the Assembly by
their Letter and Act; That exception is judged irrelevant by themselves and
others, either because there was no such Letter and Act to be found among their
proceedings: or because such a Letter and Act did include no prelimitation but
such as agrees to law: or else because it is not yet determined as to the point
of law, or not proven as to the matter of fact: and so take it what way we
will, it still includes a judgment upon the proceedings, for which they are
under trial. The Argument which I offer for proving of the other Point, is
this, Who so once judges the Commissioners proceedings to be consonant unto, or
not to be condemned by the Law according to which they ought to be tried and
judged, cannot afterward condemn the same proceedings, or find them wrong: But
who so judges these Exceptions proponed against their proceedings to be
irrelevant, judges these proceedings to be consonant unto, or not to be
condemned by the law according to which they ought to be judged. Ergo, etc. The
First Proposition seems clear and undeniable: The Second is proven, because
Exceptions that are proponed upon matters of fact that are true and manifest as
to the existence of them, cannot be found irrelevant but upon one of these two
grounds; either because these Facts are consonant to the law, or not condemned
by the law, and what is once found by the Judge to be consonant to the law, or
not condemned by the law, cannot be afterward (unless we would make him judge
contrary judgment) found to be wrong, because what is wrong is contrary to the
law. The application of the Argument may help the Reader to the clear
understanding of it, when the Commissioners with other Members of the Assembly,
by Condemning the Protestation, Judges and Condemns the Exceptions contained
therein as irrelevant, they must upon supposal of the truth of the Facts which
are manifest and acknowledged, find these Exceptions irrelevant, either
because, these Facts upon which they are founded, are consonant to the law by
which they are to be judged; to wit The Word of God, and Acts of the General
Assembly. or because they are not condemned thereby: If they judge them
consonant to the law, they cannot afterward find them wrong by that law,
because they have already by the same law found them right; If not condemned,
neither can they find them wrong, because that were to find them condemned by
the law, by which they have already found them not condemned. If it be said,
which for any thing my weakness reaches, is the only thing that can with any
color be said. That they might find these Facts as to the relevancy or
irrelevancy of them not condemned, nor determined by any Act of any General
Assembly, and so no grounds of relevant Exception, when they were offered unto
the Assembly, and yet might afterward find them condemned by the Word of God,
and so find them wrong. I return, 1. That by this Answer it is granted, That
these could never be found wrong by any Act of the Assembly, which then was in
being. 2. That the Commissioners and the Assembly when they judged of them in
order to the relevancy of the Exception founded upon them, did not only neglect
to give a judgment on them according to the just and infalible rule, by which
they are bound in the first place, and by their oath, to square all their
proceedings, to wit, the Word of God; but also gave a judgment of them contrary
to the Word of God, to wit. That they were not relevant grounds of Exceptions,
which is a judgment contrary to the Word, because the things being in
themselves wrong by the Word, cannot but be relevant grounds of Exception. If
it be said, That all that they judged was that it was not yet manifest by the
Word that they were relevant grounds of Exception; That still i^ but a poor
shift to defend an ill Cause, because this follows, That they did condemn them,
before they knew whither the Word of God did condemn them, or approve them: and
this is indeed to my understanding the up-shot of the business, That it must
either be yielded that the condemning of these Exceptions, was the approving of
these proceedings, or else that men in condemning of them, went on blindly, not
knowing whether they did therein judge according to the Word of God, or against
it; Because what I have already said, does clear and take in what is material
and of consequence to this business: Therefore I shall be the sho^ter upon his
Answers to the other two Particulars mentioned by the Writer: He does not deny,
but the Protestatian was judged before the approbation of the Commissioners
proceedings: and surely if so, this was no handsome work, not only because the
Commissioners sat as Judges to condemn the Exceptions propounded against
themselves: but also because a part of the Protestation was that the
Commissioners proceedings should not be approven as involving a conjunction
with the malignant party etc. And it is somewhat strange that they should condemn
a Protestation against the approving of these Resolutions before they find
these Resolutions approvable: and that the men who were under trial in order to
these Resolutions, should sit as Judges, in condemning a Protestation against
the approving of them. The Author thinks, that the Argument will be found by
any indifferent judicious men in the World, to bear little weight, and to be a
mere Paralogism in the whole probation of the assumption; to win, That the
Commissioners did sit as Judges in the very thing for which they were under
trial: I hope before this time judicious men may see something in it that will
bear weight, and that there is no Paralogism in the probation of the
assumption. The first part of his Answer to the First Particular, ^s a posse ad
esse, that the Assembly might have done so, therefore they did so; that the
Assembly might have judged the Protestation before the approbation of the
Commission: and yet in judging of it, not judged the matter whereof the
Commissioners were yet under trial: yea, verily they might (says he) for why
they might as to that part of it which is alleged in this Argument, viz. That
the Commissioners proceedings should not be ratified, have judged that they
should go on to try them, and if they did find them right and agreeable to the
Word of God and Constitutions in this Kirk, in that case to ratify them;
whether they might have done this is not now the Debate: It seems by what is
said, That they could not have done it, but he dare take it on him, That if
they did judge the Protestation, before the approbation of the Commission, they
did no other thing in relation to that particular: Now says he, that they
should go on in the trial of the Commissions to approve them if it should be
found as said is, and to judge in the thing wherein the Commission was under
trial, etc. are not the same, but very different things, as any man that has
half an eye may see and d^scern. This seems to suppose that when the Assembly
did first condemn the Protestation, they did not condemn it all, but only a
part of it, to wit, That part that was against the lawfulness and freedom of
the Assembly, leaving a reserve for the other part, against the ratifying of
the Commissions proceedings, until these proceedings should be tried: but I
cannot take this for granted, until he verify it by the Act it self, which does
condem the Protestation, whereof I doubt exceedingly if it do contain any such
limitation; if it had, it is like that he would have told us directly of it,
but upon supposal that it did, yet that does not take off the difficulty, nor
Answer the Argument, because as we have already shown, the Commisioners, by
judging the relevancy of the exception proponed against themselves (which they
judged of, when they condemned the first part of the Protestation, against the
lawfulnes and freedom of the Assemb.) they judged their own proceedings, whereof
no such instance can be given either in the 48. or any other lawful free Assem.
of this Kirk, As to that of the 48. we have often showed that in all that
business he goes upon mistakes, to wit, That the Parliament did except against
such Members of the Assembly as were Members of the Commission. As to his
judgment of the Writers reasoning, it is such as does make it appear, that he
had rather choose to allow to him the testimony of some ability, then not to
fasten the imputation of a foul miscarriage upon him; For he says he cannot
tell whether the Writer has reasoned this loosly out of mistake, or of
purpose; he can hardly suppose the former, considering this Paper evidences
that he is no Child: If the latter be true, he has surely promised himself
very undecerning Readers, and his carriage is the more foul. It seems the
Authors judgment of the Writer toward the end of his Vindication differs a
little from what it was of him not far from the beginning of it, or else he
speaks of him so as may contribute most for making him contemptible. There he
brings him in as one that in the pening of his Paper must have the help of
others, for the School and for the Law of it, that he may be looked upon as a
weak man, and here he styles him as one that is no Child, that he may be looked
upon as a Sophister: But I believe the Writer will rather choose rather to be
accounted weak, then wicked; rather a Child, then a Deceiver; and he has upon
this account, and upon the account of his own inocency in this particular,
warranted me to tell the Author, and all others who reads these Debates, That
if in the proof of the minor of this Argument (that the Commissioners sit as
Judges in their own proceedings) he has reasoned loosly, he has the testimony
of his own conscience bearing witness to his integrety, that he has not done
it of purpose, but out of mistake; not wilfully, but in simplicity; and withal,
that he is so far from being convinced of any mistake in this, by any thing
that is yet said, that he is more and more cleared and confirmed that they did
sit as Judges in their own proceedings, for which they were under trial,
notwithstanding of any thing that is said by the Author for clearing of them;
but of this I leave the judgment to the Readers. As to the third particular, I
acknowledge, that if the other two had been satisfyingly answered, the force of
it would have fallen to the ground, it being indeed but an aggravation of the
former; yet such an aggravation as adds not a little weight to it; for all men
know what influence the preparations and deliberations of Committees have upon
the Judicatories, whose Committees they are. But these two particulars being
established, and it being true (as it is not denied by the Author himself) that
the Committee wherein the Protestation, and that which concerned the citing of
the Protesters was handled, was for most part made up of these, who had been
Members of the Commission; no question they had in all this business a great
influence upon the determination of the Assembly, and did bring a prejudice to
the judgment, relating to their own proceedings, yea did that, that did involve
an approbation of their proceedings, at least a judgment that they could not be
condemned or found irrelevant; and therefore the Author dares to affirm too
much, when he says, That he dare affirm it that neither the Writer nor any
that were in the Assembly shall instance, that the Commissioners did sit and
vote either in the Assembly, or in any Committee of the Assembly, or any Act of
it importing either formally, or by way of consequence, approbation or
condemnation of their own proceedings; we having made the contrary to appear,
what was the carriage of the Commissioners in these things that past in the
Assembly toward the Protesters, whether their voting and judging in that
matter was to their prejudice or disadvantage; if he mean in order to censure I
do not know, as never having had the opportunity to be perfectly informed about
it; I do indeed believe that some of the Commissioners were tender, as to the
matter of censures, both in regard of the censure, and of the number of persons
who were to be picked out for censure; But to say nothing that all of them were
not so, and for any thing I know none of them were free of laying the ground of
their censure h. e. of condemning the Protestation, and declaring it to be
censurable, it does not contribute any thing, for answering of the thing that
was objected, that is, that they were admitted to sit as Judges of their own
proceedings, for which they were under trial; and therefore notwithstanding
this, or any thing that is said to the Argument, it still has weight against
the Assembly, of which I am content that all impartial understanding Readers
should judge: I do in reference to this Argumenr, and the Argument of
pre-limitation, and that of the rejecting of the Exceptions propounded against
the Commissioners close with the words of these Divines and Lawyers in their
Greivances against the Council of Trent, Quale vero hoc Concilium futurum sit,
aut quid tandem libero Concilio simile habiturum, in quo litigatorum altera
pars, and quidem rea, cum consortibus eodem judicio personam judicis quoque
sibi sumit, and judicii adsessores sub arbitratu deligit, judiciumque pro sua
libidine constituit, quaerelam and accusationem nullam audire vult; Imo
accusatores inaudita causa, and priusquam judicii compareant, protinus damnet
id (inquam) judicium quid judicij simile habiturum sit facile cui vis sine
longiore commemoratione nostra estimare poterit.

VINDICATION.
ANd now upon all that has been said, let every one judge in the fear and
sight of God, whether or no all the Reasons contained in the Protestation it
self, or in the latter Papers, be relevant grounds to protest against, or
nullify the late Assembly as unfree and unlawful in the Constitution and
manner of proceeding therein: or if in the Constitution or manner of procedor
therein there was such encroachments upon the liberty and freedom of Assemblies
as which the Writer boldly affirms in answer to his first general Objection
formed against himself, as destroyed almost all the Essentials of an Assemblies
freedom in Election, Voting, etc. or such encroachments as moved the Assembly
38. to judge null the pretended Assemblies condemned therein, or if the
Arguments brought against the late Assembly be as strong as any brought against
these: both which the Writer affirms too boldly ibidem, but puts their trial
over upon the Reader, wherein I think he did wisely, for I Am persuaded had he
taken the pains to make a particular parallel faithfully comparing the one with
the other, he should evidently fail in the proof, and wrong his credit by so
discovering the rashness of his Assertion. As we have cleared the Reasons
brought against the Assembly, so we have been at a little pains, according to
his desire, to take a view of the Reasons brought against these Assemblies, and
shall also be at the pains to set down some of them here, that the Reader of
the Vindication (who it may be has not the Acts of that Assembly at hand) may
consider them; as 1. Lithgow 1606. but seven days; Aberdeen 1606. but 20.
days before; Perth 1608. but 20 days before, contrary to clear and express
Law, and causing the absence of many Commissioners. 2 Commissioners from
Presbyteries not elected, but enjoined to come by the Kings or Bishops Letters,
or both Lithgow 1606. first and second; Glasgow 1610. first Session. 3. Many
voters, as Judges having no Commission from the Kirk, Lithgow 1608. only 22.
men, Officers of State, Counselors, Barrons and Bishops: Glasgow 1610. 30.
Noblemen and Barrons, beside the pretended Bishops. Aberdeen 1616. 25. Noblemen
and Gentlemen. Perth 1618. 19 Noblemen and Barrons: 11 Bishops. 4 Many
Supernumerary Commissioners for Presbytries, Buroughs in sundries of them. 5
Threatening of Commissioners to vote as the King would, Glasgow 1610. 3 Perth
1618. with the wrath of Authority, Imprisonment, Banishment, Deprivation of
Ministers, utter subversion of the Estate; yea, that whether reasoning or
number of votes should carry the matter. Bribing of Commissioners, Glasgow
1610. 3, 5, 7. no election of a Moderator, but usurpation of that place by the
Bishops, Aberdeen 1616. Reas. 1 Perth 1618. 2. 8. No Ruling Elders sent from
Presbyteries, Glasgow 1610. Reason first, 9. Grounds of proceeding in voting
not in the Word of God, Confession of Faith, Acts of the Assemblies: but the
Kings Commands Perth 1618. Reason 9. Now Reader compare these with what has
been said in the Examination of them, and jugde thou impartially, if no
stronger Arguments was brought for the nullity of these pretended Assemblies
then this Writer has brought against this.

REVIEW.
IT is indeed fit that in a matter of such consequence, men apply themselves
seriously to search out the truth, and to judge thereof in the fear and sight
of God; and therefore without opposing confidence to confidence, I leave men so
to do upon all that has been said, and then to give sentence whether the
Reasons contained in the Protestation, and in the latter Papers, be not
relevant grounds, to protest against and to nullify the late Assembly as unfree
and unlawful in the Constitution and manner of proceeding; and whether the
Writer had not reason to affirm, that there was such encroachments upon the
Constitution thereof, and right manner of proceeding therein, as did destroy
almost all the essential requisits of a free Assembly; freedom of Election,
free Voting, free access and recess, free hearing of what was offered for
light, impartial hearing and discussing of Exceptions against Constituent
Members; admitting of Presbytries, who were under trial, to sit as Judges upon
particulars relating to themselves: and whether there was not such
encroachments as moved the Assembly 38. because of the like to judge several of
the former Assemblies to be null; or whether stronger Reasons are brought for
nullifying any of these pretended Assemblies then of this. The Author thinks
these to be too bold Assertions in the Writer: but I hope they are not more
bold then true; and viritas non quaerit angulos. That the Writer did not make
any particular parallel of the Reasons of the nullity of this Assembly, with the
Reasons of the nullity of these Assemblies, was upon no such politic principle
as the Author insinuats, to wit, The fear of wronging his credit, or the
discovering of the rashness of his Assertion; but to spare (as I conceive he
thought) needless pains, the Acts of the Assembly being so common, and the
parallel being so easy to every Reader of ordinary capacity and understanding:
and if it was a fault in the Writer, not to make a particular parallel,
faithfully comparing the one with the other, and weighing Reason with Reason;
the Author can much less be blameless who seems to undertake it, and yet does
little as to the performing of it, only he makes a short recapitulation of the
Reasons of the nullity of these Assemblies, and leaves the Reader to make the
parallel and comparison; and in this, what has he done more then the Writer?
except that he has been at the pains to make some compend of these Reasons,
which are more clearly set down in the printed Acts that are common. It is to
be marked, that it is not asserted by the Writer, that all the Reasons brought
for anulling of all, and every one of these Assemblies, are quadrant to this
Assembly; but that there is none of these Assemblies, for the nullifying of
which stronger reasons are brought, and therefore though some breaches of the
right Rules of Constitution may happily be found in some of these Assemblies,
which are not instanced in this Assembly, it makes nothing against this
Assertion, nor for justifying this Assembly more then these, because there is
none of these in which more or more weighty breaches of the Rules of
Constitution can be found, then can be found in this. But let us take a view of
the most considerable Reasons brought for nullifying these Assemblie^, and
compare them with the Reasons which are brought for nullifying this: the first
is, The want of timous indiction which caused the absence of many
Commissioners. To this there was something equivalent in this Assembly that
caused the absence of many Commissioners, to wit, The troubles of the times
which in some places hindered the Elections, and in others hindered the
Commissioners from coming. The second is, want of freedom in the Election of
Commissioners in Presbyteries, because of Letters from the King and the
Prelates, requiring them to choose such and such. To which was equivalent in this
Assembly, the pre limiting of Elections of their freedom by the Letter and Act
of the Commission, excluding all those who were opposite to the Public
Resolutions. The third is, the admitting many to voice in the Assemblies, who
had no Calling nor Commission so to do; to which is equivalent in this
Assembly, the admitting the Commissioners to voice, notwithstanding of just
Exceptions proponed against them, before the discussing of these Exceptions,
and the admitting them to voice in the discussing of them. The fourth is, the
want of freedom in voicing, because of threatenings under no less pains then the
wrath of Authority, Imprisonment, deprivation of Ministers, etc. To which was
equivalent in this Assembly, the Kings Letter, and the Commissioners Speech,
with the previous warnings, Remonstrances, Letters and Acts of the Commission
characterizing those who were against Public Resolutions as Malignants, and
appointing them to be censured, and stirring up the Civil Magistrate against
them, together with the Acts of Parliament made against such, which Acts did
involve more and more certainly against the opposers of Public Resolutions
then any of these threatenings could do, because there was no Law, as yet, for
executing of them. The fifth is, the practicing some of the Articles concluded
in these Assemblies before the Assembly it self, notwithstanding that these
Articles were formerly condemned by the Church, by which their Voices were
pre-judged by the practice or these Articles before condemned by the Church,
and therefore they should have been secluded from voicing. To which in this
Assembly is equivalent, the practicing the Public Resolutions by many Members
of the Assembly before the Assembly concluded the same, notwithstanding they
were before that time clearly condemned by the Church: I dare say as clearly as
ever kneeling at the Communion, or feastval-daies, were condemned by this
Church, before the Assembly did conclude them to be practiced. The sixth is,
the limiting of Commissioners of their power and Commission given unto them by
their Presbytries, which was also done upon the matter by Presbytries, sending
Commissioners to this Assembly: For besides that many Presbytries, in obedience
to the Letter and Act of the Commission, did choose none but such as was for the
Public Resolutions passing by all such as were against them: so some
Presbytries did expressly discharge some who were chosen because they were
opposite to the Public Resolutions; of which I have given two clear instances
already, one in the Presbytry of the Mearnes who did by a Letter intimate the
Lord Arburthnet (whom they had chosen to be Ruling Elder to the General
Assembly) that if he had any hesitation or scruple to declare himself satisfied
with the Public Resolutions, they behoved to make choice of another: Another
in the Presbytery of Kirkaldy discharging the Ruling Elder chosen for the Town
of Burnt-Island, upon the account of his being opposite to the Public
Resolutions. Besides these Reasons, there be also others mentioned and cleared,
in the Debate that contribute for proving the nullity of this Assembly; and
when all these are put together, I believe it shall not be found that there
were more, or more material Reasons brought by the Assembly at Glasgow, for
nullifying of any of these 6. pretended Assemblies, then are brought for
nullifying of this; and therefore the Writer has done no wrong to his credit,
nor shown himself rash in affirming so.

VINDICATION.
AFter all these Arguments brought to nullify the late Assembly, the Writer
brings some general Objections against their protesting against the Assembly,
formed at his own pleasure, and Answers them. He needed not been at this
pains, I doubt not, honest and understanding men interessed, in time
convenient, will represent Reasons enough against it themselves, nor will we
stay to trace him in these, considering how fectless and weak the grounds were
whereupon the Protestation was built. The Authors of it, though I question not
their finding mercy at Gods hands, yet shall they never be able to wipe away
before the eyes of impartial men of this and succeding generations who shall be
rightly informed of it, the blot of Dividing this Kirk, and exposing our
Government to be reproached of the Enemy, by needless p^^pming of, and of the
bloody unseasonableness of it; it may sting them to remember what a time it was
they gave it in, wherein the Blood of their Brethren shed in Defense of their
Country, was as yet ^eeking from the ground, and what contentment and
insultations many of them ^^thed in their countenances and speech, at the very
circumstance of time; and that they would not delay the in-giving of it one
day, though Hearing and admittance was promised to them; and if they could not
at all be present personally, might have been presented in their name, but they
would needs give it then though it was near midnight, and the translation of
the Assembly was voted before. I shall add but a word or two more, one is this:
I put it to some of their consciences if it was not apprehension that the
Assembly would approve the proceedings of the Commissioners, together with the
occasion of that days event that moved them indeed to give that Protestation
more then conscience of any weight of the grounds whereon it was built. I give
only these two Evidences of this, 1. That they did so earnestly press the
Assembly to be but adjourned upon that ground, that there were such differences
about these proceedings. 2. That until that day some of themselves had sitten
and voted in it, as in an Assembly lawfully constitute, compeared in Committees
of the Assembly, yea, sitten as Members in them, some of them being Moderators
and Clerks of these Committees cognosced upon matters that came before the
Assembly, made reports to the full Assembly, concurred with votes in making
sundry Acts of the Assembly, until that very day the blow was given at
Inerkeithen; and even then when the Assembly met at night to advise about
translation, they voted in that business; It Is true, They voted not for
translation, but for adjourning of it: But that same did necessarily import
their acknowledgment of it for the present as a lawful Assembly; however now
they do profess that that was an error and fault: Yet these things do clearly
enough evidence, that at the time of the in-giving of be Protestation, it was
not conscience of the weight of the grounds whereon it was built (as they
pretended in the Protestation) but some other thing, even that which was said
before, that moved them to protest against the Assembly.

REVIEW.
THe Author is pleased handsomely to wave the answer brought by the Writer to
these objections, though many of them be home to the purpose: He brings for his
Reasons, that the grounds of the Protestation are weak and fectless. But the
sentence of one who is party, is justly liable to the suspicion of partiality.
If there be no more to be said against the grounds of the Protestation then is
in his Vindication, they may happily be found strong enough notwithstanding both
of his underminings and batteries: I shall the less wonder at his big words, to
wit, That the Protesters shall never be able to wipe away, before the eyes of
impartial men of this and succeeding generations, who shall be rightly informed
of it: The blot of dividing this Kirk and exposing our Government to the
reproach of the Enemy by needless proponing of it; because it is of his
interest and concernment to put these things from his own door and the door of
his accomplices. But in this the Protesters with much trembling and fear do make
their humble appeal to the Lord Jesus Christ, desiring Him in mercy both to the
one and to the other, to bear testimony at whose door the guilt of these things
does mainly lie, whether at theirs who on a sudden do change both their
principles and party, or at theirs who adhering to their former principles have
born testimony against that change, and have studied, though in much weakness
and with many failings and infirmities to preserve their Union cum Deo, cum
Foedere, cum Pristina Ecclesia Scoticana; and to preserve the Liberty of the
Kirk of Scotland [jure] by protestation, when they could not do it [facto] by
any other lawful means. As for the rest of the things which he says in this
Paragraphe concerning the bloody unseasonableness of it (as he calls it) When I
read these things, that of David 2 Samuel 16.12. when much like imputations were
cast upon him, occurred unto me; not that I mean to compare the Author to
Shimei, though yet I wish he had been more modest in these things; but desires
the Protesters to be comforted in their own innocence against unjust
imputations. I see no cause why he should desire them to remember at what a
time they gave it in; from any guilt they had in the in-giving of it, the
consideration of the Lords trysting that doolful stroke at Inerkeithen, with
the more doolfu^ defection of the Church of Scotland, does indeed afflict them
and wound their hearts as often as they remember of it; But in the in-giving of
the Protestation they have peace, as having done their duty therein: That any
of them did kythe contentment and insultation in their countenance and speech
at the very circumstance of time is a causeless reproach, and more then he or
any others shall ever be able to make good, or has any just ground to
allege: He had dealt fairly if he had set down these speeches that gave
evidence of their insultations, their own breasts best know what was the frame
of their spirits, and no man under Heaven can bring any evidence of their
contentment, or insultation in their countenance and speech. That they would
not delay the in-giving of it, was upon these grounds: 1 Because they did
perceive they were already put to disadvantages by delay. 2 Because they did
suspect that it was not safe for them to go to Dundee, which suspicion was
afterward verified not to be groundless, by the usage that some of their
number met with in that place. 3 Because they doubted if the Assembly should
have liberty to transport themselves to sit els-where, the English now being
Master of the Fields,. That it was given in when it was near midnight, and
after the adjournment of the Assembly, are no agravating circumstances of the
business; but the reason was, they delaied as long as possibly they could,
being loath to fall upon this last remedy till they have the utmost. As for that
Question that he puts to the consciences of the Protesters, I shall give a
conscientious and ingenious Answer thereto in both the parts of it, expecting
that he will do the like upon Questions put to him after this manner. As to the
first part of it I do indeed think that the apprehension, or rather the almost
certain knowledge, that the Assembly would approve the proceedings of the
Commissioners, had weight with the Protesters, both to look more narrowly to
the lawfulnes and freedom of the Assembly, and to think more seriously upon a
Protestation then otherwise they would have done if the Assembly had been like
to improve their power (whatever it was) unto Edification: many things may be
born with and winked at in legalities and forms, and ways of proceeding in
Judicatures, when their proceedings for the matter are right, which yet may be
justly censurable in themselves, and which others may be stirred up to take
notice of by things relating to the matter: But that the apprehension of the
Assemblies approving of the proceedings of the Commission did make them hazard
upon a Protestation against the Assembly, upon such grounds as to their
consciences were not weighty and relevant, I will assure him is an untruth;
they were convinced in their consciences before the giving in of that
Protestation, that these grounds were relevant, and their light and conviction
is from day to day more and more increased in this thing, albeit it was, and is
unto them a matter of great sadness to see a General Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland corrupted in the Constitution and actings of it, yet they did, and do
look upon it as a wonderful providence of God, that as all the former
Assemblies that carried on courses of defect on in this Church, were also
corrupt in their Constitution; So this Assembly which did ratify the Public
Resolutions that do involve a course of defection, and make sundry dangerous
and destructive Acts, was, as to the Constitution of it, unfree and unlawful,
and therefore no Assembly at all. As to the other part of the Question, That it
was the occasion of that days event that moved them to give in that
Protestation, more then the conscience of any weight of the grounds whereon it
was built. He that is the searcher of hearts knows that it was not so, and that
that days event had no influence at all upon the Protesters in giving in of
that Protestation, otherwise then that the days event occasioning the
adjournment of the Assembly from St. Andrews did occasion the giving in of that
Protestation before their rising, lest there should not be another opportunity.
And to make it to appear that it was not the occasion of that days event that
moved them to give it in, I desire these particulars to be taken notice of: 1
That it was resolved upon and subscribed 48. hours before there was any report
of that days event at St. Andrews; it was subscribed upon the Friday, and the
report of that event came not till Sunday at night late. 2 When it was
subscribed, it was earnestly pressed by some, that it might presently after the
subscribing thereof, or the next day without further delay be given in to the
Assembly: and upon this very reason among others, lest if our Forces should be
defeated, before the in-giving of it, it might open the mouths of some to say,
that which is now spoken by the Author. If it be asked, Why it was then
delaied? The reason was, because some was absent who had been upon the debate
of it, and were like to subscribe it; therefore it was resolved, that it should
be delayed until Monday, till they might be present to put to their hands, and
that on that day without further delay, it should be given-in without respect
to any events, yet so, as if that the Assembly should be adjourned before that
time, of which there was a constant rumor because of the fear of the approach
of a Party of the English, that it should be given in at the time of the
adjourning the Assembly, and accordingly some of the number were named to wait
on and to do it upon that exigent. The things which the Author brings for
verifying his alleadgances are soon Answered. The p^e^sing to adjourn the
Assembly upon that ground that there was such differences about these
proceedings, was because they did rather incline to strain themselves to the
utmost* and to except of any tolerable remedy, then that the Assembly should go
on to ratify a course of Detection, and to lay a foundation of bearing down
oppose^s of public Resolutions, by making Acts for censuring of them, as
afterward they did: yet so, that if the overture of adjournment had been
hearkened to, they would not have been satisfied, but with such provisions as
might have been remedy at least for the future, for preventing such things as
were wrong in the Constitution, and might have given some probable hope of
right composing of Differences: That till that day some of themselves did sit
and vote in it, as one Assembly lawfully Constituted, is an alleadgance without
a bottom. They did indeed sit and vote in it several days, but with a
Protestation oftentimes renewed both before and after the choosing of the
Moderator to be heard upon the Constitution of the Assembly without
satisfaction, in which they could not acknowledge the Assembly. And the reason
why they did sit and vote till the day of Inerkeithing, was that which I have
told already, because they were loath to use the last remedy, till there was no
hope, That any other could be effectual to bring things to any tolerable
condition: the Author cannot but remember that there was Conference both upon
the Thursday, and upon the Friday, betwixt some of the Commissioners and some
of the Protesters in order to a good understanding, and some right way of
composing Differences, and preventing of further Divisions, and of a wider
breach; and how much and how earnestly some did with tears press the
Commissioners, that they would be instrumental to get the Assembly adjourned,
and how peremptorily they did refuse, so much as once to speak in it. Their
salvo in the Assembly was also salvo enough for them to be in Committees: and
for their voting in the adjournment. I have told upon what ground they did it,
it does but at the utmost say, that they did strain themselves to the utmost,
and further then otherwise could have been convenient, until necessity forced
them to use the last remedy of Protesting: From all which it may appear,
notwithstanding of any thing said by the Author to the contrary, That it was
the conscience of the weight of the grounds whereupon it was built, and not
that which alleged by the Author that moved these men to protest against the
Assembly: The Author is a very bold and uncharitable Censurer of the
Protesters, not only as to the matter of their actions, but as to the motives
and inducements of their actings. In the beginning of his Vindication, he has
holden forth some of them, as acting upon Biased and Self-interst, and as
belying all their great Profession, of respect to the Government of this Kirk
by their Actions. Now in the close of it, he holds forth all of them as men
void of conscience in this particular, and acting upon other grounds,
notwithstanding of their pretending to Conscience: I thought that whatever had
been his Opinion of some of them, yet that he had had a better and more
Honorable estimation of others of them.

VINDICATION.
I Shall in the next place speak a word to one or two passages contained in the
general Objections, because in the one the Writer pretends to hold forth a new
argument against the lawfulness of the Assembly, in the other through the
sides of it, he strikes at the Assembly of Glasgow 38. it self: The former in
the answer to the second Objection is this, Albeit there were nothing relating
to the point of form, viz. to the Constitution and manner of proceder of the
Assembly, yet some conceive, and with much appearance of reason that an
Assembly proceeding wrong upon matters is null, because Kirk Judicatories have
no power to destruction, but all their power is to Edification, and all power
Commissioners of a General Assembly have, it is by Commissions from
Presbyteries which Commission limiteth them to the Word of God, the Covenant
and Acts of former Assemblies, and therefore in so far as they do any thing
contrary to these, in so far they may be declined as having no power for doing
any such thing, which furnishes a new argument, not before alleged for
declining the Assembly, because in the most of all the materials of their
proceedings they proceed contrary to the trust committed to them by
Presbyteries. Answer: We are not now disputing about the right or wrong of
particular Acts and Constitutions of the Assembly; the Writer does but affirm
they are wrong, and this saying is not to be holden for sententia l^ta, nor is
it an Oracle; but to the present matter: 1. Supposing as the Writer does, and
we conceive we have in what goes before made a more clear supposition, nothing
could be alleged in the point of form, that which indeed here makes nothing
for justifying the deed of the Protesters who Protested against the lawfulness
of the Assembly, when as it had not come to any of these Proceedings which the
Writer alleges to be wrong in the matter, this sure I am cannot be
justifiable: But secondly, if the Writer by these some, who conceive, as he
says, means any some Orthodox Writers, it had been fit he had named them and
cited their words and Writings wherein they express that conception, that we
might have had consideration of them: If he mean some of themselves, their
Authority cannot have weight in this matter, being but a party without
authority, speaking in their own cause, and for their own advantage, but for
the thing it self which is asserted here, that an Assembly against which
nothing can be alleged in the point of form, to wit, in the Constitution of
it, for its manner of Proceeding is a null Assembly. 1. According to the state
of the question in hand, a not having the being of an Assembly, but to be
holden a mere meeting destitute of Authority, because proceeding wrong in the
matter, id est, making some wrong Acts, is in my weak judgment a most
dangerous and irrational conception, I confess indeed that a Genesis Assembly is
not a Judicatory absolutely sovereign, whose Constitution is to be embraced upon
its bare and naked authority as Papists make their Councels to be, but
Ministerial subordinate unto, and limited by a rule, and not unfallible, and
therefore that inferior Judicatories, and private Christians also must make use
of the judgment of discretion to compare the Constitutions with the rule, and
are not obliged to receive them if they be contrary to, or dissentient from
the rule; but to say that notwithstanding it be constitute so as nothing is
wanting or amiss as to the point of form requisite in such a Judicatory, yet
if it make wrong constitutions upon the matter, that it is to be holden no
Asembly at all; that is to open a gape to confusion, inferring that absurd
consequence, that that Assembly is not completely constitute in the being of an
Assembly, until all the Acts of it be concluded and ended; and that until it
be concluded no man can acknowledge nor submit to it, but with a reserve, and
if it shall be so, I see not how it can be avoided by the like reason, that
acts wrong upon the matter must make a Presbytery not a Presbytery; yea, and a
Minister a non-Minister, which no man will not see to be most contrary to the
practice of CHRIST and his Appostles in relation to the Priests and Kirk
Judicatories among the Jews while they were a Kirk; it is also remarkable, that
that solemn Assembly of Glasgow in declaring the nullity of the six preceding
Assemblies does never take an argument to prove the nullity of any of them from
the matter of the Acts made in them, while yet there was very fair occasion to
have done, if that Assembly had been of the Writers mind. The second grounds
upon which the Writer says this conceit has great appearance of reason, are
of that sort of arguments that Arristotle calls (...), id est, That has
appearance, but not solidity, id est, That Kirk Judicatories have no power for
destruction, but all their power is for Edification; he might have taken a
large subject to his denunciation, even all Judicatories both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, for no Civil Judicatory nor Judge, nor Magistrate, more then
Ecclesiastic has his power (...) id est, moral power for destruction, but
all is for edificatication, in their kind, viz, for the preserving and
procuring the good and safty of the people, which is suprema lex by just acts.
Is then that a good consequence, an Assembly that makes destructive Acts is
null, then its as good a consequence, a Parliament that makes destructive Acts
is no Parliament, and a King that makes destructive Acts is no King. The truth
is, an Assembly that makes wrong Acts dissenting from the rule it should walk
by, Acts not as a lawful Assembly should do, nor are these Acts made
obligatory, or to be obeyed, but yet for all that, it may be a true and lawful
Assembly, as to the essence and being of an Assembly, and having lawful
authority as the Parliament 48. in carrying on the sinful Engagment, and many
Acts destructive to the Commonwealth, and to the ends of Parliament, which
people thought themselves not obliged to obey, and were afterward condemned;
and yet that Parliament was never denied to be a lawful Parliament: It was a
distinction at that time common and uncontradicted, and for my part I cannot
see a reason why it should not have place in relation to an Assembly, that the
acts of it may be unlawful, and yet it self an lawful Assembly. The other
reason is never a whit more to the purpose more then the former; for to let
that pass which he says in the antecedent, that whatever power Commissioners
of a General Assembly have, it is by Commission from, etc. (which deserves
examination) and if he mean that Commissioners sitting together and voting in a
General Assembly, have only a delegate power, and deputed power subordinate to
Presbyteries, can hardly be reconciled with sound Doctrine, concerning Church
Government) yet supposing it to be so, no more follows, but that in such acts
as the Assembly makes, contrary to the limitations and rules contained therein,
they may get no obedience, and that such acts may be declined and Protested
against; and indeed the Writer himself in his consequent infers no more but
this much, for getting in so short bounds what he had proponed as the point to
be proven, for these are his very words: For in so far as they do any thing
contrary to this, in so far they may be declined, as having no power or
authority in doing such things: Which, what is it else but what we have said?
But it does not follow, that because they make acts contrary to the limitation
of their Commission, therefore the Assembly may be declined and protested
against absolutely, as not having the being of a lawful free Assembly, just as
because, the members of a Parliament have all their power by Commission from
the people of the Land, Commissioners of Shires from their Shires, and
Commissioners of Burghs from their Burghs by a temporary election; and as I
humbly conceive) Noblement^^ by a kind of election, heriditary from the
Commonwealth, and they are limited to the laudable fundamental laws of the
Kingdom, and unto the common principles of Justice; it follows well that if
they make acts contrary to these they are not obligatory unto obedience, and in
so far they may be protested against: But it does not follow, that therefore
the Parliament that makes them may be absolutely declined and Protested against
as no lawful or free Parl. I know there are many differences between these
Judicatories in other things, but I think the Writer shall be hardly able to
let us see a reason why the parallel of this should not hold good. This is it
that takes away the force of the second ground, for proving the point that was
intended, however the impertinency of this second ground as to the point it was
intended for, is discovered before; and I hope by what has been said, it is
sufficiently evidenced that the Writer has brought no new considerable reason
for the nullity of the late Assembly, as to the being of a lawful free
Assembly, even suppose sundry of the acts and constitutions were wrong upon the
matter (which yet is not granted, and he should have proven and not nakedly
affirmed) but has brought disadvantage to himself and the Protestation.

REVIEW.
THe Writer is not positive in delivering his own judgment upon this point,
that is here so much insisted upon by the Author, but only says that it is
the opinion or conception of some with much appearance of reason, and therefore
upon supposall that this opinion were not well grounded, he has brought little
or no disadvantage either to himself or to the Protestation, in alleging the
same; yea, I believe he will take it for an advantage to have the Truth
discovered unto him, either in this or any other particular,: For my part, I am
loath, neither do I intend to fall upon the debate of this question, or to
deliver my judgment positively therein (because, (if I be not mistaken) it is
a thorny question, and full of difficulties on both hands, yet I cannot but
take notice of some things that are set down by the Author in his large Answer
to what was said shortly by the Writer: First, He tells us that the Writer does
but affirm that the Acts and Constitutions of the Assembly are wrong; and that
his saying is not to be holden for sententia lata, nor is it an Oracle: None
speaks Oracles but God, and the Writer takes no more upon him but to speak his
opinion as a poor weak man; but I believe the Author knows, that it is not only
the opinion of the Writer, and of the Protesters, and of such Ministers and
Professors as are unsatisfied with the Constitution of the Assembly, but also
of many others, even of not a few of those who were no opposites to the Public
Resolutions; I have hitherto met with few or none in estimation for Piety and
Godliness that does justify and profess their adherence to all the Acts of
that Assembly as things tending to Edification, and promoving the work of
Reformation in the Land; and seeing he is pleased to make bold with others, I
think he will not offend if I appeal his Conscience, whether he thinks these
Acts of that Assembly that do relate to the censuring of all Ministers,
Expectants, Students, Elders and Professors who do not acknowledge the
Constitution of that Assembly, and submit to the Acts thereof, such Acts as in
themselves tend to the furthering of the work of Reformation, and advancing of
Piety and Godliness in the Land. Next, I take notice of that which he says,
that supposing as the Writer does, that nothing was wrong in the point of
form, that there is nothing in the matter that will justify the deed of the
Protesters, because they protested against the lawfulness of the Assembly,
when as it had not come to any of these Proceedings which the Writer alleges
to be wrong on the matter; in this the Author is mistaken, because the
rejecting of relevant exceptions proponed against sundry of the Commissioners,
both before and after the chosing of the Moderator was wrong on the matter,
being prejudicial to the right Constitution of the Assembly, and a preparative
to the justifying of the Commissioners Proceedings. Thirdly I would have him to
know that the Writer by these some, whom he speaks of, does not mean any of the
Protesters themselves, though the Authority of some of them be of as great
weight in the Protestant Churches as any of the Divines of this age, and being
prior to the Protestation, needs not, nor ought not to be looked upon as the
testimony of a party, but he means some Orthodox Writers, and these of chief,
not in the Protestant Churches, whom (as I conceive) he thought he needed not
to name, as having no great purpose to insist much upon the business: But for
the Authors satisfaction, and the satisfaction of others, I shall name some,
First Calvin writing upon the 23. of the Acts has these words, Nascitur
quaestio, si honor non est privandus qui male officio fungitur, peccavit
Paulus Pontificem honor spolians? Responsio. Inter Magistratus Civiles and
Ecclesiae Praesules aliquid est discriminis, quamvis enim Civilis Imperii
confusa sit perversaque administratio, Dominus tamen vult subjectionem salvam
munere, sed ubi spirituale regimen degenerat, solvuntur piorum conscientiae ne
injustae dominationi pareant; praesertim si impii Sacerdotii titulum, falso ad
evertendam salutis doctrinam praetexant, sibique dominationem arrogant qua ipse
Deus in ordinem cogitur. And Paraeus upon the same place moves the same
Question, and gives Answer to it in these words; Non sequitur a Magistratu
Politico ad Ecclesiasticum, quia magna est dissimilitudo, magistratus politicus
potest esse magistratus; quamvis sit impius ideoque ei obtemperandum quoad non
praecipit quid impium; sed Ministri Ecclesiae deficientes a puritate doctrinae,
and spargentet falsa dogmata, jam non amplius sunt Ministri Christi; Paulus
Magistratum quamvis impium agnoscit pro Magistratu; Impium vero pontificem non
agnoscit pro pontifice. He will also find more writing upon that place speaking
to the same purpose: as also upon the 2. Cor. 10.8. and 13.8. and 10. It is not
now my purpose to fall upon the consideration of the extent of the meaning of
those Divines in these places, it is enough that I give him their testimonies
speaking as much clearly as the Writer said they did. 4. I doubt if for any
thing that is said by the Author, this exception will be found so dangerous and
(...): First, He thinks that it is to open a wide gap to confusion, inferring
that absurd consequence that that Assembly is not completely constitute in the
being of an Assembly, till all the Acts of it be concluded and ended; and that
till it be concluded, no man can acknowledge nor submit to it, but with a
reserve. The reason of this consequence must be, because happily in the close
they may make an Act wrong upon the matter, which one Act nullifies the
Assembly, though they had done all other things well, but so said not the
Writer, neither can any such thing rationally be gathered from his words; the
most that he insinuates i^, that an Assembly proceeding wholly wrong upon the
matter, or in the most substantial and material things, or in the rules of
its constitutions of greatest concernment, or as that so far as an Assembly
proceeds wrong upon the matter, it is so far without authority, as appears from
his own words in the inference which he makes from the power which the
Commissioners have committed unto them by their Presbyteries, and from the
Conclusion that he makes in order to the Assembly now in question, to wit, That
they having in most of all, and the most material of their proceeding proceeded
contrary to the trust committed unto them by Presbyteries; It furnishes
another considerable reason for declining of them. Secondly, He thinks that it
will also infer the nullity of Presbyteries, and make Ministers no Ministers,
if they shall proceed wrong upon the matter, which no man will not see to be
contrary to the practice of Christ and his Apostles, in relation to the Priests
and Church-Judicatories among the Jews whilst they were a Church. But to say
nothing of the difference between Ministers, Parliaments, and Assemblies, the
one being ordinary and fixed; the other not so, the most that it would infer
would be this, That in so far as they proceed wrong, or that if in the most
substantial and material parts of their duty, they proceed wrong upon the
matter, their authority is not to be acknowledged, and this seems not a very
dangerous consequence. Thirdly, He thinks this contrary to the judgment of the
Assembly of Glasgow, concerning which he thinks it remarkable, that in
declaring the nullity of some preceding Assemblies, they do never take an
Argument from the matter to prove the nullity of them, whilst yet (says he)
there was very fair occasion to have done it, if that the Assembly had been in
the Writers mind. The Writer has not yet positively declared his mind in this
matter: But the Author upon second thoughts will find his remark concerning the
Assembly of Glasgow not well grounded, because that Assembly in proving the
nullity of some preceding Assemblies, do reason not only from the form, but
also from the matter or grounds of their proceeding in their Acts, as appears
in the last reason brought for nullifying the Assembly at Pearth, which is
this, That the ground of their proceeding was not the Word of God, the
Confession of Faith, and Acts of former General Assemblies, but the Kings
Commandment only. For the question was thus stated, whether the Five Articles
in respect of his Majesty's Commandment should pass in Act or not, as the
Records of that pretended Assembly bear, where it is declared; That for the
reverence and respect which they bear to his Majesty's Royal Command, they do
agree to the foresaid Articles. And that the Church of Scotland had respect to
the matter as well as to the form, in annulling these Assemblies, is manifest
from that notable Act at Edinburgh, in the year 1639. concerning the causes and
remedies of the bygone evils of this Kirk, in which the fifth Cause is declared
to be the keeping and authorizing corrupt Assemblies at Lithgow 1606 and 16^8;
at Glasgow, 1610; at Aberdeen 1616; at St. Andrews 2617; at Pearth 1618; which
Assemblies are declared to be null and unlawful, as being called and
constituted quite contrary to the Order and constitutions of this Kirk,
received and practiced eversince the Reformation of Religion, and withal
laboring to induce Novations in this Church, against the order and Religion
established. Whence it appears, that either the Author has not known, or else
has not considered, that this Kirk has laid weight upon the matter for
nullifying of these Assemblies, as well as upon the form; and (I believe)
Orthodox Divines arguing against corrupt counsels, do the same; any who doubt
it, may be pleased to read that learned Review of the Council of Trent, and
that Book of the Gravamina against the Council of Trent, in the last of which
it is first proven by many instances that many Councels both of old and late
have erred, and from thence that conclusion is inferred; Ergo necessario ex hoc
consequitur illud Concilium tantum recte dici and esse Christianum, in quo ex
verbo Dei and non ex hominum traditionibus, constitutionibus, decretis,
somniis, aut ulla denique quantumvis inveterata consuetudine, res religionis
judicetur atque determinetur, quamvis magni in eo intersint viri. Etenim
externam illam speciem authoritatis sapientiae humanae excellentiae and
sanctimoniae detestatur and rejicit Propheta inquiens, Quomodo dicitis,
sapientes sumus, and lex Domini apud nos est, attamen ecce mendacium operatus
est stylus, falso and frustra scripserunt Scribae, pudefacti sunt sapientes
perterriti and capti sunt, ecce verbum Domini reprobaverunt, quae ergo illis
sapientia reliqua esse poterit, Jer. 8. Which words are applied at length to
the Council of Trent, and the whole purpose closed thus; atque ex his quae de
Christianorum Conciliorum proprietatibus breviter diximus hactenus planum fit
and irrefragabiliter efficitur Pontificiam Synodu^ quae Tridenti habetur, and
nunc prope finita existimatur neque generalis vel universalis, neque liberi nec
etiam Christiani concilii nomine dignam esse, a^que adeo Concilii nomine
prorsus indignam, juxta regulam communem and vulgo tritissimam, Si re priveris
nec nomen habere mereris, and quid opus est multis conjecturis in re plena and
aperta cum ipsa forma procedendi qua utuntur and Sessiones quas vocant, and
quae ex his consequutae sunt determinationes Canones and decreta manifestissime
doceant quam dissimilis sit Tridentina illa congregatio, pro libero and
Christiano Concilio, opus ipsum, artificem quod dicitur arguit, exitus etiam
acta probabit. These passages and many such which may be cited from the
Writings of Orthodox Divines make it appear, that they lay weight upon the
matter as to the nullifying of Councels. To that part of the Authors Reply
which concerns the reasons brought by the Writer, to wit, that
Kirk-Judicatories have no power for destruction, but that all their power is
for edification, and that whatsoever power the Commissioners of a General
Assembly have, it is by Commission from their Presbyteries; which Commission
limits them to the Word of God, and to the Covenant; and to Acts of former
General Assemblies. I answer these few things: First, That he lays more upon
the Writer, than the Writer does assert or insinuate either as his own
judgment, or the judgment of others, he has neither said nor insinuate, that
the making of some wrong Acts, does make an Assembly null; Neither do I think
that he would say or insinuate any thing of this kind; he did as little deny
the authority of the Parliament 48, as any other. But if there be no difference
between the Assembly and the Parliament in these cases, and that no reason can
be given why it should not have place in relation to the one as well as to the
other, I shall desire him to reconcile his judgment with Calvin his Aliquid
Discriminis, and with Pareus his Magna Dissimilitudo. The Author knows that
the Civil Power is Architectonick and Despotick; the Ecclesiastic but
Hyperetick or Diaconick; the one Lordly, the other but stewardly and merely
Ministerial. The other reason (if we may believe the Author) is never a whit
nearer to the purpose then the former; for (such he) to let pass what he says
in the antecedent. That what ever power Commissioners of a Genesis Assembly have,
it is by Commission, etc. which deserves examination, and if he mean that
Commissioners sitting together, and voting in a General Assembly, have only a
delegated and deputed power subordinate to Presbyteries, can hardly be
reconciled with sound doctrine concerning Church Government, yet supposing it
to be so, no more follows, but that in such Acts as the Assembly makes
contrary to the limitations and rules contained therein, they may get no
obedience, and that such Acts may be declined and protested against, etc. The
Author does here grant, that the Writer infers no more but this much,
forgetting (as he says) in so short bounds what he intended to prove. It will
be hard to make it appear that the Writer did intend to prove any more: The
Author may strain that indefinite expression of his, an Assembly proceeding
wrong upon the matter, as though he had meant, that the least wrong Act in the
least thing, did make an Assembly null, though to the constitution and Acts of
it in all things else it were never so right: But so absurd an assertion can
hardly be supposed to have entered in the thoughts of any rational mau; and I
think it is clear from the reason, that he bring, that this is not his meaning,
because he says that Church-Judicatories have no power to destruction, but all
their power is to edification; in these things then in which they employ their
power to edification, and make right Acts (having other necessary requisites of
lawful constitution) they are not null, nor to be declined. The Author in
repeating that reason tells us, that that which is said by the Writer, to wit,
What ever power Commissioners of a General Assembly have, it is by Commission
from the Presbyteries, does deserve examination; I wish he had also told us
what stumbles him in this; as for that which he suspects to be the Writers
meaning, that Commissioners sitting together, and voting in a General
Assembly, have only a delegated and deputed power subordinate to Presbyteries,
there is no cause to suspect him of such a meaning, as that there being nothing
in his words that look that way. I also wish, that the Author in repeating of
the Writers Argument had made mention not only of limitations and rules in
general contained in the Commission of the Presbyteries, but of the particular
limitations and rules specified by the Writer, that is, the Word of God, the
Covenant, and Acts of former General Assemblies, because it is not upon the
breach of limitations and rules simply, but upon the breach of these
limitations and rules set down in their Commission that the Writer lays
weight. The Authors similitude of the Parl. and Ass. is answered already, and
shown what maybe conceived by some, why the parallel holds no^, though as to
this point, the difference betwixt him and the Writer, seems not to be so wide
as he would give out. His conclusion is, That he hopes that by what has been
said, that it is sufficiently evidenced, that the Writer has brought no
considerable reason for the nullity of the late Assembly, even supposing sundry
of the Acts and Constitutions thereof were wrong upon the matter, he should
have said, supposing the most of all its Acts, and the most material of them
to be wrong upon the matter, for so it was supposed and affirmed by the Writer,
and upon the supposall the Author should have told his judgment upon the point:
The reason may be considerable enough, and such as brings no disadvantage either
to the Writer or to the Protestation, for any thing that is yet said by him for
infringing thereof; yea, I will assure him that it is most considerable and
weighty in the hearts of most part of the godly in the Land, who do not stand
so much to dispute and debate Legal forms, as they do look to Acts of the
Assembly, and to what good or what ill is done by them for promoving or
hindering the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the good of souls, where they see
not godliness advanced, and the hands of the godly strengthened, and their
hearts made glad; but a wound given to Piety, and the hands of the wicked
strengthened, and their hearts made glad; it is not externa species
autoritatis, to use the words cited before, nor any thing that is in that, or
can be said for it that will conciliat respect and authority to Assemblies in
men's consciences; and if there were no more in the late Assembly at S. Andrews
and Dundee, but the loosing of authority in the consciences of the godly in the
Land by th^i^ wrong Acts, it is that which concerns the Author and others who
had hand in these Acts, exceedingly to think upon.

VINDICATION.
THe other passage we would speak a word to, is his Answer to the last
Objection: He says, To make an Act appointing such as decline a General
Assembly, to be summarly excommunicate, were either to suppose that a General
Assembly could not be wrong constitute, or could not err in their proceedings,
or else suppose they should be wrong constitute, and err, yet they ought not
to be declined and prote^ted against: both of which are equally absurd. There
he says, That the Act of the Assembly 1582. alleged for that purpose, is
grossly mistaken, it being nothing against declining unlawful Assemblies (he is
as grossly mistaken, while he insinuates, that such as speak for the late
Assembly, do mean that such an Act should be against declining any Assembly
lawful or unlawful (...) but against appealing from a lawful Assembly to the
Civil Magistrate, and then closes, that from these things it may appear how
unwarrantable the Meeting at Dundee (it must be still for ought he has
alleged, the General Assembly at Dundee) did upon alleadgiance of this Act,
fall in debate of the summary excommunication of these who had protested. Any
debate that was in the Assembly, was no great or long debate upon that matter,
and it was not so much out of any purpose or desire to do it, as to find out
what they might have done by the Constitutions of this Kirk, if they would have
minded severity of censure; neither was it that Act of Assembly 1582. so much
that they looked to, as the Authority of the solemn Assembly of Glasgow 1638.
which in the sentence of Excommunication against the pretended Bishops, and
making there protesting and declining of that Assembly, one of the causes of
their excommunication, which by the acts of Assembly is censurable with summary
excommunication (whether it does mean that act 1582, or some others, could not
be gotten tried at Dundee for want of the Registers then in the Basse; but such
respect was had to the authority of that grave Assembly, that the truth of the
relation made by it was not questioned) so that all the absurdities alleged
here by the Writter, strikes as well against that Assembly, as against any man
that alleges such an act; and the Assembly at Dundee supposing themselves to
be a free lawful General Assembly, alleged no other ground in falling upon
debate of that matter then which the Assembly of Glasgow alleged (and the
Assembly of Glasgow says, there has been such an act made) by a Dilemma, he
is in a great mistake himself, for considering that the act appointing such to
be summarily excommunicate, who etc. is intended only against protesting
against, and declining of a General Assembly, not in any particular act or acts
thereof (which we confess may be protested against) but against the very being
of it as null in it self, and having no authority, there is no necessity either
of the one supposition, or of the other following upon it, not of the later;
for the act we speak of says, that decliners of a General Assembly should be
excommunicate, but an Assembly wrong constitute and erring both, or only wrong
constitute, is no otherwise an Assembly, then a painted man is a man: nor yet
the former, for I shall give you a third, it supposes a General Assembly
rightly constitute and not erring de facto, though not altogether infallible in
it self, or rightly constitute in all things belonging to the being of a free
and lawful Assembly, though it may be erring in some particular Acts, and
ordains excommunication to be the censure of these that declineth and
protests against such an Assembly, I mean as to the very being of it. Truly
this dilemmatick argument of the Writers have been made as well against that Act
made by Jesus Christ, Math. 18.17. He that neglects to hear the Church, let
him be as an heathen or publican, id est, Excommunicate: For, I suppose this
canon, comprehends not only such persons as having offended against particular
Brethren comes by degrees of process before the Church, but also such as
should offend only immediately against that Church it self. 2. It is propounded
in general terms without any express distinction or limitation; he that
neglects to hear the Church let him be excommunicate; Just as this, he that
declines a Genesis Assemgly, let him be excommunicate: Might not then those that
heard that canon first propounded, reason it just as the Writer does here (if
his argument were good) to make such an one as that is unreasonable: For it
were to suppose either that a Church cannot be corruptly constitute, and did
err, yet that it ought not to be disobeyed or declined, but the argument had
been a Cavillation; for neither did follow necessarily to be supposed, there
was a third, a Church univocally so called, id est, a Church right constitute,
and doing duty though not unerrable in it self.

REVIEW.
THe first thing the Author takes notice of in his Answer to this Objection, is
that which is said by the Writer, that the Act of the Assembly 1582. alleged
for the summary excommunication of these who decline the Genesis Assembly is
grossly mistaken, it being nothing against declining lawful or unlawful
Assemblies, to which he retorts that the Writer is as grossly mistaken,
whilst he insinuats that such as speak for the late Assemdo mean that such an
Act should be against declining any Assem. null or unlawful. Well then,
supposing the Writer to have been grossly mistaken in the writing of such a
thing, and that a wrong constitute and erring Assembly, or only wrong
constituted, is no otherways an Assem. then as a painted man is a man (as the
Author speaks) afterward, and that the Assem. at St. Andrews and Dundee is but
an unlawful Assembly, wrong in the Constitution (as is proven) and erring in
its Acts, then might it warrantably have been declined and protested against,
notwithstanding of that Act 1582. or that Act 1638 or any other act of any of
the Assemblies of this Kirk, as the six corrupt Assemblies upon the same
reasons, upon which they were afterward repealed, might in the time when they
were sitting have been warrantably protested against, as some other Assemblies
which are instanced by the Writer, and past by the Author in silence were
protested against; and so all the debate that was in the Meeting at Dundee for
making use of these Acts against the Protesters, was groundless and without
warrant: But the Writer is not so grossly mistaken as the Author gives out,
because it has past current, and does still stick with not a few, that the
Acts of a General Assembly could not be protested against, much less the
Constitution thereof, though culpable and wrong, and the Author himself seems
to come near the borders of it: That an Assembly cannot be well protested
against in regard of its constitution though wrong, when in the same
Vindication where he comes to weigh the reasons whereupon the Protestation is
built, he says, That where a General Assembly it self is protested against as
unlawful, and having no authority, who sees not how sad the consequences most
readily be in that Kirk, hardly can it by any outward means but turn to a
fixed schism, which thing godly orthodox Christians in all ages of the Kirk
have detested and abhorred, choosing rather ever to tolerate great offenses
which they did see, but could not amend, then to divide the Church of Christ: I
know that he may say that he means not here of an Assembly wrong in its
constitution; but if so, what commodious sense in reference to that which he is
speaking of, to wit, protesting against a Genesis Assembly will he put upon the
rest of his words, concerning godly men's tolerating great offenses, rather then
to divide the Church, an Assembly right in its constitution is no offense, much
less a great offense. He does not deny that there was a debate at the Assembly
at Dundee, concerning the summary excommunication of these who had protested,
but tells us that it was not great nor long (If some who were present may be
believed) it was prosecuted by sundry with a great deal of earnestness and
forwardness, and though the Author (if I mistake him not) was none of the
prosecuters of it; yet it seems by his Vindication that his judgment is, That
they might not only have debated it, but also have done it by the
constitutions of this Kirk, if they would have minded severity of censure, but
it would have contribute somewhat for clearing of the Assembly in that debate,
and for satisfying of others anent his judgment upon the point, if he had
brought any act or constitution of this Kirk, that would have born the weight
of summary excommunication against the Protesters, for the Writer has made it
clearly to appear that neither the act 1582. nor the act 1638. does at all meet
with the Protesters case, and the Author has replied nothing to the
differences of the cases, and therefore they may be still taken as granted,
what act the meeting at Dundee did in their debate look unto, whether that of
82 or that of 38. themselves best know, but if it was the Act of the Assembly
at Glasgow (as the Author says) upon which they had their eye, the Writer has
showed how that could not with any shadow of reason be applied to this case.
The dedeclinator of the Bishops 38. striking at the essential constitution of
the Government, and against the rule it self; and that of the Protesters
acknowledging the government and the rule, and protesting only against the
constitution, because not agreeable to the rule. It seems that all that they
had their eyes upon was, that they found in the act of Glasgow, that protesting
against, and declining of the Assembly was by the acts of this Kirk censurable
with summary excommunication, but should they not have found what the acts
were, and whether they were applicable to the present case: The Author grants
that it could not be gotten tried whether it does mean 1582. or some others for
want of the Registers, which were then in the Bass; I shall not say that this
is some evidence that the members of that meeting were not very well acquainted
with the acts of the Assemblies of this Church, and that it had not been much
amiss for them to have read and perused these acts of Assemblies which were
offered unto them a little after their down sitting under their Clerks hand,
concerning the Public Resolutions: If my information fail me not, a good part
of the Registers, particularly the great Book of the old acts of the
Assemblies, in which that act of the Assembly 1582. is insert, was then in
Dundee, in the hand of their then Clerk, who took some pains to find out that
act, but could not fall upon it: It may happily seem strange to some, that
because they found these words which (to wit, declining and Protesting against
the Assembly) by the Acts of the Assembly is censurable with summary
excommunication in an act of an Assembly at Glasgow, that they will have such
respects there to, without looking upon these acts, or considering their
grounds, or extent, thence to infer that these acts were applicaple to this
case; this were to defer more respect to the authority of that grave Assembly
then was fit, or they themselves would have taken with, if they had been
sitting; for they did nothing without viewing and perusing the Registers
themselves, and proving and clearing every thing thereby, that they did
allege therefrom, which Vindicates that Assembly sufficiently from the
absurdities here alleged by the Writer against these who alleged such an
act. The Author thinks that the Writer is in a great mistake in his dilemma,
but let us see what his mistake is: The writer answering a common alleadgance,
that there is an act of a Genesis Assembly appointing such as decline the Assembly
to be summarily excommunicated, denies that ever the Church in any of her
Assemblies made any such act in so general and unlimited terms; and he gives
this for a reason of his denial, that from hence it will follow, either that
they thought that an Assembly could not be wrong in its constitutions, and
could not err, or else that though wrong in constitution, or erring, that they
could not be protested against; both which he says is absurd: To this the
Author answers, that considering that the act appointing such to be summarily
excommunicated, is intended only against protesting against, and declining of a
General Assembly, not in any particular acts or act thereof which he confesses
may be Protested against, but against the very being of it, as null in it self,
and having no authority; there is no necessity either of the one supposition or
of the other following upon it; not of the latter, etc. But first to pass by,
that he seems in all this debate to suppose that there is such an act in so
general and unlimited terms which I believe shall not be found, nor does the
words of the act of the Assembly 38. say or suppose any such thing. It deserves
consideration, which he says, that that act concerning the excommunicating
such as protest against, or decline an Assembly, is intended only against
those who protest against the being of an Assembly, and not in any particular
act or acts thereof, because as the Writer told him, the act 1582. which is the
only, act relating to that business (so far as I know, or can be informed by
these who take most pains in the Records of the Assemblies) is not anent
declining Assemblies, in their being and constitution, but against appealing
from lawful acts of lawful Assemblies to the Civil Magistrate in
Ecclesiastic causes, for stoping of Ecclesiastic Discipline. Secondly, though
an Assembly wrong constitute and erring both, or only wrong constitute be no
otherwise an Assembly then a painted man is a man, that it is not really or
truly, but seemingly only, yet it being seemingly an Assembly, it gets
ordinarily and in common expression, that denomination; and as a painted man
drawn by the hand of a cunning Painter may deceive these who have not
discerning eyes, and be taken for a true man, so an Assembly wrong in the
constitution and acts, or in the constitution only, may by the vermilion of
fair pretext put upon it pass with many for a true Assembly; yea, in ordinary
way of expression, an Assembly which has any thing of the color or shadow of
the being of a lawful and right proceeding Assembly is called an Assembly,
though wrong in its constitution, or also erring in its acts, and therefore to
have said simply in an act, that decliners of a General Assembly without any
qualification, lawful, or unlawful, erring or unerring, or any thing in the
act insinuating or expressing the same should be excommunicated, it would
follow, that though an Assembly should be wrong constitute and err in its
Proceedings, yet it could not be declined. As to the third, to pass by that
the General Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee is none of these Assemblies,
but an Assembly wrong both in its constitutions, and in its acts, The Act if it
were so general as that cited and answered by the Writer, it would suppose
more then any of these, to wit, a General Assembly which is only such, nomine
tenus and secundum apparentiam in regard of its constitution, and a General
Assembly right upon the constitution, and erring wholly even in the thing of
greatest consequence upon the matter; as to this simile of his brought from the
words of Christ, Math. 18. It does not hold, because Christ never maintained it
to be unlawful to decline any Church, true or false, as these whom the Writer
speaks of in his objection. The truth is, that the Writer meant of propounding
and answering that objection, to remove a gross mistake that has been ordinary
in the mouths of many; that a General Assembly could not be declined nor
protested against, because of an act of an Assembly appointing such to be
summarily excommunicate which in the common construction that past upon it was
so expounded, that whosoever upon whatsoever ground did protest against a
General Assembly of this Church, or any of the acts thereof right or wrong,
were by the acts of the Assembly summarily to be excommunicated, which mistake
the Writer studieth to take off, by holding torch the absurd consequences,
that would have followed upon such an act, as that thereby to make it appear
that there is no such act in so absolute and il-limited terms as will reach
these who protest against Assemblies wrong in their constitution, or also
erring in their acts, and this being gained, he has all that he did intend to
prove and hold forth in this particular.

Conclusion of the VINDICATION.
HEre I leave the Writer with these additionall reasons, and leaves all that
has been said hither til to be impartially pondered by the Christian Reader,
and accordingly judged of. The Father of Lights give unto thee, and all his
servants and people in the Land, Wisdom, even that which is from above, pure
and peaceable.

REVIEW.
THe Author has been pleased to leave the Writer here with his additionall
reasons, and other things contained in his answers to Objections; but if some
of good judgment be not mistaken, he has done it to the disadvantage of his
cause, because he has left him with many things that were brought by him in
that Paper of additionall reasons unanswered, I shall not say what some have
said, that if the things in that Paper which the Author has not answered hold
relevant and true, they would go far to justify the Protestation, and annull
the Assembly, albeit all his answers to the things which he has taken notice
of had not been satisfyingly taken off; but I confess that I do somewhat wonder
that the Author having taken so much pains to contend with no small earnestness
and at length about many things that are in the by, and things that are of no
such consequence in the cause, should yet pass in silence, not a few things of
importance contained in that Paper, which did more concern him to have
answered; I shall say no more, but wishes the Lord graciously to appear in the
convincing and comfortable determination of this question to all his servants
and people in this poor desolate and distracted Church, that our bruise which
is sore, and our wound which is incurable may be bound up and healed by his
hand who has smiten us in his wrath, because of the multitude of our
iniquities; To the praise and glory of his free Grace in all the Churches. AMEN.

FINIS.
INSTANCES of the Influence that the Letter and Act of the Commission of the
Genesis Assembly 1650. had upon several Presbyteries and Synods, and upon several
persons therein, in the Election of Commissioners to the Assembly 1651. and in
the Citing of these of their Number who were dis-satisfied with the Public
Resolutions as they are attested out of the Registers, or by Members of these
Presbyteries and Synods, who were Witnesses to their Proceedings in these
things.
1. Instance in the Presbytery of Jedburgh.
THe Letter and Act of the Commission of the Genesis Assembly 1650. concerning the
Citing of such of their Number as were Opposite to the Public Resolutions,
came to the Presbytery of Jedburgh, before the choosing of their Commissioners
to the Assembly: At the time of the Election, the Presbitery after the reading
thereof, did in obedience thereto, make enquiry, who of their Number were not
satisfied with the public Resolutions; and finding that Mr. John Livingston,
Mr. Ja. Ker, and Mr. Jo. Scot, were dissatisfied with these Resolutions, they
did appoint Conference with these Brethren in order to their satisfaction, by
reading of some public Papers, refusing any other way of Conference unto them;
after which, they went on to the Election of their Commissioners, passing by
these dis-satisfied Brethren, and Citing them by virtue of the Act of the
Commission, to Compear before the General Assembly to be holden at St. Andrews
the (...) day of July, 1651.

2. Instance in the Presbytery of Dunkel.
THe Presbytery of Dunkel having chosen such of their number to be
Commissioners to the General Assembly 1651. as were in their judgments opposite
to the public Resolutions; some of the Presbytery dissented from the Election
of these persons upon the ground of their being incapable to be Commissioners,
because of an Act of the Commission for citing of such to the Assembly, and
urged, That the Dissent, and ground thereof, might be marked in the
Presbytery-Book, to be judged by the Synod.

3. Instance in the Synod of Perth.
THe Synod of Perth, which met in June 1651. having received and read the
Letter, and Act of the Commission, concerning the citing these who were
opposite to the public Resolutions, did find it incumbent unto them for
satisfying the said Letter and Act, to appoint the several Presbyteries within
their Bounds, and where the plurality of the Presbytery was dis-satisfied with
the public Resolutions, some nominated by themselves to Confer with
dis-satisfied Brethren; and in case of their not receiving satisfaction by
Conference, to cite them to the Genesis Assembly at St. Andrews, from which Act of
the Synod, such dis-satisfied Brethren as were present, who were about eight or
nine, did ^assent, and were therefore cited apudacta by the Synod, to Compear
before the Assembly, because of their opposition to the public Resolutions:
and concerning the rest who were absent, it was ordered by the Synod, That
personal Summons should be sent unto some of them, and that others of them, in
case of their not being satisfied by Conference, should be cited by their
respective Presbyteries, and such as were appointed to Confer with them: At the
same time, the Synod taking in consideration the Dissent of some of the Members
of the Presbytery of Dunkel, and the grounds thereof, from the Election of
their Commissioners did sustain the same, and appoint the Presbitry to make a
new Election.

4. Instance in the Presbytery of Kirkaldie.
THe Presbytery of Kirkaldie, having received and read the Letter and Act of
the Commission, did thereafter and in order thereto, refuse to subscribe the
Commission of Magnus Aytoun, then chosen Commissioner to the General Assembly
by the Town of Brunt-Iland, because when his Commission was presented to the
Presbitery, he was not present to declare his judgment concerning the public
Resolutions. The same Presbytry did by virtue of the same Letter and Act find
themselves oblidged to Refer or Summon two of their Number, to wit, Mr. Alex.
Muncreiff, and Mr. George Nairne to the General Assembly, because of their
being dis-satisfied with the public Resolutions, but remembering that these two
had a little before that time Dissented from an Act of the Synod of Fife,
appointing such Ministers in the Bounds of that Synod as were dis-satisfied
with the public Resolutions, to be referred to the General Assembly, did find
that they were obliged to compear before the Assembly, to give in the Reasons
of their Dissent from that Act; and therefore the Presbytery did draw up a Paper
mentioning their regard to the Act and Letter of the Commission, and also
bearing the Dissent of these two Brethren, and that they judged it not
necessary to summon them, who were already by their Dissent obliged to compear;
and this Paper they did deliver to their Commissioners, appointing them to
present it to the Assembly.

5. Instance in the Presbytery of Glasgow.
THe Presbytery of Glasgow did choose Commissioners to the General Assembly
1651. before the Letter and Act of the Commission came to their hands, from
which Election some of their Number did Dissent upon this ground amongst
others, because the persons chosen were of a contrary judgment to the public
Resolutions, and that they knew that the Commission of the General Assembly was
to send some public Directions to the Presbitery anent that matter, and the
dissenting part of the Presbitery, though the smaller number by many, did
thereafter make a new Election of their own, and did cite some of these of the
Presbitery who were opposite to the public Resolutions, to compear before the
Assembly upon the ground contained in the Letter and Act of the Commission; and
some of the same Dissenting part of the Presbitery, who were frequently with
the Commission, in promoting these Affairs, did send the Letter and Act of the
Commission enclosed in a Letter of their own to two of the Brethren of the
Presbitery of Lanrick, advising them, That before the Election of Commissioners
in their Presbitery, they should cause read the Letter and Act of the
Commission, and endeavor to carry on the Election accordingly; and that if they
could not attain this, that then these of their Number who did approve of the
public Resolutions, should make a New Election amongst themselves, and leave
it to the Assembly to judge which of the two Elections was valid; signifying
withal unto them, that they had done so in the Presbytery of Glasgow.

6. Instance in the Presbitery of Biggar.
THe Letter and Act of the Commission 1650. concerning such as did Differ from
the public Resolutions, came to the Presbytery of Biggar, and was publicly
read therein before the choosing of their Commissioners to the General Assembly;
and thereupon Interogators were made to the Brethren, for trying of their
judgment anent the public Resolutions, that these who professed themselves
dis-satisfied therewith, might be rendered incapable to be chosen Commissioners
to the General Assembly.

7. Instance in the Presbytery of the Merns.
THe Presbytery of the Merns, having chosen the Lord Arbuthnet in his absence
from the Presbytery, to be Commissioner as Ruling Elder to the General Assembly
1651. did send two of their Number unto him to take his Oath to be faithful in
that employment; and withal, to take trial whether he were satisfied with the
public Resolutions; and to signify to him, That if he were not satisfied with
these Resolutions, the Presbytery could not be answerable to give him a
Commission for sitting in the Assembly, but behoved to choose another.

These Instances may suffice for verifying of what is alleged in the former
Debates concerning the influence that the Letter and Act of the Commission of
the General Assembly had upon several Presbyteries and Synods and Persons
therein, in the Election of Commissioners to the Assembly 1651. and in Citing of
these who were Dis-satisfied with the public Resolutions, and therefore it
shall not be needful to trouble our selves or the Reader with the bringing and
setting down of more of this kind.

PAPERS betwixt the ASSEMBLY and COMMITTEE.
Offers and Desires from the Committee of Estates, Presented by the Earl of
Glencarn, the Thesaurer, Depute, and Archibald Sydserf, to the Genesis Assembly.
AS we cannot but with sad hearts regrate that notwithstanding of the many
endeavors of, and great pains taken by the Parliament and Committee of Estates,
for removing of Differences, and offering all just satisfaction to the Desires
of the Commissioners of the General Assembly concerning the necessity and
lawfulness of this present Engagement; yet they have all hitherto proven
ineffectual, and Divisions betwixt us are rather increased, then lessened; so
we cannot but here promise to our selves better Success from the wisdom of this
grave and venerable Assembly, especially whilst our consciences bears us
witness, that in all our undertakings we have nothing before our eyes but the
glory of God in the first place; and in the second, the good and preservation
of Religion; and next thereunto, the safety of his Majesty's Person now in
danger, and the pursuance of the same ends of our Covenant which has been
sealed with the blood of so many of our friends and country men: And that our
sincerity and reallity in all these may be manifested to all the world, we are
content now again at this time, not only to renew all these offers which were
formerly made by the Parliament to the Commissioners of the Genesis Assembly, for
the security of Religion; but hereby we offer to grant what further security
the General Assembly shall be pleased to demand in reason of us for Religion:
And although we cannot lay negatives and restrictions on the King, but must as
obliged in conscience and duty, endeavor his Rescue, that he may come with
honor, freedom, and safety to some of his Houses, in, or about London; yet we
are most willing to give what Assurance can be demanded for our selves and our
Army, even by an solemn Oath, if so it shall be thought fit by the General
Assembly, that we shall not be satisfied and lay down Arms, until Religion be
secured in all his Majesty's Dominions, according to the Covenant: Therefore out
of the deep sense we have of the great danger that the further growth of these
Divisions may bring to Religion, the Kings Majesty, and to these who does
sincerly wish the settling of Presbiterial Government in all his Majesty's
Dominions. We cannot but desire you seriously to weigh the sad Consequences may
ensue, if at this time there be not found amongst you, some who will endeavor
to heal, and not to make wider the Breaches betwixt Church and State, to
remember that no such effectual help can be yielded at this time to that -- as
to have the hearts and consciences of the people preposessed with prejudices
against the Resolutions of the Estates and their so pious and necessary
Engagment. And for this cause, to the end these unhappy Differences may spread
no further, we do entreat you would be pleased to appoint some of your Number,
to meet with such as shall be appointed by us, for Composing these
mis-understandings betwixt Church and State: And likewise for so clearing the
Marches betwixt the Civil and Ecclesiastic Power in these Questions has been
Debated betwixt the Parliament and the Commissioners of the Genesis Assembly; as
the Kirk may be freed of all scandals in meddling with Civil Business, and the
Estates from the scandals of Erastianism: And seeing our desires herein are
only to remove all jealousies betwixt the Church and State, and to witness to
the world our unfeigned intentions to do all that is in our powers for the most
satisfaction of the Genesis Assembly, We do desire that ye would be pleased to
forbear the emitting of any Declaration either to this Kingdom, or the Kingdom
of England, relating to our present Engagement and proceedings, considering how
unseasonable it may prove whilst our Army is in the Fields against the great
obstructions of any Enemies to our Reformation, to do any thing may encourage
and strengthen the hands and hearts of that -- who doubtless will encourage
themselves in their own ways, the more they have ours disapproven by you: And
as their unhappy differences and divisions have already so wrought upon the
hollow hearts of some of our Countrymen, as to move them to rise in Arms
against the Parliaments Forces, and of some to run and join themselves with
these -- so much the more will these -- be strengthened and encouraged against us
by their hearing of our Divisions: We do likewise desire, That before the Genesis
Assembly proceed to any approbation of the actions of the Commissioners of the
Genesis Assembly, That in these things that may relate to the present Engagement
and to these Questions has been Debated betwixt the Parliament and them, we
may be first hard. All these we desire for no other end, but that these
untimely Differences and Rents now grown to so great a height as that they
threaten the ruin both of Church and State, may by the blessing of God in the
spirit of Meekness be cu^ed and bound up, That neither Malignants on the one
hand may have occasion to laugh at our Divisions, nor -- on the other hand
encouraged and strengthened against us: But that we (as formerly) may go on in
one way, being all engaged in one Cause for one and the self-same Ends; And so
may receive a blessing from the Lord of Peace and Order (which hates the
instruments of Division and Confusion) upon all our endeavors, for advancing
the blessed work of Reformation, and for bringing to an happy end all the
Miseries and Confusions now, which these Lands has been so long toiled and
consumed with.

Before the Assembly give any Answer to the Paper produced from the Honorable
Committee of Estates, The Assembly thinks fit to enquire at the honorable
Persons who presented the Papers, If the Committee of Estates have any new
Objections against the Proceedings of the Commission of the late Assembly, or
only the same Objections made by the Parliament, or their Committees before.
Sic subscrib. A. Ker.

The Committee of Estates do make this Return to the Paper of the Genesis
Assembly, That they have just and material Exceptions against the proceedings
of the Commissioners of the Genesis Assembly, besides any formerly made by
Parliament or Committee of Estates.

The Assembly continues until the morn at ten hours that Examination of the
Proceedings of the Commission of the late Assembly, and do appoint that time
for Hearing any New Exceptions the Committee of Estates has to give in against
the Proceedings of the said Commission.

PAPER sent into the ASSEMBLY.
WHereas it has been the constant Care and Endeavor of the Parliament and
Committee of Estates, To use all means for removing and settling the Differences
betwixt the Church and the State; and in pursuance of that good way, The
Committee did yesterday give in some new Desires and Offers to the Genesis
Assembly, That some might be appointed to meet and confer with such as should
be appointed by the Committee thereupon: But since instead of embracing and
laying hold of this opportunity of composing Differences, The Genesis Assembly
does proceed toward an approbation of the proceedings of the Commissioners of
the Assembly, whereby we conceive all hopes of making up the Breaches will be
removed, and the prejudices will be great that will thereby ensue to this cause
and Kingdom; For preventing whereof, we hold our selves obliged again, to
desire you, as you tender the furtherance of the work of Reformation, the Good,
Peace, and union of the Kingdoms, and the composing of all Differences and
Jealousies, that you would apply your selves to these our Desires, and appoint
some of your Number to confer with us thereupon for the Exceptions we have
against the proceedings of the Commissioners of the Genesis Assembly: We have
confidence a Conference may preveen the same, and are more willing not to give
them in at all, or at least only to give them in to those you shall appoint to
confer with us, that if it be possible Differences may yet be removed, Then
that we be necessitate to appear in public amongst them: And that this and our
former Paper may remain as a testimony of our Desires for Unity and Peace, we
desire that they may be Recorded in the Books of the General Assembly.

The Assembly do give this humble return to the Papers sent this day from the
Hon. Committee of Estates, That they are most willing to appoint a conference
with any of their Lordsh. number, but that according to the Order and Acts of
former Genesis Asemblies, they conceive themselves obliged, first to examine the
proceedings of the Commission of the late Genesis Assembly, and thereafter shall
be willing to confer, being also now ready as of before to hear Exceptions, if
there be any against the proceedings of the said Commission. Subscrib. A. Ker.

The Committee of Estates understanding that the Genesis Assembly is to proceed to
the examination of the proceedings of the Commissioners of the late Genesis
Assembly in order to an approbation before they agree to a Conference; and the
Committee being to give in their just exceptions against the proceedings of the
said Commissioners, do desire the Genesis Assembly to allow some few days delay
to the Committee to prepare their Exceptions before the Assembly proceed in the
Business.

The Assembly continues the examination of the Proceedings of the late Genesis
Assembly until four afternoon, and appoints that time for Hearing any new
Exceptions the Honorable Committee of Estates have to give in against the
Proceedings of the said Commission. Subscrib. A. Ker.

The Committee of Estates finding it impossible in so short a time to prepare
their Objections against such of the proceedings of the Commissioners of the
General Assembly, as relates to their Engagement: and yet being most willing to
essay all fair means for procuring an happy Understanding betwixt Kirk and
State, are content to appoint some of their Number to meet with such as shall
be appointed by the General Assembly for Composing of Differences betwixt the
Church and State, without prejudice to them to use all their just Objections
against the proceedings of the Commissioners of the late General Assembly, if
the Conference shall not produce these happy Effects they earnestly wish.

The General Assembly unto the Motion sent this afternoon from the Honorable
Committee of Estates, Do return humbly this Answer, That they yield to their
Lordships Desires of a Conference, and for this end appoints Mrs. David
Calderwood, David Dickson, Robert Douglass, Andrew Cant, John Moncreif, John
Smith, and John Mac Clelland, Ministers; and the Earl of Cassilles, the Earl of
Louthian, Lord Balmernio, the Lairds of Moncreif and Freeland, with the
Moderator to confer with any appointed by the Honorable Committee of Estates,
at such time and place as shall be appointed by their Lordships, upon the
present Dangers to Religion and the cause of God, the great prejudices done to
the Liberties of the Kirk, and the best remedies thereof: And to Report the
Result of their Conference from time to time: And they have also Power to
receive any Offers or Papers from the Honorable Committee of Estates, and to
present the same to the Assembly: Declaring that the proceedings of the
Commission of the late Assembly being new exactly tried, and unanimously
approven, there is no place left for any Objections against the same. Subscrib.
A. Ker.

Reasons why these who dis-approved the Public Resolutions and Acts at Dundee,
Ratifying the same, and ordaining censures to pass upon the opposers and
unsatisfied, cannot keep the Assembly now indicted, nor be consenting unto the
Election of Commissioners for that effect.
THe chief cause of many evils which have befallen this Church in time of
defection under Prelacie being clearly determined by the Gen: Assembly at
Edinburgh 1639. to have been the keeping and authorizing corrupt General
Assemblies, it is of high concernment, that we take heed that we be not
consenting nor concurring to the keeping and authorizing such Assemblies in
this declining time amongst which the Assembly indicted by the Commissioners of
the pretended Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, is to be reckoned, and
consequently ought not to be kept by any who have protested against, or are
in their consciences unsatisfied with the Public resolutions and Acts of the
Assembly at Dundee, establishing the same as involving defection and
backsliding from the Cause of God and Covenant.

To speak nothing of the indiction of the ensuing Assembly, (which can neither
be acknowledged by any who have protested against, or by any who doubts of the
freedom^, lawfulness and constitution of the Assembly at Dundee) but allanerly
of the constitution thereof, in so far as it depends upon the Acts of that
Assembly. These reasons seem to warrant and require the forbearance and
non-concurrence of all these (who disallow of the Acts of the pretended
Assembly at Dundee) in the election of Commissioners unto a keeping the diet of
the Assembly now indicted.

1. No man ought to be consenting unto the authorizing of Commissioners to keep
an Assembly which is constitute by a corrupt rule. But in the judgment of such
as approve not the Acts of the Assembly of Dundee, the ensuing Assembly is
constitute by a corrupt rule: Ergo, The major Proposition is unquestionable,
the minor is proved thus: It is to be constituted by the Acts of the pretended
Assembly of Dundee as by a rule: Ergo, By a corrupt rule; the antecedent is
manifest, because all the unrepealed Acts of former Assemblyes that do
determine the qualification of Commissioners, are especially the Acts of the
Assem. immediately preceding, are the rule by which the Assem. is to be
constituted, as is manifest from the Acts of the Assem. themselves, old and
late, and from the constant practice of this Kirk in all her Assemblies, and
that the Acts of Dundee include a corrupt rule as to the judgments and
consciences of those who condemn these Acts as involving a course of defection,
is manifest, because they appoint all those who do not acquiesce and is
obedient to the Acts and Constitutions of that Assembly, to be proceeded
against with the censures of the Kirk, and so to be excluded from being capable
of being elected as Commissioners for sitting in the Assembly as Members
rightly qualified.

2. No man ought to concur in any Election of Commissioners when the Election
is not free, but ought rather to give testimony against the same: But the
Election of Commissioners to the Assembly indicted by the pretended authority
of the Commissioners of the Assembly at Dundee cannot be free in the judgment
of these who do not approve of the Acts of Dundee; Ergo, Nothing here needs
confirmation but the Assumption, which may be proved thus; That Election which
is limited and restricted unto such only as are involved in a course of
defection and backsliding, and is exclusive of all other who have not been
involved in the foresaid course, cannot be a free election, but the election of
the Commissioners of the ensuing Assembly is such, in the judgment of these
who do not approve the Acts of Dundee; Ergo, The reason of the assumption is,
because illud possumus quod jure possumus. Now, no Presbytery, Session, or
person acknowledging the constitution and authority of the Assem. of Dundee,
and yet testifying against the Acts thereof relating to the approbation of
Public resolutions, and to the censuring of the opposers, and such as do not
acquiesce and give obedience thereto, can legally choose Commissioners,
contrary to a standing unrepealed Act of an Assembly. Therefore the election of
Commissioners to the ensuing Assembly must be limited and unfree in the
judgments of these who protest against it in their consciences, or dis-approve
the Acts of the Assembly of Dundee, as involving the approbation of the course
of defection.

3. No man ought concur in the election of Commissioners to an Assembly, unto
which none are to be admitted Members, but such as are involved in a course of
defection and back sliding from the Cause of God, and from the Covenant, but
the ensuing Assembly is to be such in the judgments of these who dis-approve
the Acts of Dundee; Ergo, the Proposition is granted on all hands, even the
Assembly of Dundee, and the asserters of the authority thereof, grant the
Nullity of an Assembly, when the authors and abettors of a course of defection
are admitted to be constituent members. The assumption is proved, to wit, That
Assembly now indicted, is to be such an Assembly that Assembly; unto which none
can be admitted Members, but such as approve the Public Resolutions, and the
Acts of Dundee ratifying the same, is in the judgment of these who dis-approve
the Acts, but not the authority of the Assembly of Dundee, an Assembly unto
which none can be admitted Members, but such as are involved in a course of
defection: But unto the ensuing Assembly none can be admitted Members, but such
as approve the Acts ratifying the Public Resolutions: None but these can be
admitted, because none can be admitted contrary to a standing unrepealed Law,
and yet these are involved in a defection in the judgment of them who
dis-approve the Acts at Dundee.

4. No man ought to concur in keeping an Assembly from which many faithful and
godly Ministers and Ruling Elders be excluded for no other cause but for their
being faithful in witnessing against the backsliding of the Land: But from
this Assembly, many such are excluded by the Acts of Dundee, and that for no
other cause but for testifying against the defection of the Land, according to
the judgment of these who condemn these Acts, and therefore these cannot concur
in keeping this ensuing Assembly.

5. No man ought to concur in keeping an Assembly wherein the constituent
Members are for the most part such as are either authors or approvers of the
enacting a persecution of many godly men, but the ensuing Assembly is to be
such in the judgment of these who dis-approve the Acts of the Assembly at
Dundee; Ergo the Proposition will be granted by every man, the assumption is
abundantly proved by the clearing of these things: 1. That enacting the drawing
forth of censures of the Church against godly man, (to speak nothing of that
which is already executed) for that which is no fault in them, is the enacting
of a persecution of godly men, cannot be denied by any. 2. That the enacting to
draw forth all the censures of the Kirk against these who do not approve the
Acts and Constitutions of the Assembly of Dundee, to the enacting of drawing
forth censures against godly men, for that which is no fault in them, but duty,
is unquestionable in the judgment of these who dis-approve these Acts. 3. That
the Assembly now indicted, is to be made up of such, is clear from what is
before spoken, and shall be further cleared immediately.

Ob. How does it appear that the Assembly now indicted, is to be constituted,
as all these reasons do import, can we judge of the constitution of it before
we see how it is constituted?

Ans. 1. It must be constituted according to the acts and rules constituting,
which are not yet repealed, and therefore according to rules of the Assembly at
Dundee, in the judgment of these who acknowledge the authority of that
Assembly, and these acts cannot be repealed before the constitution of another
Assembly. 2. That it must be so constitute, may appear from the tenaciousness
of Synods and Presbyteries, to maintain the authority and acts of that
pretended Assembly, who being involved in the approbation of the same, have
given good evidence, that the ensuing Assembly must be so constitute, if it be
urged as for instance the Letter of the instant Commissioners, which does
appoint the place of meeting of the future Assembly, do desire Presbyteries to
choose Commissioners according to the known and ordinary rules of election; but
these know and ordinary rules cannot be supposed to include the acts of the
Assembly at Dundee: 1. Because these acts are not known, the same not being
published, yea not extant, neither can they be called ordinary, being once
only done, and being questioned much by many, it is answered, These are poor
shifts: 1. Because these acts were formally concluded and voted, and do yet
stand unrepealed. 2. Because if the authority of the Commission who wrote this
Letter, ought to be acknowledged and submitted unto, then ought these acts
which flow from the same authority to be acknowledged and submitted unto. 3.
These acts are public, and in the hands of the Presbyteries up and down the
Land, and registrated in sundry of their Books, as also in the Books of some
Synods; and some Presbyteries have processed some persons upon these acts, and
they cannot be excluded from the ordinary rule, because but once done, because
the meaning of the ordinary rule in this place must be, that these only are to
be elected, when no standing act of the Kirk does exclude, and yet it does not
make it cease to be a rule, so long as the authority of the Assembly stands,
and the act it self stands unrepealed, how much soever it be questioned by some.

Ob. But we may probably suppose, that the Acts of the Assembly of Dundee,
shall not be tenaciously stuck to in the constitution of the Assembly now
indicted, but that Protesters against the constitution or Acts at Dundee, shall
be admitted as Members in the constitution of this Assembly.

Answ. 1. Probably that may be the judgment of some godly and moderate
brethren; but how few such are to be found, and how unequal to carry it so,
against many that are otherwise minded. 2. If one malicious instrument that
desires not the healing of these differences (whereof there is no pe^^^y) shall
object the act of the Assembly of Dundee. It is impossible that any who
acknowledge the authority of that Assembly, can repeal the exception as
irrelevant, as long as that act stands unrepealed, which cannot be before the
constitution. 3. How improbable is that considering the temper of the late
Meeting at Edinburgh, the 12. of May, the instructions given by Synods to such
as were sent thither under a pretense of endeavoring the Union of the Church,
but really to carry on a design to have an Assembly depending on the authority
of the pretended Assem. of Dundee, and constitute as that was, and considering
the articles that came from the Commssion, viz. that no Union could be, except
the authority, constitution, acts, censures and Commissions issued from the
said Assem. be acknowledged by all, and the Declinator past from, which
articles are magnified by these men, and some Synods have not been so cautious
as others to keep back a Synodicall instruction, to do nothing in order to an
Union, without the advice aforesaid. 4. If such a concession had been intended
how easy had it been to the pretended Commission that takes upon them to
indict this Assembly to have given some ground in their Letters to expect it,
and not to have wrapped the rule of elections in ambiguous words, to say no
worse. 5. Suppose a possibility of constituting the Assembly otherwise nor
according to the acts at Dundee; yet how can any that have born testimony
against the Public Resolutions and acts ratifying the same as involving
defection, sit with the authors and promoters of that course, and not propone
that exception which is on all hands acknowledged to be relevant, and that such
as are guilty of it, ought not to be admitted to sit in an Assembly; or if it
be propounded, how shall it be satisfied once there is such difference of
judgment about that matter.

Ob. 3. But is it not better to keep that Assembly, and bear testimony against
unlawful acts, and labor to keep off ill, then to forbear and let things be
carried on without opposition?

Answ. If any can satisfy his own conscience, that he may with clear^ess
concur, notwithstanding these and the like reasons he may do so, and we shall
rejoice to hear of his testimony and standing, against a spate of backsliding;
but if he shall through casting himself in a temptation, be d^awn a farther
length then he intended, or shall approve himself in afterward, he shall sin
against a Warning.

O^ 4. By this means we shall have no Assemblies.

Ans. The reasons will indeed conclude, that we should have no corrupt
Assemblies, such as are prelimited in the elections, corrupted in the
constitution exclusive of many of the godly for their faithfulness, and made up
for the most part, if not only of such as are authors or approvers of the late
defection, and to want such Assemblies is no ways prejudicial, but is a mercy
to the Church in the judgment and language of the General Assembly, cited in
the beginning of this Paper, neither is the running with the spate of defection
the way to retain and preserve the privilege of useful Assemblies, but on the
contrary the giving of testimony against a course of declining in the time
thereof, has by experience often proved a mercy and in the wise and gracious
providence of God, the best ground of hope, and an open door for free
Assemblies.

FINIS.
Because in these (as in other Papers relating to the present public
Differences) the solemn Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to Duties are
frequently mentioned (And it being conceived by the fearful slighting of the
same, which of late has appeared in the Land) that they are forgotten by the
most part, and cast by as out of date; Therefore it was thought fit they should
be hereunto subjoyned.

A Solemn Acknowledgement of public Sins and Breaches of the Covenant; And a
solemn Engagement to all the Duties contained therein, namely those which do in
a more special way relate unto the Dangers of these Times.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and
Commons of all sorts within this Kingdom, by the good hand of God upon us,
taking in serious consideration the many sad afflictions and deep distresses
wherewith we have been exercised for a long time past, and that the Land after
it has been sore wasted with the Sword and the Pestilence, and threatened with
Famine, and that shame and contempt has been poured out from the Lord against
many thousands of our Nation who did in a sinful way make War upon the Kingdom
of England, contrary to the Testimony of his Servants and desires of his
People, and that the remnants of that Army returning to this Land, have spoiled
and oppressed many of our Brethren, and that the Malignant party is still
numerous, and retaining their former Principles, wait for an opportunity to
Raise a New and Dangerous War, not only unto the rending of the bowels of this
Kingdom, but unto the dividing us from England, and overturning of the work of
God in all the three Kingdoms: And considering also that a cloud of calamities
does still hang over our heads, and threaten us with sad things to come, We
cannot but look upon these things as from the Lord, who is righteous in all his
ways, feeding us with the bread of tears, and making us to drink the waters of
affliction, until we be taught to know. How evil and bitter a thing it is, to
depart from him, by breaking the Oath and Covenant which we have made with him,
and that we may be humbled before him by confessing our sin, and forsaking the
evil of our way.

Therefore being pressed with so great necessities and straits, and warranted
by the word of God, and having the example of Gods people of old, who in the
time of their troubls, and when they were to seek delivery and a right way for
themselves, that the Lord might be with them to prosper them, did humble
themselves before him, and make a free and particular confession of the sins of
their Princes, their Rulers, their Captains, their Priests and their People,
and did engage themselves to do no more so, but to reform their ways, and be
steadfast in his Covenant; and remembering the practice of our Predecessors in
the year 1596. wherein the Genesis Assembly, and all the Kirk Judicatories, with
the concurrence of many of the Nobility, Gentry and Burgesses, did with many
tears acknowledge before God the breach of the National Covenant, and engaged
themselves to a reformation, even as our Predecessors and theirs had before
done in the Genesis Assembly and convention of Estates in the year 1567. And
perceiving that this Duty, when gone about out of conscience and in sincerity,
has always been attended with a reviving out of troubles, and with a blessing
and success from Heaven: We do humbly and sincerely as in his sight, who is the
searcher of hearts, acknowledge the many sins and great transgressions of the
Land: We have done wickedly, our Kings, our Princes, our Nobles, our Judges,
our Officers, our Teachers, and our People: Albeit the Lord has long and
clearly-spoken unto us, we have not hearkened to his voice, albeit he has
followed us with tender mercies, we have not been allured to wait upon him and
walk in his way; and though he has stricken us, yet we have not grieved: nay,
though he has consumed us, we have refused to receive correction. We have not
remembered to render unto the Lord according to his goodness, and according to
our own vows and promises, but have gone away backward by a continued course
of backsliding, and have broken all the Articles of that solemn League and
Covenant which we swore before God, Angels and Men.

Albeit there be in the Land many of all ranks, who be for a Testimony unto the
truth, and for a name of joy and praise unto the Lord, by living godly,
studying to keep their garments pure, and being steadfast in the Covenant and
Cause of God; yet we have reason to acknowledge that most of us have not
endeavored with that reality, sincerity, and constancy, that did become us, to
preserve the work of Reformation in the Kirk of Scotland; many have satisfied
themselves with the purity of the Ordinances, neglecting the power thereof; yea,
some have turned aside to crooked ways, destructive to both. The profane,
loose, and insolent carriage of many in our Armies, who went to the Assistance
of our Brethren in England, and the tamperings and unstraight dealing of some
of our Commissioners and others of our Nation in London, the Isle of Wight, and
other places of that Kingdom, have proved great lets to the work of
Reformation, and settling of Kirk government there, whereby Error and Schism in
that Land have been increased, and Sectaries hardened in their way. We have
been so far from endeavoring the extirpation of Profaneness, and what is
contrary to the power of godliness, that prophanity has been much winked at,
and profane persons much countenanced, and many times employed, until
iniquity and ungodliness has gone over the face of the Land as a flood; nay,
sufficient care has not been had, to separate betwixt the precious and the
vile, by debarring from the Sacrament all ignorant and scandalous persons,
according to the Ordinances of this Kirk.

Neither have the Privileges of the Parliaments and Liberties of the Subject
been d^ly tendered, but some amongst our selves have labored to put into the
hands of our King, an arbitrary and unlimited power destructive to both; and
many of us have been accessory of late to those means and ways, whereby the
freedom and privileges of Parliaments have been encroached upon, and the
Subjects oppressed in their Consciences, Persons, and Estates: Neither has it
been our care to avoid these things which might harden the King in his evil
way; but upon the contrary, he has not only been permitted, but many of us
have been instrumental to make him exercise his power in many things tending to
the prejudice of Religion and of the Covenant, and of the Peace and safety of
these Kingdoms; which is so far from the right way of preserving his Majesty's
Person and Authority, that it cannot but provoke the Lord against him unto the
hazard of both; nay, under a pretense of relieving and doing for the King
whilst he refuses to do what was necessary for the House of God, some have
ranversed, and violated most of all the Articles of the Covenant.

Our own consciences within, and Gods judgments upon us without, do convince us
of the manifold wilful renewed breaches of that Article which concerns the
discovery and punishment of Malignants, whose crimes have not only been
connived at, but dispensed with and pardoned, and themselves received unto
intimate fellowship with our selves, and entrusted with our Counsels, admitted
unto our Parliaments, and put in places of Power and Authority for managing the
public Affairs of the Kingdom, whereby in Gods justice they got at last into
their hands the whole power and strength of the Kingdom, both in Judicatories
and Armies, and did employ the same unto the enacting and prosecuting an
unlawful Engagement in War against the Kingdom of England, notwithstanding of
the dissent of many considerable members of Parliament, who had given constant
proof of their integrity in the Cause from the beginning, of many faithful
testimonies and free warnings of the servants of God, of the supplications of
many Synods, Presbyteries and Shy^es, and of the Declarations of the Genesis
Assembly and their Commissioners to the contrary: Which engagement as it has
been the cause of much sin, so also of much misery and calamity unto this Land,
and holds forth to us the grievousness of our sin of complying with Malignants
in the greatness of our judgment, that we may be taught never to split again
upon the same Rock, upon which the Lord has set so remarkable a Beacon. And
after all that is come to pass unto us because of this our trespass, and after
that grace has been showed unto us from the Lord our God, by breaking these
men's yoke from off our necks, and putting us again into a capacity to act for
the good of Religion, our own safety, and the Peace and safety of this Kingdom,
should we again break his Commandment and Covenant by joining once more with
the people of these abominations, and taking into out bosom those Serpents
which had formerly stung us almost unto death: This as it would argue great
madness and folly upon our part, so no doubt, if it be not avoided, will
provoke the Lord against us to consume us until there be no remnant nor
escaping in the Land.

And albeit the Peace and Union betwixt the Kingdoms be a great blessing of God
unto both, and a Bond which we are obliged to preserve unviolated, and to
endeavor that justice may be done upon the opposers thereof: Yet some in this
Land, who have come under the Bond of the Covenant, have made it their great
study how to dissolve this Union, and few o^ no endeavors have been used by any
of us for punishing of such.

We have suffered many of our Brethren in several parts of the Land, to be
oppressed of the common Enemy, without compassion or relief: There has been
great murmuring and repining because of expense of means and pains in doing of
our duty; Many by persuasion or terror, have suffered themselves to be divided
and withdrawn, to make defection to the contrary part; Many have turned off to
a detestable indifferency and neutrality in this Cause, which so much
concerns the glory of GOD, and the good of these Kingdoms; Nay, many have
made it their study to walk so, as they might comply with all times, and all
the Revolutions thereof. It has not been our care to countenance, encourage,
entrust and employ such only, as from their hearts did affect and mind Gods
Work; But the hearts of such many times have been discouraged, and their hands
weakened, their sufferings neglected, and themselves slighted, and many who
were once open Enemies, and always secret underminers countenanced and
employed; Nay, even those who had been looked upon as Incendiaries, and upon
whom the Lord had set marks of desperate Malignancy, Falsehood and Deceit, were
brought in, as fit to manage Public Affairs; Many have been the lets and
impediments that have been cast in the way to retard and obstruct the Lords
Work, and some have kept secret, what of themselves they were not able to
suppress and overcome.

Besides these and many other breaches of the Articles of the Covenant in the
matter thereof, which concerns every one of us to search out and acknowledge
before the Lord, as we would wish his wrath to be turned away from us; So have
many of us failed exceedingly in the manner of our following and pursuing the
duties contained therein, not only seeking great things for our selves, and
mixing of private Interests and ends concerning our selves, friends and
followers, with those things which concern the Public Good, but many times
preferring such to the Honor of God and good of his Cause, and retarding Gods
Work, until we might carry along with us our own interests and designs. It
has been our way to trust in the means, and to rely upon the Arm of Flesh for
success, Albeit the Lord has many times made us meet with disappointment
therein, and stained the pride of all our Glory, by blasting every carnal
confidence unto us: We have followed for the most part the counsels of flesh
and blood, and walked more by the rules of Policy then Piety, and have
hearkened more unto men then unto God.

Albeit we made solemn public profession before the World of our unfeigned
desires to be humbled before the Lord for our own sins, and the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially for our under valuing of the inestimable benefit of the
Gospel, and that we have not labored for the power thereof, and received
Christ into our hearts, and walked worthy of him in our lives, and of our true
and unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under
our power and charge both in public and private, in all duties which we owe to
God and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the
example of a Real Reformation, that the Lord might turn away his wrath and
heavy indignation, and establish these Kirks and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace;
Yet we have refused to be reformed, and have walked proudly and obstinatly
against the Lord, not valuing his Gospel, nor submitting our selves unto the
obedience thereof, nor seeking after Christ, nor studying to honor him in the
Excellency of his Person, nor employ him in the virtue of his Offices, not
making conscience of public Ordinances, nor private nor secret duties, nor
studying to edify one another in love. The ignorance of God and of his Son
Jesus Christ, prevails exceedingly in the Land; The greatest part of Masters
of families amongst Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Commons neglect
to seek God in their Families, and to endeavor the Reformation thereof; And
albeit it has been much pressed, yet few of our Nobles and great ones ever to
this day could be persuaded to perform Family duties themselves and in their
own persons; which makes so necessary and useful a duty to be mis^regarded by
others of inferior rank; Nay, many of the Nobiiity, Gentry and Burrows who
should have been examples of Godliness and sober walking unto others, have
been ringleaders of excess and rioting. Albeit we be the Lords people engaged
to him in a solemn way, yet to this day we have not made it our study, that
Judicatories and Armies should consist of, and places of power and trust be
filled with men of a blameless and Christian conversation, and of known
integrity and approven fidelity, affection and zeal unto the Cause of God, but
not only those who have been neutrall and indifferent, but disaffected and
Malignant, and others who have been profane and scandalous, have been
entrusted, By which it has come to pass that Judicatories have been the seats
of injustice and iniquity, and many in our Armies by their mis-carriages have
become our plague unto the great prejudice of the Cause of God, the great
scandal of the Gospel, and the great increase of looseness and prophanity
throughout all the Land. It were impossible to reckon up all the abominations
that are in the land, but the blaspheming of the name of God, swearing by the
Creatures, profanation of the Lords day, uncleanness, drunkenness, excess and
rioting, vanity of apparel, lying and deceit, railing and cursing, arbitary
and uncontrolled oppression, and grinding of the faces of the poor by landlords
and others in place and power, are become ordinary and common sins; And besides
all these things, there be many other transgressions, whereof the land wherein
we live is guilty: All which we desire to acknowledge and to be humbled for,
that the world may bear witness with us, that rightousnes belongs unto God,
and shame and confusion of face unto us as appears this day. And because it is
needful for these who find mercy not only to confess, but also to forsake their
Sin; therefore that the reality and sincerity of our repentance may appear, We
do resolve, and solemnly engage our selves before the Lord, carefully to avoid
for the time to come all these offenses, whereof we have now made solemn
public Acknowledgment, and all the snares and tentations which tend thereunto:
And to testify the integrity of our resolution herein, and that we may be the
better enabled in the power of the Lords strength to perform the same, we do
again renew our solemn League and Covenant, promising hereafter to make
conscience of all the duties whereunto we are obliged in all the heads and
Articles thereof, particularly of these which follow:

1. Because Religion is of all things the most excellent and precious, the
advancing and promoving the power thereof against all ungodliness and
profanity, the securing and preserving the purity thereof against all error,
heresy, and schism; and namely, Independency, Anabaptism, Antinomianism,
Arminianism, Socinianism, Familism, Libertinism, Skepticism, and Erastianism,
and the carrying on the work of uniformity shall be studied and endeavored by
us before all wordly interest, whether concerning the King, or our selves, or
any other whatsoever. 2. Because many have of late labored to supplant the
liberties of the Kirk, we shall maintain and defend the Kirk of Scotland, in
all her liberties and privileges, against all who shall oppose or undermine
the same, or encroach thereupon under any pretext whatsoever. 3. We shall
vindicate and maintain the liberties of the Subjects in all these things which
concern their consciences, persons and Estates. 4. We shall carefully maintain
and defend the union betwixt the Kingdoms, and avoid every thing that may
weaken the same, or involve us in any measure of accession unto the guilt of
those who have invaded the Kingdom of England. 5. As we have been always loyal
to our King, so we shall still endeavor to give unto God that which is Gods,
and to Caesar the things which are Caesar's. 6. We shall be so far from
conniving at, complying with, or countenancing of Malignancy, injustice,
iniquity, prophanity, and impiety, that we shall not only avoid, and
discountenance those things, and cherish and encourage these persons, who are
zealous for the Cause of God, and walk according to the Gospel; But also shall
take a more effectual course then heretofore in our respective Places and
Callings, for punishing and suppressing these evils, and faithfully endeavor
that the best and fittest remedies may be applied for taking away the causes
thereof, and advancing the knowledge of God, and Holiness and Righteousness in
the Land. And therefore in the last place, as we shall earnestly pray unto God,
That he would give us able men fearing God, men of truth, and hating
Covetousness, to judge and bear charge among his people, so we shall according
to our Places and Callings, endeavor that Judicatories and all places of Power
and Trust both in Kirk and State may consist of, and be filled with such men as
are of known good affection to the Cause of God, and of a blameless and
Christian conversation.

And because there may be many, who heretofore have not made conscience of the
Oath of God, but some through fear, others by persuasion, and upon base ends,
and humane interests, have entered thereunto, who have afterward discovered
themselves to have dealt deceitfully with the Lord in swearing falsely by his
name, Therefore we who do now renew our Covenant in reference to these duties
and all other duties contained therein, Do in the sight of him who is the
searcher of hearts, solemnly profess, That it is not upon any politic
advantage, or private interest, or by-end, or because of any terror or
persuasion from men, or hypocritically and deceitfully, that we do again take
upon us the Oath of God, But honestly and sincerly, and from the sense of our
duty, and that therefore denying our selves and our own things, and laying
aside all self interest and ends, We shall above all things seek the honor of
God, the good of his Cause, and the wealth of his people, and that forsaking
the counsels of flesh and blood, and not leaning upon carnal confidences, we
shall depend upon the Lord, walk by the rule of his word, and hearken to the
voice of his servants: In all which professing our own weakness, We do
earnestly pray to God, who is the Father of mercies, through his Son Jesus
Christ, to be merciful unto us, and to enable us by the power of his might,
that we may do our duty unto the praise of his Grace in the Churches. Amen.

FINIS.

