A REPLY, TO A Namelesse PAMPHLET, Entitled, An Answer to a Speech without
doors, etc. OR, A DEFENSE OF Master CHALONER'S Speech.

WHEREIN The Question is rightly stated, The Interest of the Kingdom and
Parliament vindicated, And all moderate men answered.

By G. G a lover of his Country.

Veritas Index sui and obliqui.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for R. Leybourn 1646.

A Reply to a namelesse Pamphlet, entitled an Answer To a Speech without
Doors, etc.
I Had thought M. Chaloners speech should not sooner have been published then
received, the joy of our Nation for so knowing a man of it, his gallant sayings
did not tend to the advance of himself, but his Country, not to destroy the
King (as some will have it) but to let him know he was Prince of a People that
know their privileges, and his just authority, which they would not have
questioned by servants and hirelings, but preserved by Freemen and Masters: but
the bad people of our Nation, that had rather be slaves to strangers, then live
in necessary subjection under the Government of their Countrymen, must stretch
their little proportion of wit to a defense of the Scorishmens interest in the
disposition of the English affairs. For allow them a right in the disposal of
the King in England, and that of the Kingdom must needs follow: but the
undertaker of this must be such anon whose expressions of himself in Greek
may persuade a man of the excellency of the English intended to put a Blur on
this Worthy of Israel: But to leave this prefacing (as he terms it) I shall
discover the weakness of this Malignant imagined confutation.

And first (God not permitting him in this to lie) he admires Master Chaloner
coming forth as a Goliath, and being unable to meet him in the field of Truth,
which M. Chaloner had stated in few lines (making the Scotchmans much appear
little, which are wheresoever the King of Scotland has an interest in their
King they may dispose of him.

But the Kingdom of Scotland has an interest in their King, he being in
England, therefore in England they may dispose of him. But he will have it
altered from the Truth, and says, thus it ought to be.

Whatsoever is by Covenant, Treaty, and the very Law of Nations of joint
interest, and common concernment to both Kingdoms, ought not to be disposed of,
but by mutual advise of both Kingdoms for the good of both.

But the person of the King, whether in England or Scotland, is by Covenant,
Treaty, and the very law of Nations, of joint interest, and common concernment
to both Kingdoms.

Therefore the person of the King whether in England or Scotland ought not be
be disposed of, but by the mutual advise of both Kingdoms, for the good of
both.

I confess, for a principle for him to ground his argument on thus. It ought
to be, But whereas he urges Covenant, Treaty, and the Law of Nations to be the
ground the Scots work upon to prove their interest in the disposing of the
person of the King he being in England, if it were as well proved, as it is by
him urged, it might appear rational, but not true enough for rational
Englishmen to believe it. For as no president can be brought to prove the King
of England was ever in his Kingdom of England disposed of by the greatest
foreign Prince, I hope we are not grown so effeminate to let him be disposed
of, or we subjected by one of the meanest people.

Page 3, he says the Scotch Papers do state the question not upon the
authority, power and office of the King, but upon the person of the King.

When a question is put to have judgment given on it, if it be not right put,
it cannot be rightly judged: And the case between us and the Scots is not how
it is put, but how it ought to be.

He has an ill tongue that cannot tell a good tale for himself, the Scots make
the person of the King the only thing of dispute, but we are by Covenant
obliged to mayntayn as well the Law of the Land, as the person of the King,
therefore they leaving that out has made the case imperfect.

But imagine the person of the King to be the only thing now in dispute, yet
has the Parliament of England the sole disposing of it in England.

The case is thus, both the Kingdoms have voted, the Kings person ought to be
disposed of, and therefore it ought, to be so beyond dispute; so that now the
question is whether the Parliament of England shall dispose of him in England,
or the Scots and Parliament. Now as it is a great prejudice to the honor of
the English Nation to have any other people to dispose of their King in their
own Country singly, or jointly, so it ought to be looked into whether they have
a right to do it, if they have a right, it must be by custom, or an Act of
Parliament: And if they can show neither President nor Law, God forbid that the
Parliament that sits to make us free, and preserve the privilege of the
English Nation should consent to this that will so much destroy it.

Page 3, he also says, That the honor, person, and just privileges of the
King ought by Covenant to be mayntained, wherefore they being joined in it,
they are bound to mayntain it.

We will allow that they ought, and when they find that the Parliament does
take away the just privileges, or wrong his person, then let them endeavor to
defend it: and if the Parliament cannot justify their actions by their
privileges they will be blameable.

Page 4, he says, the paper says, Persona sequitur locum, and his person must
be disposed of by the supreme power of that Country wheresoever he shall hap
to abide. By which principle says he, the person of the King of England, if he
were in Scotland must be disposed of by the supreme power of that Country: And
was not this well pleaded for the interest of the Parliament of England.

There is nothing can be said to justify the just spirit of M. Chaloner more
then this noble expression, for as he would have no inchroachment on the
privilege of the English Nation by the Scots, so he is equally just in
defending the privileges of the Scots against the English.

He says in Page 9 of M. Chalenors Speech, he reads that what person soever
comes into the Kingdom of England, he is forthwith a subject of England, for
being protected by the Laws, he becomes subject to the Laws. On which he
concludes that when an Ambassador coming from an other Country into
England, can receive no protection in England, and further inferres that the
honor of the Parliament and Kingdom are blemished by this with foreigners.

As the Laws of all Nations are made positive to all people residing under the
protection of them without exception of Ambassadors, yet the condition of
Ambassadors is so welcome to a Kingdom or Common wealth (that always coming
to make peace, or continue it) that they have from the beginning had the
privilege to be protected in all Countries where they shall happen to be, and
our Laws of England are so agreeable to the Civil Law, that the subjection an
Ambassador is in by them, is agreeable to that Law of Nations that maintains
their freedom, wherefore although they are not excepted from it, yet are they
not liable to prejudice by it, therefore any reasonable creature may judge
whether the honor of the Kingdom and Parliament can for this be brought in
question by Foreigners. This civil protection to Commissioners or
Ambassadors is in Scotland as well as England, and although he will have the
contrary, yet will the Parliament of Englands Commissioners residing in
Scotland, claim as their Jus, the same protection and privilege there, as
they and other Ambassadors enjoy in England, and will beyond all peradventure
have it.

But in page 5 on these words of Master Chaloners. That if a King of Scotland
had come into England before the union, his person might have been disposed of
by the sole authority of the Laws of England.

He insinuates, that by this principle the Prince of Wales, his person is to be
disposed of by the authority of the Laws of France, and the King and
Parliament, have no authority to recall him and is not this a good salve for
the honor of the Parliament? says he.

This is a further discovery of his quibling and little ability to judge on
such things for want of knowledge in the proceedings of former ages in such
cases. He needed not have gone further for presidents then his own Country (if
he be an English man) in this case, for the taking prisoner of Richard the
first King of England by the Duke of Austria, as he passed through his Country
at his return from the termed Holy War, notwithstanding they were both
engaged in it, and the securing of the person of Mary Queen of Scots in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. But if any shall say they were both enemies to
England, as well the Queen of Scots as the Duke of Austria, and therefore to
take all advantages against each other. It is most sure that the King of
England and the Duke of Austria wereboth in amity and kept good
correspondencie, as was necessary for Princes whose Countries lay so far
distant one from the other, and the Queen of Scots had several Ties on the
Queen of England that might obliege her friendship to her, as that of kindred,
the leaving out of her Coat the Arms of England, which the Kingdom of France
had adjudged her a right to bear, and assurance from the Queen Elizabeth of
her welcome and safety in England, had she staid in her own Country till it
came into her hand, and as there was no certain peace, so there was no war
between them. Wherefore if the Prince of Wales is gone into France, without
assurance from that Kingdom of his safety there, and liberty to return, he may,
for ought I know, have the same fortune that these Princes had, and as his
going was without the consent of the Parliament, so if it should happen he
should suffer there, they are free from blame of his misfortune.

A little further he says Master Chaloner has it thus. No man can be said to
be Rex but in Regno, wherefore says he, by just Analogy the Parliament of
England cannot be acknowledged a Parliament, but in England only, Neither can
there Commissioners in any other Kingdom or State being admitted to propound,
declare, treat, or conclude in name of both Houses; These are fine Oxford
Inferences for as a King of England by being in France loses not his Title of
King of England, he gains not the Title of King of France, And they may take
him as Subject of France and King of England as we know they have done those
Kings as have been Dukes of Normandy. And if they will admit the King of
England his Title of England, he being in France, Master Chaloner only denying
Foreign King, the Title of that Country where he shall happen to comeunto and
not the Title of his own that he brought with him they will admit whom he
appoint his Messengers or Agents as servant of the King of England, when they
shall reside there from him, and the Parliament when they send their
Commissioners thither, or to any other Country, desires not the title of the
Parliament of that Country, nor their Commissioners to be so accepted: But
those that will allow them the title and power of the Parliament of England in
England, may accept of their Commissioners in any other Country, as servants
to the Parliament of England without prejudice of the Parliament of that
Country where their Commissioners shall so reside. And although in England we
would not admit of Mary as Queen of England, yet was she acknowledged Queen of
Scots at her being here.

A few lines further Master Chalenor, says he, in his page 9, tells us, If
the Scots be our fellows why come they not to our Parliaments, on which, says
he, if it can be made to appear that they be our fellows, equals and brethren,
they may come to our Parliaments and see how the privileges of Parliament is
maintained, does it make a breach of priviviledge of Parliament to do justice
in it? And when the Scots can make it appear that they are in that capacity,
that M. Chalenor and all the Kingdom knows them to want, God forbid but they
should have right, and then how could that be against the honor of the
Parliament?

On what M. Chaloner says of John King pf England, in his Speech in this
Answerers page 6. he will have it much to strengthen the Scotch papers, for
says he, if the King of England must be disposed of by the sole authority of
both Houses of Parliament, what shall become of the person of the King of
Scotland? There is no more cause of doubt in them of that, then we ought to
make of their disposing of the King of England, whom they have in their
custody, and as he is in England they are unjust in deteining him, but if they
shall get him into Scotland, as they have no right in him in England, we could
pertein as little to him, he being in Scotland, and though M. Chaloner pleads
for a sole power in both Houses to dispose of him in England, yet does he not
plead for it out of England, as their suggestion will have it, which discovers
this Answer of a false calumner, and that he has an insight into his
disability to answer other men's, and therefore he will make questions of his
own.

This pretended Answer to M. Chaloners Speech is no better then that of this
Answerers fellow Collegian, where telling a sheepherd, he was a sheep and he
would prove him so, the shepherd desiring to know how, he replied, That the
sheepherd had a head, and a sheep had a head, ergo he was a sheep.

The rest that comes from this Subtilist is no answer, but a malicious
aspersion on M. Chaloner, and the honorable Parliament, and as he ends so do
I, with my desire of God, that from such Apostates from their native Country
and Countrymen he would deliver us.

FINIS.

