THE Groans of Kent: OR, An Humble REMONSTRANCE from diverse well-affected in
the County of KENT. To His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and the Army
under his Command.

LONDON, Printed for G. W. near the Exchange.

The Groans of Kent: OR, An Humble Remonstrance from diverse well-affected in
the County of KENT.
To his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and the Army under his Command.
Humbly shows,
THat the pressures, miseries, distractions, and troubles of our Nation, our
tedious and wasting Wars, with the sad effects and consequences thereof, the
loss of Trade, Treasure, and Blood, the bitter and lamentable complaint of
poor widows and fatherless, especially in our own County, and which is most
piercing, the sad Omens of future troubles yet impending, the returning of the
clouds again after the rain; as they call upon us to humble our selves under
the Almighty hand of God, so they provoke us humbly to address our selves unto
your Excellency, and the Honorable Army under your Command, as the hopeful
instruments (under God) of a seasonable deliverance from our present miseries,
and timous restoration (if the Lord will) unto our former felicity, that the
oppressions, taxations, and vexations of our English Nation (through an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical administration of rulers) were great and manifold
before this present Parliament began, was the complaint of all; that a
seasonable Parliament (our wonted refuge in such cases,) would certainly
relieve us, was the hopes of all; that the Protestations, Promises,
Engagements, Vows, and Covenants, most happy beginnings, and prosperous
proceedings of this Parliament above all others, would make us a happy and free
people, was the belief of all; but through the just and righteous judgment of
God, and the unjust and unrighteous proceedings of men, even of our own native
people, of some by force and violence, of others by fraud and deceit, our
expectations languish, our hopes perish, our estates impair, our treasure
wastes, our blood runs out, our liberties are enthralled, our privileges
threatened, our oppressions multiplied, our taskmasters increased, poverty,
slavery, and tyranny coming upon us like a mighty flood, and our condition
every way like to be worse then it was before this Parliament began; in this
deplorable estate, we cannot but call to mind, and look back upon those
hopeful expectations of a happy deliverance from our former troubles by
several hands, and the unhappy frustration thereof from all; we have always
observed that the most public ruin, and particular interests, have been
always fomented under the plausible, and specious advantages of public and
common good; we well remember under what pretenses of common benefit,
Monopolies, Ship-monies, Coat and Conduct-monies, oppressing Courts of
Star Chamber, high Commission, Ceremonies, Altars, Liturgies, and many other
oppressions and grievances, in matters both of Church and State were imposed
upon us; we cannot forget the primitive zeal, the professed resolution, and most
promising beginnings of this present Parliament, in delivering the Nation from
these sore and miserable pressures, together with the voluntary and free
Contribution of moneys, horse, plate, servants, children, yea, and very lives
of the well affected of the Kingdom in the Parliaments assistance unto these
ends; together with the several Protestations, Oaths, Vows, Covenants, and
mutual Declarations of Parliament and People, to live and die each with other
in the mutual preservation each of other against the common enemy, all
tyranny and oppression whatsoever, as also the most wonderful successes,
deliverances, and victories, which by the right hand of the most high, have
been wrought for us, the many and formidable Parties and Armies of the enemy
broken to pieces, their multi-forme, secret, and bloody plots. Councels,
Contrivances, and Projects, through the mercy and goodness of God, proving
abortive and successlesse: but that which is as a sword, piercing through our
very souls, is this, That after 7. years labor and travel in fire and blood,
the common Enemy fully suppressed and vanquished, all his Armies broken in
pieces, his strong Holds and Garrisons reduced, we expected to reap in joy what
we had sown in tears, yea, in blood, which (our record is on high) was not the
lives and estates of our enemies, but that just liberty and freedom of this
Nation, which is their natural, native, and proper right and due, so often, so
zealously, so effectually promised unto us by our present Parliament, who did
frequently engage themselves, that upon our endeavors to assist them in the
common cause of the Kingdoms interest, they would make us as happy, and free a
people as any Nation under the heavens, yet notwithstanding all advantages
administered for the performance thereof, not only these promises are not
performed, our hopes and expectations frustrated, but the oppressions,
taxations, and troubles of the land in general, are multiplied, the well
affected party in special is most of all molested, and vexed, the disaffected,
viz. Commissioners of Array, and those that have been notorious enemies to the
Parli. evidencing the same by their actual endeavors in Arms against the
Parliament, and by their voluntary assistance with moneys, horse, plate, etc.
admitted for Deputy Lieutenants of the Counties, and so betrusted with the
Militia, and into several Committees, Offices, and places of trust, by means
whereof, the well-affected party is most of all oppressed, vexed, and grieved
in all the parts of the Kingdom, and that in a way of revenge, for assisting
the Parliament in the late Wars, common justice obstructed, the cry of the
poor, the fatherless, the widow, and oppressed of the land, against the
maladministration of justice and judgment, and the complaint of all, as
loud, as strong and piercing in the ears of God and men, as in the beginning of
this present Parliament; the Peace and quietness of the Kingdom not only
unsettled, but new and thick clouds of blood arising from several parts and
Counties of the Kingdom, through that general distemper every where abounding,
do still threaten more storms of blood and War, even unto our utter ruin and
destruction; we have oftentimes addressed our selves in humble Petitions and
Representations of our grievances unto the Parliament, where (we confess) we
have had candid receptions from time to time, with many fair, and most
acceptable promises of a seasonable relief, yea, and sometimes Votes, Orders,
Declarations, and Ordinances, giving us very great hopes hereunto; but alas
(though we forget not the many good things done for us in the beginning of this
Parliament) yet of late what have all our endeavors been unto us, but as sowing
the wind, and reaping the whirlwind; our labors of this kind proving unto us
not only vanity, but vexation of spirit; for when we have expected the actual
performance of these Parliamentarie Promises, Votes, etc. we have met with
contrary Votes; Orders, and Ordinances, destroying those hopes and expectations
which were begotten in us by their former expresses; by means whereof, the
Parliament of England, the wonted terror of evil doers, (though ever so
great,) the relief of the oppressed, (though evers so mean) and the joy of the
whole Kingdom, is ecome the derision of Delinquents, the grief of the innocent,
and the complaint of all; In this condition, let not your Excellency be
offended, if we humbly reminde your Excellency, and most Noble Officers and
soldiers under your Command, of your most worthy and acceptable Declarations,
Proposals, Promises, and Engagements, which you were pleased also to make upon
the earnest Solicitations, Petitions, and Complaints of the well-affected in
several Counties, for the relief of the oppressed, the freedom of the Nation
from its grievous pressures, the just satisfaction of all interests, and the
settlement of the Peace and quietness of the Kingdom; nevertheless even here
also our hopes, raised up by the public expresses of your Excellency, and your
Army, have been (if not altogether frustrated) yet abundantly deferred, making
our heart sick, and dejecting the spirits of those that did undoubtedly expect
the performance thereof; notwithstanding when we consider,

First, Your endeavors to procure the accomplishment of those things in a
Parliamentary way, to the satisfaction of all, and stopping the mouth of
scandal.

Secondly, That nothing has yet been done by your Excellency and Army (at
least to our knowledge) repugnant with, and contrary unto the aforesaid
Promises, Purposes, and Engagements.

Thirdly, That neither your Excellency, nor Army, have made a prey upon the
estates and treasure of the Kingdom, or any part thereof, though many
opportunities hereunto have been frequently offered, which we may speak without
the least suspicion of flattery, it being the general acknowledgement, even of
the worst of your enemies; no Officers in your Army that ever we heard of,
found guilty so much as of a false muster, to the everlasting honor of your
Army.

Fourthly, Your constant love, care, and faithfulness to the Peace and welfare
of the Nation; as heretofore, so especially of late, eveidenced by the
readiness, freeness and willingness of your Excellency, and your Army,
(notwithstanding all discouragements, affronts, reproaches, dishonor, and
abuses many ways offered, and the personal diseases and distemper of your own
body) to interpose between the Peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and the
malicious enemies thereof, who rose up like a Lion out of the thicket, and like
so many Bears robbed of their whelps, making several insurrections, openly
committing murders, felonies, riots, and treasons in the great City, and in
several parts of the Kingdom, as in the North, in Wales, Essex, and in our own
County, which had they not been suppressed by the blessing of God, through the
courage and faithfulness of your Excellency, and Army, the City and Kingdom
had either been in blood, or (which is as bad) at the cruel mercies of bloody
and violent men, whose design was doubtless the utter extirpation of the very
life, and power of Religion, and just Liberty from amongst us, and to have made
all honest and conscientious men, however distinguished, the objects of their
revenge, rage, and fury, the most profane and malignant sort of people being
the chiefest agents in these tumults, (unto whom the profession, and much more
the practice of godliness under any form of Discipline whatsoever is an
Abomination) which labor of love the Lord reward seven fold into the bosom of
your Excellency, and Army; and for ever adored and magnified be that wisdom
of the only wise God that prevented your disbanding contrary to the wisdom of
men, and reserved you for such a season as this was; for we are now fully
convinced of that hand of Grace and Mercy which so ordered your continuance in
Arms.

The consideration of these things most Noble Sir, has strengthened our hearts
and hands once more in our most humble address unto your Excellency and you
Army, to pray and beseech you upon all the bands of Charity, mercy, and
compassion to your own native Country upon all Parliamentary Conjurations,
Declarations, Vows, and Covenants, imposed upon you to defend the peoples just
Rights and Liberties, upon all your printed and published Declarations,
Engagements, promises, and resolutions upon all the Victories, successes and
appearances of God for you heitherto, in your upright endeavors for the common
good, to assert the Liberties, and just intrest of an oppressed people; your
own Brethren and Countriemen against the Tyranie cruelty, and oppression of
any party or parties whatsoever to sollicet the Parl. (by all just ways and to
lay forth your selves to the utmost of your power in the speedy settlement of
this distemper, and afllicted Nation. Give us leave we humbly beseech you, to
dictate to your Excellency: our humble thoughts of the most hopeful and
promising means hereunto, and that (we conceive) is the speedy determination,
and happy issue of these 4 things.

1 The Differences touching the King. 2 The Securing the Militia of the Kingdom
in faithful hands. 3 A just and prudent framing an act of Oblivion. 4 The just
satisfaction of all intrests.
FIrst concerning the interest of the King, be pleased to call to mind, your
own exprssieons, printed and published to the world, filling the hearts of the
Sollicitors and perplexed people, with the expectation of your actions
accordingly.

In your Declaration and proposals of the 14. of June 1647. tendered to the
Parliament, and printed and published to the world, you have these words. When
his Majesty in these things (having proposed several good things for the
public peace and benefit) and what else shall be proposed by the Parliament
necesary to secure the rights, and Libertyes of the people; and for settling the
Militia and peace of the Kingdom, shall have given his concurrence to put them
past dispute, we shall then desire that the Rights of his Majesty and his
posterity, may be considered of, and settled in all things so far as may consist
with the Rights and freedom of the Subject, and with the security of the same
for the future. And in your Declaration of the 2. of August 1647. And to these
proposals which we here first tendered, as necessary to a peace, and upon which
we desire a seal of prace in the restitution of his Majesty and others to
their rights, and in an act of oblivion to be past etc. And in your proposalls
of the 1 of August 1647. in the 14 head of those proposals thus. That the
things here before proposed being provided for the settling and securing the
Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the Kingdom, His Majesty's Person, His
Queen, and Royal Issue, may be restored to a condition of safety, honor, and
freedom in this Nation, without deminution to their personal Rights* or
further limitation to the exercise of the Regal power, there according to the
particulars aforegoing.

These several promises and engagements of yours concerning the King, give very
great satisfaction to the well-affected of the Kingdoms, and did put them into
great expectations of the speedy performance thereof. We cannot conceive how
the peace of the nation can be settled, and the differences, distempers, and
jealousies of the people composed, until the differences between the King and
people be (by some just and safe way) determined; for hear the flames of war
at first broak out, and the fire (though seemingly quenched) will from hence
(except timely prevented) kindle into higher flames of war and destruction.
It cannot be our rational desire, that the King (or any others) should be
advanced to the hurt, prejudice, and vassallage of the people; we knowing that
there is no prerogative or privilege of King or Parliament, which is
inconsistant with the just liberty and welfare of the people; we would
therefore much rather choose an everlasting war, then everlasting bondage and
slavery, as conceiving it more sntable to the principles of piety and humanity.

And we humbly pray that the Parliament may be minded by you, that our Covenant
(solemnly made, with* our hands lifted up to heaven, thereby calling the great
God of heaven and earth to witness for our sincerity, and employing his divine
aid for performance) was not made to King or Parliament: but to God the judge
of all; And that therefore neither King, nor Parliament, can absolve us from
the obligation of it; as therefore we were drawn into this bond at the
instance, by the convincing arguments and good example of the Parliament: so we
hope the Parliament will not commit so great wickedness, as to become Covenant
breakers with their God themselves, much less require others, and least of all
compel them to it, and thereby bring an heavy curse upon the whole Kingdom.
Which yet, if they shall do, (and which our gracious God forbid) we (knowing
the terrors of the Almighty) beseech you to declare (in our behalf, that we
cannot, we dare not, nay we will not join, or consent with them therein.
Pardon us if again we beseech your Excelencies endeavors in settling the great
business of the King, by some just and righteous way: Let the people know what
they shall trust unto and not be thus harrased by perpetual troubles, and
war, as they are like to be if this business be not determined.

And in case his Majesty shall refuse to give satisfaction to these just demands
of the people, and so continue the Kingdom in this sad, unsettled raging
distemper, so that we cannot enjoy peace and truth in security with him, (whose
just rights together with our own we heartily desire) then we entreat that the
Parliament may be minded, of their most reasonable and equal votes which they
have made, and published to the world in print, viz. To setle the Kingdom
without him. And our further hopes and desires to your Excelency and honorable
Army are, that (until these things before mentioned shall be accomplished, one
way or other) you will not lay down Arms, nor cease to use all just
endeavors, according to those vows and engagements that lie upon you.

And the sense of our own engagements together with your selves hearin, enforce
us to declare that we must, and shall stand by you with our lives and fortunes,
in the speedy prosecution hereof, as choosing rather to die a thousand deaths,
and to hazard the displeasure of all men in the world, then to be found false
in the Covenant of our God, and so draw down divine vengeance on us and our
posterity. And because the future peace and welfare of the Kingdom cannot be
secured, except the Militia thereof be entrusted into safe hands.

In the second place we humbly request, and beseech your Excelency and Army,
to call to mind the second and third heads of the Proposals of your Excelency
and Army, of the first of August 1647. concerning the disposing the Militia of
the Kingdom both by Sea and Land, and the many particulars hereunto belonging
(to long to be here inserted) that the said Militia may not be trusted in the
hands of any but those, that have given most palpable evidence of their good
affections to the common care, against the common enemy nor declined since in
their faithfulness, as some most basely have done.

And (that every root of bitterness, wars and divisions may be plucked up) in
the third place we humbly desire your Excelency and Army, to take again into
consideration the eighth particular of the Declaration, and Representation of
your Excelency and Army of the 14. of June 1647. in these words, That public
justice being first satisfied, by some examples, of the worst of excepted
persons, and other delinquents having past their compositions, some course may
be taken by a general act of oblivion or other ways, whereby the seeds of
future war or fears, either to the prosent age, or posterity, may the better
be taken away, by easing the sense of present, and satisfying these fears of
future ruin, or undoing to persons or families who may drive men into any
desperate ways for self preservation or remedy, and by taking away the private
remembrances, and distinction of persons, as far as may stand with safery to
the rights and liberties we have hithers a fought for.

As also the 16 head of your Excelencies and Armies Proposals of the first of
August 1647 in these words That there may be a general act of oblivion, to
extend to all, (except the person: to be continued in exception) to absolve
from all trespasses, misdemeanors etc. done in prosecution of the war, and
from all trouble or prejudice for or concerning the same, after their
compositions past, and to restore them to all privileges etc. belonging to
other subjects provided as in the fourth Article, under the second general
head before going concerning security.

In the fourth place (the seeds of future wars being taken away) that all
interests may be satisfied, we desire your Excelency and Army to reconsider,
what you were pleased to remonstrate to the Commissioners as St- Albans June
the 23. 1647. to be by them humbly presented to the Parliament; You are pleased
to declare for the King and his party (so far as can consist with common right
or freedom, and with security of the same for future) in these words, And we do
further clearly profess, we do not se how there can be any peace to this
Kingdom firm and lasting, without a due consideration of, and provision for the
rights quiet and immurity of his Maj sties Royal family, and late partakers,
and herein we think that tender and equitable dealing (as supposing their
cases had been ours) and a spirit of Common love and justice diffusing it self
to the good and preservation of all, will make up the most glorious conquest
over our hearts (if God in mercy se it good) to make them and the whole people
of the land lasting friends.

As for satisfaction in matters of Religion, you have been pleased to declare,
(and we trust in the true and real purposes of your hearts) in your Declaration
and Representation of the 14. of June 1647. in these words. And whereas it ha^h
been suggested or suspected, that in our late or present proceedings, our
design is to overthrow Presbytery, or hinder the settlement thereof, and to
have the Independent Government set up, we do clearly disclaim and disavow any
such designs; we only desire, that according to the Declarations promising a
provision for tender Consciences, there may some effectual course be taken,
according to the intent thereof; and that such who upon conscientious grounds,
may differ from the established forms, may not (for that) be debared from the
common rights, liberties or benefits belonging equally to all as men, and
members of the Commonwealth, while they live soberly, honestly, and
inoffensively toward others, and peacefully and faithfully toward the State.

Now may it please your Excellency, and Honorable Army, these things and many
others of the like nature, you have been pleased (we trust) to represent and
publish to the world, with a true and real intent and purpose of heart (and not
to serve a present turn) that you might perform, and by all just ways put the
same in execution, notwithstanding those clamorous objections, reproaches, and
accusations cast upon you by the ignorance of some, and malice of others, that
you should take upon you the ordering of the Parliament, and the Government of
the Kingdom by the power of the Sword, the Parliament it self having often
taught us, as you well observe in your Declaration of the 14. of June 1647. in
these words, the Parliament has declared it no ^esisting of Magistracy to side
with the just principles and law of nature and Nations, being that law upon
which (you say to the Parliament) we have assisted you, and that the Soldiery
may lawfully hold the hands of the General who will turn his Cannon against
his Army on purpose to destroy them; the Seamen the hands of the Pilot, who
wilfully runs the Ship upon a Rock, (as out brethren of* Scotland argued who
were justified and protected by their own and this Kingdom, when in the first
beginning of their late differences associated in Covenant for the very same
grounds and principles, having no visible form either of King or Parliament to
countenance them. For it is not Salus Regis but Regni, that is Suprema Lex. As
for Parliaments privileges, it cannot be presumed that they amount to any
thing, directly contrary to the peace and welfarre of the Kingdom, the
Parliament it self, (much more their privileges) having their very being as
such for the peace and welfarre of the people. Your Excellency and honorable
Council of War declared in your letter to the Lord Major, and Common Council
of London June the 25. 1647. That the name of Privileges must not lie in the
balance with the safety of a Kingdom, and the reality of doing justice. And
in your Remonstrance of the 23. of June, 1647. We clearly find, (and all men
may see it) that Parliament Privileges, as well as Royal Prerogative, may be
perverted and abused, to the destruction of those greater ends, for whose
protection and preservation they were admitted or intended; to wit, the Rights
and Liberties of the People, and safety of the whole, and (in case they be so)
the abuse, evil, or danger of them, is no less to be contended against, and
the remedy thereof no less to be endeavored then the other.

We humbly pray your Excelency and Army that all due ways may be continually
employed to maintain mutual amity, love, and correspondency between the
Parliament, Cit^^ and Army; but above all that the common interest of the
people may be preserved from the violent hands of any, and that your Excelency
and Army would improve your utmost wisdom and power in the just and speedy
setlement of our common freedom from this perplexed condition in which we are.
We desire your Excelency and Army to believe, that we are so far from declining
the Parl. in our humble addresses, as that having frequently solicited them in
our own persons. so now by your Excelencies implored mediation, we humbly pray
their consideration of our afflicted condition, and utmost endeavors for a
speedy relief herein. Alas Sr. what shall we do? in the beginning of these
troubles he that did not engage for King nor Parliament was punished by both
(if within the reach of either) he that engaged for the one was perplexed by
the other, and of late the cross orders, votes, and ordinances of the
Parliament it self, have been such that their most cordial friends know not
where to fix.

We humbly pray your Excelency and Armies serious consideration of the
premises, and assistance in this extremity, and the Lord of Hoasts bless and
prosper your Excelency and whole Army, teach your hands to war and your fingers
to fights, cover your heads in the day of battle, and at length give you to
reap the fruit of jeoparding your lives in the high places, in making you the
happy instruments in his hand of settling the unhappy differences of the Nation
upon the pillars of peace and truth.

FJNJS

