New-Englands VINDIDATION.

Showing the Misunderstanding of the APPREHENSION To take all that vast
Country under the Notion of a particular place of one Pattent of Boston, the
Metropolitan of the Machechusets there, who in these late Times have Acted as a
Free State and Illegal proceeding, as by the many Books and Complaints by
Petition have caused an Odium on the Country in general, in vindication to
manifest the worth of the Country in general, it is as hopeful to enlarge His
Majesty's Dominions, as if all the Baltic Seas were Annexed to His Empire.

By HENRY GARDENER Merchant, whose Father was one of the first Adventurers
thither, and into other parts of America.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1660.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER*
Courteous Reader,
MY Father with others, and Capt. John Mason, having lived long in the Oriental
parts of the World, almost as much Eastwards, as New England is Westwards, in
the same lo^gitude from 42 to 44 degrees, at great charges procured sundry
Pattents, as may appear; hoping to fix them and their posterity, propagate the
Gospel, and enlarge His Majesty's Dominions where never any Christian
inhabited, to the vast charges of many 1000 l. as by sundry Books extant,
besides the Relation of an old Gentleman in them mentioned, Mr. Godfrey.
being well known to have merited of his own Country, in other parts, here,
and in New England 27 years in person, is manifest; has induced me to write
these few lines. I find the Country no less hopeful to His Majesty, then what
we did expect, but under Notion of one particular Pattent, of 30 others, now
grown great, strong and potent by the Times and friends here. In these most sad
times of distraction, the Machechusets of Boston acting as a Free State; have
by those proceedings cast an Odium on all that vast Country, not only to be
despicable, unprofitable, and matters of other consequence. I thought good to
show so much His Majesty's Title to the Country, by some Collections I have
seen from New Foundland to Cape Florida, which were well to be published with
the Mapps and Cards: till when this may suffice to show the unjust proceedings
of the said Gentleman of the Colony of Boston, against the said Gentleman and
those of the Eastern parts, who were not all of their tenants, but ever acted
according to His Majesty's Laws, in taking the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, they being of a contrary opinion: and Mr. Hugh Peter's and other
their Agents made use of their times here, 1652. subjugated all the Eastern
parts, and put the Oath of Fidelity to the State, without any Relation to
England, to the ruin of some Families. I wish every man may have his Right,
and His Majesty his Right Interest: which is all my aim and endeavor. It were
good the Mapps and Cards to be Printed, were spherically drawn, each Pattent to
be bounded, and their acknowledgements looked unto, what not granted, nor
Conditions performed, if His Majesty would Grant, Customers would not be
wanting, and a Revenue to His Majesty raised, which will cause Peace and Quiet
to the Country, and security of His Majesty's Interest.

To Answer such as say His Majesty KING CHARLES has no Title to that vast
Empire, from New Foundland to Cape-Florida: some such there be; others no King
but Christ; others Libertines, to do what is good in their own eyes; some
Israelites; the rest Egyptians.
AGainst all. His Majesty's Right in those parts, is 1. By Discovery from Henry
the 7th time, by Sebastian Cabott, for which he had a Pention of 200 Marks per
annum. 2. By Possession of Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Sir Richard Greenfield, Sir
Walter Rawley in Queen Elizabeth's time, named Virginia. After whose death King
James of ever blessed memory, peace being concluded, many Seamen and Soldiers
went to serve other Princes; others on Discoveries, as the North-West passage,
etc, some fell with the Coast of New England, and brought home some of the
Natives.

About 1644.
So my Lord Popham and others procured Pattents, for two Colonies to be settled
in those parts, one by the Name of Virginia; the other of New England.

Then my Lord Popham and others sent to inhabit New England, 1607
and settled a Colony at Saquadahock, the Ruins and fruit Trees remain to this
day; but he dying, all fell: Then diverse Fishermen went only to fish; and one
Hunt at the end of his Voyage, in the Long-Robert betrayed 22 of the Natives
aboard his Ship, carried them for Spain, to sell them for Slaves; (an ill Act)
they would not work; the Spaniard refused them; some of them brought for
England: Hunt taken by the Turks coming home.

By reason of these salvages another Achievement was made, 1614
but it came to nothing.

Sir Richard Hawkins went in Ship of his own, 1615
the Garland, to make a Fishing-Voyage and Discovery: made a good Voyage, but
no Discovery.

His Majesty granted Letters Pattents to the Council of Plymouth, 1619
and after confirmed by Pattents of Incorporation to certain Lords, 1620
but great troubles arose in Parliament, that it was a Monopoly; of which and
other passages, I shall treat hereafter at large.

Then the said Council granted sundry Pattents, as to Capt. Willeston, Mr. Tho.
Morton, some of Dorchester and other, to settle in the Bay of the Machechusets.

There were diverse of Robinsons Tenants of Amsterdam, 1621
and other Merchants of London joined to settle a Colony nigh Cape Cod, now
called New-Plymouth in New England; Godfrey was one, but in two years they
brought those that sent them 1800. l. in debt, so that the principat was fain
to pay the debt; but since they have flourished and thrived, and do to this
day: have well acted for themselves, as the Mode of New England is.

There were diverse worthy Gentlemen, 1621 4o. Car.
desirous to separate from the Church of England, yet among themselves of
sundry Opinions, (as hereafter) the most discreetest of them procured a
Pattent, first by my Lord of Warwick, from the Council of New-Plymouth, after
enlarged by his Majesty to Sir Will. Russel, Mr. Jo. Wynthrope, and diverse
others, as may appear; by Authority whereof, and persons of so great Eminency
and Quality going, and Books of Encouragement dispersed over all England; they
proceeded so well and effectually, that seven Ships were provided at the Couses
and Hampton, and those parts, with all sorts of Provisions fit to settle a New
Colony in a New Country; diverse good and godly people went, but diverse under
the Umbrella of Religion, in regard of the largeness of their Pattent, which
was three Miles South of Charles River, three Miles North East of Merimack, and
fifty Miles by Sea shore, 1629. Bounded by themselves, named it the
Bound-House, yet to be seen; their Pattent had large Limits and Privileges by
Incorporation, as Custom free for seven years, which other Pattents had not;
yet they were tied not to act contrary to the Laws, or any way repugnant to
England; and other Acknowledgments, as may appear. Men of great Estates went,
and many ventured deeply, great Sums of Money of Benevolences gathered, at
present about 700. l. per Annum, in I and yearly, for the converting the
Indians, what done therein, the Lion not so fierce, as painted Mr. Rouses Book
will show. Of persons of note went the Lady Arabella, Daughter to the Earl of
Lincoln, and her Husband, Mr. Isaac Johnson; in honor of whom the Ship Eagle,
the Admiral, was called the Arabella; so with great Riches, Furniture,
Provisions of all sorts, Tradesmen, and Utensils for all Manufactures, people
of all sorts went; Portanter avarii Pigmaliones opes pellago Dux, Faemena facti.

Relinquendo, to leave their Native Country, Relegando, to combine to settle at
Vtopia, they safely arrived at Salem, and yearly great multitudes of People of
all sorts went thither and resorted to them by Thousands; they fell to
modelling of Government for Church and Commonwealth, gathering of Churches; as
People came, they could not agree of points of Controversy in Religion; a most
hideous Monster was born, of stupendous Forms and Shapes, which did
prognosticate their Dissension; Mr. Cotton the Minister said in the Pulpit, it
had as many Shapes as Tenants broached; so that some not agreeing were
banished, and a Council, or a Conventicle held, a man might see a Speech, but a
wise man would not regard the Punctilio's, as in occasion I shall say
hereafter; there was such a Confusion, that the wisest were at a maze, and so
many Complaints came to England against them, that it was doubtful in short
time they would quite shake off the Royal Jurisdiction of England (as now) all
the Ships stayed for going thither; all Objections against them were then
answered by Mr. Godfrey, who lived remote from them, where all had then taken
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; so that upon his Plea, all the Ships were
cleared. Thereby their Governor and others, held Gratum Opus, since ill
rewarded. Mr. John Wynthrope was a worthy Patriot and Governor, his equal they
may in time have, but a better will never come there; for since his death
others also dead, and some reurned to England, seeking ambitiously far beyond
their power or abilities, as by so many Books Petitions, and Remonstrances
against them may appear: So we may say as of Rome, Behold of late O little
Rome, to what a greatness she is come; of Boston one poor Pattent granted, but
of late is now become a mighty State; never Horse nor man ere turned home
bettered by the sight of Rome.

From Boston in the American Strands, none ere came bettered, except he came by
Land, for too much power so far off, in such hands, seldom wants danger not to
measure Jurisdiction by the length of their Swords; they may hold themselves
wise, and turn others out for fools, (but now) Che Tropo se stringe toto
disleguea; if of meek spirit, should have suffered others after thirty years
possession, and never any Complaint there or here, and approved by themselves,
as under all their hands will appear. If Royal or Loyal Subjects, should have
emulated who should have given the best account of all their Transactions, and
suffered Appeals and Judication for England, and assisted one the other, if
they will acknowledge Englands power: If it be but weakness in some Men, as a
sublimated Coachman from the Box to the Bench, and Plow to Pulpit; a Tailor or
two, and the like, with the mecannick Grandee Laymans Deputy, to stritch so
large as to act contrary to Jus Gentium Lex, Law of our own Country, or
Concelarum Contience, to pass Sentence before Plea or Judication, to enrich
some turbulent men of low condition and less breeding; as one answered about
the Book of Common Prayer, he showed them that could read, the 29. Eccles. How
can he get wisdom that holds the Plow, etc. such should not sit high in the
Congregation, etc. They may do well in time to submit, and for wrongs done,
make satisfaction or acknowledgment, as 22. years passed their Pattent was sued
to a Quo Warranto, and sent for; if thirty more Queries be added, as for
instance three or four, denying Appeals, Printing, Coining, and that his
Majesty's Coin from 12 d. to 9 d. the Jurisdiction of Admiralty, English
Collors.

By such proceedings the Country is held despicable, and an Odium cast on it,
by the most unjust and unadvised proceeding of one particular Pattent and place
of Boston, which if others have their Rights, is not one 6th. part of the
Country, and but one of thirty other Pattents, by the sad distractions of the
Times; here diverse Ministers went thither for the good of the Cause, as they
said, returned for the Loaves sake, as Mr. Hugh Peter's, with twenty more of his
Tribe; and some other men of great esteem, as Sir Henry Vane, Sir R.
Saltenstal, and an Agmen of men of all sorts, all highly preferred in Church,
State, Army, Navy, Customhouse. etc. and some of no Literature, to preach, and
Beneficed, and plundering here violently; it has a worm in the root in this
time, the ablest Ministers and Magistrates dead, and some gone. There is some
good Gentlement yet, as Mr. Indicoat, Mr. Bellingham, Mr. Demson, but they have
no power, the Country act as a Free State, the Deputies first, they as the
Ministers will; so if the Ministers and Deputies enter on men's Estates and
Lands, as they have done, as I shall show, and subjugate all other Pattents,
and make them Town-ships; We that first ventured must petition, our sometimes
Servants to be good to their Masters Children; what Law can we have or expect
that be of the Church of England, they Independants, so our Antagonists,
incompetent Judges, being parties in action, and opposite in Religion: Let it
be observed, that if in ten years they came to this height, what in these
twenty, having so enriched themselves in Wealth, Strength, and Fortifications,
that if they Fortify Pascataqua River for themselves, as they have subjugated
it, and now Arm against the Dut^^ ^ew Neatherland, with their united Collonies,
they may be the invicible States in America. If any object the contrary, I
shall make it appear; let Major Robert Sedgwick, and Capt. Leveret, Nova Scotia
France, Business be a president, for the difficulty, charges, and danger, if
not in time prevented, may be more obnoxious to England, than ever the
Hollander was to the King of Spain. All the power is in the Independent way,
yet three to one out; and his Majesty has to my knowledge as Loyal Subjects as
any in England: in short time they will be in Confusion in themselves, the
Country wholesome, pleasant; and if good Society and English Government were
there, people would rather live there than in Africa, Greece, Italy, France,
Spain, or England; it transcends all the Baltic Seas, and affords all or any
Commodity they have, and more plenty of sundry sorts, and of more concernment
to his Majesty, than if all the Baltic Seas were annexed to his Empire; as in
a short Epitomy and Anotamy of those Countries, from New Foundland to Cape
Florida, with the Mapps and Cards shall appear, with Collections of 55. years
Pilgrimage: it is want of Charity in the Independent Ministers, the Commons are
possessed they are all Israelites, and we Egyptians, of the Orthodox and true
Church of England, and reject old Planters that made way for them; Mr. Sa.
Maverick for one, the most Hospitable for entertainment of People of all sorts,
America afforded not, nor does the like, yet never free of Avenies and troubles
to many, some Life, Imprisonment, Illegal Subversion, and Usurping others
Rights: I could wish they had so much Charity as Turk or Remish, do as you
would be done to; no Salvation without Restitution if able, not so much such as
Israelites and Egyptians, and not to reward evil for go^^: If this is too short
or tart, I shall be more copious with their proceedings with us, whom you call,
without Authenticated, by proceeding of their Courts, with their Magistrates
Hands; and though you have some good, godly, and able Ministers, some are to be
blamed for irreverend speaking against ours, and they worse.

FINIS.

