THE Sage Senator DELINEATED: OR, A DISCOURSE OF The Qualifications,
Endowments, Parts, external and internal, Office, Duty and Dignity OF A PERFECT
POLITICIAN, WITH A Discourse of KINGDOMS, Republiques, and States-Popular. As
Also, Of KINGS and PRINCES: To which is annexed, The New Models of Modern
Policy.

By J. G. Gent.

London, Printed by Ja: Cottrel, for Sa^. Speed, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To the Reader.
THere are few or none (I presume) even among the Vulgar, but understand that
Republique or Kingdom to be most happy, that lives most peaceably: Yet what
does most conduce to the Welfare and Felicity of King and People, has been
long debated by the Ancient as well as Modern Philosophers, and Politicians.

Some are of opinion, that good Laws work and frame the people to a civil life;
others think it lies in the power of good Education: some imagine that it
proceeds from the Influence and Operation of the Stars upon sublunary Bodies;
and others, from the Endeavors and Examples of good Kings. To the last, we
subscribe: for the peace and tranquillity of a Nation proceeds primarily from
the splendour of Princely ^^^rtues; which are so glorious and attractive, that
they do not only incite the Subject to gaze on them, but with an extasied
admiration, to adore and affect them, so that they are stimulated to an
imitation, as far as in them lies: and when Prince and People mutually labor
in the pursuit of Virtue (pro viribus, as we say) according to the utmost
extent of their ability, how can there choose but be a result of Unanimity,
Peace and Concord? To perfect this, it is requisite that a Senate be elected;
which is a certain number of grave, wise, discreet Persons, that may help their
Sovereign to pull in or slacken the reins of Government, according as it is
judged convenient; by the Nobility of whose Persons, and the Prudence of whose
Consultations, married to the Judgment of the King, the quiet and glory of the
People is infinitely promoted and preserved. To which intent and purpose, we
have here deciphered A SAGE SENATOR, with all qualifications tending to his
Perfection; his Office, Duty, Honor, Preferment and Repute among the Ancients,
as well as those of latter Ages; first asserting, and then proving their
necessity, and the benefit that accrews to a Kingdom or Republike from their
grave and serious Debates in Counsel, and their industrious management of
political Affairs. By such Union between King and Council, Prince and People;
the whole Nation will undoubtedly flourish with a perpetual Verdure, as if an
immortal peace were entailed upon them and their posterity for ever; Laws will
have their full force and efficacy, as well for the punishment of Malefactors,
as the Reward of honorable deserving Persons: Justice will run in its proper
current, and not be diverted to sinister and base ends, by lucre or
self-interest; two Hammers that are able to knock a Kingdom in pieces. Learning
will be advanced, and the Learned promoted according to their merit and desert:
without this, no Kingdom can stand; take away the Pen, and the Pike will be
unnecessary. 'Twas the Saying of a potent Monarch, That, He received more
benefit from his dead, then living Counselors; intimating thereby, that his
Library did afford him better Counsel then his Senate. Learning and Senators,
like Hippocrates his Twins, are inseparable; they cannot dwell asunder;
especially in such a one as is here described. And though I am sufficiently
sensible, that a discourse of those Qualities that are required in a Perfect
Politician, is, not only a work of great Importance, but attended by a Troop
of opposing Difficulties: Yet I have endeavored to display the Ancient
Government of the most famous Kingdoms, Republiques and States Popular,
according to the Statutes, Laws and Customs of the most potent, as well as
prudent Monarchs. And my hope is, (though my imbecility can lay no claim to
merit) that my earnest desire to promote the public good, will plead my
excuse; and I am confident, there is no person that is unprejudiced, if
commonly courteous, but will accept of my humble Devoirs; which is the very
highth of the Authors Desires; who at this present has no more to say, but bid
thee, Reader,

Farewell,
J. G.

The Table.
The First BOOK.
Chap. 1. OF Senators in General, their Original and Necessity. page 1 Chap. 2.
Of the diversity of Man's nature in general, and of the Parentage and Education
of a Senator in particular. p. 13 Chap. 3. The knowledge of Arts and Sciences
required in Senators; and particularly, that of Philosophy. p. 32 Chap. 4. Of
Eloquence, Clemency, Piety, and other Virtues necessary to the accomplishment
of a Senator. p. 47 Chap. 5. Of Justice and her concomitants, which our Senator
ought to be adorned with. p. 78 Chap. 6. Of Fortitude and her Concomitants, as
Magnanimity, Constancy, Patience, Confidence, etc. p. 113 Chap. 7. Of Travel;
the Age, Gravity, and Election of our Senator. page 136
The Second BOOK.
Chap. 1. OF Kings and their Prerogative. page 157 Chap. 2. Of the division of
Commonweals and Kingdoms. page 170 Chap. 3. Wherein is contained the various
Forms of the most renowned and famous Commonweals and Kingdoms in the World.
page 186 Chap. 4. The Newfangled Model of Modern Policy, being of three sorts,
a Protectordom, a Committeedom, and a Rumpdom; and first of the Protectordom.
page 198 Chap. 5. Of a Committeedom. page 206 Chap. 6. Of a Rumpdom. page 211
THE Sage Senator.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
Of Senators in General, their Original and Necessity.
HE that sweateth in the pursuit of those studies that conduce to private
recreation, as well as public emolument, personates and represents a grave
wise man; and merits the general applause of all persons: For, Omne tulit
punctum, qui miscuit util^ dulci. And (if I may be a competent Judge) there is
no Science accompanied with more delight to the Student, or benefit to the
Commonwealth into which he is incorporated, than that of Government: wherefore
being sufficiently convinced, that all the transactions of a well-regulated
State are managed by solid reason, mature deliberation, and sound judgment,
not by wavering opinion, uncertain fate, or fantastique fortune; I have made
the original of Senators, their duty, dignity, internal and external
qualifications, the Theme on which I intend to expatiate in general in this
first Book: But more particularly in this Chapter, of the original cause of
their institution or creation. For the performance of that task which I have
voluntarily imposed upon my self, I have dived into the depth of civil
knowledge, and pried into the Arcana of Philosophy; collecting whatsoever has
been related, penned, or experimentally known heretofore, either by Academick
Learning, Parliaments in Commonweals, Policy in Government, or History.

But to begin: Man, the perfection of the Creation, was not made a Citizen or
Inhabitant of this World only, but Lord Paramount over all Creatures that have
a being within the compass of the terrestrial Globe: This authority and dignity
was conferred upon him by the supreme Governor of Heaven and earth, who has
descended so far below his sacred Self, as to make him his Co-partner in
Government, adorning him with divine understanding; to the intent, that the
Scepter of this terrene Empire may be swayed by his Reason and Counsel. The
cause of this counion of Government between God and Man, proceeds from Reason;
which being perfect, makes Man capable of imitating Almightiness; so that it
appears, there is a kind of near alliance or consanguinity between the Creator
and the Creature, who sometimes is made God's Vicegerent upon earth: yet
without divine assistance, no reason or counsel can be termed good, or perfect:
For, the seed of this glimmering resemblance of a Deity planted in Man, if it
light on fertile ground, and that happen to meet with good culture, produces a
crop according to the expectation of the Celestial Planter; otherwise, it is
like corn cast into a barren soil; whose product is nothing but brambles,
thorns, or thistles. Thus then Man being reduced to a sense or feeling of those
sparks of divinity that lie latent in him, should be wrought to a persuasion,
that he has the Character or Idaea of a Deity in his mind; the impression of
the Creator's holy Image stamped on his soul; and ought thereupon to be so
industrious in the employment of his talent, and the management of his affairs,
that his actions may speak him worthy, in some sense, of so heavenly a favor
bestowed on him. Yet, though he be made God's associate (as it were) he must
return him the glory, to whom it properly and primarily belongs; and
acknowledge all authority to flow from him, as from the Fountain: For, as brute
Animals are not governed by Animals, but by an Herdsman; no more can Man rule
or govern Man, without the assistance and protection of Providence divine. And
should any man be so sordidly ignorant, or atheistically profane, as to
undertake the Government of any Country or Nation, without divine knowledge or
assistance; it must necessarily follow, that that State, Commonwealth, or
Kingdom, and every Member thereof, be implunged into an Ocean of misery and
infelicity: For, it is in vain to build upon the imagined welfare of a State,
or Kingdom, if God be not the Protector and Patron thereof. It is then as
conspicuous as the Meridian Sun, that all virtue, wisdom and goodness owes its
original to God; which did instigate the purblind, or rather pure-blind
Heathen, that had only the rush-candle of Nature, to consecrate public Temples
to Virtue, Faith, Concord, Wisdom, Peace, etc. And if Ovid the Ethnic durst be
so bold, well may we then a fortiori affirm, and maintain, Est Deus in nobis,
agitante calescimus illo;
Spiritus hic sacrae lumina mentis habet.


It is therefore our duty to endeavor the deserving a more noble title than
that of mere Man, and strenuously to labor in the pursuit of Understanding,
that flies a higher pitch, than either humanity or morality dare aspire unto;
that so, if possible, we may surpass all our Ancestors, and live according to
the dictates of that which has the greatest supremacy in us, viz. Reason; by
virtue whereof, we are made sensible of a Deity, know how to exercise Virtue,
embrace that which is good, and avoid what is evil: this is that which endows
a man with the qualifications of Wisdom, Valor, and Justice; by this we are
able to discern, that the terrestrial Globe is wheeled about by divine wisdom;
it is this that makes a man Noble, a Hero: which was the reason that the
Lacedaemonians imposed the title of Gods upon those persons, that were judged
to move in the highest sphere of understanding; homines de meliore luto; men of
a more noble allay, than dull mud-wall'd man can boast of: Nay, Homer deifies
Hector in this ensuing Distich: Non hominis certe mortalis filius ille
Esse videtur, sed divino semine natus.
So that we may maintain (without being Paradoxical) that that man, who is
guided by solid reason in all his words and actions, is quasi semi-deus inter
mortales; a Demi-god among men.

Now, of such repute is a Sage Senator, or grave Cousellor; who has reason for
his Cynosure, and wisdom his coadjutress in all undertakings. Such persons are
so necessary in a Commonwealth, that they can by no means be omitted or left
out: For, the King being but a single person, cannot have an eye unto all the
transactions of his Kingdom; besides, sometimes it happens, that he is seduced
from the conduct of reason, by yiedling to his affections, or slackning the
reins of his appetite and licentiousness; and the rude multitude, being
ignorant, is altogether incapable of that understanding, or knowledge. Yet the
Senate, elected according to the Law of the Land, and compacted or made up of
virtuous, sober, grave, discreet persons, do from their place, as from a
Pharos, or Watchtower, look about them, and provide all things requisite for
the discreet and well regulating of the State wherein they live; preventing all
mutinies, seditions and dissentions that the rebellious rabble durst any ways
attempt: Of such great use and necessity are they, and that not only to the
King, but the people also; like unto the vital part of man's soul, which
residing in the heart, enliveneth and quickens that which partakes of Reason,
and is situated in the head: and a Monarch that is guided by the advice and
counsel of a grave Senate, rules his Kingdom prudently, and governs it
discreetly. For, as reason in all her proceedings, makes use of the service of
the senses; yet she alone determines, and deserves the greatest honor and
esteem: so a Prince, though he admit of Counsel, is to be judged the wisest;
and is uncontrollable in all his actions: for it is a Maxim among us, that The
King can do no wrong. And as the hand distinguished into fingers is thereby
strengthened, and made the more apt to lay hold on any thing; so he that
governs with the aid and assistance of Counsel, shall manage all affairs with
the greater consideration and prudence. Their original did proceed from the
benefit that it was imagined would accrue to the Commonwealth, whereof they
were members, by their counsel: And although they, that first assembled men
into Cities, who before like Savages, ranged over the woods, and inhabited the
deserts dispersedly, without either Law or Order, first gained the Title of
Kings; yet that course alone could not make them understand the dutiful
Allegiance they owed unto their Sovereign: wherefore perceiving, that when they
were civilized, and reduced from their brutality, the authority of a single
Person was not of sufficiency to curb and check them in the full career of
their exorbitancies, they judged it convenient to have assistance from serious
and grave Counselors: which we find performed by Romulus the Proto-basileus,
or first King of the Romans; who supposing the Government of a single Person
without a Senate to be perilous and unsafe, made a Convocation of 100 Senators,
who out of respect to their gray heads, and grave understandings, obtained the
name of Patres. Theopompus also, King of Sparta, trod the same path; For, he
constituted the Ephori, and invested them with eminent authority: whereat his
wife being offended, was so pragmatical as to tell him, That he had derogated
from his dignity, and clipped the wing of his ensuing Posterity, by diminishing
their authority and supremacy: But he replied, like himself, That the Counsel
and gravity of a Senate would fortify his Kingdom, and be instead of a Bulwark
against the impious machinations and plots of rebellious Subjects. Whereby it
is apparent, that Monarchs first embraced Counselors out of necessity: and all
rational men are of opinion, that those State-transactions are most firm and
solid, that are digested by the wisdom of a Parliament, ere they come to a
public birth. Now, I call that a Parliament, or Senate, which by Royal
Authority, and the general consent of the whole Nation, is freely elected, and
constituted, to advise and govern the State; and consequently, a Senator, or
Parliament Man, is one lawfully chosen into the number of those that are
authorized to sit at the helm, and steer the Ship of State. And it has ever
been observed, that they were always the most grave, discreet, and noble sort
of Subjects; because there is no Society of Men, or Nation, how barbarous and
brutish soever, but will voluntarily and cordially consent, that the Government
should be imposed upon, and rest in those persons that are virtuous; and think
it just and reasonable to obey them. Nor are there any so fit to govern, as the
ancient, experienced, which are usually chosen; because others, either through
want of maturity or experience, are usually withdrawn by their juvenile
phancies, and recreations, from such serious places of authority: but a grave
Counselor is not disturbed or discomposed with extravagant affections,
transported by appetite, or inveigled by youth; but by Reason directed, by
Counsel fortified, and by Age made perfect. And further, Philosophers maintain,
that in all things there are three degrees; Great, Small, and Indifferent: And
that is judged the most perfect, that participates of either, and stands in an
Aequilibrium between two: Now, the Senator standing as a mean or moderator
between the King and People, the Monarch and his Subjects; may be the more
intimately acquainted with the perfection of all things; and study what is the
Office of a King, and the duty and Allegiance of a Subject; with the Rights,
Properties, Liberties, and Laws appertaining to both; and so advise them
accordingly; that the King may not turn tyrannical for want of Counsel, nor the
people transcend the bounds of a moderate becoming liberty: Therefore he must
of necessity be a man of excellent endowments, a clear intellect, and a
piercing understanding, to dive into the intricacies of Government. Scipio
says, That as the end of Mariners, and their laborious endeavors, tends to a
safe arrival into the intended Haven; the Physicians skill and art is employed
for the recovering and preserving health in his distempered Patients; and the
Captains valor levels at victory: So the happiness of Subjects, their glory,
life, and liberty should be the summa totalis, or chiefest end that our
Counselor should aim at; all which he must labor to preserve, maintain and
augment, by his industry and endeavor, to the utmost extent of his ability;
and leave no stone unturned for the benefit of the Republic, of which he is a
Member. Nor is it my design here in this Treatise to broach any newfangled
opinion, like those that are hatched in the brains of our Phanatick Regicides;
or to phancie a Chimaera, or make my brain the womb or Idaea of an Utopian
Counselor, that can only be imagined, and not found in esse (as Plato did in
his Commonwealth, and Cicero in his Orator) but my discourse shall tend to, and
end in a relation and description of such Persons as have lived heretofore, and
citra omnis controversiae aleam, may be hereafter. And as divine Plato
composed, and reduced all those things into order, that might conduce to the
felicity of his City, or Republic; the same course will we take in the
Character of our Counselor: wherefore persuade your self to be arrived at, or
come to some famous Emporium, or Piazza; whereunto all persons, of all Nations,
Countries and Cities repair; and we will disrobe every single person of some
Virtue, Law, Custom, or Qualification, that shall seem most advantageous and
beneficial to our enterprise; and therewith make up our Sage Senator, Grave
Counselor, or Perfect Politician: that they, who for the future are invested
with such eminent dignity and authority, may imitate our Senator, and endeavor
to be adorned with these ensuing qualifications.

CHAP. II.
Of the diversity of Man's nature in general, and of the Parentage and
Education of a Senator in particular.
THere is nothing more clear, than that the Supreme Power, among many other
gifts, has conferred that of Reason upon Man, to the end that by virtue
thereof, he may pry into the nature of Celestial, as well as Terrestrial
bodies; and thereby honor, reverence, and adore the Creator.

Now, he that is sensible of the gifts of God, and the benefits of Nature; and
does, both by contemplation and action, employ this supernatural gift, slowly
Apes the Deity, and thereby resembles him, as much as comes within the compass
of mortality. But, they that contrary to Nature, and the end of their Creation,
indulge their genius, delighting themselves in sensuality, neglecting, or
totally deserting Reason; Facie tantum homines sunt, non animo: carry only the
outward aspect or complexion of a Man; because they are destitute of his more
noble endowments.

Hence arises the variety of men's natures and dispositions, or rather
conditions: for, some are born Free, Noble, Wise, and with an aptitude to
govern; others, Vassals, Rusticks, Idiots, predestined to servitude and
bondage: All Societies of men, being willing and ready to submit to the
Government of the more grave and wise; promoting, and accumulating honors on
them, and Offices, with reverence and respect suitable to their deserving
gravity and understanding.

Plato is of opinion, that God in man's first Creation, did by his omniscience
so order it, that in the generation of those that are destined and adapted to
govern, he has distilled some drams of gold in their composition; and in them
that are to assist Kings and Superiors by their deliberate counsel, and mature
advice, silver; but the Nature of Peasants and Mechanics is tempered with
Brass and Iron. Which similitude the Philosopher extends to the manners,
nature, and capacity of man.

For, although every man naturally desires, that the issue of his loins may
resemble him; yet sometimes, though seldom, it happens contrary to his
expectation: for Gold sometimes produces Silver, a more inferior metal.
Therefore it is requisite, that a Prince should be capable of understanding the
natural disposition and inclination of his Royal Offspring, that their Iron
may be converted into the Gold of a more noble disposition: but, if neither
good Education, Documents nor Precepts can operate upon their inclinations, so
as to cause a Metamorphosis, or Transmutation; the Government must be
transferred to those, whose wisdom renders them more capable. For, it has
been prognosticated, and the event has been experimentally known to succeed
according to the Prediction; That they that are ruled by ignorant, mechanic
Governors, come to ruin, destruction, and confusion. To prevent all which
misfortunes, it is requisite, that our Counselor be a natural Subject of that
place or Country where he governs; no forreigner: of the same Country,
because that birth and being do not only oblige, but induce a man to believe,
that it is honorable, just, and requisite for him to spend his blood in
defense thereof, when occasion is offered: Dulce and decorum est pro patria
mori; It is a sweet and comely thing to die for ones Country. And how can it be
that any man, of what constitution soever, should not affect that place wherein
his Parents, Neighbors, Friends, and Allies reside; and that Country to which
he is indebted for his Life, Name, and Honor, and every thing else that is
either for delight or necessity? Non nobis enim nati sumus (says the Orator)
sed patriae; Our Country challenges the greatest part of us. And it is most
certain, that Nature has so deeply rooted the affection to their native place
in the mind of man, that never was any good Subject timorous, or unwilling to
lay down his life, and hazard his fortunes in her defense, if necessity
required. Nay, it has been so prevalent, that the most impious and unnatural
persons, that endeavored the subversion of the place of their nativity, the
very sight of their native soil has prevented their cruel enterprise. Veturia
did dissuade her Son Martius befieging Rome, only by reducing to his memory the
love and respect he ought to bear to his natural Country; branding him with the
name of impious and audacious, for being so highly ambitious, as to disturb the
quiet of that City wherein he was begot and educated; altogether unmindful of
his Wife, Children, and friends that remained there. So notable was the piety
of Veturia to her Country, and no less was that of her Son in forgiving it;
which had been somewhat ungrateful to him at that time, through the cruelty of
the Tribunes persecuting the Nobility. Sertorius also entreated Pompeius and
Metellus to endeavor the procurement of his revocation; alleging, that he
took it for a greater piece of honor to have the name of an obscure Roman
Citizen, than that of Emperor in any other place of the habitable World. Well
then might Naso sing, Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctas
Dacit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
The Obligation that devoteth and binds us to our Country, is great, upon
this account; because our goods, persons and fortunes are therein contained.
Pythagoras (as it is reported by divine Plato) judged it a crime of as deep a
dye, to be guilty of ingratitude to the place of ones nativity, as to ones own
Mother, to whom we are indebted for being: Nor can there be an offense so
heinous, but the affection to our native Country should allay and mitigate. Our
Counselor must be of natural birth: no Forreiner; because their counsel or
advice is thought and accounted suspicious and dangerous; which was the reason
that moved the Athenians not only to exclude strangers from their Council, but
to drive them out of their Cities, lest they should aspire at the dignity of
Magistracy, and instigate or work upon the minds of Citizens, so as to persuade
them to Innovation; and so mutation of Laws, Customs and manners might ensue,
and consequently Seditions and Rebellions. Which method the Venetians have
diligently observed; for, it is their study and their whole industry, to
prevent their sitting among them in Council, lest they intruding under a false
name or title, should arrive to dignity and eminency in the Republic. Besides,
it is requisite he be of the Nobility; begotten of honest Parents; because
honest parents produce honest children, for the most part. He must be of the
number of noble and free Citizens, who assumes his title from that Nobility
that owes its original to Virtue; which he may partly challenge as his own, and
partly as his Ancestors. They therefore that are nobilitated and adorned with
their own peculiar virtues, as well as with those of their Predecessors, merit
esteem, preferment, honor and fame, above all others, and are to be highly
reverenced; and the reason is, because that Virtuous and good Parents, have a
generous, good, virtuous and noble Issue: according to the Lyrick Poet, Fortes
fortibus creantur, and bonis,
Est in jumentis, est in equis Patrum
Virtus, nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
Now (as Aristotle affirms) that person that comes of a noble race, is the
stem of a noble stock, and has the affluence of Fortune accompanied with
Virtue, has arrived to the apex or perfection, the very Quintessence of true
Nobility. But, because it is a rarity to find one person adorned with them all;
Virtue alone can by her own right and property nobilitare viros. As for
revenues, large acres, specious and spacious Manors, but no manners, and the
honor that we challenge from our Ancestors, without virtue, they are so far
from being ornaments, that they prove a disparagement and a stain to the Owner.
Such persons render the name of their Predecessors obscure; And through the
vices of their Posterity, are entombed in the grave of oblivion: Therefore it
is better to ascend the top of Nobility by a man's own virtue (says the fluent
Orator) than to be reputed for the opinion conceived of his Ancestors; because
the Beginner of Nobility deserves most praise and applause. He that is the
offspring of a noble Family, deserves honor and esteem undoubtedly, with this
proviso, that he make it the Butt and End of his Endeavors and Industry, to
equal, if not excel, the Virtues of his Parents and Predecessors, and to gain
unto himself more virtuous and glorious Attributes. And infinitely are they to
be commended that do so; for they are so far from obscuring the Fame and Renown
of their Forefathers, that they add a most resplendent luster: to it by their
own virtue yet verdant and blossoming. The Law of the Rhodians is worthy of
commendation; for they enacted, that those children that did lead a debauched
life, not imitating the virtues of their Parents, should be utterly
disinherited, and their Lands by a Deed of gift freely disposed of to the most
virtuous of the Race or Family. It is an office of piety, to leave unto
Posterity a demonstration of our gratitude and thankfulness to our Ancestors,
whose heirs we are, not only of their external substance, (the goods of
fortune, I mean) but of their virtue, glory, and renown: which is the true
inheritance, and the best of all terrene possessions. For, it is not a stately
Building hung within with coats of Arms, and badges of the honor of others,
nor the vast unmeasurable pieces of Land belonging thereunto, but Virtue, that
Nobilitates; As Juvenal sings, Tota licet veteres exornent undique cerae
Atria, Nobilitas sola est, atque unica virtus.
For, wheresoever Virtue is resident, it deserves more ample commendation than
Fortune can lay claim to, because she refuses none, but may be by every one
embraced; she dwells in the homely Peasants Cottage, as well as in the Princes
stately Palace; and we find the Sun-bak'd Peasant adorned with russet-honesty,
when the gaudy fantastic Lord oft-times is so vicious, that he is a stranger
both to virtue and honesty. Cleanthes was a poor water-drawer; and, though his
outside might seem rough-hewn, and he despicable and contemptible to one whose
sight pries no farther than the external part: yet his mind was refined, and
his intellect ennobled with such faculties as will speak him Man, to an
understanding person, maugre all the force and violence of Poverty or Fortune:
Nor did Virtue find Plato noble, but made him so. And it is most certain, that
from Bondmen Kings have descended, and the offspring of Kings has been
enslaved: such revolutions, long tract of time, by the assistance of fickle
fortune, does produce: for, according to the Poet, Si fortuna volet, fies de
Rhetore Consul;
Si volet haec eadem, fies de Consule Rhetor.
Up and down,
Kiss and frown.
Fortune is no state at all.


Was not Agathocles from a Potter advanced to the Throne? What Heroes were
Romulus, Tullus, Hostilius, Tarquinius Priscus, and the whole Race of the
Romans, more than others? Of mean parentage all, not atavis regibus editi.
Hearken to Juvenal, and he will give you the same information: Et tamen ut
long repetas, longoque revolvas,
Nomen ab infami gentum deducis Asylo.
Who therefore may be termed noble? He that by nature is made virtuous, and
qualified or adorned with the attribute of wisdom. Moreover, as the exercise of
our qualities is various, so are the degrees of Nobility. The Nobility of
private persons, that lead a contemplative life only, may be called
Philosophical Nobility; but the same in those that gain glory and renown by
their sage and wise Counsel in behalf of the Commonwealth, or that manifest
themselves stout and valiant in managing war for the defense of their Country,
is termed Civil Nobility. The force and efficacy of this Nobility extends to
Posterity, and engraves or makes monumentum aere perennius; That is, armor of
proof against the iron teeth of time; Quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis, Nec
poterit ferru^, nec edax abolere vetustas. By these ensigns of Fame and virtue,
men are stimulated and spurred on to imitate and exceed the virtue of all their
Predecessors. And as in every Republic there are two kinds of Time, the one of
Peace, and the other of War: so the Citizens are of two sorts; the one fitted
for Peace, and the other adapted for War: The former by Arms does enlarge the
Territories and bounds of his native Country, or at least defend them from the
invasion of foreign enemies; the other by wise counsel and grave advice does
rule and preserve it inviolable. Wherefore, a Commonwealth should be composed
of these two sorts of men: for, as in the management and proceedings of
State Affairs, action follows consultation, and is inferior to it; so those
persons, by whose mature counsel and deliberate advice the Commonwealth was
quietly, peaceably and discreetly governed, were of greater esteem than those
that enlarged the Confines thereof by War and Arms. Homer, the Prince of
Grecian Poets, produces Agamemnon, saying, He could sooner surprise and
subjugate the City of Troy by the advice of ten Nestors or Ulysses, than by the
valor of twice as many Ajaces or Achilles. Pyrrhus likewise was heard to use
this expression frequently, That Cineas by his eloquence had won more Cities,
than he with all his men of War had ever conquered. But, he that excels in
wisdom and martial knowledge, deserves the Crown and honor above all: and
though, as we said before, it is Virtue that makes a man Noble, without the
additional riches of Fortune; yet it is requisite our Counselor should be
wealthy; because thereby he may be able to supply his Country, if compelled to
wage war; for money is the sinews and strength of war. But good education,
says Plato, is the basis and foundation of solid wisdom and prudence. It is
therefore requisite, that from their tender years they be instructed in all
things that conduce to the accomplishment of man, e cunabulis, as we say, even
from the cradle and swathing clouts, for then are they most apt to imbibe and
suck in the most wholesome Precepts that shall be exhibited unto them: for then
anima est quasi tabula rasa, like a blank or piece of clean white paper,
capable of any virtuous or noble impression. And as it behooves a Republic to
be stored with knowing Subjects, so ought they to be diligent in their
education, and provide them good Tutors, that may instruct them, and chalk them
out the way of Virtue. For, as a good husbandman diligently pruneth his plants,
and loppeth off the superfluous branches, when the season requires it, that
they may grow the faster; so the Commonwealth, that may justly be termed the
Parent and housewise of Subjects, ought to be extraordinary diligent to provide
for the careful and virtuous education of youth, by lopping off the superfluous
branches of vice, and engrafting them on the stock of Virtue. The
Lacedaemonians used to elect Magistrates out of the number of their grave, wise
and sober Citizens, and call them public Tutors, which might serve to educate
and train up their younglings; and were always reverenced by them, being
judged virtuous men in action, and well skilled in military discipline. And the
ancient Romans were as strict and careful in this point of education, as the
Lacedaemonians. Cato was so diligent in the nurture and education of his Son,
that he disdained not to receive him into his tuition, and take him into his
pupillage or guardianship as soon as ever ripeness of age had fitted him for
instruction. And although at that very time he kept Chilo the Grammarian, and
one excellent in that art, in his house, to instruct his Children, yet he had
not permission to correct them, but that was left to the discretition of the
Father. Besides, he disdained to be engaged to a Schoolmaster for the
instruction of his Children altogether; wherefore he taught them the Laws,
manners and Customs of his own as well as other Nations; as also, how to dart,
handle his Arms, swim, (which was anciently much in esteem; for, Aristotle when
he would set forth an absolute Dulman or Ignaro, says, (...), he could neither
read nor swim,) and to endure both heat and cold, that he might be hardened and
seasoned for any enterprise. Besides, he penned a History with his own hands,
and committed it to the perusal of his Son, that he might therein see and
understand the heroic deeds and actions of his Ancestors, and be instructed in
the art of Government. He never spoke any unclean or passionate word before his
Son, but was as circumspect in his language, as if the Vestal Virgins or
Priests were in presence; observing that ancient rule, Nil dicta foedum,
factuve haec ^^ina tangat
Intra quae puer est -- --
And this was the oeconomique or domestique discipline of Cato, and of the
major part of the Romans, especially of the better sort, in the education of
their Children. In like manner the Philosophers of Greece composed plays for
the instruction of youth; which is preserved to this very day among us, (though
that custom for some years was almost obsolete and out of request.) Nor were
they only capable of indoctrinating, or laying down the tenets that are
necessary to a happy and good life, but they were of ability to instruct in the
Laws and manner of Government: Yea, this our present Age has some Seminaries
of Learning and Virtue (according to the Grecian custom) the Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford, (though lately ready to expire, and almost demolished by
the Phanaticks, who hated all book-learning (as they term it) because their
crimes were so heinous, that they went beyond the mercy of the book.) Hither
Youth might resort, as unto a Harvest of Science and Knowledge, and might reap
a crop of Virtue and good Discipline. But it were to be wished, that the
Doctors and Tutors in our Universities would instruct their Pupils in the art
of living, and not disputing well altogether, (for, so might they deserve
preferment from the Commonwealth, and commendation from all solid persons,) and
not take more delight in hearing a Praevaricator or Jester, than a solid
Philosopher. In ancient times, Philosophers enjoined their Pupils silence, and
taught it also; but our modern wits teach them only to talk or discourse; which
is the reason the Nation is filled with so many worded Orators, and prating
Philosophers. They endeavor not, nunc di^rum,* to refine the understanding, but
to cloth the tongue with frothy language; and are applauded for altercation
and strength of wit in their public arguments, but not for modesty or solid
wisdom: yet there is hope of a reformation in these Schools of Learning, when
those loyal Spirits, that for their Allegiance to their Sovereign were
dismissed, are re-instated. The ancient Grecian Academies were the Nurseries
of Commonweals; and out of them (as from the Trojan Horse) issued most
excellent Monarchs, stout Captains, and wife Governors. Alexander and Scipio,
with whose Fame the whole World has ecchoed, had their primitive education in
Schools of Literature; and many others, which I omit. Thus it is apparent, that
men ought to be trained up in Schools, that so they may be instructed in the
Principles of Government: wherefore it ought to be the care of every State,
Republic and Kingdom, that their Seminaries of Learning be as well furnished
and stored with Virtues, as the Citizens shops are with wares and commodities.
Now then, we see that good education is requisite, and accomplisheth our
Senator. Besides, he must have an inclination to Virtue; for if not, his evil
disposition will hardly be bettered by Philosophy: for, the nature of man
prompts him to evil; and he finding himself strengthened with the Science of
Philosophy, is more expert, and gains more skill to palliate and plead for his
bad actions: for the best of Sciences possessed by a man of an evil dispostion,
is depraved, and, contrary to its own nature, is a help to, and promoter of
evil counsel. So that it may be maintained, that good instruction bestowed
upon an evil nature, is oftentimes ill employed, and ineffectual. Though it is
most certain, that Education prevails much with tender years, changing it from
vice, and molding it according to the form of Virtue. Diogenes being demanded,
How a man might lead a peaceable and quiet life; Replied, first, He must fear
the Deity, who is the Author of all felicity. Secondly, He must bestow good
education on his Children, the want whereof makes them enemies, and
disrespectful to their aged Parents. Thirdly, He must avoid ingratitude to his
friends, which of all crimes is the most odious and comprehensive, containing
within it self a whole bundle of offenses. Ingratum dixeris, and omnia dixeris.
Mention but Ingratitude, and you have epitomized all sins in a word. Moreover,
it is necessary that Children be instructed in the rudiments of Grammar,
Rhetoric and Logic, whereby they may understand the property of speech, and
the excellency thereof, as also defend it by argumentation. Thus may he
understand the Art of Eloquence, which is perfected by use, discourse, and
surveying the works of Poets and Orators; and being thus instructed, he will
shake off those petty inconsiderable things that are understood by every mean
capacity, and take into consideration matters of greater weight and importance.
And the mind, beginning to know her self, seeks after the true food and
nourishment that will satisfy and content her, which is Philosophy; of which
in this ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The knowledge of Arts and Sciences required in Senators; and particularly,
that of Philosophy.
PHilosophy is the food and medicine of the mind, affording it Virtue as
Aliment, and healing all sorts of maladies and disturbances that are incident
thereunto, making a perfect pathway to happiness. The reason is, because that
then the mind shakes on the terrene incumbranees that usually clog the body,
and meditates upon things Divine and Celestial. This knowledge of Philosophy
is of two sorts; the one consists in the subtilty of Nature, and is subject to
the universal contemplation of all men: The other demonstrateth and lays down
the true institution of men and manners, showing how Republics and Kingdoms
ought to be regulated, and private Families ordered. To the first these parts
of Philosophy belong: Physics or natural Philosophy, Metaphysics or Divinity,
and the Mathematics; and to the other, Ethics, Politics and Oeconomicks. Nor
is the finis or end of these two sorts of Philosophy altogether discrepant,
since they both tend to the perfection of man: yet in this they differ, that
the one endeavors it by Contemplation, and the other by Action; the one by
Theory, and the other by Practice; whereof a double felicity does arise, the
one private, and the other public. Now, those that place felicity in the
exercise of virtue for the good of the Republic, the more public it be, the
more praiseworthy it is judged; because a multitude receives benefit thereby,
and not one single person. Yet we are necessitated and compelled to confess,
that contemplation on felicity has the preeminency, because it instructs in
the principal efficient causes of all things and transactions. God also without
action, by his perpetual and divine contemplation and prescience, foreseeing
all things, does by his own example move Philosophers to prefer divine
contemplation before all humane action and felicity. That Philosophy is
necessary in a Senator, for the more secure management of State Affairs, will
appear by what follows. Philosophy is the eternal, immortal gift of the
Creator, instructing us in the knowledge of all things both divine and humane;
as also the nature of virtue and vice: so that he that (as in a glass) peeps
therein, and then considers and meditates upon it, shall see the forms, Idaea's
and Images of all things; and perceive a resemblance or representation both of
body and mind. It was not therefore without cause styled by fluent Cicero,
Universal knowledge, the conduct of life, the searcher of virtue, the expeller
of vice, and the Panacea, or health of the Soul. For indeed, there is nothing
in the world to be thought or acted, either in Court or Council, of great or
small importance, but proceeds from Philosophy, as the Nurse of all
consultations, actions, and resolutions: which if you make your rule to walk
by, all your words and actions will be judged sober, wise, discreet, and in all
respects perfect, as far as man can be. For, in what Country soever the People
have a Philosopher to their Prince, or one that is counseled by Philosophers;
war, discord, or rebellion is seldom found. But, methinks I hear some
Phanatick lay this Objection in my way, as a stumbling block to my proceedings.
Do thou imagine, Sir Philosopher (that is as good as Mr Doctor, an usual
phrase among them) that the felicity of Kingdoms and Republics, or the wisdom
of Kings and Governors proceeds from thy lazy idle discipline? (Rash,
illiterate fellows, they never consider that the sweat of the brains is greater
than the sweat of the brow) whenas that Art is but a mere juggling, prating
science; not that knowledge whereby men arrive to their intended felicity. How
can thou be so impudent (the Omer of respect they afford to every one is Thou
and Thee; and if it lay in their power, they would take away two as necessary
Pronouns, Thine and Mine) as to dare to infect the Kingdom (Commonwealth, I
should have said; for the name of King is enough to fright them into
convulsion-fits) with that that will prove the ruin and destruction of it?
For, as thou have filled the Schools with debate and contention, so will thou
rend the state with divisions; and though it may be argued out in the
University without blows, yet can thou think, that it will be determined in a
Commonwealth without the effusion of blood? How shall the happiness of a
Republic be maintained and preserved by Philosophers, whose opinions carry so
much variety, dubiousness, and diametrical opposition? Which of all the
Philosophical Sects shall our Commonwealth be guided by; the Platonist,
Peripatetick, Stoic, Cynick, or Epicure? Now, they that differ about the
summum bonum, do they not dissent in the substance of Philosophy? Therefore I
am clearly of opinion, That they who rely solely on Philosophy, are rather to
be excluded than admitted to govern in any State or Republic whatsoever. Is it
consentaneous to reason, that he should be a Legislator, that approves of no
Law, but what is of his own prescription, relying wholly upon his own reason,
or rather phancie and opinion; conceiting all persons, himself excepted,
brutish and irrational? Is not this the humor and disposition of your
philosophical crew? Did Diogenes, Zeno, or Epictetus ever deserve to sit at the
Helm of State? To which I reply; There are two sorts of Philosophers whom I
judge altogether unfit to govern: the first are they that have only had a smack
of Philosophy, so that the thirsting heat of their vicious desires and
appetites is not quenched by virtue; and they themselves lead lives quite
contrary to the Precepts of Philosophy, for want of good ground and solid
foundation in that Science. Another sort of Philosophers there is, quite
contrary to the forementioned, who having a tenera aetate, from their very
youth been conversant with Philosophers, and studied Philosophy, do waste away
their days in the contemplative part only: such kind of Philosophy, which
conduces not to the emolument and benefit of the Commonwealth or Kingdom, is
altogether improfitable. For, albeit they be learned, wise, and have turned
over most Authors, and can give an account of all their Precepts and rules; yet
they applying their minds to contemplation, not being experienced in civil
affairs, are unfit for Government. Now these contemplative Philosophers are
justly called Sapientes, but they are not prudentes; as Geometricians,
Mathematicians, and all the Society of natural Philosophers. In like manner
Diogenes, Zenocrates, Chrysippus, Carneades, Democritus, Metrocles, Aristippus,
Anaxagoras, and Thales, were wise men, and of profound knowledge; but not
prudent; because their manner of wisdom and Philosophy did prompt them to
recreate and content themselves in obscure, secret and hidden matters, contrary
to the nature of prudence: and though these Sciences in themselves are good and
commendable, yet are they impertinent and unprofitable to the State, when kept
close to themselves, and not employed for the public good. Now, prudence
consists in those things that require deliberation and counsel: yet, if those
contemplative Philosophers had not debarred themselves from humane Society and
conversation, but sought after employment in public affairs, as Pericles,
Solon, Lycurgus, Plato, Demosthenes, Cato, Cicero, and others did, they had no
doubt been men of incomparable wisdom and prudence, which Socrates (though
herein he contradict Aristotle) styles the only virtue; meaning (as I conceive,
with submission to more mature judgments) that no virtue can be or continue
without it. Bion was of opinion, That Prudence did excel all other virtues, as
far as the sight does the rest of the senses; affirming that virtue to be as
proper and frequent in old men, as vigor and strength in those that are young.
Wherefore it is requisite that our Senator be endued therewith; for he can
neither speak nor act any thing suitable to his age and gravity, if he be not,
as with sauce, seasoned therewith. The Latins call this virtue Prudentia, a
providendo, from foreseeing things to come, disposing of those that are
present, and recollecting things past. For, he that does not ruminate on things
past, is altogether unmindful of his elapsed life; and he that foresees not
things future, is subject to many perils, and apt to be ensnared by every
misfortune. Prudence (says Cicero) is the knowledge of things good, evil, and
indifferent; consisting wholly in the choice of that which is to be embraced,
as also in that which is to be eschewed, or carefully avoided. And according to
Aristotle, it is a habit coupled with perfect reason, apt for good action, and
exercised in those things which are either good or evil, and may evene or
happen to man during this life. Therefore contemplative wisdom differs from
Prudence in this, that the former exceeds not the bounds of contemplation,
and the latter is wholly exercised in action, and the management of humane
affairs. Plato affirms, that there are two things observable in the life of
Man; The first is, For a man to know himself: And the second, To know and
understand all things: Therefore let our Senator be stored with this wisdom,
viz. of knowing himself; for without it, no reason, virtue, action or
cogitation can be reputed good or perfect. By the help of this wisdom, the
prudent man first settles and orders his own affairs; in which skill if he be
deficient, he must not be offended at the name of fool. Now, under Prudence is
comprehended or contained the skill of well-regulating domestical business, and
the knowledge of enacting and making Laws, civil wisdom, and policy in
consultation and judgment. Which is the reason why Cicero terms the prudent
management of oeconomiques, or household, domestical, and the fame in
State Affairs, civil wisdom. And to the end that the Senator may ground his
wisdom upon a solid foundation, whereunto his imagination may have recourse for
reason to steer him to the truth; let him always have before his eyes these
things, honesty, and profit: So that whatsoever he acts or affirms
privately, or publicly, may be directed by them both: for, all things that can
be either conceived by reason, or expressed by truth, are included within the
limits of these two. Wherefore it is convenient that he be furnished with a
peracute wit, and solid understanding, that he may dive into the abstruse
nature of things, and find out what is honest and profitable; lest the mind
hoodwinckt with inordinate affections and desires, seduce the judgment, and
lead him from the path of truth. And many there are, who finding themselves to
have depraved their reason, by giving the reins to their loose affections and
lusts, do fall into erroneous opinions quite opposite and contrary to wisdom.
Whence it follows inevitably, that they are not only cheated in their choice of
that which is honest and profitable, but are blindfolded with the love of that
which is absolutely dishonest and unprofitable. To prevent which error, two
things are to be taken into consideration. First, Not to take things unknown
for known, and praecipitantly assent unto them: Next, Not to give way in the
least to any evil custom; (for, consuetudo or usus secunda natura; Custom
does tyrannize over the nature of man;) or to walk contrary to the rules of
virtue. A thing that may with facility be comprehended by a Senator, if he
consider the good and welfare of the Commonwealth, which is the Meta or scope
that all wisdom and counsel aims at: nor can the Natives of his own Country,
nay, wisdom her self, require more at his hands, or expect more from him, than
industry in preserving the safety and felicity of the place of his nativity.
But now it lies upon me to prove what Philosophy best befits a Senator.

Wherefore since the felicity of every Counselor, and the quintessence of all
knowledge consists in action, it ought to be his care and study to be exquisite
in that part of Philosophy which prescribes the rules of regulating men's
actions, and the Science of Government; to the end, that he may understand what
is the best course of life; what is necessary and requisite for the
administration of public and private affairs, and be skilful in ordaining
Laws, correcting Judgments, and governing of People. Let him therefore be
expert in that part of Philosophy that instructs the management of man's life,
and the Art of Consultation. For otherwise what account will he be able to give
de vivendi ratione, of the best way of living, according to the rules of
virtue, that is incapable of giving you a definition thereof? What discourse
can such a one make concerning Counsel, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance, or
Wisdom? How shall he appease the mutineers, suppress sedition, or mitigate the
rigor and severity of the Laws, or proceed according to the rigor thereof,
when he is ignorant of the precepts of Justice and Prudence? What counsel or
advice can he afford either of War, Peace, or Contracts, that understands not
when War is lawful, or unlawful; Peace just, or unjust; and Treaties honorable,
or dishonorable? Whenas he ought not only to conceive all the Precepts of
virtue and morality, and to understand them by name; but to exercise and put
them in practice. The sum of which knowledge is contained in the Ethics,
Politics, and Oeconomicks; from these, as from a Magazine or Storehouse, he
may furnish himself with all Rules, Directions, and Precepts, for the exercise
of virtue, and the government of a Kingdom, as also the order of a domestical
life. And though all this while we plead for the necessity of Philosophy in our
Senators, yet are we clearly against the divisions and Sects of Philosophy; nor
is it profitable, but rather injurious to the Commonwealth, that the minds of
men should be divided into several whimsies and opinions. First therefore, we
extirpate Epicurism; Because it being grounded on, and supported by sensual
delights and pleasures, ought not to be in him whom we elect for our Senator.
The Stoic we do not blame or accuse; yet we hold it convenient that their
Tenets be exploded, as unfit for our Counselor; in regard that (as Cicero
says) they maintain the Philosopher to be the only wise man, and that all
other persons are but Thieves, barbarous, and infatuated. For, it were absurd
to admit him a Senator, that is of an opinion there is no wise Counselor,
Freeman, or Citizen, himself excepted. And though there has ever been a
dissension between the Stoic and Peripatetick touching the Summum bonum: yet
we adhere to the latter, because they are the best Tutors of Virtue and good
Manners, and the most noble, valiant, wise, discreet Captains: Counselors,
Emperors and Kings have issued out of that Society. Besides, it is requisite
that our Senator be well read in History, and exercised in all humane Learning:
For first, in History he will find out the notable sayings and acts of wise
men, that have lived in elapsed time, which are not so plentifully found in any
Books, as in the monumental Annals, and Chronicles of fore-past Ages. This was
the reason that moved Tully to call History, The witness of time, the light of
truth, the memorial of life, and the Herald of Antiquity. For, can any person
paint out so fully to the life, or give so perfect a delineation of Virtue,
Fortitude, Justice, Continence, Frugality, and contempt of death, in an
eloquent and fluent Oration, as may be read in the actions of Cornelii,
Valerii, Fabritii, Curii, Decii, Mutii, and others? What noble Heroes have our
modern times produced! Has not the Politic Monck, Noble Massey, and Loyal
Montross, been singular and almost unimitable for their Policy, Valor, and
Magnanimity? From these, and the like, he may make an extract of the most exact
civil knowledge, and direct himself in the management of State Affairs.
Besides, Policy must be one of his chief studies: and he must be expert in
understanding the transactions of Noblemen, the humors, dispositions, and
temper of all men's spirits, the Order and Government of Commonweals, and civil
Societies: it is also necessary, that he be perfect in all Ordinances, Acts and
Laws, either for Peace, War, Provisions, the quality of the Subject, the
administration of the State, or the nature of men: as also to understand, what
exalts, and what abaseth the mind; what Virtue is, what Discipline and
Education is most convenient for youth; what Customs must be ratified or made
firm; what duty we owe to God, and what reverence to Religion, and Allegiance
to our Sovereign: in all which, we have a Monck among us of late (though none
that ever entered into Canonical Orders) who will sufficiently instruct us. Nor
must he be ignorant in Leagues, Contracts, and Alliances with Foreign Princes
and Potentates: Since such proceedings are daily found in Kings Courts. Well
therefore did Antonius describe a Senator or Counselor, in these words: He is
one that ought to understand by what means the Kingdom or Republic receives
benefit; and when occasion offers, to put them in practice. And, such were in
Rome the Lentuli, Gracchi, Metelli, Scipiones, and Lelii. Now, he that is well
practiced in the Law, has experience in War, or skill in oeconomicks, or
domestic Authority, deserves to be promoted to the dignity of a Counselor.
Eloquence is also a great ornament to our Senator; but of that and some other
qualifications, more at large in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Of Eloquence, Clemency, Piety, and other Virtues necessary to the
accomplishment of a Senator.
THese most noble Sciences and Arts will be infinitely adorned in our Senator
by the addition of Eloquence, which is the true ornament of wisdom. For,
without this accomplishment, all things else are as it were dead, till they do
flourish by the help of Rhetoric; And an eloquent, terse, and curiously-penn'd
Oration does not only commend the Author, but the private and public benefit
is oftentimes promoted thereby. It is this that appeaseth with her neat-spun
blandishments the fury of our enraged enemies. Now, whatsoever he pronounces,
it must be done gravely, advisedly, eloquently, readily, and with comely
gesture; for this, according to the Poet, -- Emollit animos, and temperat iras.
The supple oil of an insinuating Oration will heal the wounds of a mutinous
Rabble, and reduce them to their former obedience. Next unto Eloquence, the
knowledge and insight in the Law is required; the end whereof tends to the
conservation of Equity. And indeed, who can with greater wisdom decide a cause
or controversy? Who can better appease sedition, (the poison of a Kingdom) or
more rationally defend the Laws, Customs, Rights and Privileges of the People,
than he that is skilled in the Law? Well then may we say, as it has been
affirmed heretofore, That the Habitation of a learned Lawyer is the Oracle of
the City. Now, the Law in all Kingdoms is bound to tie every man to his duty,
and to defend them so long as they continue virtuous and faithful. But, it is
not sufficient only to enact Laws neither, that punish or recompense men
according to demerits; but, to compose Laws, Customs, and Exercises (as the
Lacedaemonians did) wherein the People may take delight: besides, such judgment
must be used in the prescribing of Laws, that therein all occasion of offenses
may be removed. For, as the Physician by his medicines heals the maladies of
the body; so the Counselor ought by good and wholesome Laws to cure the
distempers of the mind. Yet they are not to be approved of, who perceiving an
inconveniency growing, immediately fall to execution, without considering how
the same mischievous design may be utterly extirpated: For it is more consonant
to reason, for a Senator to endeavor the reducing men to justice and honesty,
than to study how to execute them for every offense committed. What man can be
so inhumane, that would not rather remove the cause? and then assuredly the
effect would cease. Who would not rather provide corn for the poor, than
through the want thereof force them to turn Robbers, and send them to execution
for it? And who is there, that seeing the Kingdom overspread with debauchery,
and the peodle addicted to licentiousness, would not endeavor to correct and
reform these enormities by pecuniary mulcts, sooner than by penal Laws?
Therefore, as Cicero says, if thou will remove Covetousness, take away her
Mother, Execess. Wherefore he must have all the commodities and discommodities
of his Country before his eyes, and then he may be so expert in
State-Chirurgery, as to heal the sores and wounds wherewith the body politic
is oftentimes troubled. Yet we desire not that our Senator should be a pleader
at the Bar, Proctor, or Advocate, because that most of that Tribe (Charity
forbids me to say all) being mercenary, are many times the ministers of
falsehood and injustice, bearing about them minds and tongues principled against
justice and truth. Indeed, it is a difficult piece of business for him to be a
Lover of equity and truth, whose tongue has been accustomed to walk for lucre.
Not but that many famous Counselors have been found among those gowned
Gentlemen; but all men are incident to failings, of what profession or function
soever: nor is this to be imputed to them alone, there are others that shake
hands with them: But enough of that. Civil Discipline falls next under our
consideration, whereby he is instructed how to lead his life discreetly, and to
govern his Country with gravity and justice. Now he was termed a civil man
among Philosophers, who by virtue and wisdom was enabled to command civilly;
and he oftentimes had the authority of making Laws, and governing of Subjects.
Plato in his Commonwealth has framed two sorts of Discipline; the one relating
to the exercises of the body, and the other of the mind: the discipline of the
mind he called Musica, and that of the body Gymnastica. Now, by the harmony of
Music, he understands a certain concord or consent of mind, wherein all
actions do amiably agree with virtue, and virtue with them; which Copula Law
and Philosophy make up in Man: for hereby we are capable of judging what is
honest, and what dishonest; what just, and what unjust; what is to be loved,
and what to be loathed: and besides, what duty we owe to our Parents, Princes
and Magistrates. By Gymnastica, he means the exercises of the body, whereby the
vigor and strength of man is much helped and increased. This consists in
leaping, running, wrestling, hunting, riding, darting, swimming, to be both
right and left handed; in brief, all military exercises and honest recreations
are contained in this word Gymnastica. It is very necessary and requisite in
all sorts of men (much more then in our Senator) to conjoyn the exercises of
the body with the virtues of the mind, and to mix Fortitude with Temperance.
For, as by the one, Man aspireth to that which is noble; so by the other, he
thinks it no derogation to him to be humble; and being thus in aequilibrio, he
inclines neither to this side, nor that; so that he shall never dare, nor doubt
too much. And as by Fortitude we are able to repulse injury, so by Temperance
and Moderation we abstain from offering injury. By the former, we are prompted
to an honest becoming violence; by the latter, we are instructed to check and
curb hair-bain'd fury, and to quench the flames of a vindicative spirit. Now,
it is the opinion of Plato, that the Musical and Gymnastical Sciences conduce
much to these qualifications; For to the one, Temperance, and the other Virtues
may be referred; to the other, Fortitude of body, and magnanimity of mind.
Wherefore it is convenient, that they be both united, and walk hand in hand;
because the Gymnastick Exercises alone, create firmness; and Music of it self,
begets too much mildness and effeminacy: but both twinn'd and coupled together
in any man, do mould him according to the shape and perfection of Virtue.
Therefore every person that would be thought fit for counsel, must be thus
exercised; because hereby he is adapted both for peace and war; and to this
very purpose was he born; for he must be as able to perform the Office of a
Commander, as a Counselor: notable therefore, and worthy the mentioning, was
that Roman Institution, which imposed a command upon them to train up their
noble and honorable Citizens to be Counselors at home, and Captains abroad:
which is the reason, that Rome enclosed so great a number of Sage Senators and
stout Soldiers within the circumference of her walls: Insomuch that Cyneas,
the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, having had audience of the splendid and illustrious
Senate, reported, that in Rome he had seen an Assembly of many Kings. Nor can
they be skilled in commanding, if the Subjects are not exercised in obedience;
which is performed by their love and honor to the Magistrate, as well as
obeying their Commands; all which proceeds from the due execution of Laws: and
the first step that leads up to the Temple of Virtue, is to submit to the Law,
and the Law maker: for the Law of every Kingdom, State, or Republic, is
nothing but virtue, and a good decorum in the leading of our lives, reduced to
certain rules. Theopompus King of Sparta, hearing it related that the reason
why that Commonwealth flourished so much, proceeded from the Kings skill in
Policy and Government; replied, No such matter; for the true reason is this,
The Subjects are well exercised in their duty and obedience to Superiors. And
(as Plutarch has it) to obey the Magistracy and the Laws, to undergo all
dangers and travels with patience, to fight manfully, and die voluntarily, was
the chief point of the Lacedemonian discipline. And herein they were all
trained; to the end, that being thus instructed, they might know how to defend
their Country in time of War, govern it in time of Peace; and such as live
privately, to employ their vacant hours honestly, that is, in the prosecution
of Learning; obtaining a becoming gesture, music, painting, vaulting, and the
like, that they may keep themselves in action, and be freed from that gross
imputation of ignorant. It behooves him also to be witty and docible. Now, Wit
is a certain natural force of reason, able to conceive what is rational; which,
although many times it be not helped by industry, art or memory, yet it is
powerful of it self, and without learning may burnish a man. Wherefore he must
so know his own wit, as to become sharp in reason, and finding out the causes
of things: which of it self is a happiness, and that a great one too; as the
Poet sings, Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Nay, wisdom her self,
whereby we first conceive all things, springs from acuteness of wit: Now, they
that are adorned with them both, are termed ingenious; and that wit is the
best, and most to be commended, which is constant, strong, sharp, pleasant, and
natural. Now, the edge of ingenuity is very much acuated by the whetstone of
docility and memory: By the one, we are taught to make a construction of those
things that are laid before us; by the other, we retain whatsoever proceeds
from our invention, or the expressions of others; therefore it is requisite our
Counselor should be well exercised in these accomplishments: for, it is an
argument of a dull, slow, ignorant person, not to have a quick conception of
what is said, and a tenacious memory to recollect what has been spoken by
others. Now next, he must have Understanding: For as wit is the ornament of a
Senator, so Understanding is the light of wit, by which we conceive all things,
or their Idaea's, whether true or false. For, by common understanding we
comprehend the knowledge of things, and thereby pass a judgment on them, and
conclude, all that is honest is to be referred to virtue, and what is unlawful
or dishonest, to vice: yet this understanding is not separated from the Senses,
who are, as it were, Interpreters and Reporters of knowledge; yet must we be
careful to avoid being deceived by sensual judgment; for it is frequently
known, that either art or subtilty, singly or jointly, play the cheat with us;
which error is to be diligently avoided. Besides, he must be circumspect, not
only in private, but public chances and events: For he must endeavor to
foresee all blustering storms that may be injurious to the State, and study the
preservation of every member thereof. This that we call circumspection, is a
careful and mature consideration of things to be practiced or acted; and of
great importance, as well in the serene time of peace, as in the blustering
season of war; because that wise circumspection diverts the force and fury of
Fortune, and we are ready to submit to grave counsel and advice. In this virtue
Quintus Fabius did excel; for he according to the Poet, by procrastination and
lingering delay, preserved the Roman State. Unus homo nobis cunctaendo restituit
rem. But on the contrary, Flaminius relying upon the arm of strength, and his
courage, incircumspectly assaulted Hannibal, to his great disadvantage and
prejudice. So Q. Scipio the Consul, with diverse that might be mentioned,
through their incircumspection were infested by the Cimbri. And it is as useful
in time of peace: for the Senator should be eyed like Argus, and Lynx-sighted,
to pry narrowly into those things that might arise to the discommodity of the
Commonwealth, and make a discovery of them; otherwise, he cannot prevent the
seditions, wars, and calamities that daily happen to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth. Some men are so ignorant and blinded with superfluity and
pleasure, that they can hardly discern things that are placed before their
eyes, much less foresee them; which sort of men, as persons given up to their
private more than the public interest, are to be exempted from Government.
For, though they understand that through want of circumspection war threatens a
Nation, the people are captivated, the Country run over and ruinated, Towns
sacked, Houses burnt, fields wasted, Temples profaned; yet use they no
circumspection, counsel, and medicine, either to cure or cool their fury or
rage. But the grave Counselor studies by what means to continue the common
safety and welfare of a Country or Kingdom: He provideth, that the rage of a
barbarous enemy may be beaten back or restrained by Fortresses, Pallizadoes,
and Garrisons; that Castles and Bulwarks may be erected, the places of defense
fortified, and all breaches stopped up; all which thus ordered, check the fury of
an insulting enemy, and annihilate his barbarous design and intention to bring
all to destruction. Now there being a convention of well-trained Citizens,
armed and ready to oppose, the Commonwealth is thereby fortified, (and the
Lacedaemonians call stout men the walls of Sparta) disdaining the force of
foreign enemies, and preventing their offering violence.

As for his Speech, he must be compendious, curt and grave, in all his Orations
that he pens, or Speeches that he makes; as Horace advises him, In verbis
etiam tenuis, cautusque serendis. For, a rash inconsiderate speech, is not so
soon called back as pronounced; and the unadvised utterance thereof, may
prejudice the Commonwealth, and afford the Orator matter of repentance. And the
reason is this, because in an extempore speech we pour out and divulge many
things that are to be concealed.

Nor must our Senator be overswayed by Passion; for, passion is like false
position in Verse, nine faults at least. Now it is the noblest piece of wisdom
under the heavens, for a man to monarchize over himself, so as to subjugate and
conquer his affections, according to that known verse, Fortior est qui se, quam
qui fortissima vincit
Moenia --
It is a greater piece of valor for a man to subdue and curb his hair-brained
passion, than to conquer the stoutest enemy. Besides, when he is put upon a
parley with the enemy, a treaty with Ambassadors, or a conference with
neighboring Princes, he must be very circumspect; for their endeavor is to
discover secrets by conjecture, and fish out the design intended by
circumstances and signs. Wherefore he must have a constant fixed resolution,
and a composed countenance; for the changing of the countenance, motion of the
eyes, and variety of gesture, are the bewrayers of men's minds, as Gondamore
well observed; and indeed, facies est index rerum. One may soon read a man's
mind in his face, and by the calculation of his looks guess at his intentions.
And as he must not be too credulous, no more must he be altogether incredulous,
unless the reputation of the matter or person compel him to it; Since it is
very unseemly, and beneath the gravity of a judicious Senator, to maintain a
controversy against an apparent truth. Neither would we confine him to an
absolute silence, or padlock his mouth, so as to debar him of that excellent
gift of speech; for, thereby he may be thought stupid or effeminate, since the
one is imputed to ignorance, and the other to a kind of maidenly modesty, or
misbecoming bashfulness. Therefore he must use a mean between both; yet so,
that he be a greater hearer than speaker: Nature bestowed on man a pair of
ears, and but one single tongue. Yet, notwithstanding all this, it must needs
be judged as great a piece of discretion to know when to be silent, as well as
how, where, to whom, and in what place to speak.

Next, Sagacity and craftiness is requisite: for, War was never more politickly
managed, Armies more securely governed, nor the plots and machinations of
subtle enemies more wisely undermined, or overthrown, than by the virtue of
caution; which he that wants, can no way be termed a Captain General. Now,
Sagacity is a sharp and pleasant conceit; and as it is the property of a wise
man to consult well, so it is the part of an apprehensive spirit, ingeniously
to understand, and pass a solid sentence or judgment of what another speaks.
And as he must be quick of apprehension, so it is likewise necessary that he be
crafty and subtle in searching and prying into the thoughts of Subjects, to
the end he may understand what they desire, what they expect or hope for, and
what their inclination binds them most unto. By which means, he will not only
keep the Subject close to his lawful obedience, but also by knowing their
intended conspiracies, prevent the evil thereof. For, sometimes debauched
Subjects aim at the destruction of sober solid persons; induced thereunto, or
rather seduced, by hate, malice, or insolency; sometimes because they find
themselves inferior to others in riches, dignity or authority; and sometimes
because they imagine themselves to be inconsiderable, and of little or no
esteem in the Kingdom, Republic, or State wherein Providence has allotted
them their being and residence: And so by these means, create war, and cause
sedition, and reduce the State to an apparent hazard. In suppressing these
commotions and cogitations of wicked men, he must be close and reserved, not
dealing openly, or by direct opposition; but rather by soft persuasion, kind
admonition, earnest entreaty, or favorable chastisement, reduce them to a
better temper, and furnish them with more honest principles. But, if he deal
with a refractory stubborn people, he must menace them with authority, and
terrify them with severity, that so he may divert them from such execrable
enterprises; perpetually meditating on the conservation of the Commonwealth,
which is consummated by his endeavor for the felicity of Subjects, and his
extirpation of sedition and discord, with their efficient causes.

Aristotle says, that a man may speak doubtfully upon any occasion twice, and
be excused: but if he trip the third time, he is permitted to speak no more in
that cause. Nor must he be tedious or prolix; for a long-winded Oration, crammed
with cart-rope speeches, longer than the memory of man can fathom, does but
talk them into dullness, and sooner stupifie their minds than quicken their
attentions. And he must likewise suit his discourse to the capacity of his
Auditory; for, he prodigals a Mine of Excellency (says one of our Learned
Gentlemen) that wastes a terse Oration to an ignorant assembly, where Mercury
himself, were he Orator, would lose his labor. Therefore as his speech must
not be overlong, (a fault that Caesar sometimes found Cato guilty of, and
reproved him for) no more must it be obscured with aenigmatical sentences, or
intricate words, which puzzle the Auditors rather than profit them; and by
laboring in the explication of the terms, make them forget the subject and
matter of the discourse.

Now it imports not much whether his speech be penned or rehearsed; yet the
reasons written are more solid, and penned with more diligence, if the matter
require a long Oration.

His voice should be manly, promising of gravity, not effeminacy, clear and
audible; not so low as cannot well be heard, nor so loud as to be termed
bawling.

And as he must be moderate in his speech, so it is requisite that he be of a
temperate mind. Now, Nature has so ordered it, that there is a kind of combat
or contention between the mind and body of man, suspending and diverting his
disposition from the true end of virtue. For, the alluring irretiating lusts of
the body do labor to oppress and enslave the mind; and the mind armed and
fortified with reason, does endeavor to resist and oppugn them: and that
virtue of mind is called Temperance, which is employed in contemning all
pleasures, especially those that are known by the senses, as Taste, and Touch;
yet does it not generally detest all pleasures, but only those that thwart
virtue and reason. Now, some pleasures there are by nature lawful, and others
unlawful; and both incident to the mind, as well as the body. The corporeal
pleasures are bred up and born with us, so that with difficulty are they
restrained, especially in those men that take more delight and complacency in
the exercises of the body than those of the mind, which renders them brutish
and sensual. Therefore the body must submit to the checks and controulment of
the mind, and by this means man may attain perfection. All Virtues conduce to
the felicity of a Kingdom, but Temperance alone is the preservatrix of
felicity; for it keeps the State from that infection which oftentimes arises
from excess and immoderation, and has subverted many famous Cities and
Countries. Now every Senator ought to furnish the Kingdom with such Laws as may
punish riot and excess, lest the Subject being poisoned therewith, Covetousness
spring up among them, the mother of all Vices. We read, that in Rome there were
Laws and Ordinances made and enacted against excess both in expenses and
apparel. The Lacedaemonians did also keep their feasts in public places, that
no man should dare to be wastful in the sight of other Citizens, and so
encourage them to an imitation of their luxuriousness or extravagancy.
Heretofore, the Magistrates of Gallia Belgica allowed of no Law nor Custom
that might make the people effeminate. And at this day, licentiousness and
immoderate expenses are inhibited by Law in some parts of Italy. And since the
lusts of men are insatiable, (as appears by Catiline and his
fellow-conspirators, who being thriftless and licentious persons, attempted to
make war against the Commonwealth) they must be held in with the bridle of the
Law. And the Senator must be free from intemperancy, that so he may be an
example for others to follow and imitate; wherein let him take pattern by the
severity of the Censores, who were the Masters and Tutors of civil temperance
and modesty: and so by private admonition, as well as public castigation, he
may withdraw them from intemperance. Nor is this virtue without her
Concomitants, Modesty, Bashfulness, Honesty, and Continency. And by these, man's
life is beautified, adorned, and made happy. Modesty (say the Stoics) is a
virtue that contains the knowledge of decent speech and action. And
whatsoever we speak or do, we ought to observe a mean, lest we expatiate on a
subject more largely than necessity requires, forgetting the Counsel of Solon,
Ne quid nimis. Wherefore tie your self to a comely decorum in all your words
and actions, composing your countenance, eyes, gesture, motion, and your whole
body to a modest posture, that the simplicity and integrity of your intentions
may thereby be made manifest and apparent.

Bashfulness sometimes gains a man much commendation; and this qualification
renders a man honest, and induces him to lead a good life, because in all
actions it instructs how to avoid all reproach, obloquy, and villainy. And as
Justice forbids the wronging of a person by act or deed; so Bashfulness
teaches a man not to be offended: for a good man does not only voluntarily
abstain from doing injury, but is, as it were, frightened from it by
Bashfulness. Yet I mean not here, that Bashfulness that is frequent with young
men, and Offenders, because they are compelled or constrained to that kind of
shamefacedness; and that perturbation of mind does misbecome a grave and
temperate person; But that that we hunt after, arises from a virtuous
disposition, and so gets a certain habit or exercise, accompanied with a fixed
resolution to avoid all evil: so that if at any time through ignorance an
error be committed, we remain ashamed; which is commendable. Julius Caesar
engaged with Pompeius the younger at Corduba, perceiving his men ready to
retreat, and seek for refuge by their heels, steps out into the front, and
there in person behaved himself manfully; which the Soldiers seeing, could not
for shame but turn about, and face the enemy again; being, partly by the valor
of their General, and partly by their own shamefacedness, instigated thereunto.

There is in man a certain natural instinct of honesty, prompting and spurring
him on to the performance of all lawful actions, and diverting him from the
perpetration of what is unlawful; which proceeds from virtue; and therein her
dignity rests, though sometimes it arises from fame, glory and opinion. Now,
he that through diligent observation understands what is meant by measure,
order, and gravity, and observes this sweet decorum in his words and actions,
making it his chiefest care not to think or speak any thing unseemly,
effeminate, or licentious, may be termed honest; and the power of honesty is so
great, that of it self it suffices to dissuade men from an ignominious life.

Among the number of virtues required in our Senator, Continency and Abstinency
challenge no mean place; for, they not only contemn the illecebrae, or
allurements of inordinate desires, but also withhold our eyes from beholding,
or our hands from fastening on them. Nor is there a more noble spectacle, than
to see men contented with what nature and industry has allotted, without
coveting what appertains to others; which they might easily do, did they but
consider, that Natura pauc is contenta: Nature will be satisfied with mean
commons. Paulus Aemylius is highly extolled for his continency, who converted
no part of the vast wealth that was brought out of Macedonia and Spain to his
own private use, but delivered the whole into the public Exchequer; choosing
rather to be termed poor, than branded with the name of deceitful: And after
his expiration, his goods being sold under the Lance (uti mos erat, according
to custom) there was not left a sufficient competency for his Wife to live on.
The example of Scipio Africanus is admirable, who in his greener years, at the
taking of Carthage, being but twenty years old, had there (among many other
captives) a Virgin of incomparable beauty, yet did he not offer to deflower
her, but gave her to a man unto whom she was formerly betrothed; and bestowed
all that gold upon her for a dowry, which her friends offered for her
redemption. We therefore judge it necessary that our Senator be continent,
imitating Pericles in his advice to Sophocles his Associate, and Praetor at
Rome; who fixing his eye on a beautiful Roman Damosel, whom they met
accidentally in their way to the Senate House, and being somewhat too large in
her commendation; told him, that a Senator must not only keep hands free from
corruption, but also chaste eyes, that cast no wanton glances, because they are
grand instigations to lust. Wherefore, it was judged an act of discretion in
Cato the Censor, to turn Lucius Quintus Flaminius out of the Senate for his
incontinency; because he being Consul in France, permitted a common Strumpet,
at her request, to strike a Prisoner that had his Sentence past, without
offense. Nay, Manlius was divested of that dignity, for kissing his own Wife in
the sight of his own Daughter. And Salustius for adultery, and light actions,
was excluded from fitting (had it been so with us, Henry Martin had never
rested so long in the Parliament House.) I omit speaking of Alexander the
Great, with many more, who by their continency gained no less honor than by
their martial triumphs.

Now, it is most certain, that there is nothing brings more dishonor to the
dignity of a Senator, than a lewd, debauched, incontinent life; because it
procures private obloquy or reproach, and defaceth, or at least blemisheth the
Majesty of commanding.

Sardanapalus spun out his days among the Distaff-bearers, I mean women,
consuming all his time in incontinent exercises, wasting both his internal and
external substance upon wanton women, and the pleasing his gust; as appears by
that Epitaph, which, living, he commanded to be engraven on his Tomb, Ede,
Bibe, Lude. Which Aristotle chancing to spy, stopped, and read; and smiling,
said, It was fitter to be fixed on the grave of an Ox, than the Tomb of a
Prince.

All pleasures that are not reduced to necessity and honesty, are reproachful;
and those above all, draw men to vice and uncleanness most, that are discerned
by the touch and taste. Wherefore the Counselor must be careful, that neither
his own, nor the life of his Subjects, be implunged into the mire of
voluptuousness and obscenity; which may be soon effected, by removing all
occasions of intemperancy. The Lacedaemonians used to show their drunken
servants to their children, that they, beholding their sordidness and
bestiality, might abhor the vice of excessive compotation. But it were to be
wished that we could follow, as well as read these instances. Great was the
moderation and temperance of the Ancients in their diet; for, they lived not to
eat, but did eat to live: Though in these our modern times the plague of
intemperance is so epidemical, that more men are infected with, and perish
thereby, than by the rage or fury of war; and it is the mode for them to drink
other men's healths so long, till at last they drink away their own. Who would
not then commend M. Curious the Roman Senator, that had rather the Ambassadors
sent by the Samnites should find him at a homely supper, quenching his thirst
in a wooden Bowl, than surrounned or accommodated with all the variety Nature
or Art could afford? Nay, he refused the Gold they presented him with; saying,
I had rather command those that are rich, than be rich. I need not mention
Fabricius, Fabius, Tubero, Cato and Scipio, whose temperate and sober lives
have eternized their names. Hortensius went not without a reproof, for
presenting his Guests with a boiled Peacock, at a Supper prepared for the
Augurs. And Cassius was thought intemperate, for drinking a little water in
public, and not enduring thirst for a small time. Yet do we not tie our
Senator to so much strictness, but only to moderation in all things. Duronius
was removed from the Senate, because that he being a Tribune, made null the Law
for the restraint of feasting.

Surely, the Roman State was altogether happy in such Senators, that were not
only Masters of Counsel, but Tutors of Virtue and good Manners. Now, that the
people of Rome were temperate, even to admiration, may be conjectured from what
is reported of them: when the presents which Pyrrhus King of Epire, after his
overthrow, brought to Rome, were publicly shown, hoping thereby to gain the
good will of the People, there was not one among them, that did so much as
offer to stretch forth his hand to lay hold on any of them; so as that King saw
himself twice vanquished at once, as well by continency, as force of arms. But,
when excess found footing in Rome, after the victory obtained in Asia, and that
the people began to wantonize through plenty and idleness; on a sudden, the
civil discipline of Temperance and Parsimony was neglected; and in lieu
thereof, Avaritiousness attended with a Legion of other vices, soon entered
among the Roman Legions, and (if we may credit Salust) brought their City to a
sad and lamentable Catastrophe. Nor indeed is there any thing that sooner works
the ruin of King, Kingdom, and Subjects, than excess. Diogenes seeing a Bill
upon the door of a Prodigals house, which showed it was to be let; said, I knew
very well that House was so full of meat and wine, that ere long it would vomit
out the Master. Now it is most certain, that immoderate pampering, and excessive
drinking, wastes the strength of the body, and prejudiceth the mind. Notable
is that Law of Solon, whereby that Senator was thought to deserve death, that
was addicted to the vice of drunkenness.

Philip the Macedonian King being overcome with drink, past sentence upon a
woman: she forthwith made her appeal; and being demanded to whom, replied, To
Philip being sober. And without doubt, excess in drinking depraves the
judgment of man; insomuch, that Kings are made Slaves, old Folks become
Children, Wise men are infatuated and made fools, and fools turned to mad men.
But our Senator shall observe the old rule: -- (...). A medium is to be
observed in all things: we must eat and drink for necessity, not satiety;
following the advice of the Poet Anacharsis, who usually said, The first
draught was of necessity, the second of superfluity, and the third of madness.
Besides, it were unseemly in a Counselor to have bloud-shot eyes, a furious
countenance, and a stammering speech; all which imperfections are the customary
attendants of drunkenness: Nor will it become him, overcome with meat or drink,
to snore away the night, but only to use both with so much moderation, as that
they may only continue health, and make the body agile and fit for action. For,
by moderate diet we find, not only the mind, but the body more submissive and
obedient; when as satiety and excess is the sepulcher of the one, and the
corruption of the other. We find Troy to be ruinated through the excess of the
Inhabitants; when as otherwise it might have stood to this day: Invadunt urbem
somno, vinoque sepul^am. But, although we discommend excess in both, as a thing
misbecoming, and very heinous; yet our Senator must be sure not to be
avaricious, niggardly, and closefisted, because it is an argument of a base
servile spirit, to debar himself of that comeliness and order that is required
in the Family of such a person. Therefore private excess must be banished, and
public magnificence maintained; and as needless and superfluous delicacy is to
be avoided much more than penury and niggardliness; And, as immoderate expenses
are known to be prejudicial both to the Estate, Body, and Mind: so necessary
and convenient fare is both comely and wholesome; and this must be observed with
respect to the place, time and persons. For, we read, that L. Tubero making a
public Feast, covered all his beds with the skins of Kids; and in so doing was
judged indiscreet, and ignorant in the knowledge of what appertained to public
honor and dignity; and for this same fact, lost the Office of Praetor. Notable
was that quip that a Duke bestowed upon a Prince, to this purpose; who with his
noble retinue being invited to a Collation, the Prince altogether ignorant of
any mode used at Court, or indeed common civility, suffered them to be seated
without cushions; which the Duke perceiving, put his Cloak under him in lieu
thereof; and all his followers in imitation of him, did the same; and after
their repast, left their Cloaks upon the stools, and were departing: at which
the Prince somewhat amazed, told them, they forgot their cloaks: No, no,
replied the Duke, an't please your Majesty, it is not our custom to be so
uncivil, as to carry our Cushions along with us: then did he begin to
understand the mistake, and went away ashamed. Next to Temperance, Justice is a
Virtue to be very much followed by our Senator; of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Of Justice and her concomitants, which our Senator ought to be adorned with.
NAture has made all things in themselves good, certain, perfect, and in all
respects absolute; which was the reason that induced the Stoic to believe,
that to live according to Nature was the chief felicity of man: for, Nature is
the Conductrix and Tutoress of perfect life, instructing us in our obedience to
the Author thereof. Now, this harmony of Nature may be fitly called Justice;
for, this is that Virtue (and indeed Regina Virtutum, the Queen of all Virtues)
which labors in defense of the Law, and preservation of the consent of Nature;
since whatsoever complies with Nature, is Just; and what dissenteth, unjust.
Such men therefore, that follow the dictates of Nature, are just; being it is
contrary to Nature to think ill either of God or Man. Whereupon Justice is of
three sorts, (though there be many subdivisions) Natural, Humane, and Divine.

The first foundation of Justice natural, proceeds from Nature her self; which
informs us to do as we would be done by: Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris. This natural equity commands us to abstain from doing injury, or
offending of any person whatsoever. And by this ligament, men are conglutinated
or co-united with a mutual affection and bond of amity. In that Age, which is
known by the name of Aetas aurea, among the Poets; by the help of natural
Justice only, deceit, fraud, or injury had no residence upon Earth; they were
non-entia, no such things to be found in Nature. Then was there no sedition,
tumults, or hatred; but benevolence, fidelity, true love, and real affection.
The Lawyers Profession was not in use, pleading and wrangling was unknown to
them; for, equity and Justice determined all things, and all things were
common; every man thought that his own goods did belong as much to his
neighbor as to himself. They that lived in that Age were enforced and confined
to virtue and honesty, because they knew not vice, and by natural instinct were
stimulated to the exercise of Justice. Of this happy time Ovid sings most
excellently. Aurea prima sata est aetas, quae vindice nullo,
Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem rectumque colebat;
Poena, metusque aberant, nec supplex turba timebat
Judicis orasui, sed erant sine judice tuti.
But, as soon as the Sun of truth declined, and began to be obscured with the
caliginous mists of vice; immediately the minds of men were depraved, and they
headlong without fear or wit implunged themselves into an Ocean of filthiness.
Then every man shielded himself against Virtue, quite contrary to his former
principles; but afterward it was a practice among them, lawful, to scandalize
and prejudice all persons, whether in goods, or good name; to lead a brutish,
inhumane life; abuse that excellent gift of Reason, and employ it in the
exercise of vice; as the same Poet has it, Protinus erupit venae pejoris in
aevum
Omne nefas, fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum, fraudesque, dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.
And surely that deluge of impiety had overrun the whole race of mankind, had
not the force of nature and reason in some few, opposed, and stood as a trench
against the fury of this inundation. That small residue of men (proclaiming war
against vice) did so work upon them (that lived like brutes) by persuasion, as
to reduce them to humanity; informing them how to live, not only by words, but
also by works; what Civility, Virtue, and Honor was, and what was the original
of Laws in Cities and Countries: so that hereby they might be instructed in
those things that were good, honest, and civil. From hence the precepts of
virtue took their original, and vast volumes of the duty and manners of men
were composed. This consideration of humane nature and the Universe, was
epitomized in one word by the Grecians, viz. (...), or wisdom; and the Authors
thereof were termed (...), or Wisemen, who afterward (according to the example
of Pythagoras,) named themselves Philosophers. And by this means the light of
humane reason and nature, that was benegroed with the clouds of vice, did
reassume its pristine luster and splendour, and endowed us with the knowledge of
divine and humane things; which knowledge is called Philosophy. Thus was that
golden world restored. Now, that duty which natural Justice prompts us to
observe to our Parents, is called Piety; which was the reason, that Aeneas by
the Homer of our Latin Poets was styled Pious Aenaeas. The Daughter of Cimon
was adorned with this Virtue; for she fed her Father with her own milk, being
condemned to die, and thereby did eternize her name. This Justice does also
oblige us to nourish and cherish all persons in distress; defend and govern
himself: for, he that by wilful obstinacy destroys himself by famine,
negligence, or violent death, is judged an enemy, and no friend to Nature. By
this Justice natural, we are engaged to relieve and refresh our necessitated
friends and neighbors, and by generation to propagate posterity; which is
called nodosa aeternitas: propagation is a knotty Eternity; for, by the issue
of our loins we do as it were tie a knot, and thereby lengthen our name and
family. Socrates defines this natural Justice thus: It is the Science of good
and evil according to nature; which that man that exercises, deserves the term
of a good man; and if he communicate it to others, the title of a good Citizen;
because then he is not only beneficial to himself, but to others also. They
that Nature has been so prodigal unto, as to bestow singular gifts, and
incomparable endowments on, ought to transcen^ all others in this natural
Justice, as much as they do in their natural parts; otherwise they will have
but a mean repute (if any at all) in the world.

The next is Justice divine; whereby we are obliged and bound to acknowledge,
love, honor, reverence, adore, and worship God: And it has pleased Nature to
implant this knowledge in man; as if thereby she would intimate unto us, that
all other creatures do only feed and pamper their bodies, whenas Man should
aim at a more noble mark, viz. the Deity. Nor is there any people upon earth
but adore some God or other, and hold it a duty incumbent upon every one of
them so to do. Now all the substance and force of this Justice is contained in
Religion, which is the worship of God. But being that is a different subject
from what we intend to expatiate on, we shall leave the prosecution thereof to
the Clergy.

Humane Justice, which is also termed sometimes civil, is of an obscure and
hidden nature; for, although it receive its being from Justice natural, and
therefore the precepts and use thereof carry little or no seeming difficulty
along with them: yet is it not truly conceived, unless it be by such who are
either endued with a kind of divine nature, or have been employed in all sorts
of virtue. For, this Virtue requires a Learned, Wise man, who reasonably,
constantly and voluntarily practices it. And such our Senator should be.

All civil Justice consists, partly in the preservation of humane society, and
is partly exercised in a Court of Judicature. This Virtue approves of no
unlawful, cruel, or barbarous action; but embraces honesty, tranquillity and
peace; endeavoring to keep men from sedition, malice, and enmity; not coveting
aliena bona; but, unicuique suum tribuens; gives every one their due. By this
Virtue our Counselor becomes a defender of the common people; the Protector of
the innocent and Orphans; and a debaser of the proud and haught: a Lover of
those that are good, a friend to truth, and an enemy to vice, and consequently
to vicious persons. The foundation of this Virtue is fidelity; which Cicero
defines to be a constant and true performer of promise. A just Senator
therefore affirms the truth, sticks close to his promise; stands to compacts;
restores what he borrows; and is not compelled to be faithful by Law,
testimony, or oath, but by his own free will and conscience; laboring to keep
under injustice, and to see that the weaker sort be not over-powred by the
stronger; that might overcome not right. Valiant men, in his judgment,
deserve to be crowned with reward; and idle, puny-spirited subjects, the lash
of punishment; and by these two, punishment and preferment, the benefit of a
Commonwealth is infinitely promoted. In the distribution of offices, he is
directed by the rule of uprightness and equity; hating to be greaz'd in the
fist with bribery, reputing those worthy of most ample honor, who can lay
claim to the greatest merit. Which is a thing to be very much insisted on in a
Kingdom, or Republic; because, Honos virtutes praemium, Honor is the reward
of virtue; and as due to a deserving person, as wages to an hired servant:
which was the reason, that wrought the Ancients to erect stately Images,
triumphal Arches; and public sepulchers, open commendation, and the like, were
conferred on men of service and desert. Now they that are nobly educated,
virtuously inclined, grave and ancient, deserve honor and reverence; and that
either by bowing the head or body, in giving them place: And, as goods are of
three sorts, viz. goods of the mind, goods of the body, and goods of Fortune;
so they are all in conferring of honor to be respected. Therefore those of the
mind assume the first place; those of the body the next, and those of Fortune
the last, as the meanest in value and worth, though now adays of most esteem
in the eye of the World. All these things our Senator must be skilled in; and
in the distribution of offices, and conferring of honors, he must observe
equality, the balance of Justice; wherewith every man's manners, virtues and
actions are poized and examined. In which he must be very circumspect and
unbyassed, lest he prove partial, leaning to one side more than another; and so
come off with the term of an unequal Judge. For, he that bestows honor, and
accumulates favors upon the undeserving, does a manifest injury to those that
can plead desert; and so by consequence is an unjust Judge. Wherefore
Philosophers give us a definition of this justice, as follows: It is an habit
of the mind destined to common utility; giving honor to every person that may
be judged worthy of it. And among those virtues that plead for an interest in
humane society, equality is neither the last, nor the least; she exercising the
office of a Handmaid or Lady of honor to that Queen of Virtues, Justice: Nor
does she remove a hairs-breadth from her, but sticks close to her principles
and precepts. Now this equality in just pondering and weighing things, and
persons, uses a double manner of proceeding; the one ordinary, and the other
common; one judging by number, weight, and measure; the other more difficile
and secret, that is, weighing every thing by reason and judgment. Which
knowledge is only attained by wise men, and those that are exercised in great
affairs, and matters of importance and weight; and the other by those that are
chiefly employed in barrating, buying and selling. Let our Senator be skilled
in that knowledge that proceeds from reason and judgment, that he may thereby
understand how to distribute offices, confer honors, bestow gifts, what is due
to every person, just, good, and indifferent in all things, persons, and
places. This equality is an excellent qualification, and of eminent use and
service in a Kingdom. And where Counselors are ignorant therein, we find but
raw and weak consultation, and all things managed at random, without any thing
of certainty; to the disturbance of public society.

Another kind of justice there is, which is commonly called justice foreign,
not much unlike this before mentioned, chiefly conversant about judgment;
whose foundation is the Law, and whose prop or support is the judgment of
wise, solid, discreet Senators. Before such time (as is already mentioned) that
written Laws were found out, each man was his own Legislator, and prescribed
his own peculiar Laws, not diving into the books of Lawmakers or Doctors for
precepts or instructions: For, then that pure and immaculate Virgin Justice had
her residence in the mind of man, dictating unto him Laws and Precepts, whereby
he led an upright life, without exercising any fraud, deceit or collusion. But,
as soon as men, tired with the strict discipline of justice, began to covet
their neighbors goods, offer injuries, and neglect the restoration of what
they had taken no upon credit; immediately hate, dissimulation, enmity and war
sprung up, and gave way to the invention of martial weapons, as well offensive
as defensive; and that in so furious a manner, as might force Justice, nay,
compel Jupiter himself to give place: thus, as sweet-tongued Ovid sings, --
Terras Astraea reliquit. She made her self wings, and flew to heaven for
sanctuary, wherever since she has taken up her habitation. And hence it is
that we have recourse to heaven in our daily Orizons for justice. Homer used to
term Kings inspired with the wisdom of good Government, Sons of Jupiter: and
we style them, Gods Vicegerents. And since reason cannot prevail with us so
far, as thereby to lead a quiet, peaceable, and just life; we must have
recourse to justice; who by her Laws admonishes, corrects, and honors us,
preparing rewards for good, and storing up punishments for evil actions. This
justice (according to Ulpianus) is a constant desire, or fixed resolution to
bestow upon every man that which of right belongs unto him. Now the ordaining
and enacting of Laws, appertains to a Counselor, as the most discreet person,
and fit for that office. And Plato teaches, that these things are to be
observed in constituting Laws, Acts, or Ordinances. The Legislator must enact
them with a paternal love, that may cause a reciprocation of filial duty: not
with a Lordly, tyrannical intent, yet framing them to the terror of
malefactors, who neither regard Law, nor reason; according to that known
Hexameter, Sic volo, sic jubeo; stat pro ratione voluntas. My will is the only
Law that I own or acknowledge. Besides, he must be sure that his Laws contain
no more prescription of commands, than discipline of manners; that the severity
of the one may be mitigated by the gentleness of the other. And the intent and
end of all Law is, that men may be felicitated thereby, as far as comes within
the compass of humanity; and that offenders may receive a punishment suitable to
their crimes, of necessity, and not on set purpose: which moved Justinian to
make a triple division of legal precepts: To live honestly, prejudice no man,
and give to every one his due. He therefore that does abandon the Law, and
follows the dictates of his own corrupt will, contemning the Statutes of a
Kingdom, is guilty of a notorious crime, as well as he that denies God, Nature,
or Reason. Heraclitus, that streamed away his time in tears, was wont to say,
That all men were as deeply engaged to defend their Laws, as the walls of their
City; and his reason was, because that a wall-less City might be preserved, but
a Lawless one could never, by all the strength of humane invention. For by Laws
they expel idleness, the mother of Vice, which renders the mind effeminate, and
makes it grow wanton. Cato said as truly, as pithily, Nihil agendo, male agere
didicerunt: By doing nothing, the people learned to do ill. Diodorus mentions a
certain Law that was among the Egyptians, whereby every Subject was compelled
to give in his name to the Magistrates, withal declaring what kind of life he
most affected, how he lived, and what Art he exercised: And if he were found to
give a false account of his life, he was put to death. Draco seeing the
Citizens wasteful, made a Law, that he that was found idle should be executed;
which being too severe and rigid, Solon did qualify, punishing that offense
with infamy only. By the imperial Law it is provided, that idle, sloathful, and
thriftless Subjects be either whipped to death, or enslaved. In every Kingdom
there are certain exercises both for peace and war: Some are bred up
Clergymen, Counselors, and Judges; others, Captains, Commanders, and
Soldiers: that so the Kingdom may be furnished with Subjects in Peace or War,
and by their actions the Country may be defended from the invading enemy, and
her Territories or skirts enlarged. Nor must Laws be often altered; for, as
soon as the people perceive any mutation, their minds being prone to
innovation, they presently desire all the rest be changed and subverted; though
sometimes necessity requires that they be corrected or reformed. The least
mutation in a Kingdom, is of dangerous consequence, breeding a contempt of
Laws, and sedition also. Wherefore the Locrenses had a Law, that if any man did
invent a new Law, he should propose it to the people in public, with a halter
about his neck; to the end, that if it were judged pernicious or unprofitable,
he should be forthwith hanged, as an Author of evil. And it does very much
concern Princes and Counselors to walk according to those Laws they ordain;
for it is odious to be Legislator; and Legis violator; a Lawmakers, and a
Law-breaker: for there is nothing that Subjects so much look upon, as the lives
of their Superiors. Regis ad exemplum totus componitor orbis. All Nations, all
the World over, follow the example of a King: which if he steer his actions
according to Justice, finds Subjects obedient and loyal, who will keep close to
their allegiance. Seleucus made a Law, that whosoever was taken in adultery
should be deprived of both his eyes. Afterward his Son was found guilty of
that Crime: his Subjects went to mediate, desiring him to sign his pardon; but
their suit prevailed no otherwise, then that first he caused one of his Sons
eyes to be put out, and then one of his own; that so the severity and
reputation of Law might be observed, and that the force thereof might be in
more esteem than the authority of men. The ends why Laws were ordained, were
two: The one, that men may understand Justice, and have entertainment among
them; the other, that it may continue. The first, is the duty of the Lawmaker,
who frames the people in the mould of Virtue. And the second is the Office of
the Judge, who is to suppress the exorbitancies of offenders, and preserve the
rights and privileges of his Country. Now it often falls out, that dubious
businesses, and those matters of concernment too, are brought before a Judge;
expecting his determination. Wherefore he must reduce that to equality, which
he thinks unequal: not unlike a line cut into unequal parts, and that part
which is found too long is cut shorter, and so added to the other: So does the
Judge, who is the Living Law and Oracle of the Kingdom. Nor must he pass a
sentence upon any matter, or decide any cause, before he has heard both
Plaintiff and Defendant, and examined all their Witnesses: For, as Seneca has
it most excellently, Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera;
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuerit.
He must be void of all passion, hate, or partiality: one that scorns bribery,
will not be daunted with menaces, or threatened out of the truth, or moved by
the subtilty of adulation: for, where a Judge, Magistrate, or Senator is
subject to passion, there is little, or indeed no Justice in his Judicature:
nor is there any one thing that poisons a Commonwealth or Kingdom more, then
corrupt and unjust Magistrates.

Justice of old was by Philosophers painted like a beautiful Virgin, having a
severe grave countenance, penetrating eyes, a chaste look, inclining to
gravity: which Image carries this representation, that Judges ought to be
incorrupt, chaste, severe, sharp-witted, good, grave, constant and inexorable.
Cambyses, King of Persia, caused the skin of an unjust Judge to be flayed, and
hung up in the Court, as a terror to all those that were unjust in their
sentence. Solon being demanded, How a Kingdom might best be preserved;
answered, By the Peoples obedience to Superior authority, and the Magistrates
subscription to the Law. And Bias used to say, That place was most secure,
where men stood in awe of the Law, no less than of a Tyrant. It is a shame and
reproach to a Nation to have Laws, that like the Spiders web, entangle the weak
and simple, and let the strong and mighty escape. Which our Senator must very
diligently observe, and continually provide that the Laws be preserved
inviolable.

Justice admits of another division among Moral Philosophers, and that is
Distributive and Commutative. Justice Distributive, is that that respects
equality in the distribution of reward or punishment, according to Geometrical
proportion. For, as there are several degrees of crimes and offenses
perpetrated by the impious; so there are likewise of the merits of deserving
and virtuous persons; In regard that the circumstances of persons, places, and
time, do oftentimes aggravate the crime. As for instance; He that offends a
Magistrate, deserves a higher punishment than he that offends a private person:
And he that commits an insolency in the Church during divine service, or in
Court before a Judge sitting upon the Bench, must be more severely corrected,
than if these circumstances did not accompany the fault. And in like manner,
the different conditions of men in the distribution of recompenses, or
conferring of honors, must be narrowly considered and pried into.

Wherefore it is apparent, that in the distribution of honor, as well as in
the inflicting of punishment, this Geometrical proportion must be observed;
because that by this means we observe the same proportion between persons, as
we do between things; and though there be an inequality of measure, yet will
there be an equality of reason. As thus: He that has a double share of merit,
twice as much as another man, deserves a double recompense according to the
Geometrical proportion, which differs from the Arithmetical, observed in
Justice Commutative: for the latter respects the equality of quantity, and
things distributable, without regard to the merits or demerits of a person.

Justice Commutative is that that looks upon equality and faith in contracts,
bargains, humane commerces and negotiations; as buying, selling, borrowing, and
the like. As for example; the same sort of wine, oil, corn, cloth, or other
vendible commodities, is sold to a Magistrate as well as to a Mechanic. But
now let us come to her Concomitants.

And first of Piety; by which we please God, and get repute among men. Numa
Pompilius, to get credit by the Religion that he framed for the Romans
(counterfeiting Piety) induced them to believe that he and his Wife Aegeria
used to convene with the Gods in a certain place consecrated to Camena, and
there did receive the Laws and Religion the Romans were to follow: so that they
that neither by the softness of persuasion, nor the violence of compulsion
could be reduced to Religion; by a counterfeit color of Piety were brought to
be very religious. And if so among them, how will the true Religion prevail
among us that are Christians? Yet in Religion two things are to be declined,
viz. heresy and superstition; which vices pervert weak instable persons. There
is likewise a certain kind of Piety due to Parents, by which we obey,
reverence, and respect them.

Innocence is another of her Associates; which Virtue affects simplicity,
abhorring dissimulation and hypocrisy; wherefore, fawning Sycophants, that
Dog-like will (...), fall down under your feet, and seem to adore you;
Dissemblers, that hold with the hare, and run with the hound; carry fire in one
hand, and water in the other; and tale-bearers, that are rimarum pleni, full of
chincks, no sooner a secret can be committed to their keeping, but it drops
from them like water through a sieve; such persons are to have no place in the
Catalogue of our Senators. And as no man might have admittance into the Temple
of Ceres Elucina, but he that was innocent; there being this Superscription
over the Portal, Let no man enter but he that knows his own innocence: So
into holy Council, which is the Temple of Justice and Truth, let no man have
admittance, but he that is innocent, and of integrity. His mind must be open
and sincere, not obscure or deceitful, saying one thing, and meaning another;
his thoughts and his words must be Relatives; his tongue must be the true
interpreter of his mind; and his face not shrouded with a fained disguise, but
full of natural sincerity.

Courteous he must be; for an affable debonaire disposition will scrue it self
into the good will of all men. He must hear with patience, and reply with
discretion; free from all sowerness and insolency in words or action.

Benignity is another thing necessary; for as God is kind and gentle to us, so
must we manifest our selves to those that are a sphere below us. He must
therefore be gentle, mild, and of a sweet disposition: not austere,
supercilious; and as Timon was, (...), A man-hater. For as to the Moderator of
all things, Religion and Piety is due; so is love and benevolence unto men.

Next, Clemency; which properly appertains to Magistrates, and men in
authority; for by virtue hereof, the heat of their displeasure toward
Malefactors is abated, and they themselves qualified. Her opposite is Cruelty,
and bitter extremity in punishment; a quality proper to Tyrannical and inhumane
persons. Draco was so rigid and severe, nay (I may say) cruel, that he
inflicted death upon idle persons, as well as Murderers; and being asked the
reason, replied, because he thought that punishment due for the commission of a
petty offense; and for those of a higher nature, he could not invent any great
enough. But Scipio much more clement and pitiful, could say, That he had rather
be instrumental to the saving of the life of one single Citizen, than to the
slaughter of 1000 Enemies. And indeed for a Magistrate to be perpetually
punishing, is as reproachful, as to see Physicians always killing their
Patients with their Quacksalving and Emperical tricks. Besides, Clemency in a
Governor creates a kind of bashfulness or fear of offending in any person. Yet
Clemency must be so used, as that severity, if need be, must not be altogether
neglected: for no Country can be well governed without it, by reason of the
different dispositions of men; for a harsh word strikes deeper with some, than
a shrewd punishment with others. Overmuch clemency was an imperfection that
the Stoics would have all wise men to want; alleging, that it was an argument
of an ignoble mind, condescending and subscribing to the guilt of other men's
crimes and offenses: and therefore such men may be assimilated to fond foolish
women, that would have Malefactors freed from the lash and rigor of the Law,
because Crocodile-like, after the commission of an heinous offense, they can
drop a deceitful tear.

Next, Liberality. Among some of those Virtues that were constellated in Scipio
Africanus, this is not the least; that before his return from any place, he
obliged some person or other to him by his liberality.

The Son of Titus Vespatianus was wont to say, That that day wherein he had not
bestowed some benefit, was utterly lost. Now in giving, these two things are
observable; to forget the benefits we bestow, and remember perfectly what we
have received: for ingratitude is a black crime; Ingratum dixeris, and omnia
dixeris; Name but Ingratitude, and you epitomize all crimes in a word.

Magnificence is the next concomitant of Justice; which Virtue consists in
large expenses, and great gifts; differing from Liberality in this only, that
the one is employed in small and mean, the other in large gifts. Now it is
observable, that Magnificent men usually erect Churches, build Cities, Towns,
and Villages, and employ themselves about such things as may either redound to
the glory of the Creator, or else augment the fame of the Author. And though
Parcimony be judged a noble revenue, yet must not our Senator be so penurious,
as altogether to forget liberality, or Magnificence; and so degenerate into
Covetousness, which is a malady incurable: which as Salust has it, does
effeminate both body and mind: Delighting it self in two things, giving
nothing, and receiving much: and yet excess must be avoided; so that the middle
way is best. The advice of Apollo to his unsatisfied Son Phaeton is very good,
-- Medio tutissimus ibis. Therefore that no man might exceed a becoming
moderation in expenses, it was provided by a Law at Rome, that no Senator
should be indebted above a certain sum of money prescribed. Which order was
taken, to remove excess and superfluity in expenses. P. Rufinus was deposed by
the Censors for having 10 l. weight in Silver. And Aemilius Lepidus having
spent 6000 l. in building a house, was divested of his Senatorship. So strict
were the ancient Romans, lest the Senators excess should move the Plebeians to
the same superfluity. Yet we allow a Senator far more liberty than so; for, our
Laws do not so narrowly confine them.

Next, Friendship; which is absolutely necessary: for, since man is a civil
person, and a lover of society, he cannot be destitute of other men's
conversation; from hence, as from a source or foundation, all amity, marriage,
or consanguinity does flow: And he that endeavors to deprive a Kingdom of
united friendship, does in a manner snatch the Sun out of the firmament.
Friendship is of an uniting or congregating quality; for as cold congeals a
multitude of waters into one cake of Ice, so Friendship makes of many one;
which is by Laelius defined to be a perfect consent of things divine and
humane, in all love, charity, and affection. Yet are we not to entertain any
person at the first sight (prima facie, as we say) as a friend; we must first,
according to our Proverb, eat a bushel of salt with them, that so we may dive
into their disposition, and know what metal they are made of. It is the opinion
of the Philosophical Tribe, that that amity is most sure, and best grounded,
that is nourished by similitude of temper; for where man's delight is one and
the same, his affection cannot be diverse. Such friends were Achilles and
Patroclus; Orestes and Pilades; Damon and Pythias, with many more that might be
mentioned. The friendship of the two last was so great, that Dionysius did
earnestly desire to make a third person, that so there might be a Trinity of
friends linked together with the ligament of love. Few friends are best; and
the reason is, because perfect friendship is inconsistent with multiplicity of
persons: and indeed they that delight to associate themselves with many, are
not accounted friends, but sociable; for it is one thing to be a lover of
conversation, and courteous in the entertainment of all persons; and another
thing to be a friend to one whom we make a constant companion, one who is the
Manuscript wherein we write all our secrets. Epaminondas was heard to use this
expression frequently, That a man should not leave the Court till he made an
addition to the number of his old friends by gaining of a new one; but this
observation tends more to the obtaining of the common good will of men, than
perfect friendship. Now true friendship requires three things.

First, Virtue, from which we must never swerve; Next, Pleasure, which proceeds
from familiarity and sweet conversation, stealing away the tediousness of
melancholy hours. For, amici fures temporis. And lastly, Profit; whereby one
real friend may accommodate another with necessaries, when stimulated by that
Tyrant necessity. Though it be the custom of the World to fawn upon a person
that abounds with the affluence of all terrene comforts, and has high and
mountain'd fortunes; but when he is at a low ebb, then they usually forsake him
with a Benedicite, or God help you. Nor can you try a real friend better, than
in the kick of malignant chance: Then, if he deserves that name, he will stick
close to you; if not, scoff at your meanness. Well might the Satyrist say, Nil
habet infelix paupertas durius inse,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. --
As if the Poor man were but fortunes Dwarf, (says one excellently) made lower
than the rest of men, to be laughed at. Yet, if any thing that is unjust be
requested by one friend of another, it is his duty to dissuade, rather than
encourage him. Pericles being desired by a friend to assist him by bearing
false witness; replied like a Christian more than a Pagan, Tuus sum usque ad
aras; I am yours to do you any courtesy that comes within the limits of my
power, as far as Religion gives me leave: intimating thereby, that he would aid
his friend so far as justice, equity, or divinity would permit, and no farther.
Now by the concatenation of amity, and co-union of Senators, the Kingdom is as
it were linked together, and so strengthened. Whenas, who can expect concord or
mutual love between Subjects, when Magistrates are disagreeing and at variance?
Aristides and Themistocles were enemies, yet whenever they went out on
public Embassage or Commission, being arrived at the borders of the Athenian
Land, there they laid down all contention and former enmity; though after their
return home they did often renew their old grudge and displeasure. To forget
injuries received, is a noble part, and an argument of a royal spirit.

Out of Friendship arises Concord, which is nothing but civil amity: and a
conspiracy or plot among all degrees of men to maintain Liberty, Law, Justice,
Fidelity, Religion and Quietness in a Kingdom. Wherefore the Senate of Rome did
usually sit in the House of Concord, to demonstrate thereby, that in Council
nothing should pass contentiously. Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemonia, being asked
why Sparta was not environed with walls; informed the Questionist, that the
Citizens lived united; and showing him the men, said, Behold the walls of
Sparta. Scilurus blessed with a numerous offspring, fourscore Sons, before he
expired, produced a bundle of arrows, and bid them break them all at once: they
replied, It was absolutely impossible: then took he the arrows from them one by
one, and so brake them all; thereby exhorting his Children to live in concord,
for so they might be invincible and happy; whenas otherwise they would be
ruinated and dispersed.

In like manner Mycypsa, King of Numidia, being on his deathbed, assembled all
his Children, and left them this golden Sentence as a Legacy: By concord the
smallest inconsiderable things increase; but the greatest and most considerable
by discord come to confusion.

Hospitality is a companion to Friendship and Concord, which entertains
strangers as well as friends, with courtesy and affability; which Virtue
redounds very much to a man's credit and reputation. The privileges belonging
thereunto are so considerable, that the Romans observed the performance of the
rights thereof even to their very enemies; and would never join in battle with
them, till such time as the Prisoners to whom they were indebted for food, were
manumitted. Plato understanding that it was impossible to reduce his
Commonwealth to a happy condition by any other way but amity, concord, or
hospitality; brought down all Laws and Customs to friendship, making all things
common, that so mutual society and love might be conserved; affirming withal,
that that brace of words, Meum and tuum, were like a pair of Engines framed on
purpose to unhinge the whole World.

Now, since it is manifest, that man, whilst he lives, floats in a turbulent
Sea of vexations and misfortunes, subject to perils as considerable for their
number as their weight; and that we must overcome them by patient suffering, or
manfully revenge them; we must next discourse of Fortitude, which is able to
supply us with weapons to defend us against the assaults of the mind and
fortune. A Life free from the intermixture of discontent, is aimed at by all,
but impossible to be obtained by any: for Nature has so ordained it, that
care, trouble and molestation is interwoven with the web of our life; so that
as our more gross part, the body, is burdened with labor and toil; so our
more spiritual part, the mind, is disquieted with discontented imaginations.
Nor indeed can we tell how to relish Virtue, unless we first taste of
discontent; for, the clouds of sorrow being overblown (like rest after labor)
the fruit of felicity is much more delightful and pleasing. Virtue is not a
Lady that loves to smother her self in down, and lie at her ease; -- Petit
ardua virtus: But she affects industry, triumphing in the midst of most
imminent danger: which made Hercules forsake the path of pleasure, because it
was wide, broad, and easy to be traced; and turn into the way of Virtue,
whereunto the passage is hard, and the ascent difficult. Nor must we only
despise all labors and difficulty in ascending the Pyramid of Virtue; but when
we are possessed therewith, we must with far more courage and magnanimity
endure all calamities, sorrows and afflictions. Now there is no misfortune, how
great soever, but she can withstand, and with her own power overcome. This
excellency of mind is called Fortitude, an affection that submits to Virtue by
constant and patient suffering. The nature and substance of Prudence, Justice,
and Temperance, is soft and effeminate without Fortitude: for it is their
property to think and act only; but the quality of this Virtue is to think and
execute constantly, manfully, and valiantly. All commendation due to Fortitude,
consists in Domestical, and Public or Military actions. Domestical Fortitude
adorns a Man; and her quality is to remove all perturbation of mind, Fear,
Sorrow, Anger, Voluptuousness, and every other exorbitant affection. Fortitude
Military consists in undergoing all perils and dangers, all labor and
hardship, that so a man may be able to look death in the face, if his country
or a good cause require it. He must look to lie sometimes at the sign of the
Star, and have his bed feathered with the down of Heaven; lie down a Man, and
rise a Snowball; gnaw Match, instead of Liquorish; He must fear nothing;
contemn all worldly things, and be resolved to suffer whatsoever can befall him.

Moreover, it is the duty of our Senator to be so courageously affected and
disposed, that all his gifts of body and mind be as with a certain sauce
seasoned with Fortitude; for, as without salt all meats, so all Virtues without
Fortitude are judged unsavory. This is that which defends both body and mind
from the cruel shock of misfortune. This is that which renders us quiet and
peaceable in Prudence, constant in Temperance, and stout, valiant and
invincible in Justice. Yet is there something to be declined in this Virtue; as
being foolhardy, proud, rash, timorous, sloathful, or puny-spirited; For, he
that intends to gain the reputation of valiant, must be pricked forward by no
other spur than Glory, Renown, or Virtue; -- Immensem gloria calcar habet. He
must follow the conduct of no other Captain but Reason, and not be led up by
Chance, Hazard, or Desperation; alleging that rash piece of Poetical fury for
his excuse, Una salus victis nullam sperare salutem.

The People of Numantia chose rather to be massacred, than yield to the
merciful enemy; and the Saguntines were guided by the same Precepts: but we
must never act any thing desperately. Well might that Roman Demosthenes Cicero
say, Injustissimam pacem bello justissimo antefero; I prefer the most unjust
Peace before the most just War. Now he that despairs, flees from Fortitude; and
it is an argument of a dunghil-spirit, to seek death by showing the heel
through fear and pusillanimity. But a valiant man despises life judiciously,
fights stoutly; not as one destitute of all hope; but, because he is grounded
on this persuasion, that it becomes him so to deport himself: which moves him
rather to choose an honorable death, than blur his life with the stain of
reproach. This Virtue has many Concomitants, which with some other
qualifications shall be the subject of the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Of Fortitude and her Concomitants, as Magnanimity, Constancy, Patience,
Confidence, etc.
THis Virtue, as is before mentioned, wants not her retinue of other Virtues.
And first, Magnanimity, which makes a man aspire to honor and dignity; and yet
by the help of virtue, imitating Marcellus, who consecrated a Temple to Honor
our of the spoils of Syracusa, making the access thereunto through the House of
Virtue near adjoining; persuading himself, that there was no possible way of
catching at honor, to a man's credit and reputation, but by the aid and
assistance of Virtue. This will support him, as bladders do a young swimmer,
from being implunged into despair when he floats upon the waters of affliction.
The fame of Codrus shall live till the conflagration of the World, who for the
preservation of his Soldiers and Country, offered up himself a sacrifice.
Curtius and Scaevola are immortal; the one, because he cast himself into a
merciless gulf, to cure Rome of the infectious Plague; the other, for burning
his own hand, to make his enemies sensible that no torture should deter Romans
from prosecuting the defense of their Liberty. Heroic actions embalm the
memories of Magnanimous spirits, and preserve them sweet and fresh, maugre the
malignity of fickle Fortune, or the succession of Ages. There is no Chronicle
nor History in which they shall not have a place, and be honorably mentioned
and registered, for Posterity to imitate.

Besides, our Senator must bestow gifts voluntarily and liberally, and receive
them with a modest blush, and a kind of unwilling willingness, following the
counsel of Hesiod, who teaches, that a good turn received should be returned
with Interest; for the Recipient is inferior to the Donor. Taxilis, an Indian
King, meeting with Alexander the Great (as Plutarch informs us) accosted him in
this manner: Noble Monarch, I challenge you, not to war, or duel; but to
another kind of combat: if you be our Inferior, receive a benefit; if our
Superior, bestow one on us. To whom Alexander replied, as the Story farther
informs us, This contention is laudable, and suits with Our Dignity; for we
should endeavor to exceed one another in well doing: and closed these words
with an embrace; suffering him to enjoy his Kingdom, with additions. Among
those of the more noble extract, let him behave himself with a well-balasted
deportment, and be the discreet Herald of his own praise; but among those of
the inferior allay (the vulgar I mean) he must abstain from so doing, because
of the contrary effects: for in the one, it attracts love; in the other, it
causes hatred.

Next, it behooves our Senator in all successes and events to be constant and
unmoved; and not like Proteus, capable of receiving all shapes. The constancy
of Aristides deserves no mean commendation, considered as he was a Heathen; for
Dionysius the Tyrant, demanding his Daughter in marriage, he retorted, That he
had rather see her wedded to her Grave, than to a Tyrant: and having slain her,
he was re-demanded, whether he had changed his opinion; he replied, He was
sorry for the fact, but glad that he had so expressed himself. Who can but admire
the constancy of Cato? Who, if we may rely upon the Records of the Ancients,
was ever observed to keep the same countenance, as well when he was repulsed
and accused, as when he was Praetor: being still immutable in Counsel, War, at
the time of his Death, and when that pannick fear agueshook his whole Country;
Caesar being victorious, and as a Tyrant usurping the Government of the
Republic. Xantippe, who was the Billingsgate Wife of Socrates, the wife
Philosopher (if a modern title may be applied to an ancient scold) could utter
this to his eternal honor, that she always observed he went out and returned
with the same countenance; for indeed, he was so rarely qualified, that no
violent or impetuous gusts of adversity could shake him out of his constant
composed temper. Merit will be crowned with her deserved bays, Velit nolit
invidiae, in spite of fate; or else her very enemies will lend a helping hand.
It becomes him therefore to be a fixed star, no Planet, in his own Sphere; like
Regulu^, who rather than the Captives should be restored, delivered himself
into the hands of the Carthaginians. It is reported, that when Nicorontos, the
Tyrant of Cyprus, had vanquished Anaxarchus; he told him, he might prolibitu,
as he pleased, torment and wrack his body, but he could never prejudice the
constancy of his mind; that would be still inviolable. Yet he must be wary that
his constancy extend only to just causes and ends; for to defend any conceit by
strength of sophistical dissertations, against the opinion of wise men, is an
argument of a perverse and obstinate, no constant disposition: For in vain were
all our consultations, if like the River Euripus, they ebb and flow at no
certainty. In Council, as he must be active, so like a stone he must be mute,
and not divulgive, because there pass many things in consultations which are to
be communicated neither to strangers, nor domestical friends; and it is the
property of a light and unsettled head, to blab all mysteries spoken in
Council: as if they could receive nothing, but like squeamish stomachs they
must immediately cast it up. The Romans would not admit the Senators Pedarii,
when they had any weighty matter in hand, nor any of the Clerks to be present;
but they themselves debated it. At first, indeed, the Senate House was open to
all young men, that were descended of the Patricii; till after that noble and
memorable part acted by Papyrius, they were forbidden; lest through the
unsetledness of greener heads, the secrets of State should be divulged, and the
Republic thereby damnified: who being one day questioned by his Mother, what
matter was so long in debate among them, and compelled to give some answer;
replied merrily, Whether it were more advantageous to the Commonwealth, that
one man should have two Wives, or one woman have two Husbands: and so by
dissembling the truth, came off handsomely, satisfying his Mother without
prejudice to the Senate or the Commonwealth.

The next Concomitant of Fortitude is Patience, which (according to Tully) is a
voluntary and continual enduring of adverse fortune, either for credit or
commodity; which are the two Poles about which the World moves; and the use
hereof is in war greatest. For they that are Men of war, Soldiers, adventure
their lives for their Country, and undergo all perils and dangers whatsoever,
with a patient, resolute, and undaunted mind.

If Coriolanus had taken it patiently when he had a repulse for aspiring to the
Consulship, he had manifested himself discreet, and his life had not been
attended by so many disasters. Patience is the Panacea of all griefs: sor
things past that are irrecoverable, may be endured, though not amended. He that
cannot undergo the bitter chance of misfortune, is but a bearded woman: yet in
the exercise of patience, we must be very circumspect that the multitude and
greatness, the quantity and quality of injuries do not discompose us: for,
Laesa patientia fit furor; Patience abused is turned into fury.

Confidence is another of Fortitudes Associates, which is a certain conceit or
assurance of mind that we shall have future success; encouraging, and fetting
us forward to the achievement of noble and heroic performances. He that is
confident, is a perfect stranger to cowardly fear. It is storied of Julius
Caesar, that seeing Caius Crastinus prepared for the Pharsalick war with hope
of success, asked him what he thought would be the event of the battle:
whereunto Crastinus (holding up his hand armed) answered, Caesar, thou shall be
victorious, and have cause to commend me dead or alive: which accordingly fell
out, and he was slain in the skirmish; whereupon Caesar assembled his Army, and
made an Oration in his praise. Aristotle affirms, that men, according to the
success they have already had, judge of the future in their proceedings.
Plutarch reports, that Antonius was always accompanied with an Egyptian
Philosopher, who, by the calculation of men's looks, would give a shrewd guess
at their disposition, fortune, and destiny: He did very much expatiate upon the
felicity of Antonius, but more upon that of Octavius; saying, That the Genius
that waited on Octavius was more powerful than that that attended Antonius;
which he conceived, because in gaming, Cock, or Quail-fighting, he had the
better hap, and was most fortunate; besides other conjectures. It is thought,
nay, maintained, that every King, Prince, and Person has a certain Guardian
Angel; which Spirits are by Homer and Plato called Genii; and by others Lares,
Daemones, Lemures; and by us, Angeli: which, as they affirm, assist them in
battle, and inform them what is to be done. Of which there are two sorts, the
one good, the other evil. We read that Uladislaus Jagelonus King of Polonia,
in the Prussian war against the Germans, spied an Angel armed assisting him;
whom he religiously called Divum Stanislaum: by reason of this spectacle, he
fought resolutely, came off victorious, and in spite of the Tyrants fury
delivered Prussia. Plutarch tells us of an evil Angel that still accompanied
Brutus; who being in consultation about the management of war, perceived a man
standing before him of a prodigious bulk: he demanding of him, Who he was;
received this answer, That he was his evil Spirit, whom he should see in the
Philippick war: which proved true; for thereby he did not only prognosticate
his ill success, but his death also, which accordingly happened. That the
Romans relied much upon the predictions of their Spirits, appears, by the
Inscriptions of the Roman Coyns: Genius Augusti, Genius Senatus, Genius Populi
Romani; and thereupon Ovid sings, Et vigilant nostra semper in urbe Lares. But
to pass by all these Phancies; there is nothing conduces more to the
perfecting of a Conqueror, than Confidence; which our Senator must be endowed
with; for many times all other helps and hopes fail, when this remains for the
last Refuge.

Security brings up the rear of the Concomitants of that Noble General
Fortitude; which as it is the end of a good, so is it of a valiant life; and
hereby we gain tranquillity of mind. He that has Security, is in the same
condition he was before his Birth: my Author is Cicero. Now, this Security
tends to a peaceable and quiet life in a Republic, which is commonly termed,
Common Felicity. Yet our Security must have a better foundation than an airy
conceit; Sloth, Carelessness, or Negligence. Pompeius, being Commander of
numerous Forces, and going to wage war with Caesar, seemed secure; yet some of
his captains, that feared the vigilance of Caesar, advised him to be diligent:
to whom he said, All was secure, and they might in utramque aurem dormire, take
their rest, and sleep securely. But this Security caused his flight, and by
consequence his overthrow. This is an error incident to most Kingdoms and
Republics; who being russetted with peace, and grown hoary, as it were, with
quietness, think themselves secure, when as they are sloathful, cowardly, dull,
and negligent.

The Roman Empire was extremely enlarged by their Virtue Military; insomuch
that their Eagles flew as far, if not father, than the current of their Laws
did run. This Metropolis, from the time of Romulus, till the reign of Octavius
Augustus, was never unarmed. But Octavius finding a general peace all the World
over, caused the Temple of Janus (which stood open in time of universal peace
only,) to be shut; as if thereby the State should be for ever secured from
Martial tumults. Rome being by this means secured, no succeeding Emperor
opened the Temple of Janus: so that from that time the People embraced an idle
lazy life; whence it followed, that in process of time all Countries, Cities
and Kingdoms shook off the Roman Yoke, and purchased their own liberty; whereas
she, quite-disarm'd, became subject to the Goths. We therefore approve of no
other Security in our Counselor, but such, as wants not care and provision
to repel danger and misfortune when they begin to encroach upon us. And happy
is that Kingdom, that in time of peace prepares for war. It will not be amiss,
I presume, to inform you what men are to be judged valiant, and the rewards due
unto such persons so judged. Some there are, that only led with love to Virtue,
grounded upon honest Principles, choose rather to hazard their lives and bodies
in fight, than in time of necessity to abandon their Prince, Country, or
Friends. We find it recorded, that the Roman, German, and French Captains did
always animate their Soldiers to fight, with persuasions of the efficacious
power of their great Forces, the Valor of their General, the Virtue of their
Ancestors, and the numerous spoils taken from the enemy: but the Commanders of
Polonia use no other argument or compellation than this; Let every person be
mindful of his own Virtue, and peculiar reputation: which only Sentence did
satisfy the Polonians, whose fixed resolution it is to fight till Victory
seats her self upon their Banners, or die in the Field. Now, he that stands
thus affected to Virtue and Honesty, may lawfully be termed Valiant. Which sort
of men are not to pass without their reward, and badges of honors, as Ensigns
of their Loyalty and Allegiance to their King. It is but reason and equity,
that after the turmoyls of War, they should be clothed with long Robes, and
enjoy the tranquillity of a serene, quiet and peaceable life. In Rome, all such
Soldiers were adopted Senators, as brought home any spoil that did belong to
the Person of the enemy, or that wore a Garland for saving a Citizen in fight.
Those that had born office in the field for the space of ten years, were
admitted to be civil Magistrates. Nay, Regulus being removed from the dignity
of a Senator, was so much disturbed at the affront, that he tore his clothes,
and manifested the wounds of his body that he had received in battle; thereby
claiming a place in the Senate House; and made a succinct relation of those
martial services he had done for the good of his Country; which wrought so much
upon the Senate, that he was readmitted to his former dignity.

The Peripateticks affirm, that anger is Cos fortitudinis, the whetstone of
Fortitude; and men lightly moved thereby, attempt all things with the more
vivacity and sprightliness. Yet our Senator must be careful that he avoid all
fury and outrage in the use thereof, lest he be branded with madness, and lose
the title of Valiant; which may be effected by making Anger a Companion, no
Commander of Fortitude. There is nothing more misbecoming any man (especially a
Counselor) than Anger: for he that is overswayed with that furious passion,
becomes like a brute beast, whose property it is to seek revenge in the heat
and height of fury. Wherefore in all enterprises, let Honesty bring up the
front, or be Commander; and Anger be Adjutant General. Plato the Divine calls
Anger, The Sinews of the mind, because thereby she is stretched and scrued up,
and by Lenity let down. And he that engages with an enemy, prompted to his
enterprise by no other instigation than Anger, deserves the name of Choleric,
and not Valiant; because he undertakes the management of his affairs, moved
thereunto by a certain perturbation of mind, not by reason or honor. Wherefore
it was well said by the Epicure, Anger is the issue of Madness; which is a
prejudicial to the health of the body, as the perfection of the mind. Some
there are that ascribe more to Fortune, than, if rightly considered, she can
lay claim to; and being armed with this conceit, only cry out Victoria, before
they do classicum canere; which, as we say, count their Chickens before they be
hatched. For although the force of Fortune be great, and most considerable in
War, (because it is most prevalent in those things where reason is least
powerful) yet must we not rely upon her so much, as altogether to forsake all
advice and consultation; for, those that are conducted by reason, want not the
Auspices of Fortune. Hannibal suing for peace with Scipio, expressed himself as
follows; I have been instructed by good and bad success so well, that I am
sensible it is far better to rely on Reason, than Fortune. For she often fails
when a man is come to the last pinch of extremity; and there is nothing more
fickle and inconstant; she is a Female, and will wax and wane twice in a minute;
and blinds the judgment of those that bridle not her headstrong fury.
Therefore let our Senator be suae fortunae faber, the hammer of his own
fortune; and make way for his success by his valor and magnanimity, and then
she will afford assistance; for she lacqueys reason, as a shadow does the body.
It is the opinion of Xenophon, that in war evil fortune accompanies the bad,
and good fortune the good. Alexander, Scipio and Hannibal were fortunate, but
not so much through the aid of that fickle Lady, as the assistance of Wisdom,
and the benefit of Virtue. Yet he behaves himself wisely, that takes Fortune
and Opportunity when it is offered: for, post est occasio calva; he must take
her by the foretop, because she is bald behind; and once past, is past recovery.
Now, some there are, that if they find success in their undertakings,
immediately ascribe all to Fortune as the Authoress, as is before mentioned;
yet there is no man that may be termed wise, but scorns to make her the
Directress of his actions.

Now, to the perfection of our Senators body, (for we have already discoursed
of the endowments of the mind.) The goods of the body consist partly in the
whole body, and partly in some particular members thereof: Health, strength and
soundness are required in the whole body; but perfect sense, and agility, and
activeness in some peculiar members only. And as there is a consent or harmony
between the body and mind; so is there a certain correspondency and similitude
between the virtues of them both. Health resembles Justice; because it
reduces the different constitutions of the body to an equal temperature, and
they both conspire to make the body and mind perfect. Strength is compared to
Fortitude; because they mutually assist one another in the undergoing of perils
and dangers. Soundness of body is assimilated to Prudence: for as Prudence
makes a reconciliation between all opinions and judgments, till they shake
hands; so in a sound body, all parts unite their forces together, to make it up
perfect. Health does very much avail; for in all our actions she sets us
forward with courage and delight; whereas sickness debilitates the body, and
hinders it from the prosecution of a design: She Is not to be had by price,
says the Lyrick Poet, -- Non gemmis neque purpura venale nec auro. Neither
Gold nor Silver can purchase it. The multitude of Acres will not cure so much
as the headache; nor the tumbling over of your Bags, the rich-Gout, Stone, or
Colic. It is a free gift of the Creator, as from the prime efficient; but
good diet and exercise is the secundary cause: Therefore our Senator must take
heed lest he destroy or lose this inestimable Jewel by Intemperancy. Health
(says the Prince of Orators) is maintained by knowing a man's own body, and
taking an observation of those things which agree or disagree most with the
natural constitution; as also by continency in diet, and contempt of pleasures:
what else remains, must be fetched out of the volumes of those two famous
pillars of the Temple of Aesculapius, Galen and Hippocrates. Diogenes used to
laugh them to scorn, that thought to procure health, being distempered, by
sacrificing to the Gods; and yet wallow all their lifetime in debauchery and
excess. Let our Senator therefore be, as the Physicians term it, Sanguine or
Choleric; for those humors incline men to be ingenious, docible, healthy, and
of large memories. Aristatle says, Melancholic men are witty, because they
being subject to anger, are apt to have divine cogitations, and profound
thoughts; yet are they to be excluded from Council, because the humor most
predominant in such persons is cold and dry; which makes their consultations
solitary, sour, sad and dull: for a melancholy person is nothing but a lump of
quickened care; whereas the merry soul is blithe, pleasant, affable and
debonair. Cicero chancing to meet with that passage in Aristotle, that
melancholic persons were ingenious; with a smile, said, He rejoiced extremely,
that Nature had favored him so far, as to make him dull witted, and not
melancholic. Caesar being desired to take heed of a corpulent, merry, jovial
person; said, Such persons were not to be feared, but those rather that were
sad, of a swarthy meagre complexion; pointing to Brutus and Cassius. Nor do we
approve of phlegmatic persons, as fit for Senators; lest their cross humor be
a disturbance to all the rest, and so prove offensive: for, as the motion of
the phlegmatic is Saturnine, slow and dull; so likewise is the disposition of
their mind.

Good proportion and comeliness of body is requisite in our Senator; for
according to the Poet, Gratior est pulchro veniens and corpore virtus. Now I
call that comeliness in him, which shows him to be manly, and not effeminate.
Aristotle says, in tall persons there is no great virtue, and in the short or
low of stature, little; therefore let him be of a moderate size. His body must
not be gross, nor yet lean and dry, like a Skeleton or Anatomy. For, the former
is unapt for travel, and the latter over-weak to endure hardship. Besides,
great notice should be taken of those that Nature has marked with any
deformity, or defect of Member, as the want of an eye: For such persons are
counted crafty and subtle, and so unfit for Consultation, (had this been
observed among us, Hewson had never sat so often in Council.) Yet,
notwithstanding all these niceties of features and comeliness, if any such
person, though deformed in body, be perfect in mind; he shall be admitted: for
the excellency of Virtue over-comes the imperfection of Nature. And though the
inward disposition is sometimes known by the outward complexion; yet is not the
conjecture of the virtues of the mind by the lineaments of the body so certain,
but that it may fail: for many there be, who are rough-hewn without, but neatly
polisht within. Nor can deformity of body blemish the mind, though the beauty
of the mind beautify that of the body. Nor does Virtue confine her self either
to beauty or deformity, meanness or greatness; but sometimes dwells with russet
honesty, in the low cottage, as well as with plumed gallantry in lofty Palaces.
So that not the countenance of a Senator is altogether to be regarded, but his
mind and qualifications.

Now, to the Robes and Vesture of our Senator: He must be decently apparelled,
according to his degree and dignity; for the comely ornament of a garment adds
a reverence to his person; and by his Robes he is distinguished from all other
sorts and kinds of persons. The Roman Senators wore a Garment set full of studs
or tufts of Gold; and on their Hose did they wear the form of the Moon; which
was the cognizance or hadge of great honor. This kind of Ornament the Romans
were beholding to other Nations for, according to all probability; for Isaiah
the Prophet foretold the Noble women of Judaea, that God would take away those
Moons and Ornaments of the Hose. Plutarch alleges four causes of this
fashioned Hose among the Romans, which for the Readers delight and recreation I
shall here rehearse.

First, Because their superstition taught them, that the souls of their Heroes
should be led the nearest way to Heaven by the light of the Moon.

The second was, that the Sign of the Moon did manifest their descent from the
Arcadians, who came into Italy with Evander; and the Arcadians were so lunatic
as to imagine themselves more ancient than the Moon.

The third cause that moved them to the wearing of the Moon, was, to the end
that in prosperity it might be as a memento unto them of the mutability and
inconstancy of Fortune. For, as the Moon is sometimes partly lightened, and
partly darkened; so no honor or felicity can be so clear and refulgent, but it
may sometimes be overcast with clouds of obloquy and malice.

The fourth cause was, that as the Moon drinks in all her light from the Sun;
so ought all men to think themselves indebted to heaven for their wisdom.

Others there are who affirm, that the Roman Senators did not wear the figure
of the Moon, but the proportion of the letter C. as though the hundred that
Romulus chose to be Patres (as he called them) should thence take their Title.
It has ever been a Custom in all Kingdoms, Republics, and well-governed
States heretofore, to distinguish the Degrees of men by their Vesture; and
without doubt this is of much moment to make them constant and settled in their
professions. Among the Romans no man might be adorned with Purple, but
Senators, Magistrates, Priests, and the Younger sort that were of noble rank
and quality. I omit the mentioning of Rings, Chains, and Bracelets, which were
bestowed on virtuous persons, advanced to dignity, as encouragements. Though
these customs now adays are obsolete, since the alteration of virtues, manners
and times; for Jone is as neatly trickt up as my Lady, and the Artizan as the
Gentleman: It is most certain, that by ornaments and additional titles of
honor men are put in mind of their duty; and thereby they prosecute all things
with the more eagerness and diligence. Scepters, Crowns, Chains, Rings, Gowns,
Robes and Saddles, are no dignities, but the badges of Dignity, whereby men are
stirred up and encouraged to perform what is requisite in the office and place
whereunto those Badges belong. Remulus (says Livy) intending to take the
Government of a strange People upon him, did adorn himself with his majestical
Robes, and called twelve Lictors with Maces, to attend upon his person, that he
might thereby appear with greater pomp and ostentation, and so captivate the
hearts of the people: for the Vulgar (like Children) are hugely taken with the
outward face and appearance of things; and mind the outward bark more than the
inward substance. Our Senator therefore shall observe such a decorum in his
apparel, as not to incline to lightness or foolish gallantry, so to decline all
slovingliness and rusticity: As he must not be like the Frenchified Gallant,
who when he has once seen Paris, comes over metamorphos'd both in body and
mind; dancing out an entertainment to his friend with a giddy feather in his
Crown: no more must he be like the Sunbak'd-peasant, who understands nothing of
ceremony or civility besides the management of his plough, and understands no
other Gammut but Hay, gee, ho, which he signs to his country Teem when they
draw the Plow that furrows the face of the Earth. He must ever observe such a
comely neatness, as may speak him man, and not woman; utterly declining and
abhorring all nice curiosity.

CHAP. VII.
Of Travel; the Age, Gravity, and Election of our Senator.
THe major part of the wisdom of a Counselor consists in the knowledge of the
Manners, Laws and Customs of all Nations; which is best attained by foreign
Travel, as Homer sings of Ulysses, Dic mihi Musa virum captae post tempora
Trojae,
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit, and urbes.
And indeed, there is nothing accomplishes a man more than foreign Travel. In
motu melas. There is a certain kind of harmony in motion. And as the Master of
Eloquence has it, Plebeiae sane sunt istae animae, quae suis affixae trabibus
domi resident; illa divinior, quae coelum imitatur, and gaudet motu. Those are
dunghill spirits, that live confined to the narrow round of the place of their
nativity; and that soul is of a more noble allay, that like the Heavens
rejoices in motion. Sir Thomas Moor writes, that a man's best friends in Travel
is his coin: yet under favor, notwithstanding the Authority of so learned a
Grandee, if a man be accompanied with too many of these friends, his journey
will be motus trepidationis; for according to the nipping Satyrist, Pauca licet
ports argenti vascula puri;
Nocte iter ingressus gladium, contumque timebis,
Et motae adLunam trepidabis arundinis umbram
Whereas, as he immediately affirms, Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator. The
indigent Traveller shall sing before a Qui va la? or High-way-man. Yet would
not we have our Counselor so destitute of money, as thereby to expose himself
to hardship and distress; but so handsomely accommodated, as that he may take a
survey of all Countries with honor and credit. Yet in traveling, he must be
very careful that he only come over again furnished and full fraughted with
those Laws and Customs that are honest and civil, and leave those that are
erroneous and evil behind him. For, Terras, non animos mutant, qui transmare
currunt. Or at least they should do so, and not like some green heads that
corrupt themselves, and learn nothing but the superstitious Idolatrous
ceremonies of other Countries, and be sure to retain what is bad, though it
prove to their own prejudice and ruin. He must be very exact in informing
himself what Laws, Jurisdictions, what order of life, military Discipline,
civil Government, and domestical life is in every Nation practiced. He shall
take particular notice of the situation of Countries and places, the building
of Cities, their Fortification, Strength and Ammunition. Let him also
understand the virtue of every Prince; how his People stand affected to him,
and upon what terms; the wisdom of their Senate, the form and method of their
Consultations, as far as without prejudice to himself it may be pried into; the
nature and ingenuity of the people; what virtues they adhere to, and what vices
they are most addicted unto; what Learned men, Soldiers and Commanders are in
every Country to be found out; that so by the report of them to his own Nation,
the best precepts may be culled out, and the rest rejected. Yet he must take
heed, lest by the newfangled fashions that he brings over, he make not the
people effeminate, and careless of their own Laws, Customs, and ancient
virtues: for as Pliny says truly, Est natura hominum novitatis avida: Man's
nature prompts him to embrace Novelty, which oftentimes proves pernicious, and
tends to the molestation of the Kingdom, Republic, or State. Many famous
persons have taken delight in travel, as Nestor, Menelaus, and Alexander the
Great, out of love thereunto, Homer, and Democritus, that merrily passed his
time away, traveled all over Egypt, Babylon, and Persia; thereby hoping to
obtain knowledge, that so their minds being stored with variety of observation,
they might be the more accomplished, and remain content with their own fortune.
The words that Diodorus Siculus reports to be written upon the Tomb of Osiris,
are worthy the quotation and remembrance; which are these, or to this effect:
Osiris Rex sum, Saturm antiquior filius, qui nullum orbis locum reliqui, quem
non attigerim, discens ea omnia, quae generi humano utilia sunt, and
necessaria. But if he want money to support him in travel, let him employ his
time in the study of Geography, and Cosmography: And a smack he may have of
Natural Philosophy; but to consume much time in that Science, is judged, by
some, superfluous in a Senator. The field of knowledge is unmeasurable and
infinite; which was the reason that men applied themselves to one particular
Art or Science. Aliquis in omnibus, and nullus in singulis, is no fit Motto for
a Counselor. Wherefore, we commit to the Jurisdiction of our Senator two sorts
of Countries; the one is that which contains both God and Man (not as if we
prescribed God his place of residence, but we speak here according to vulgar
capacities) not limited within the bounds of Europe, Asia or Africa; but is
only surrounded by the posting Sun. The other is the place that Nature has
destined for his residence or being, as England, France, Italy, Spain, Germany,
etc. For it belongs unto him to take a survey of the order and nature of the
Macrocosm, the universal World, which the Latins call, Majorem Mundum; as well
as the Microcosme, or little World, where he has his habitation and abode,
which they term, Minorem mundum. And when the mind is dismanacled of those
worldly encumbrances which usually adhere to the body, and by Travel and
Science is perfected, as much as lies within the verge of humanity to be; she
officiates as she ought, affecting Virtue, and disaffecting Vice, suppressing
the lusty insurrections of the flesh, and like a Monarch curbing and giving
Laws to all exorbitant affections. Nay further, when the mind has pried into
the nature of the Heavens, considered their harmonious motion, knows the
circumference of the Earth, her Longitude, Latitude, and the rarities contained
therein; has plough'd the furrowed Ocean, and seen the wonders of the deep,
understands their causes, beginnings and ends; what is the order and beauty of
the glimmering Lights of Heaven, and what influence they have upon sublunary
bodies: what causes the passions or deliquia of the two Grand Luminaries, the
Sun and Moon; the reason of their Rising and Setting, their Diurnal, Nocturnal
and horary motion; what is the generation and corruption of all things; what
the nature of the Elements, of Animals, and the virtue and beauty of that
innumerable number of fragrant herbs that usually adorn the Earth: when, I say,
all these things are understood by one single person, and God acknowledged the
Supreme Author and Governor of them all; Shall not that Person be judged a
Prince, rather than a mere Inhabitant or Citizen of the World, that is of so
profound and polite an understanding? Surely yes. Socrates, who by the Oracle
at Delphos was pronounced the wisest of Ethnicks, being demanded what
Countryman he was; replied, A man of the World; not confining himself to any
particular place or Country; for he thought himself to be an universal Prince.
The same Laertius reports of that Tub-hugging Cynick Diogenes. Omne solum forti
patria, is an old saying; and Omne solum sapienti patria, carries as much truth
with it, as the former antiquity. The whole World is a Wise man's Country: It Is
a City that comes not under the tyrannous scourge of any Nero, Domitian, or
Caligula; Nor can be environed with walls, but is surrounded with the universal
Circle, governed by a comely order, and natural decorum, as it were with a Law
certain and inviolable, palizadoed with no other fortifications than the
Elements. The Citizens or Inhabitants of this place are termed Philosophers,
commanded only by themselves, fortified with invincible minds, and sufficiently
armed against the griping talons of penury, or any other misfortune that can
seize upon man. Such Persons (nay, Princes as these, I may say, without
entrenching on the Royal Charter of Kings) no fury of War can terrify, no
Faggot frighten, nor Axe disturb; for they are all valiant, resolute, and
beyond the prejudice of Fortune.

Now, to the Age and Gravity of our Senator. They that have penned any thing of
the life of man, did usually confine it to a certain proportion of time. Plato
assigns eighty one years; Solon, eighty; others affirm, that the continuance
of man's life extends but to seventy, referring all to the number seven, because
it frequently falls out, that every seventh year some alteration or change
appears in the body. The first seven years, Childrens teeth fall out; The next
seven, their hair grows; The third, their body comes to its proper stature and
height; The fourth, they increase in bulk and thickness; The fifth, they arrive
at their full strength and virility; The sixth, they find themselves addicted
to pleasure and delight; The seventh, they come to the maturity and ripeness of
wit and understanding; The eighth, they begin to be termed aged, or ancient;
The ninth, weak and feeble, beholding to the support of the staff, and the help
of Spectacles; And the tenth, they have one foot in the grave, and are reckoned
to be e peculio Proserpinae, of Proserpina's fold. Others there are, who
maintain that this change happens every ninth year, and so ascribe the
alteration thereof to every unequal number till twenty and one. Pythagoras the
silent, called the eightieth year of man's Age fatal, dividing it into four
times twenty, as follows: Childhood, continues till twenty; Youth, other
twenty; Man's estate, the other twenty; and old Age, the fourth, which puts a
period to all. Some again compare Man's Age to the four Seasons of the Year:
Childhood, is compared to the Spring; Youth, to Summer; Manhood, to Autumn; and
Old Age, to Winter. Varro divides Man's Age into four degrees, and comprehends
every of them within the number of fifteen: Childhood (says he) lasts till
fifteen, for so long Children are weak and tender; Youth, till thirty, because
till that Age men increase and grow in height and thickness; Ripe Age till
forty five, for so long strength of body continues, and men are then fit to be
employed in public affairs; Old Age begins at sixty, and then the body is
impotent, crazy and decayed; so that they are not fit for State-employments,
lingering, and consuming till death come and trip up their heels, as he did all
their Ancestors before them. To this division of man's Age we assent; but the
distinction by number does principally belong to Physicians; for they in
exhibiting their medicines, observe certain critical days. But our opinion is,
that the forty fifth year of man's age is most suitable for Consulation;
because then the strength both of body and mind is arrived to the very height.
Besides, it is the middle age of Man; and at that time, if ever, the mind is
perfect in judgment and experience, less attracted with brutish affections and
desires, and least of all transported with rage, fury, or passion. When old
Rome was in her glory, and shone with all her splendour, Senators were chosen at
that Age, being then most perfect in body and mind: yet dare we not deny, but
that some men may be termed Aged at thirty; that is, are both prudent, grave
and wise. And we find it upon record, that some, though very few, were created
Senators by the Romans before the thirtieth year of their Age; which we do not
disallow, in regard that men may be reputed ancient for virtue as well as
number of years: yet care must be taken that the Kingdom be governed chiefly by
mature and grave Head-pieces; for as Plutarch affirms, that Kingdom is most
happy that has store of young men's Lances, and old men's Laws. Pertinent is
that of Euripides to this purpose: Dictum est vetustu^ facta Juvenum, caeterum
magis valent concilia Senum. In Athens no person was created Senator before he
was fifty years old. And in Rome it was permitted for any man of sixty to enter
the Senate House, though he never came to the Senatorship by choice or
election; and after that year, it was left to his pleasure to be present or
absent; so that they did neither bind him to, nor bar him from coming to
Council. A good, though ancient Custom; for every man, though he has seen as
many Winters as hoary-headed Nestor, ought to employ himself pro posse suo,
according to his utmost ability, for the benefit of his native Country. Plato
is of opinion, that men must learn till Age snow white hairs upon their heads.
Nulla dies sine linea; that day is lost, in which a man has not bettered his
knowledge. Yet we prohibit decrepit, doting persons, whose judgments are as
crazy as their bodies; and the reason is, because their counsels and
consultations are for the most part dubious, and are rather he sitant
conjectures than solid counsels, beginning every Sentence with perhaps,
perchance, peradventure, and the like: and this they do, as being sensible of
their former imbecility and weakness, and so are unwilling to suffer a relapse
into their juvenile and youthful errors and mistakes. Yet, if they have only
so many years over their heads as may render them grave, solid and wife, they
are perfect in uttering their conceits: for by use and experience (which is the
best School-Mistris) they have gained, as it were, a third eye, whereby they
are enabled to pry into, and discern with the more vivacity, the events and
causes of things. And as every man is discovered by his speech, so is the
prudence and wisdom of a Senator manifested by uttering his opinion. Socrates,
casting his eye upon a Youth that he never had seen before, says to him,
Speak, that I may know thee: So may we say to our Counselor, By the solidity
of thy speech, and the gravity of thy deportment, manifest thy self unto us.
Now his opinion must be delivered in significant, but plain naked terms; not
daubed over fuco Rhetoricae lascivientis, with the paints of lasciviating
Rhetorique, which becomes the Rhetoric School, better than the Parliament
House. But so much for his Age and Gravity.

Now to the Election of our Senator. Among the Romans (in the times of Yore
Lords of the whole World) Senators were elected diverse ways; for, they were
chosen either by the King, Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes of the people, the
Censors or Chieftains. And the Custom of freeborn natives is to choose
Senators among themselves, or else to commit the authority of Election to a
single person, who for wisdom, gravity and dignity is judged the most fit, and
that is the King; which the Romans did at first. Romulus, the first founder of
their City, elected a hundred Senators; which custom was followed by their
succeeding Kings. But, when Kingly Government, through the insolent government
of Tarquinius the Ravisher, was removed, this power of election (according to
the quality of the time) was somewhat changed, yet not given to a multitude;
for till the State returned to the Basis and foundation of Government,
Monarchy, Senators were elected by Consuls, Censors, Dictators, or Chieftains.
In all which Elections, till the time of Augustus, there is no mention made of
lots; but the Fame, Family, Order, Office before born, riches and possessions,
were most of all considered and respected. Now, since there is no earthly
possession but comes far short of Virtue for excellency in the choice of
Senators, that must be chiefly looked upon; because they are reputed Defenders
of the Law, Moderators of Liberty, and Conservers of a Kingdom. And as the
Republic or Kingdom is oftentimes infected by the vice and impiety of
Magistrates; so is it antidoted, corrected and repaired by their virtues. Such
are the People of every Country, as are the Manners of their Governors; and
the Subjects are apt to Ape the Customs and Constitutions of their Prince. It
was well said of one, That the change of Princes Lives, and the alteration of
Manners in Magistrates, would also work even to a mutation of the Customs,
Institutions and Rights, nay, of the Kingdom it self. And to deal really with
you, evil Princes are very much to be blamed, not in that they themselves are
guilty of any crime, for it is a Maxim in our Common Law, That the King can do
no wrong; but that thereby the Subjects are prone to be feduced, and led away
to the same exorbitancies; which may justly be so termed in them, though not in
a King. And indeed, how can it enter within the lists of possibility for a man
to persuade other men to be virtuous, when he himself is vicious? The Romans
derided Scylla, who, though a man infinitely debauched, and wholly given up to
licenciousness, did nevertheless admonish and stir up others to Sobriety,
Temperance and Frugality. And who would not blame Lisander? though he swam in a
contrary stream, yet he allowed and gave toleration to the Citizens for those
vices which he himself abstained from and abhorred. But Lycurgus deserves
commendation, because he never imposed the observation of that upon any man,
which he himself did not first of all diligently follow. Yet in a Free State,
(if any such there be) it has been observed, they have been directed by the
suffrage of chance. This order of Election is observed by that Virgin, Venice.
The like institution Solon authorized among the Athenians for the choice of the
five hundred Senators: For, out of every Tribe were so many elected, as were
thought to deserve that dignity; whose names were put into a Pot; and into
another as many Beans, the one half white, and the other black: now so many as
happened upon the white, were pronounced Senators; and those that chanced to
light on the black, were repulsed and dismissed: which made Thucydides to call
that Senate, Senatum a Faba. Besides, it was observed among the Romans what
Office he had born before his Election, and with what fidelity he had
discharged himself of his duty: for they made choice of their Senators out of
that number of men only, that were by them styled Patres, which was, as it
were, the Nursery of Counselors, that so they might be known to be men famous
for some public exploit, or renowned for their Wisdom and Gravity.

Among us, those that sit in Parliament obtain that Dignity three manner of
ways: First, By reason of their Tenure. Secondly, By virtue of Writ; and
Thirdly, By virtue of Office.


Per Tenure are these: Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls and Barons. And these are summoned to appear before the Parliament in the
space of 48. days.

They that come in per Breve, or by Writ, are these: Knights of the Shires,
Burgesses, Citizens, Barons of the Cinque Ports, and the King's Council. There
come also per Breve, directed to the several Deans and Archdeacons of this
Kingdom, two several Proctors of the Clergy for every several Deaconry and
Arch-deaconry; and these Proctors of the Clergy are elected by the Clergy.
There come hither per Service, or by virtue of Office, The Chief Crier of
England; The Chief Usher; The Chancellor; The Treasurer; The Chamberlain, and
Barons of the Exchequer; The Justices of either Bench; The Steward of England;
The Porter, Grooms, and all tied by service to be here done. The Stewards
Office was to place the Lords; the Porter used to see there be but one door to
enter in and go out at: And every one of the abovementioned Officers, has had
his several Charge respectively. Thus have you had a description of our Sage
Senator, of all the qualifications that tend to his accomplishment; his Duty,
Dignity and Office displayed and laid open; the rewards due unto, and conferred
on him; the ancient Customs of the Romans and Grecians touching this
particular; their election and choice; as also their manner of sitting in
Parliament among us; how and by what means they obtain the Senatorship, or
title of Parliament Men, according to our modern styles, who were so termed,
because every Member of this High and most absolute Court of Justice in England
(from which there is no appeal to any other for redress) should sincerely and
discreetly Parler la meant, as it is in the old Norman French, that is, freely
express their minds for the benefit of the Kingdom. Nor are the Laws of this
Island only, and the Liberty of the Subject conserved by Parliament, but those
of all well policied Kingdoms and Countries else in Europe. The Germans have
their Diets; The Danes and Swedes their Riicks Dachs; The Spaniard calls his
Parliament Las Cortes; And the French have (or at least should have) their
Assembly of the three States, though it be now in a manner grown obsolete,
because the authority thereof was by accident devolved upon the King: it will
not be altogether impertinent to give you a succinct account of this memorable
alteration; which happened as follows: When our Nation had taken such large
footing in France, that they advanced as far as Orleans, and had forced their
then Sovereign to fly to Bourges in Berry, for sanctuary; the Assembly of the
three States not being able to convene during these pressures in full
Parliament, because that by those invasions the enemy made into the very bowels
of the Kingdom, the Country was altogether unpassable, so that the power that
was inherent in the Parliamentary Convention, of enacting Laws, assessing the
Subject with Taxes, subsidiary Levies, and other Impositions, was transmitted
to the King, during the rage and fury of that war only; which proving of long
continuance, that entrusted Authority began to grow habitual, and could never
hitherto be taken from him; so that his Edicts stand in lieu of Acts of
Parliament. Out of these foregoing premises this Conclusion may easily be
deduced, That the principal Fountain whence the King derives his happiness and
safety, is the Parliament: It is the great Conduit-Pipe which conveys unto him
his Peoples bounty and gratitude; the truest Looking-glass wherein he discerns
their loves. Now the Subjects love has been ever accounted the prime Citadel
of a Prince. In his Parliament he appears as the Sun in the Meridian, in the
Altitude of his Glory, in his highest State-Royal, as the Law informs us. But
lest we should spin out too long a thread, and so wear the Readers Patience
threadbare, we will conclude this first Book, and make the discourse which we
allot for the scope and Subject of our next, run in another Channel.

Finis Libri Primi.
THE Second Book, TREATING Of KINGS, and their PREROGATIVE.
CHAP. I.
EK (...) --
A Jove Principium --
In the Trinity we find Unity; Among the Orders of Angels there is an
Archangel; The Heavens have their Primum mobile, and the Sun is their chief
Luminary; The Beasts of the Forest have the Lion to their King; The Fowls of
the Air, the Eagle: The Fish of the Sea a Sovereign; And shall man only be
Independent? Absit, Absit; let us therefore sing with Homer: (...)
(...).


Kings (says one of our quondam Penmen, though since an Apostate) are lively
Representations, living Statues or Pictures, drawn to the life of the great
Deity: these Pictures, for their better continuance, are done in Oil; the
colors of the Crown never fade, they are no watercolors. They are Gods
Vicegerents here upon earth; nay, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost say, they are Gods, and would have them live as Gods. God the Father
plainly affirms, Joh. 10. 34. Dixi dii est is: I have said ye are Gods. God the
Son told Pilat^ Thou should have no power, except it were (^^ta de super)
given from above. And I Am sure the Holy Ghost tells us, Per me Reges regnant;
By me Kings reign, and not by the suffrage of the people; for then it would
have been per nos. They are the Lord's anointed, therefore not to be touched or
brought in question by their Subjects: for all the failings in a King can but
make him a bad King; but he remains a King still. If indeed, as one says
excellently, Kings held their Crowns by Indentures from the People, they were
then disobliged from their obedience to him upon his failing (in those things
whereunto he was sworn at his Coronation) on his part; but if they receive
their Crowns immediately from God, and that by him alone Kings reign, as is
said before, then they must still stick close to their Allegiance, or else come
off with the brand of Traitors. Our modern times have furnished us with too
many of that infernal rabble, who were so hellishly wicked and impious, as to
fight against their lawful Sovereign; and having got him in their clutches,
slew him at his own door. But to the purpose.

The Athenians, (as Demosthenes writes in his Oration against Neaera) when
Theseus had contrived the model of their Commonwealth, being accustomed to
choose some one out of the number of the virtuous, by a general consent,
manifested by holding up their hands, they elected him King. In ancient times,
the election of Kings was ever held sacrum and divinum quid, a certain holy and
divine action among the very Heathens. Romulus, after the sight of twelve
Ravens (if we may credit Livy) or rather because the lightning had pierced his
body from the left to the right side (as Dionysius has it) was by divination
chosen King; and that ordinance, called Jus Auspiciorum, was religiously
obeyed. Their authority has been judged ever as divine as their election; for
Homer and Isocrates jointly affirm, That he that governs as a King,
represents the Deity. The Kings of Persia were honored as Gods, and the people
believed that they were the sole and absolute defenders of their Laws,
Liberties, Lives, and Country. The ancient Latins called their Kings,
Indigetes, that is, deified; (as Aeneas and Romulus were) whose bodies after
they were expired, could never be found. Kings are the Sons, not of the most
voices, but of the most High; and as God is King of the whole Universe, so are
they Lords of the whole Commonwealth. About their skirts they have this Motto
written by the finger of God, Touch not mine Anointed. Nor did ever any
Churchman, Christian Father or Expositor, obtrude any other sense upon this
Text, than that it was meant of Kings, till such time as the Puritan and
Papist, both at a time, and that time bearing not above 100. years date, who
began then to infect the world with this damnable doctrine, That it was Lawful
to murder Kings. It is strange that two such contrary factions, that had ever
been antipathetical one to the other, should nevertheless, like Herod and
Pilate, agree in condemning the Lord's Anointed. Dieu and mon Droit, is their
Motto; God, and my Right: no body else have any thing to do with me. They have
a Noli me tangere, to defend them from the assaults of rebellious Subjects.

Yet although Kings are counted God's Lieutenants, or Adjutant-Generals; the
Council, Wisdom, and Knowledge of Kings is not their own, but given them by
God, who is the Author of every good and perfect gift, according to that verse
of the Holy Penman: (...)
(...). --


And since, I say, no King can with his own peculiar stock of wisdom govern his
Kingdom rightly (for it is the prerogative of the Almighty only to know all
things that appertain to good Government,) they have ever used to call unto
their aid and assistance some wise grave men, by whose advice and counsel the
Kingdom might be well regulated. These men being as a mean between the King and
the People, do on the one hand, understand the Office of the King; and on the
other, the Duty of the Subject; knowing what course must be taken for the
preservation of the Kings Honor and Royal Prerogative, and what belongs to the
profit and benefit of his good and Loyal Subjects. Thus a King may govern all
things well, not only by his own opinion, which may oftentimes prove deceitful;
but by the general advice and counsel of others, whereby his judgment and
reason is brought to perfection. And as the hand divided into many fingers, is
thereby made more strong and apt to lay hold on all things; so he that governs
by the aid and assistance of Counselors, will manage all public affairs,
tending to the benefit of the Kingdom and Country whereof he is Sovereign, with
the greater discretion and wisdom: for a single person is not able to manage
all affairs without additionall help. Alexander, King of Macedonia, conquered
many Countries, and subjugated a multitude of Enemies. Pyrrhus was excellent at
the choice of places for Fortification. Hannibal was often attended with
success in Victory, but knew not how to make the best improvement of it:
Vincere scis Hannibal, uti Victoria nescis.

Philopoemon was a brave Admiral at Sea; Cleon could manure lands and
possessions; Cicero was a famous Orator; Pompeius a valiant General; Cato a
grave Senator; and Scipio admirable both in peace and war. So were several
others, that might be instanced: for every man (according to the Proverb) is a
Roscius in his own Profession. Now when so many well-qualified Heroes are bound
up together in Council, what a Constellation of Virtues will shine and appear
there? And what firm Edicts and good Laws will there be enacted by them for the
public benefit and good of the Kingdom? which he is obliged to; for he is
called Rex, a Regendo; but some will have it, a recte agendo. And it is clear,
that one man cannot be so clear fighted as to perceive all; which proves that
verse of Homer to be true, rendered into Latin, thus:

Bini convenient melius rem perspicit alter. Nor does this any ways diminish
his power and authority; for though many convene, yet he is still the head of
them all, and has a negative voice; nor can any Act be passed without his
Royal assent or approbation. It is taken pro confesso, that there is much care
and vigilance required in a Monarch; for, he must not seek so much after his
own profit, as the public good and commodity of his People; he must observe
the Laws, preserve the Rights and Liberty of his Subjects, and maintain the
authority and reputation of his Senate. For Kings were first of all instituted
for the aid and assistance of the virtuous, against those that are vicious: to
them absolute power is transmitted, to the end that they may revenge injuries,
and be just Judges in all causes and legal proceedings. A good King ought to be
as vigilant over those whom Providence has allotted him Supreme, as a Shepherd
is of his Flock. Homer calls King Agamemnon, the shepherd of the People; and
Plato in imitation of him, the Shepherd and Conserver of Mankind. Besides, he
should govern his People, not as Masters do their Servants, but as Parents do
their Children; with Paternal care, not with rigid severity or cruelty. And as
it is customary with indulgent Parents, sometimes to rebuke their Children,
sometimes to admonish and encourage them, and sometimes also to correct and
punish them; so should a Prince behave himself toward his Subjects; manifesting
himself sometimes severe, (when moved thereunto) and at other times gentle,
affable and courteous, both for the preservation of his people, and the safety
of the Kingdom; defending and enlarging the bonum commune with no less care
than a Father provides for the sustentation of his Children. This makes the
difference between Kings and Tyrants: the one is studious for the public good,
the other for his own private profit. The end of the Tyrants endeavor is
voluptuousness; but the Kings study is honor: Riches are the mark at which a
Tyrant levels, but Virtue is the true Meta of the King. Tyrants desire the
assistance of strangers, but Kings are guarded by their own loyal Subjects.
Alphonsus, King of Arragon, being demanded what Subjects of his he most
tenderly affected? answered, I love them better that love me, than those that
fear me. And not without reason did he thus express himself: for fear is
usually accompanied with hatred. A King is as secure by the love, good will and
loyalty of his Subjects, as by the defense of Arms; and his Senators will stand
him in more stead upon any occasion, than a Tyrants Soldiers. Trajanus, that
great Emperor of the World, did always call the Senate, his Father: for, as
the Father usually foretells the Son what may prove beneficial, and what
injurious to him: so the Senate counsels the King, and instructs him how to
conserve his Kingdom, and by what Laws and Ordinances it must be governed. This
is the only way to keep the King from Tyranny, and the Subject from Rebellion.
Now tyranny in the one, with rebellion in the other, will soon verify that
Dystich of the Satyrist: Adgenerum Cereris sine caede, and vulnere pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
A good King knows how to irretiate and allure the hearts of the People to him
by love and clemency, sooner than by violence and compulsion. And good people
know their duty and obedience: and if the King through the sins of the people
be any way misguided, they will bite their nails, and not scratch their heads;
they know it is a crime inexplable, to quarrel with Majesty: the only way to
live happy in a Kingdom, is this, first, to give God, and then Caesar his due.
But when Kings grow tyrannical, then there is little or no allegiance from the
Subject, but what they are compelled to; whereas that is far more to be
esteemed, that flows naturally and voluntarily from the people; and this
usually stirs them up to sedition, and so consequently to their utter ruin and
destruction, and the downfall both of Kingdom and King: and the reason is,
because Tyrants use certain sleights and State-tricks to deprive the Subject of
liberty: First, by clearing the Country of all good and wise men, either by
banishment, imprisonment, or death; because the virtue of good men reproves
them for their vice, and renders them odious; whenas all they aim at is only to
enslave the Nation, to the intent that they may prosecute their own lust and
pleasure without obstruction. Such counsel as this, Periander poisoned
Thrafibulus with; who by his infernal Rhetoric endeavored to persuade him to
cut off the highest spikes of corn; meaning thereby, that he should cause the
cream of the Athenian Nobility to be executed. The like subtilty did Sextus
Tarquinius, the Son of Lucius, follow; who being suborned by his Father,
pretended to be banished, and fled fraudulently to the Gabii; where having
scraped as much acquaintance as he judged convenient, sent privily to his
Father to know his will and pleasure, and what farther was to be done in the
business for his satisfaction: who conducted the Messenger into the garden,
where walking together, he with a wand in his hand struck off all the heads of
the Poppies before him; which being by the Nuncio reported to his Son, who had
hellish wit enough to understand such damnable mysteries, soon put the chief of
the Nobility to death, and by force and injustice usurped the Government of the
Commonwealth, and deprived the Subjects of their liberty. Another knack they
have to prejudice their Subjects, by inhibiting their meetings, conventions and
conferences, to prevent their study of honest discipline. Nay, farther, they
often sow discord among the people, to the end that filled with hate and
private displeasure, they may be stirred up to civil war and sedition; who
being thereby much impoverished, and the war ceasing, are compelled to pay for
their pardon; and being after this manner fleeced both ways of their money,
and reduced to poverty, become base minded, and altogether unfit to defend
their Lives, Laws, or Liberties. These, and many more that might be numerated,
are the plots and devices of Tyrants; all which, they imagine, tend to their
own benefit, and to the promoting of their ambitious designs; whenas oftentimes
it proves quite contrary, to their own ruin and personal destruction: for if
they mount themselves too often on the Subjects galled back, they will
undoubtedly cast their rider, let him be never so expert a Horseman. But Kings
are of a quite contrary temper and disposition: it is the good, and not the
ruin of their Subjects they labor for; because they understand sufficiently,
that the loss of Subjects is the shaking off of their Crowns; and wanting their
protection, they are left unarmed to the mercy of the insulting enemy. But we
will now leave the lofty Subject of Kings to the fancy of a more sublime wit,
and the work of a more noble quill; and come to our second Chapter, which
treats of the division of Commonweals.

CHAP. II.
Of the division of Commonweals and Kingdoms.
THe diversity of Republics proceeds not from Fortune, or Chance-medley, nor
the disposition of the Heavens, or the influence of the Stars upon things
sublunary; but every Government is framed according to the minds, tempers, and
constitutions of men, their wits and education; though some ascribe their
variety to the situation of the Country or Climate where men have their
allotted residence and being. It is confessed, that sometimes, through sedition,
faction, and civil war; Kingdoms are subverted, and changed into States; for
the proof whereof we need not ramble far, since our native rebellions have
lately manifested the truth hereof. Such is the fluctuating condition of all
worldly things, that mischance waits at the elbow of good fortune, and vice is
masked with virtue, that she may not appear in her own native hew and
deformity; for Man is prone to forsake v^^^ue and embrace vice, which ever
hoodwinks him with an appearance of good. Sometimes also it falls out, that
well-governed Republics, through evil Ministers, are either utterly
extinguished, or altered into other forms of Government. Hence it happens, that
Kingdoms become Tyrannies, Optimacies come under the jurisdiction of a few;
Popular States are perverted into licentious liberty, and from that reduced
into Tyranny; and this is the revolution of their Government, and original of
their Catastrophe. Plato writes, that the mutation of Commonweals is fatal,
through the disposition of the Heavens, and the operation or influence of
Celestial bodies upon Terrestrial. But as we have already instanced, their
variation happens from the variety of the minds of the Inhabitants. For some
Countries abound with rich, others are crammed with poor men. In some, there is
store of Nobles, Soldiers and Husbandmen; in others, plenty of Merchants,
Handicraftsmen and Artificers. Now, wheresoever the number of Merchants,
Artificers and Husbandmen surmount the rest, that State usually becomes
Popular: But where there is the greatest quantity of rich men, there is
established the government of a few. Where the major part of Citizens be good,
wise and virtuous, that State is apt to be governed as an Optimacy. There are
three things (says Aristotle) that contend for priority in Government:
Liberty, Riches and Virtue. For, Nobility (which supplies the fourth place) is
the associate of virtue and riches, because the equal mixture of rich and poor
men, make a Popular State. A faction of rich men, is called, the Government of
a few; and the consent of all three, viz. Freemen, rich men, and good men, is
counted an Optimacie: such was the Carthaginian Republic; for Rich men, Good
men, and Noblemen were therein equally esteemed. Now, it is the disposition and
desire of some men to live, in Kingdoms rather than in any other State; who are
such men as are naturally ambitious of honor, virtuous, and fitted for action.
The Cappadocians having enjoyed Kings for many years (whose Race was at length
extinguished) were proffered by the Romans to have their State converted into
popular Liberty; but they refused it: whereupon they appointed Ariobarsanes,
their friend, King of Cappadocia. The Athenians followed the quite contrary
course; for they affecting a Popular State, would not allow of the Government
by one, nor many. Yea, some there are that approve of Tyrannical Government
most of all; as the Siculi of old, who were ever accustomed to be ruled by
Tyrants, and so were almost all the people of Asia; who being naturally
servile, are even to this Age subject to tyrannical Government. Now, if any man
demand, What a Commonwealth is? This doubt cannot arise from the name, it being
a certain order among the Inhabitants assembled together in one City or
Country, and there residing; but from the variety and difference of Republics:
for as men's manners, delights and estates be various, so also is the Government
of Commonweals manifold. And though the Terminus ad quem, or end, is one and
the same, viz. bonum, good; yet the Terminus d quo, or means whereby they
aspire to that good, are various, and so consequently the Laws and Customs are
of sundry sorts that are by them used. For, he that shall compare the Laws of
Hippodamus enacted for the Miletians, with those of Minos made for the
Candians; or the Ordinances of Lycurgus, with the Decrees of Solon, the one
writing of the Lacedaemonian, the other of the Athenian Government, may with
facility understand their Laws to be diverse, their Magistrates unlike, and the
Form of their States very discrepant. The seven Wise wen (Thales excepted, who
did not care for fishing in the troubled waters of State Affairs) introduced
several exercises, Laws and Governments according to the peoples capacity, and
their own pecular fancies, and by sundry orders and uses did execute them.
Which variety of Government has ministered matter of great controversy and
contrariety of opinion; Insomuch, that the Learned, as well in our, as foreign
Schools and Universities, have assumed the disputation of the several sorts of
Commonweals, and confined them to a certain number; besides, they have
manifested which of them deserve the greatest commendation, and ought to be
embraced. Plato and Aristotle seem to excel all persons that ever wrote on
this Subject: For they with solid judgment, and great respect to the nature of
men, and the temperature of the Region or Climate, have discreetly appointed
Laws and Governments suitable to the disposition and temper of the Inhabitants:
therefore according to the opinion of these two famous Philosophers, we will
discourse of three sorts of Republics: The first is called, Monarchia; The
second, Aristocratia; And the third, Democratia; which the Latins term,
Regnum, Optimatum Principatus, and Popularis Respublica. The Supreme Governor
of all things, by his Providence divine, has so ordered, that the faculties or
powers of man's mind should reside in three parts of his body, representing
thereby three Idaea's or Forms of Republics; constituting Reason as sole
Monarch, or Lord Paramount of them all, to remain in the head, being the
highest part. The second part, as most vigilant and apt to obey, he has placed
near unto it, in the breast, creating it a companion and helper to the head;
which Plato calls, Vim irascendi, or affectuum sedem. The third, resembling a
rude multitude, witless, froward, and full of sensual desires, harbors beneath
the heart, far remote from the other. In these parts of the soul, as in a
Mirror or Looking-glass, we may spy out three sorts of Commonweals. The
highest supplies the place of King, as destined and appointed to exercise
authority over all. The second, though in place inferior, yet in quality is of
no less regard, being well obeyed: for, where Reason swaies without the aid and
assistance of the affections, all actions are weak and impotent. Just so a
Senate wanting the assistance of Reason, which deports her self partly as
Captain, partly as a Soldier in all actions and consultations, becomes
timorous and effeminate. Aristotle has therefore made a division of the power
of Reason, making one part absolute and standing upon its own Guard, and the
other, as it were, depending and subservient, like a Son that obeys the
Father. Which Titus Livius has significantly expressed, in setting forth the
error of Minutius in his unadvised fight against Hannibal, which Fabius
reprehends in these or the like words: Soldiers (says he) I have often heard,
that he that of himself can rightly judge, deserves the greatest commendation:
next unto him are they, that know how to subscribe to the good advice of
others: But he that can neither counsel, nor follow the counsel of others, is
but an inch on this side a Natural, and of a very shallow capacity. The third
part of man's mind resembles a Popular Government, wherein the multitude has
authority to hear all causes, and determine or decide all controversies, though
many contests arise from hence to the prejudice both of the Country and
Inhabitants.

Aristotle writes also, that the Image or representation of Republics may be
found out in private families; for the authority of the Father over his
Children may be compared to Principality; because Children are the Parents
charge; he alone must provide for them all, and their faults are chastised,
rather than severely punished by him; so ought a good King to demean himself
toward his good Subjects. Therefore Jupiter, the God of Gods and Men, is by
Homer styled Father. The Husbands authority over the Wife may be compared to
Optimacie; for the Husband ought to rule his Wife according to Justice, and
command nothing but what may endure the test of the Laws of God and man. The
State Popular is assimilated to brotherly Society; for they ought to live in
equality, differing only in the degrees of Age. And as the Father that uses
rigor and cruelty toward his Children, is judged a Tyrant, and no Father; so
that King, that by the oppression of the Subject endeavors to increase his
private interest, contemning all Laws, and living dishonourably, puts off his
Kingship, and is called Tyrant. A Husband and Wife living in discord, either
through negligence, or obstinacy, rejecting the care of their Children, and
domestic affairs, do thereby abuse their authority, and become unworthy the
name of natural Parents; so Optimacie abused, deserves not that title. In like
manner Brethren disagreeing, neglecting their mutual profit, addicting
themselves to sloth and lasciviousness, are not to be accounted Brethren; no
more is a Popular State so to be esteemed, if of such a temper. Thus it is
apparent, that through the default and inconsiderateness of Superiors, true
Commonweals are converted into false and contrary Governments. Policy, which by
the Graecians is called, (...), and by Plato and Aristotle, Respublica
popularis, may be referred to all sorts of Republics; because that word is
universal, and includes all civil Government. Plato adds another kind of
Government, that is, a King subject to his Laws; making Monarchy of two sorts,
and consequently two Kings; the one bound and confined, the other free, and not
restrained to any Law: this is his opinion of Monarchy, though not ours.

But now let us discourse of the best sort of Republics, though it be a very
hard task: to the accomplishment of which intended work, it is requisite that a
man understand the best kind and order of life; for otherwise a perfect
Commonwealth cannot be conceived: but what sort of life merits the reputation
of the best, as yet latet in obscuro among the major part of Philosophers. The
Epicures, Stoics and Peripateticks are of different opinions concerning this
subject, and have divided the world by the variety of their Sects and whimsies.
But our intent is to concur with the Peripateticks, because their Schools have
been the greatest Nurseries of good Governors. The Stoics, that did ever wed
themselves to an austere life, ground their felicity upon Virtue only; which we
disapprove not, so that they consent, that external goods, which both Nature
and Fortune have made for the use of man, to the end he may thereby be the
better accommodated, be joined thereunto as necessary additaments; otherwise he
cannot be perfect: and seeing that man's felicity is numbered among things that
are perfect, and that thing is only perfect that wants nothing; surely,
whosoever desires to be happy, must necessarily be fully furnished, so that his
felicity may be absolute, and no way deficient. Riches are very necessary; the
liberal person stands in need of money to perform the actions of Liberality,
and the just man must therewith reward and make satisfaction. The Warrior
wants it; for according to the Poet, (...).
Argent is pugna telis, ac omnia vinces.


Now the Epicure, he places his summum bonum in sensual delights and
pleasures; which is more becoming a beast, than a man. Whereas Aristotle makes
a joint agreement of Virtue, and other additional ornaments, or external helps,
most necessary for a well-regulated person.

Philosophers affirm, that there are three sorts of life: The first, consists
in Action; The second, in Contemplation; And the third, in Pleasure. That which
rests in Action, if not accompanied with wisdom and virtue, proves
unprofitable, and is subject to many vices and imperfections. That which is
employed in Contemplation, not being accompanied with Action, is vain and
ineffectual. For, as he that boldly looks upon the Sun when in the Meridian of
his luster, is made blind with his vehement heat and tralucent splendour: so the
mind of man, continually occupied with the speculation of sublime mysteries,
becomes stupid, heavy, and languishing. He therefore that desires the name of
virtuous, must lead a civil as well as a philosophical, an active as well as a
contemplative life; the mixture of which two, makes man happy and fortunate.
But he that delights only in sensuality, absolutely forgetting that he was ever
qualified with the gift of reason, may be said to represent man, as to his
outward complexion or blush; but he wants the true and proper nature of man.

Hence arises the diversity of mankind; for some are born free, noble, wise,
and fit for government; others, servile, boorish, witless, destined to
servitude and bondage. Plato has it, that God in Man's Creation had so
ordered, that in the generation of those that are apt to govern, he has mixed
gold; of them that are appointed as assistant to Governors, silver; And the
nature of Plough-men and Artizans is compounded with Brass and Iron: which
similitude Aristotle applies to the manners and capacities of men. For,
although every man does naturally desire that his children should resemble him;
yet it often happens, that silver is the issue of gold, and some metal of a
more inferior allay, the issue of silver. It is therefore very requisite, that
Princes pry into the nature of their Children, that they may understand their
disposition; and they that are like Iron may be converted into gold; or that
proving impossible, the government may be allotted to others: for it has been
oraculously prophesied, that those Countries that are governed by Brass and
Iron, should perish and come to confusion.

But now as to Optimacie, it consists in a certain number of virtuous Citizens
(or at least should) because they govern the Republic according to the Rules
and Edicts of the Law; whereas in popular States all things are contrarily
managed: for Liberty being the end thereof, the State is ruled according to
will and popular fury, without the consideration of virtue or reason. In such
Cities, men are called good, because they are profitable or beneficial to the
Commonwealth, not for their being endowed with honesty, which consists in the
action of virtue; so that virtue there is measured by public profit, not
honesty; for Popular Justice, called Jus populare, is where honor is conferred
upon persons, not according to the virtue of him that receives, but the number
of those that give it; who think those things to be most equitable, that are so
according to the Vogue of the multitude, not as Justice instructs us; and that
to be honorable, which has the repute of popular fame, or approbation of the
Multitude. And though it must necessarily be granted, that there is corruption
in all Republics; yet is it frequently known in Popular States, and that more
than in any other kind of Government: for if any man well-principled chance to
have his residence or abode in any such State, and he out of natural reason
only disgust the Plebeian insolency, and by admonition, reprehension and
correction strives to reduce the Citizens or Inhabitants to a more virtuous and
religious course of life, he is instantly branded with the name of an enemy to
the State, and arrested by the Law of Ostracisme; and many times it falls out,
that he comes to execution. Many famous Citizens of the popular States of
Greece were hereby afflicted, as Aristides, Thucydides, Socrates, Themistocles
and Damon; and at Rome, Camillus and Scipio had the same measure dealt them.
Aristides deserves a monument that may endure to perpetuity, for his singular
virtue and wisdom; who for his integrity of life and conversation, was surnamed
Justus. And at that time when the Law of Ostracisme was in force among the
Athenians, a rude, boorish, beef-brain'd fellow, with a scrole of paper in his
hand, chanced to meet him, who with much importunacy would have forced him to
write his name therein. Aristides being astonished at his earnest and strange
request; asked him, Whether any man could ever say he had injured any person?
No, (replied the fellow) all the reason that prompts me to my demand, is only
this, I stomach your Surname, Justus. It is reported by Cicero, that the
Ephesi, at the banishment of their Prince, Hermodorus, pronounced this
Sentence: Let us not excel one another; and if any do contrary to what is
herein specified or mentioned, he shall no longer reside among us, but must
procure some other dwelling place. Strange Customs of Popular States! Plato (as
we have already instanced) says, That no State can be long lived that is
governed by Iron or Brass; that is, by phanatick or infatuated persons; who
being altogether unfit for Government, seem to be born to disturb, rather than
obey. For they, after some petty or imaginary success at war, growing insolent
and tympanous, have always some flattering Tutors, and colloguing popular
Captains to extol their Virtues, ready at hand; who immediately upon this
allured, or rather caught with the golden bait of glory, reject the authority
of their wise governors, rebelling against their Superiors, and so usurping
their lawful power, take it into their hands, and manage it according to their
own corrupt wills and depraved judgments; which is the cause that such States
soon expire, and that oftentimes in their very infancy: for through the
diversity of minds and opinions among them, they become void of counsel; and
after a continued series (if it last any considerable time) of insolency,
contention and faction, they become submissive either to a few, or else to some
single person. Thus did the Athenians, who having obtained the victory in a
memorable Sea Fight against the Medes, bladder'd up with pride from their
success herein, it caused sedition and tumultuation in that State,
notwithstanding the contrary endeavors of the more sober to prevent it. Nay,
the original of States Popular sometimes arises from rebellion attempted
against the Royal Party, as it frequently happened at Rome: and at other times
it falls out, when the people through tyranny are exasperated, and made
desperate by the rigor of their Princes or Governors; for then by force of
arms against their King, they begin to mould a new-fashioned Government among
themselves; which the Swisses, not many years since, have done. As to Oligarchy
or Tyranny, we shall not extend our discourse, but pass them by, because we
judge such kind of Government to be altogether unjust, insupportable, and quite
contrary to a virtuous and civil life.

Now, as to the discovery of the most notable and imitable Commonweals and
Kingdoms in the habitable World, that shall be the subject of our ensuing
Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is contained the various Forms of the most memorable and famous
Commonweals and Kingdoms in the World.
THe excellency and pre-eminency of every Nation or Republic may easily be
understood by the Government and Laws therein practiced and exercised: for
those are judged the best, that direct the course of their life according to
justice and equity, and not the peculiar w^imsies of their own natural fancy;
and constantly persevere therein, without so much as the appearance of change
or variation: it is an apparent and clear argument of female frailty, far
derogating from the dignity of Man, to be so fickle and inconstant, as to seek
after variety; but to be fixed and grounded, is an argument of a noble
resolution.

And first, as for the Commonwealth of Plato, we shall pass that by, because it
is usually said, that such a Government as his, neither is, has been, nor
shall be hereafter.

The Athenian Republic was first made as follows: That People being
dispersed, and haunting the woods and fields like brute Animals, were first by
Cecrops, and after by Theseus confined to a City, which was then called
Cecropia, now Athens, and at length reduced to a Kingdom, descendable to their
Posterity. But what authority the Senate had under those Kings (which order did
represent the Optimacie) cannot be manifested or apparently known, by reason of
the length of time, and multitude of years since elapsed, as also the paucity
of those Writers that have any ways discoursed thereon. Yet we must believe,
that Kings had in those days their Sages or Wisemen about them, and made use
of their counsel in the management of their political affairs. The Kings of
that Age (as Thucydides writes) did rule by consent of People, and with their
suffrages did many times determine those things whereof they themselves were
doubtful. Yet that Government was of short continuance; for, in tract of time
(which alters all things) it was committed to the multitude, whose force and
power did utterly subvert the Commonwealth.

The Lacedaemonian State seemed to contain all the three sorts of Government,
viz. King, Nobles, and People; the Nobles were their Senators, and the People
were the Ephori; for they were always elected out of the number of popular
men. Now the Lacedaemonians are very much extolled, in that for the space of
seven hundred years complete, they have continued without any alteration of
their Laws, Customs, or Government. But the Venetians in that respect may
challenge a greater portion of glory, for they have till this very present Age
of ours constantly lived under one Form of Government and Governors the space
of one thousand years, and better.

Now the Venetians in framing their Republic, do include within the name of
People, Gentlemen and Citizens; being very careful to oppose any other, if he
presume or dare usurp that title, because they only are capable of Magistracy.
The Senate is chosen out of that number that represents an Optimacie, and is
the foundation, as it were, of that State. The Duke is elected out of that
number that resemble Kings.

Polybius does very much extol the Roman Monarchy, because it was made up of
the King, Nobility and People; supposing that by this means the King for fear
of the People durst not become insolent; and the People, out of respect to the
Senate, durst not disobey the King. Which Form of Republic is accounted most
just. For as perfect harmony is made up of Treble, Mean, and Base; so the best
and surest agreement among men, and the most stable Government, is established
by the mixture of the Best, the Mean, and the Base people.

Romulus (says Livy) being (as we have already mentioned) by consent both of
God and men elected King, though the State was then but an Embryo, refused to
have the reins of Government lie altogether upon his own shoulders, and did
therefore call unto his assistance one hundred Senators, who out of respect to
their Age and Gravity, were called Fathers. And lest the People should suppose
that they were hereby deluded, misled, and defrauded of all honor, and thereby
envy and malignity might ensue, to the prejudice of the King or Senate; He made
them Judges, and gave them full power and authority to sit and determine War,
and conclude peace, with many other privileges thereunto annexed. And if this
model of Government had still continued in Rome, there had not been so great an
effusion of blood in aspiring after Liberty and enlarging the Territories of
the Roman Empire; Nor had the happiness of that Country been shaken with so
many seditions, which did at length work her ruin and desolation: for she was
observed to be very little acquainted with peace all the time she stood upon
her own legs, ever since she was able to go alone.

But now let us take the Governments of our Age into consideration; and first,
of the French Monarchy; which owns a King, who rules ad placitum, at his own
discretion: and although his authority come not under the lash of the Law, yet
like an honorable and just Prince, he acts nothing contrary to Law, or Honor.
In his Kingdom, the Noblemen, which they call Peers, represent an Optimacie:
the People are divided into three sorts; Gentlemen, Clergymen, and the popular
Multitude; and a choice number of these three assembled together by the Kings
Edict or Command, determine matters of greatest importance in the Kingdom. This
Council was anciently called Panceltium, as the Aetolians named theirs
Panaetolium, and the universal Council of the Ionians was termed Panionium;
though since, as we have already hinted, by reason of the English wars there,
the King got all authority into his own hands, so that his word carries as much
force and validity with it, as the former acts of Parliament, which were their
three Estates convened and met together.

As for the Spanish Monarchy, the King there has Sovereign authority and
power; the Council-Royal represents an Optimacie; and the three prime Orders of
Knighthood may be compared to the popular State. For the Order of St Jago,
Collatrava, and Alcantara, assembled with the King, decide the most important
State-controversies and affairs.

The Monarchy of Polonia consists likewise of these three sorts, i. e. The
King, Nobility and People; but it is to be noted, that this word People here,
denotes only Knights and Gentlemen. The Union and Fellowship of these orders is
so admirable, that the King without the advice of his Council and their
authority, can do nothing; nor can the Council determine without the King's
approbation, and the Peoples consent. In this Kingdom, the Laws are of so great
force, that every man religiously swears to keep and observe them; and if any
person act contrary to that Oath, he is accounted unjust and impious. Now that
Oath by which they swear to be strict in the observance of their Laws and
Liberty, is in their vernacular language called, Captue; which is as much as
Tegmen capitis in Latin: for, as the head is kept in health, and preserved
from the injury of the nipping weather, by being covered; so by virtue of that
Oath, their Laws, Lives, and Liberties are conserved; and to maintain it, no
man is so fearful, as not to venture his life against Tyrants, and all such as
endeavor to cut the wings of public Liberty and Happiness. This people enjoy
great freedom; being principled with this persuasion, that to live according to
the direction of the Law, is the most absolute Liberty in the World. In this
Kingdom, the Prince follows not the dictamen of his own will and fancy, but
sticks close to the Rule of the Law. In waging war, or concluding peace, he
makes use of his Council; never transgressing Law: which works this effect,
that the Kings person is not only honored among the people, but had in high
reverence and estimation; so that he may be said to be adored, rather than
obeyed. And who indeed is there, that would not entirely love, honor, respect,
and reverence that Prince, that in governing steers himself by the Cynosure of
the Law, contented to be led by the Line of reason, directing himself in all
his undertakings, according to the prudent and grave advice of his Senators?
Authority thus used, creates a general love, liking and consent among the
Subjects. To conclude, the King of Polonia seems such a Prince, as Plato,
Aristotle, Xenophon, and other Legislators have desired to bear sway in all
well-regulated Commonweals and Kingdoms, and such as both God and Nature
approve. The Senate here bears the Image of Optimacy, and has much power and
authority; for they being chosen out of the wiser sort of Nobles, they only, I
say, consult with the King about State Affairs. Their authority is not unlike
the Homotimi of Persia, or the Ephori of Lacedaemonia. The Gentlemen of Polonia
resemble the Popular State; for on them is imposed a great part of the
Government, and may be said to be as a Seminary from whence issue both
Counselors and Kings.

The Empire of Germany consists of the Emperor, Princes, and People; which
being governed by diverse Potentates, and their policy being scattered into
sundry Governments, comes not easily within the reach of a concise description.

The quondam Kingdom of Britain, now called England, obeys one King; who
electeth Senators, unto whom the residue of Nobles, and some of the Popular
Order being joined, make one Common Council, which is called in our Idiom, a
Parliament. But native modesty forbids us to proceed any farther upon this
subject; whose Encomia's we judge to be a Theme far more suitable to a foreign
Pen.

One difficulty there remains still, the resolution whereof we have reserved
for the close of this Chapter; and that is this; What a Citizen is, which we
have so much all along discoursed of? To which we answer:

That this word Citizen has had several acceptations among Writers. Some have
called the whole number of Inhabitants by the name of Citizens. Others, only
those that are descended of Noble and freeborn Citizens. Some call them
Citizens whose Fathers were freeborn within the City; Others would have them
to fetch their Pedigree more remote, from their ancient Grandfathers. And some
are of opinion, that forrainers received into the Society of Citizens, and
naturalized, or Denizen'd, deserve the name of Citizens. Aristotle terms them
Citizens, that are capable of public Offices in State, and are descended of
free and honest Parentage. In popular States, all they are usually called
Citizens that dwell in the City, as well Poor, as Rich; Bad, as Good; none
being Bondmen; for every one is capable of Government, because there is an
universal parity among them. Of this nature was the Athenian Commonwealth
(before spoken of) so long as it was subject to Popular Government; and the
Cantons of Switzerland steer the same course even to this very Day. And diverse
Cities in Germany there are, called free; where the Inhabitants live popularly,
secluded from Gentlemen, and noble Citizens. In an Oligarchy, because men are
most respected for their revenues and substance, they that are most rich are
reputed Citizens, though they are dishonorable, because careless of all
virtue; and make it their whole study to be rich Quo jure, quaque injuria, by
hook or by crook (as we say) right or wrong, no matter which way they obtain
it; to the end that they may come to dignity and preferment, not as wise and
virtuous, but as rich and wealthy persons.

Among the Romans, there were several sorts of Citizens; Some were called
Municipes, some Coloni, and others Latini; every one of them retaining those
conditions that were allotted them by the people of Rome. Some whereof were
free, some Confederate, and some Stipendiary. Some were created Citizens pleno
jure, which was by voice; and they were thought worthy of all honors; Others,
Jure honorario, which were of the number of those that were admitted into the
the City without the suffrage of the people; and they were honoris gratia
called Citizens, as the Campani, and Equites. He likewise was counted a Citizen
of Rome, whose name was written in the Book of the Censors, and was an
Housekeeper. By all which it is perspicuous and evident, that in all
Republics they were properly called Citizens that could plead a right to
Office, and could give suffrage in the State; whereas he that wants these
privileges, is rather to be called Inhabitant, or Client, than Citizen. In
Monarchies and Aristocracies those are Citizens that are virtuous. In the
latter, good and virtuous men only govern; in the former, one alone, that for
Bounty, Liberality, and Magnificency excels all others. Those people which are
naturally Slaves, or wickedly debauched, do for the most part obey Tyrants, and
that Government is called Imperium despoticum: Yet are not all they to be
judged Slaves, that are encumbred with the power and oppression of Tyrants, if
they be not withal base minded and vicious. For we read of many Citizens that
have freed themselves and their Country from servitude, by slaying or expelling
the Tyrants; and if they found their expectations were herein frustrated, they
chose rather to lose their lives than their Liberty, as Brutus and Cato did,
with many other Romans. Thus we have given the description and division of the
ancient States Popular, Republics and Kingdoms; in the next Chapter we shall
demonstrate the new models of Government set up by the rebellious since the
late unhappy wars between King and Parliament.

CHAP. IV.
The newfangled Model of Modern Policy, being of three sorts; a Protectordom,
a Committeedom, and a Rumpdom; and first, of the Protectordom.
AS for that hellish monster, that damnable Machiavilian that first gave rise
to this same strange and unheard of Government; we shall say nothing tending
either to his Parentage, Birth, or Education, because we have reserved that as
a subject for another entire piece; only, that he might be said to be a man of
bloods, in the plural number, as Zipporah said to her Husband Moses: Who
butcher-like made cruelty his profession, and was never better than when he had
his Sword sheathed in his Country-mens bowels; so that we may affirm, what
succeeding Ages will unquestionably maintain: -- Dicat de Tygride natum
Posteritas --
An audacious Rebel, that durst aspire from the mean condition of a private
person, to the Throne, though he first washed his hands in the blood of his
Sovereign! He represented the real Tragedy of a King and no King; whose mouth
watered after that Title, but that he durst not assume it, being he had fought
so long against it, and was sworn to the deposition of all Kingship for the
future.

He, to raise himself on the top of the Pyramid of honor, trampled over the
heads of the most Loyal Subjects of the Realm; made a football of a Crown, and
endeavored utterly to extirpate the Royal Progeny, Root and Kind, Stem and
Stock: Nay, I will be bold to say, if that an innocent Babe had been born with
Vive le Roy in his mouth, he must have been food for his Sword, as well as the
firstborn were for Herod's. It is credibly reported, that Hugh Peter's, that
spiritual Dragooner, and Nol, hatched this Government as they were walking
together in a field: a brace of pious Devils! They would carry the outward show
of sanctity, whenas all their actions proclaimed them diabolical. There was
never so furious an Incendiary, as this pious Pulpit-cuffer; nor no Machiavel
more apt to receive the impression of infernal Counsel, who would sacrifice
both soul and body to accomplish his own ends, or promote his self-interest.
The whole Nation was enchained in a more than Egyptian Bondage; who were
compelled to submit to this Tyrant Nol, or be cut off by him; nothing but a
word and a blow, his will was his Law; tell him of Magna Charta, he would lay
his hand on his sword, and cry Magna Farta: No Liberty was granted to the
Subject, unless it were that of Conscience; and that too was denied the more
Orthodox and Loyal Party. The People were robbed of all Laws, Rights and
Privileges, and sometimes of their Lives; whilst he, like a Tyrant, insulted
with a Quis contradicet? The Citizens were so fleeced and pilled, that had this
inhumane barbarous wretch continued much longer, he had sent London into the
Country a begging. To say God save the King, was a crime as black as any
forbidden in the Decalogue: but so long as that was prohibited publicly and
privately, it was in vain to cry out, God speed the Plough, or expect any
blessing from the superior power. His infernal plots and machinations had
wrought the utter ruin and desolation of the Country, had not Providence
divine cut him off, to the general benefit and rejoicing of the Nation. English
ground groaned with the burden of this inhumane Tyrant. It was not enough that
the English should be scourged, but the whip must lie before them; it was not
sufficient that he should be the Author of all their woes while living, but
they must live subject to his Tyranny and oppression; and like so many mutes,
condescend to all his actions by silence, not daring to mention the least
dislike, though it thwarted their disposition never so much. He was a rod of
their own making, and they were content to untruss whilst he whipped them. In
vain it was for the most accurate wit to plead Reason or Law against the Sword:
the Tongue is too weak a weapon for the Dagger. During the usurpation of this
same hellish Tyrant, what a Chaos of confusion bespread the face of the whole
Nation? How was all the Land benegroed with more than the Egyptian darkness of
persecution? The whole Country was enveloped in clouds, and ruin hung over the
heads of the people, by as slender a thread, as the Sword over the head of
Damocles at the Banquet. The whole Land was entombed in despair, and little or
no hope of a resurrection, till a divine hand wrought it by his long-expected
death: and it is the Cordial wish and hearty desire of the loyal Penman, that
all his Majesty's and the Kingdoms enemies were as stately interred as he was.
Had he deserved an Epitaph, we would have stretched hard but our brain should
have furnished him with one; but since he was so unworthy, we hold it as great
a disparagement to our quill to bestow a Copy of Verses on him, as he was a
grief and trouble to the Loyal Party of the Nation. And indeed, how can any Son
of Phoebus employ his time so ill, as to salute his dead corpse with an
Epitaph, that was so great an enemy to them when living; Who had a real design
to extirpate all literature, and implunge us into as deep a gulf of ignorance
and profaneness as the Turk is cast into? he hated all Learning, and the
Learned, because his crimes were so black and horrid that they went far beyond
the mercy of the Book. He granted a toleration for all Religions, because his
own was to choose; and that he might not offend the tender Consciences of his
pretended Zealots and Favorites, who were true Vassals to the Lust and Villainy
of such an imperious Usurper. Honesty was so much out of fashion, that he that
was virtuous was a Malefactor, and deserved death; for Knavery was a la mode;
and you know the old Saying, It is as good to be out of the World, as out of
the Fashion. An honest loyal Subject was as much hooted and pointed at, and
judged as ridiculous an Object, as a Spanish Don in his Country Garb at Paris.
An honest man was as strange a sight in England, as a Horse in Venice, or a
Beggar in Holland; and he was as like to be preferred to his favor, as a
Spurrier was to Queen Elizabeth. But since he is in his grave* we will not rake
up his ashes any farthe^ if he can find any rest there now dead, who living I
am sure had little or none in his conscience; (for he ever carried a civil War
in his breast, of fears, suspicions and jealousies) he shall lie secure; for we
intend to disturb him no farther.

After the death of this British Idol, Richard the fourth his Son peeped out;
who had no fault so great, as that he had him to his Father; for it was
generally believed, he would be but Tenant to the Right Landlord, or the
Stuarts Steward, to set all things in order till he was restored. But alas! he
proved but a fortnights wonder; no sooner up, but down; his deposition (if we
may credit report) was the womanish plot of weeping Fleetwoods Lady; who
stomach'd it that his preferment should be greater than her Husbands, though it
proved to little purpose: and indeed, it is seldom known that female counsel
ever arrives to any better success; nor is there any reason that the Distaff
should be a companion for the Scepter. A Kitchen was a great deal more fit for
her than a Throne, though she had ambition enough to persuade her self that she
deserved the name of a Princess.

Yet had Richard been heir of his Fathers parts (though it was well he was not)
he would soon have frustrated all their designs, and come to as much height and
greatness: But he had not enough of the Rogue in his Composition, to make up a
damned Politician. He was fitter to bear a Hawk on his Fist, than to hold a
Scepter in his hand. A sedentary, retired, Country-life, was far more suitable
to his temper and disposition, than a tumultuous City-life. He was altogether
ignorant in that so much practiced profession of piecing the Lion with the
Foxes tail; which no doubt he might have done, had he been as well read in
Machiavil as his Sire was. He was not much read in Politics, as appears by the
small term of time that was allotted him to play the Protector. But no matter,
it was well it fell out so: he is like to fare the better for it, in the
judgment of the most censorious. Besides, it was what suited with his fancy
(according to relation) better than all the usurped power and authority of his
Predecessor. Exit Protector, he was but like a Pageant, a King in a Play; he
only appears upon the Stage, makes a leg, and takes his leave of you: but what
comes next? The State -Grotescoes will soon resolve you, the business is
already hatched; room for a Committteedom, which being the second branch of
this tripartite Anarchy, challenges a place in the fifth Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Of a Committeedom.
WHen Richard (as the Major part of the Gentry do) had retired himself to his
Country House for a mouth-full of fresh Air, there starts up another kind of
Government, hatched by a Committee of Safety; (of slavery, they meant) who were
a rude rabble of Factious, Illiterate, Phanatick, Disloyal Rebels; a knot of
Knipperdolings; of the same stamp with that German Botcher, Jack-a-Leyden: the
very merdaille and excrementitious offscouring of the Nation: during which time
we might be said to be the true Antipodes; for the Shoe was placed above the
Head: and the Nation troubled with such a State-Apoplexy, or Political Meagrim,
that it would soon have reeled to its destruction (being drunk with Rebellion)
had not the Heavens made a restautation of our pristine Laws and ancient
Liberty, by the re-establishment of our most gracious Sovereign, Charles the
Second. Thus did they wheel about the Circumference of Government, till they
hit upon the Center, viz. Monarchy. How like a senseless body did the Nation
lie, during this strange unheard of Government? Nor was it a wonder; for how
can the Members live without their Head? Miserable and despicable was the
condition of the Natives, so that they became ridiculous to their Neighbors;
Law lay bleeding, and Justice run quite contrary to her Institution. Learning
was of so small esteem and account, that it was thought an encumbrance and
prejudice to him that could boast of it. Divinity was quite out of date;
Churches were pulled down for Edification; To rob Cathedrals sacrilegiously,
was Piety; The Temple was converted into a Stable; so that it might well be
said, that Horse and Man served God alike. The Pulpits were hung with blew
Aprons, and Cheapside produced better Preachers than Cambridge. No Order nor
Decorum in Gods house, but all things sluttishly handled; as if the Queen of
Sciences, Divinity, must be clothed in filthy rags. As if the Father of
Languages understood no Language but English, the Latin and Greek Fathers must
not be quoted, but were almost come to the Chandlers shops to make waste Paper.
No Prayer but what was by the Spirit: Bold audacious Villains, that dare ascend
the Pulpit, and there talk with God ex tempore. And indeed, most of these
Spirit-mongers made moving Sermons: for not a man of understanding in the
Church, but would go out before they had done. The Orthodox Clergy were
dis-respected, calumniated, reviled, imprisoned, and executed, what not? But
why, or wherefore, no one knew: as squeamish as these Sectaries seemed to be,
they could swallow down fat Benefices, and never disgorge them. The
Steeple Houses must down, they were superstitious businesses; They say, their
tender, I say, their large Consciences prompted them to these sacrilegious
actions; and all for the promoting of their own filthy lucre and self-interest;
which made them convert those Church-Utensils that were consecrated to Sacred
uses, to their own benefit and profit. These foul fiends haunted sacred grounds
most, not out of devotion, but gain; Thus was it their daily practice to learn
to leap over Steeples: and whereas we used to say, Lord increase our Faith; we
might then heartily cry out and say, Lord decrease our Faiths; for we had then
so many among us, that if a Jew or Pagan had come to be converted among us, he
would have found as much difference in the outward ceremony and preaching of
the Word, as there is between our Tenets and theirs: Outward show and
ostentation had almost worm'd out the Substance of Religion. But this
Cockatrice (thanks to Heaven) was crushed in the Shell; this prodigious birth
proved abortive, almost as soon confounded as conceived. Had we suffered those
Birds of prey to have been fledge (for they were but pin-feathered) it might
have been said in our Proverb, that we brought up Birds to pick out our own
eyes. But they were all soon got by Lowbelling; these silly Wood-cocks were
ensnared in a Gin laid by the Royal Party. Well may Albion acknowledge St
George her Patron, since we have a Trinity of them to protect us; one St
George, and a brace of Sir Georges. This Committee-Conventicle of Cacodaemons
was soon cracked and dissolved; which happened very successfully, for else the
whole Nation had soon come to its dissolution. If ever there was a Tower of
Babel, sure it was here then; for what could be said of England more justly,
than that it was a Land of Confusion? Now the Anabaptists strutted it en
cuerpo; they domineered as if they had been sole Masters of the Universe: And
had liberty to broach their damnable and erroneous opinions in all places
without control: Six days shall thou labor, that part of the Commandment
they allowed; and the seventh thou shall teach, that was their own addition; at
work all the week, and a preaching on Sundaies. Surely the leaven of these
Pharisees must be very strong, that can work a Cobbler out of the Stall into the
Pulpit; where you might see him thumb the Bible with his massey fist, and
begins to pitch on a portion of Scripture, though he begin at the wrong end of
the Book; and then like a Fugitive, runs away from the Text (and how can he do
otherwise? for he is beside the Last.) Ne suitor ultra creptdam, was an ancient
Proverb; but they neglected all antiquity so much, that they pulled down all
Churches whose outside pronounced them ancient, and crept in holes and corners;
which is enough to evince that they can never be registered inter Angelos, who
were found so often in Angulis: but their deeds of darkness required such dark
corners, who if they had appeared in the Light, had soon manifested their
imbecility and villainy: But now we may in the Juglers Dialect say, Presto! Jack
Lambert and his Legion of Hobgoblins are vanished; Ingoldsby routed his Forces,
and secured his Person; where now in the Tower he has so much liberty (though
confined) as to sing a Palinode for his forepast misdemeanors, if he have but
the grace to do so: his hellish crew may wait for his deliverance by an Angel,
as long as the Turks did for the Resurrection of their Mahomet, and find
themselves at length miserably deluded. All which may afford them matter of
repentance, if they have but the knowledge to make a spiritual improvement of
so gracious an opportunity. But as their reign was short and of small
continuance, so will we be, suiting the discourse to the matter discoursed on,
and come to the third sort of this newfangled Government, which will take up
the last Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Rumpdom.
THe Subject of this discourse being concerning the Rump, we thought fit to
place it in the Buttock of our Book, that so we may come to an end by
discoursing of an End, a Fag-end of Parliament, the Rump. It is credibly
reported, that noble Brown was their Godfather, and bestowed this name upon
these Arse-worms; which proves him to be as good a Nomenclator as Adam, who
gave names according to the nature of the Beasts that came before him; and so
did he; which was, and will continue to be a brand upon them (notwithstanding
the Vote that past in the House for a fifty pound forfeiture on every person
that should call them by that name) and their posterity, so long as the Sun and
Moon endures. Had he searched all the Dictionaries that ever were extant, he
could never have found out a term more suitable for them. Had these beasts been
to enter the Ark, it would have puzzled Noah himself to have suited them into
pairs.

This Rump was made up of a Rabble of rude, illiterate, rebellious fellows; a
heap or cluster of Mechanics; that intended to reduce the Nation to as much
slavery and servility, as they themselves were born to. And first of all, let
us nip Hesilrig; that wide-mouthed fellow, that could swallow down Church and
Bishops Lands without any scruple or conscience: so furious a Villain, that he
was able to set a whole Kingdom in combustion: One, that would have made a
Bonefire of the City, so that he might but have warmed his hands thereby,
rather than fail. So horrible a Mammonist, that he was resolved to cram his
Coffers, though he starved his Conscience: so that Lord have mercy upon rich
Sir A. Hesilrig a sinner, might have been the sum of his Letany.

Desborow, that bloody beef-brain'd wretch falls under our description next;
who was a State Hay-gee-ho, or Carter; and never shall come to the honor to be
Waggoner to Charles his Wain; who still thought, when he sat in the
Parliament, that he was whistling to the Country Teem; and therefore always
endeavored to ride the Citizens, and make Asses of them. But indeed, to speak
truth, we cannot much blame the Man; for he was ever so much used to the Whip,
that he must still be lashing wherever he came. Yet one would have thought he
might have spit in his hand and took better hold; for now his Whip may prove
like a Rod for his own Breech: But no matter, every Schoolboy could have told
him, that the Rump used to pay for all faults; And he might have remembered that
we have a Proverb runs thus, The Pot goes not so often to the water, but it
comes broke home at last; which no doubt he will soon be made sensible of. But
I am weary with whistling to this Brawny Boor.

Enter Scot: his very name implies treachery; As treacherous as a Scot, is old,
though true; and may be appliable to him: for they are as true Types one of the
other, as the Dragon of the Devil. A bitter enemy to Kingship he was, and one
that had the impudence to affirm publicly (so report informs me) that he was
one of the chiefest that sat in the Highest Court of Injustice for the
executing of Charles the first; and were it to do again, he would be as ready
upon that design as ever. Sure he was some kin to a Tinker, he proves himself
such a man of metal.

Surge Harry Martin; show thy smockface: well might he be a Rumper, he
delighted so much in the Tail. A lewd dissolute fellow; fitter to walk before a
party of Whores, than to lead up a Regiment of Horse. This is one of that
sanctified Crew, that would procure any business to be done, if a female, from
whom he might but expect a kindness, put up the Petition. But he was once
handsomely fitted by a handsome Girl; which action made the name of Trepan first
known in England: His lustful desire, though unaccomplished, cost two hundred
pounds in sauce; only they were so civil to bestow a dinner of him, inviting
some other of the Members of this mock-Parliament, only to divulge the
frollick. Henceforth, Harry, take this advice as from a friend, Beware of all
such costly petitions, if ever it be thy hap to prefer any more.

But to dwell upon particulars thus, would require a Volume: I must hasten,
fince I am come to the end. Thus did Nol and the Rump play at Nose in a -- with
the Nation, intending (as it is thought) to stink the People out of their
dominions, and to remain with their Confederates Lords of Great Britain. (As
for the Rumpers, they provided a Scavenger) to sweep London-streets; and he
has swept them away, and made the house clean for more deserving Persons. I
wonder what benefit did ever accrue to the Nation by their Acts and Ordinances;
or when did they ever attempt any thing, but, Tinker-wise, in mending one hole
they made three? All their consultations tended only to their own preferment. A
knot of gnawing Vermin, that fed upon the fat of the Land; A Company of
Book-worms, who, because ignorant themselves, were resolved to destroy all
Learning, and implunge the People into an Abyss of Brutishness and Barbarism:
and make them subscribe to, and approve of whatsoever their dunghill spirits
prompted them to. But I must draw to a period. This Newfangled Model you have
under the notion of Modern Policy (though it is a favor to call it so) for
Rebellion it should be; but I was unwilling to front my Page with so formidable
a Title. For the Nation has been too too long sensible of the heavy effects of
Rebellion; which have lighted somewhat hard upon their shoulders. The latter
part of this Piece, I confess, differs from the former, as much as Heraclitus
from Democritus; yet it is no offense, I presume, (if I may be thought a
sufficient Apothecary) to put a scruple of mirth into a dose of seriousness;
wherefore I shall conclude with what I ever made my Motto, -- Non seria semper.

FINIS.

