A DECLARATION Of some of those People in or near London, called ANABAPTISTS,
That own, and believe, that Gods love, in the Death of his Son, is extended to
all men; and that are in the belief and practice of the doctrine of Christ,
contained in Hebrews 6. 1, 2.
Humbly presented to the High Court of PARLIAMENT, and the People of this
Commonwealth.
WHereas the people in this Nation called (though falsely) ANABAPTISTS, are
represented as the only men causing those sad, and much to be lamented
troubles, that has lately happened in the Commonwealth; and as if they were
such, who would endeavor the setting up their own Interest and Religion, by
taking away the Lives, and shedding the Blood of others; yea, and as if they
were utter Enemies to Magistracy: These, and such like Calumnies, being by the
Tongues of the Malicious, or Ignorant cast upon them, we think it our duty,
being as well as others concerned, to publish to the world our Innocence
therein, though in this we have peace, that in our Consciences we know, (the
most high God bearing-us witness) that in those things we are wholly
misrepresented. And truly, in this we can rejoice, (we knowing our selves
falsely reported of, and reproached) that we should be so accounted, considering
that Gods People in no Age did escape such foul Aspersions: for who was
accounted the troubler of Isarel but Elisha? and who a Pestilent Fellow, and a
mover of Sedition but Paul? We do therefore, in behalf of our selves, declare,
(before the Lord, who, should we not speak the truth, would be a swift
witness against us) to Magistrates and People, that all men may have a right
understanding touching us.

I. That we have not, neither do we desire, or seek the Blood of any; no, not
of our greatest Enemies that hate us, and do, or shall despitefully use us: but
desire their good as our own, and believe it our duty to seek it by all lawful
means we can, desiring to be found followers of Christ, who came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them, who accordingly laid down his life for his
Enemies, and has commanded us that we love our Enemies, and do good to them
that hate us. And although we have been represented as men thirsting after
blood, and designed to cut our neigbours throats; We do hereby declare, that we
are so far from such a wicked thing, and do so much abominate the thoughts
thereof, that the Lord, who is our Record, knows that it is upon our hearts,
as our bounden duty, to assist and defend the Nation, this City, and our
Neighbors as much as in us lie, from such violence, against whomsoever they
are that shall at any time attempt it, if called thereunto by the Magistrates
of this Nation.

II. We do declare, that, as for Magistrates, we own them to be Gods Ministers,
and that they bare not the Sword in vain, but have their power given them by
the Lord, to the end, they might be a Terror to them that do Evil, and a
Praise to them that do Well.

III. We Declare, that it is our Duty, enjoined us by the Lord, to submit to
them in all things, and to obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, viz.
when they shall command things civil and lawful, then in those things actively
to obey them; and when they shall command us to do things relating to Religion,
and contrary to the light of our Consciences, then (though we cannot actually
obey them) we ought (and doubt not, but through the strength of Christ Jesus
our Lord, we shall) passively obey by sufferings, and that joyfully, when
called to it, without resisting.

IV. We Believe, and Declare, that it is not our business to meddle with their
State Affairs, or the Government of the Commonwealth, unless by them duly
called thereunto, further, then according to the will of God, to pray that we
may live a peaceable life under them, in all godliness and honesty.

V. We Declare, that the National Ministers we disown, as not being the
Ministers of Christ, and their ways and worship, as not the true worship
appointed by Christ now in the Gospel; and in particular, we declare against
their sprinkling Infants, and their cruel, and inhumane forcing of maintenance
by Law, or otherwise from any: yet notwithstanding, we declare, that we do
desire their good, and that they may enjoy Common Freedom in the Nation, equal
with others.

VI. We believe, and Declare, that all men whatsoever, ought to have their
liberty in point of Conscience; and that no Magistrate has received power from
Christ to punish for, or to compel any to this or that form of Religion.

VII. We do Declare, that we our selves, and all other of what persuasion
soever they are, if found to walk contrary to the Just Laws of the Nation,
ought by the Magistrates thereof to be punished, according to the demerit of his
or their transgression, and not in the least to be tolerated therein.

VIII. We Believe and Declare, That we ought not; yea, and that it were sinful
for us to maintain our Religion by a Carnal Sword, or to assert any Spiritual
cause or thing thereby.

Lastly, We Believe and Declare, that all the kingdoms of the earth, are by
right Jesus Christ's, and his Saints; and that He, and They, shall one day
possess them, which shall be the Fifth, and Last MONARCHY upon Earth; for which
time we wait, as pilgrims and strangers: and do again Declare, that in the
mean time, it is our duty to obey the Powers that are, (as above said) and not
to assert his Kingly Power, and Authority by any other Sword than the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God; and do hereby Declare against all such as
shall so do, as not owned by us in such a practice: So far are we from setting
up our selves, or asserting our Religion, by taking away the lives, or shedding
the blood of any.

POSTSCRIPT.
PEradventure some may question why we should publish this Declaration, seeing
there was two published before it; to such we give these Reasons for
satisfaction.

I. Because that, dated December the 12. 1659. we cannot in all things close
with, Therefore, forasmuch as we, who go under the same Notion with them of
being ANABAPTISTS, thought it our duty to manifest our non-consent with them,
in their sewing pillows under the elbowes of the Ministers of the Nation; and
their want of boldness, to witness against their Babylonish Worship; which is
also the reason why we Declare against those National Ministers, more than
against any other.

II. Secondly, because in that Declaration, bearing date December 29. there is
not every thing that was upon our hearts to Declare; yet, this we testify to
all men, That what they do Declare, we own as avery honest thing, and in
nothing disscent from it; but do Judge that they have used much plainness, and
manifested much fidellity to Jesus Christ; and do bear the same testimony
against the first, dated the 12. of December, as they do.

John Griffith William Gurney Charles Latham William Daniel James Eachell John
Foxwel Joshua Palmer William Williams William Purver Thomas Field William
Tomkins Edward Stevens John Bull William Martin Francis Wilcocks John Howard
George Cooper Thomas Hinton John Knight Thomas Hull Richard Groom Edward Hull
Randal Emerton Will. Tomlinson William Tiddman Mich. Butterfield John Ridal
John Grace


London, Printed by Thomas Milbourn for Samuel Cleaver, near the Stone-Chappel
in Pauls-Church-yard.


