THE SPEECH OF Colonel HUGH GROVE, UPON The Scaffold at Exceter, on Monday
last, immediately before his head was severed from his Body.

With his Prayer a little before death, and his Declaration and Protest to the
People, touching a A Loyal Heart, A faithful Conscience, A Bloody Scaffold, And
a Fatal Axe.

TAken by an impartial Hand, and transmitted to the Press, to the end, it might
be printed, published, and dispierced, throughout the three Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

London, Printed for Sam. Burdet, 1655.

The Speech of Col. Hugh Grove, on Monday last, at the place of Execution upon
the Scaffold, immediately before his head was severed from his body.
AFter he came upon the Scaffold, kissing the Block he said, I hope there is no
more but this block between me and heaven; and I hope I shall neither tire in
my way, nor go out of it: and turning to the Rail, he spoke to the People as
follows; Christian Gentlemen, and Friends, Should I be silent in this great
Work, and not act my part like a Christian upon this bloody Scaffold, some
might be so exasperated as to expostulate why this great Judgment is fallen
upon me; but know I am able to give a better account of my moral honesty,
judgment, and execution, then my Judgers themselves, or you are able to give;
It is Gods wrath upon me for fins long unrepented of, many judgments withstood,
and mercies slighted; therefore God has whipped me by his severe Rod of
Correction that he might not lose me; I pray join with me in prayer that it may
not be a fruitles^ Rod, that when by this Rod I have laid down my life, by this
staff I may be comforted, and received into glory.

And I desire that God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable
grace and mercy to those that are the cause of my coming hither to pay this
violent death, as much mercy as their hearts can wish; and truly, for my heart,
I shall not accuse any one of them of malice, truly I will not, nay I will not
think there was any malice in them; what other ends there is I know not, nor I
will not examine, but let it be what it will, from my very soul I forgive them
every one: and so the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of true obedience to
his Commands, our great and glorious King, that so he may send down his Spirit
of Peace and Concord, and unite the hearts of all his Subjects on Earth.

I take it for an honor, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose power I
am, that they have sent me to a place, however of punishment, yet of some
honor to die a death, somewhat worthy of my blood, answerable to my birth; and
this courtesy of theirs has much helped toward the pacification of my mind.

I am not the first that has suffered in this kind, it is the common portion
of us all while we are in this life to err, Righteous Judgment we must wait for
in another place, for here we are very subject to be mis-judged one of another.

For my Death, I here acquit all the world, and beseech the Lord God of Heaven
heartily to forgive them that are accessory to it. As for my Native Country, I
wish it all the prosperity and happiness in the World, I did it living, and now
dying it is my wish, I do most humbly recommend this to every one that hears
me, and desire they would lay their hands upon their hearts, and consider
seriously whether the beginning of the happiness and reformation of a people
should be written in Letters of blood: consider this when you are at your
homes, and let me be never so unhappy, as that the last drop of my blood should
rise up in Judgment against any one of you, but I fear you are in a wrong way.

That debt I owe to Nature, to pay it upon the score of a subject, does hold
forth somewhat of Innocence: O what a sad thing it is, when Loyalty must be
accounted not only a Sin, but a Crime! may, a Crime of so vast and boundless
extent, that nothing can appease and satisfy the wrath and indignation
thereof, but Life it self.

Blessed be God, that he has thought me worthy to suffer for my integrity and
faithfulness toward my Master; and blessed be his Name who has filled me with
such ecstasies of Heaven, that I thing long till I am arrived at Tabernacle,
which leads to Eternal Glory.

As touching my Religion, I profess that I die a true and obedient Son to the
Church of England, wherein I was born, and in which I was bred: peace and
prosperity be ever to it. I have always been fearful of offending Almighty
God, according to the grace he has given me, and my Allegiance has been
incorporated into my Religion. Blessed be Almighty God that has called me to
the knowledge of him, and this ready Obedience which I pray, and mercifully
accepting of my Savior, and patient Death: And I beseech you all whatsoever
you are, That you will accompany me with your prayers, whereby my soul may be
assisted within me, in that passage to my Savior, whither I am a going. And
turning to two Ministers upon the Scaffold, said, I have a good Cause, and a
gracious God on my side.

Minister, Sir, There is but one stage more; this stage is turbulent and
troublesome; it is a short one, but you may consider, it will soon carry you a
very great way; it will carry you from earth to heaven; and there you shall
find a great deal of cordial joy and comfort.


Col. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Being, where no disturbance
can be.


Min. You are exchanged from a temporal Being, to an eternal Being; a good
exchange. And I humbly beseech God that you may now with a holy and Christian
courage give up your soul to the hand of your faithful Creator, and gracious
Redeemer, and not be dismayed with the apprehension of any terrors of this
death.


Col. Truly Sir, I do take you in mine Arms, and I bless God for it, I do not
fear, I have an assurance that is grounded here (laying his hand upon his
heart) which gives me more joy then ever I had; this is my Protest, I dissemble
not my words.


Min. Sir it is a mavelous great satisfaction, that at this last hour you can
say so, I beseech the Lord for his eternal mercy strengthen your Faith, that in
the very moment of your Dissolution, you may ses the Arms of the Lord Jesus
stretched out ready to receive your soul. I doubt not Sir, but you now behold
with the Eye of Faith, the Son of Righteousness shining upon your soul, and
will cheerfully submit unto him, who has redeemed us through his blood, even
the blood of Jesus Christ; that you may appear at the Tribunal of God, clothed
with the white Robe of his unspotted Righteousness; the Lord grant that with
the Eye of Faith you may now see the heavens opened, and Jesus Christ standing
at the right hand of God ready to receive you into his Arms of Mercy; for it is
the unspeakable joy of a Believer, that at the hour of death his soul has an
immediate passage from this earthly Tabernacle, to that Region of endless
Glory, yea to the presence of God himself, in whose presence is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.


Col. Sir, Blessed be God, who has endued me with such a Spirit, that
witnesses unto me, that Christ is become a Jesus unto me, the Author and
Finisher of my Salvation, who himself was brought to a violent death by the
Redemption of Mankind: This is all, Sir, that I have to say; only I desire you
to join with me in prayer; and kneeling down, prayed thus,


O Most blessed Lord, I thy poor and unworthy servant come unto thee,
presumeing in thy infinite mercy, and the merits of Jesus Christ, who sits upon
the Throne; I come flying from that of Justice, to that of mercy and
tenderness, for his sake which shed his blood for sinners, that he would take
compassion upon me, that he would look upon me as one that has redeemed me, and
shed his blood for me; that he would look upon me, as one who now calls and
hopes to be saved by his Alsufficient merits. For his sake, glorious God, have
compassion on me in the freeness of thy infinite mercy, that when this sinful
soul of mine shall depart out of this frail Carcass of Clay, I may be carried
into thy everlasting Glory; O Lord, my, God, and my Redeemer, hear me, take
pity upon me, take pity upon me, gracious Father, and so deal with with my
soul, that by thy precious merits I may attain to thy joy and bliss; O Lord
remember me, for thy Names sake, and receive me into thy own bound of mercy; O
Lord, I trust in thee, let me not be confounded, but grant me a mansion in my
fathers house. O hear me sweet Jesus, even for thy own goodness, mercy, and
truth; O glorious God, O blessed Father, O holy Redeemer, O gracious Comforter,
O holy and blessed Trinity, I do render up my soul into thy hands, and commit
it with the Mediation of my Redeemer, praising thee for all thy dispensations
that it has pleased thee to confer upon me, and even for this, praise, honor,
and thanks, from this time forth for evermore.

Having ended his prayer, he prepared himself for the fatal stroke; and pulling
off his Doublet, and putting on his Cap, the Minister again spakes Now, now,
Sir, lift up your eyes unto Jesus Christ, and cast your self into the
everlasting Arms of your gracious Redeemer.

Col. Sir, I thank you, to Paradise am I now going. And laying his head over
the Block, to try it; the Minister concluded with these words: Jesus the Son of
David, have mercy upon you.



Then rising up, and taking his leave of his friends and acquaintance, saluting
them with a courteous valediction, casting his eyes up, and fixing them very
intentively upon Heaven, said, When I say Lord Jesus receive me, Executioner do
thine Office; th^n kissing the Ax he laid down, and with as much undanted, yet
Christian courage, as possible could be in man, did he expose his throat to the
fatal Ax, his life to the Executioner, and commended his soul into the hands of
a faithful and merciful Creator, through the meritorious passion of a gracious
Redeemer; and upon giving the sign, at one blow his head was severed from his
shoulders; which was taken up by his friends, and (with his body) put into a
Coffin and carried away.

FINIS.

