THE RELATION Of a strange APPARITION IN THE AIR.

On the 19. day of August, 165^* at night, seen on the Borders of the Highlands
of Scotland, some 12. miles from Elliot.

Written by B.G. who was an Ey-witnesse of the same.

PSALM. III. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all that have
pleasure therein.

Verse 4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered.

Printed in the year, 1654.

(...) were then present, and did behold the same. There are also many hundreds
of private Soldiers of the said Regiments that can witness the same.

I shall not declare what my thoughts have been concerning the meaning hereof,
but shall leave it to the wise consideration of those that shall be better able
to judge of it, and shall wait for the farther manifestation of the Lord's
mind in this, and all other his Acts of power and providence toward us, which
is the expectation of him who desires to be a diligent observer of his will,
and a lover of all those that do the same.

B. G.

The Relation of a strange Light in the Air on the 19. day of August, 1653. at
night, seen on the Borders of the Highlands of Scotland, some twelve miles from
Elliot.
UPon the 19 day of August, 1653. upon the Borders of the Highlands, where that
part of our Army) then commanded by Col. Morgan) lay encamped; It was my turn
to watch the night following, with my Company, and about eight of the clock, I
having been at my Tent, was returning to my Guard on the West side of the Camp,
where I found diverse of my Sousdiers stand looking at a light place in the Sky
Eastward, saying one to another, It was a Shoale of Herrings in the Sea that
caused the same; whereupon I cast mine eye that way, and saw a more then
ordinary light arising, as it were out of the East-Sea, streaming upward into
the Air, and increasing greater and greater; and looking about, I saw another
in the same form arising in the West, opposite to the former, and in a short
space they grew so high, that they met at the top, and were in form like a
Rainbow, only higher; Also there were sudden strange fleshings of lights up
and down toward the North-East and North-West; The former Light began to move
toward the North, and to sink down lower: And as they moved, they divided in
the midst, one part to the North-East, the other to the North-West, and were
like two great bright Clouds. The Air being clear and starlight, and not an
ordinary Cloud appeared all the night, these two Lights that divided, became on
a sudden like streaks of blackand white, pointing directly up and down, or like
groves of straight Trees without any boughs, or like multitudes of ships masts;
and presently they began to move in opposition, and grew very swift in their
motion, and appeared in this motion like a great Body of Pikes, swiftly
countermarching, and so continued for about half an hour. The Air all this
while toward the North parts seemed strangely to roll to and fro with smaller
Lights, darting or flashing up and down.

So this first motion of the Trees began to cease, and the Trees to retire one
part from the other; and as they divided, the form of Trees vanished, and
became again like Clouds, as before, one toward the North-East, the other
toward the North-West; and all this while it was very light, that a man might
see to read in a Book, small lights flashing still up and down; and anon began
the great bright Clouds to move in opposition, and the Trees appeared again in
their former shape, and began to encounter each Party with other, as before,
and grew very swift and furious in their motion, in the manner of a
Countermarch, which motion continued near half an hour, and then began to cease
and divide again, as before; And as they retired, the form of the Trees or
Masts vanished and only the bright clouds appeared, which moved toward the
North-East and North West as before; The Air still seemed to be in a strange
motion of sudden opening and shutting, and small clouds darting up and down;
and within three quarters of an hour began the Trees the third time to appear,
and to advance one Party toward the other, till they met, and encountered more
swiftly and furiously then before, and at the bottom of the North-East Party
there appeared the likeness of Blood or Fire, very dreadful to behold, but
very little of it appeared on the North-West; This third encounter continued
rather longer then the two former, and at last began to cease and to divide the
one part from the other, and still as they divided, the form of Trees or black
and white strakes vanished as before: And one Part moved Eastward, the other
Westward, until at length they came to their first station and to their first
form; the appearance of Blood or Fire also vanished: there were still small
Lights flashing up and down, and these two first Lights began to stream upward
as at the first, till at length they met again at the top, and became the
second time like unto a Bow, and then moved Northwards, and then all the other
motions and flashings ceased, and this Light sunk down lower and lower toward
the North till it came to the likeness of a great Arch of a Bridge, supported
as it were at either end with a short Pillar, one fixed toward the North-East,
and the other toward the North-West; It was by this time two of the clock in
the morning, and this form of the Bridge continued firm without any other
motion until day light expelled the same; Many other circumstances might have
been noted concerning thi^ thing, which could my memory have retained them, yet
I should have wan^ed fit words to have expressed, they being of so strange a
nature, therefore I forbear, having given you the sum thereof: only, I may not
omit the great ^errour and amazement which did accompany the beholders, for
many men of resolute pi^i^s in other cases, were now like Belshazer ready to
sm^te their knees one against the other for ^ear, and went trembling and
fighing up and down like men astonished, fearing that the great day of Account
had now been beginning, as by the expressions of some d d appear. I did set my
self diligently to observe every passage hereof, expecting also, what would b^
the event; About midnight I went to Colonel Morgans Tent to acquaint him with
this strange sight; he told me, he was but newly gone in from looking upon it,
and said, It was a wonderful strange thing, and that certainly it did betoken
some great Se^-Fight, because there was the appearance of the Masts of Ships,
which Interpretation ha^h been since sufficiently ma^e good, although the
lat^er part did seem to signify something further, which is left to
consideration until the event of things in time do further manifest same.

FINIS.

