A true DESCRIPTION OF CAROLINA.
CArolina is part of the Main in America, and so much celebrated by Monsieur
Laudonere, that he entitles it Florida, because of her florid, and fragrant
Fields, imbellish'd with Flowers, that perfume the Air: whose sweet
Scituations, by reason of most delicious and pleasant Meadows (and flourishing
Savana's) adorn the Continent; and whose benevolent Breast sends daily Supplies
to the Planter, and hourly Relief to the poor and necessitous Native: whose
spacious Arms (as if circulating the Ocean) proclaims her Shores Sanctuary to
distressed Mariners; and a generous protection to deplorable Seamen, that
solicit refreshment from her replenished Harbors, which extend themselves
southward to the River St. Mattheo, so dilates to Luck Island, near Roanoack on
the promontories of Virginia, in thirty six degrees North Latitude (now called
Albemarle) a large and spacious settlement consisting of some two or three
thousand Inhabitants, upon a fertile Soil.

But the late and flourishing settlement lies yet more Southerly, in and about
32 Degrees, odd Minutes; parallel with Jerusalem in Palestine: and equals the
height of Bermudos, upon the navigable Rivers of Cooper, and Ashly; formerly
known by the Names of Wando and Kiawah.

This is that famous Carolina, which his Majesty the King of Great Britain has
united to his Imperial Crown, and by his Royal Grant established it a Province;
and has dignified it a Principality: which by consent amongst the Lords is
transferred to the eldest Proprietor. But the Proprietors are eight in number,
and their Names and Titles as follows. Lord Chancellor Clarendon, Lord Duke
Albemarle, Earl of Craven, Lord Anthony Ashly Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, John
Lord Berkley, Sir George Carteret, Sir William Berkley, and Sir John Colleton
Knight. and Bar. These are the Lords Proprietors, whose Laws and Government
(because to proceed in my Description) is suspended till farther Opportunity
presents to usher them in.

The Heavens shine upon this famous Country the sovereign Ray of health; and
has blessed it with a serene Air, and a lofty Sky, that defends it from noxious
Infection; nor is there any known Distemper incident to the Inhabitant whereby
to terrify and affright him; who for the most part lives by the Law of Plenty,
extended to the utmost limits of Sanity.

Several Families have transported themselves from the Ports of Barbados, but
what from the rest of the Caribbies, I know not: yet am credibly informed (and
from very good hands) that diverse are gone, and going from thence: as also from
New-Providence, Bermudus, New York, New Jersey, New England, Long Island
De-la-ware, Maryland and Virginia; but great numbers from Scotland, and several
from the borders of Ireland: besides diverse good Ships, with some eminent
Families that are lately gone off from the Kingdom of England. Moreover, its a
salubrious Air to the sick, and diseased; and a generous retirement to
necessitous, and abject Families; as also the assurance of such as study to be
rich: Engines strong enough one would think to induce Mankind to hope the
prosperity of this famous Settlement.

But the settlement of Albemarle (otherwise called Roanoak) presents first to
our view; and is the oldest, and remotest Northern County in the fair Province
of Carolina; situated about 35 Degrees, and odd Minutes North Latitude: from
whose replenished Meadows (as also from the more Southern Inhabitants) as good
Beef, and Pork is saved, and sent off to Barbados, and other the Charibbee
Islands, as Art and Industry can husband.

Now Ashley County is yet more southward, and lies situated 32 degrees, 45
minutes; where the Setlers and Inhabitants toil not in Summer to accommodate
themselves with Winter's Provision: because hitherto they have considered it
useless, and altogether unnecessary for the Planter to employ his Hands, and
Strength, where Nature so liberally stocks them with Herbage: and the Winter,
because so softened with a moderate Air, represents it much of the cast and
temperament with our March in England; and that is as much as to consider it the
relic only of a mild and short Winter, or rather the surprizal of an
approaching Spring, that breaths forth to iniciate the Summer. And here it is
that their Ships are built, and dressed up by Bermudian hands, the most approved
Mariners; and a general Error if not the best navigating Ships in America.

And now by way of Advice, the first thing requisite and necessary for the
Setler to embrace, is to fell Timber, and to clear the Ground (which is
reasonably undertaken, as by an Advertisement in the last Paragraph) as some
already have done, and planted Potatoes, the Cassaida Root, Yams, Eddies,
Carrots, Cabbidges, Onyons, Turnips, Parsnips, Shelots, (but they grow
naturally there) Collyflowers, Artichokes, Musk-Melons, and Water-Melons;
besides Wormwood, Nep, Scurvy Grass, Rue, Meadsweet, Trefoil, Cinquefoil,
Elecampane, (Annis, Cububs, and Cardamome Seeds) Radishes, and Horse-Radishes,
Mellelot, Angellica, Archangel, Rosemary, Thime, Lettice, Spinach,
Sweetmarjarum, Summer, and Winter- Savory, Endive, Succory, Hopps,
Watercresses, Cena, and China-Root, with other Druggs, and Saxafrage,
Sassafras, and Sassaperrilla: besides diverse other Vegitables without number.

Moreover, all sorts of English Grane, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Peace, Beans,
Oats, Lentills, Fitches, and Indian Corn, with other European and American
Roots, and Plants; which Carolina beyond dispute with small industry will
produce as large, and as good as the World has.

The next thing worthy our consideration, is their plentiful Eating; because
having their accommodation very cheap within themselves; where Beef two years
since was sold at 12 s. a 100, and Pork at the rate of 16 s. So that Cattle
(you may read) begins to be plentiful, and Hoggs of a prodigious increase. And
most of those Cattle very fair, and large-headed Beasts, now grazing up and
down in beautiful Savana's, little or nothing inferior to our English Meadows:
there are several industrious Setlers, and Planters, that prosper very well,
tho not having much to begin with.

Moreover, there are Barrows (which by reason of the superabundant plenty of
Mast, and Roots in those parts) that some have weighed three or four hundred
weight a-piece, and such had the Lady Yeomans, as I am credibly informed, who
had 400 Hoggs in a Herd, and 500 Turkies in a Drove; besides Dunghill Fowls too
numerous to relate without suspicion. And which Plantation of hers, consisting
of 1500 Acres, was by the industry of one Mr. James Moore (an English
Gentleman) cleared from Charge in some three years time, and with the natural
produce of the Country only; which amplifies the great fertility of the (...)
^^gether with the increase of Beef, and Pork, which if well saved, and sent off
to (...) (as some has already been sent to Barbados) must of necessity bring
in consider^^^^ (...)

Upon Honey some have strong Inclinations, when because having such variety
(and Blossoms) that invites to accommodate the Laborious Be; where, as b^
(...) they become so prolifick, as frequently to swarm four times in a year;
and such ^^crease from one single Hive, brought over from Bermudus (tho half of
them were (...) that within less than two full years, Captain Morris Matthews
(an industrious Ge^ (...) manages Lieutenant Colonel James Colleton's
Plantation) had a produce of more th^^ (...) besides a Presentation made to the
Governor and others.

The Indian Natives get a sweet Oil out of the Hickery Nutt, which is much
(...) of our English Walnut, but not so racy, nor the Kernel so plump and
pleasant; (...) they sell for Beads and Trifles of little or no value: which
Oil may be much mo^^ (...) and substituted in lieu of Oil Olives. So that the
staple Commodities of Ca^ Wine, Oil, Silk, Hides, Wool, Tallow, Honey,
Bees-Wex, Tobacco, Hemp, Flax, Linn^^ Cloth, Pitch, Tar, Cordage, and Masts for
Shipping.

Here are very tall, large, and straight Timber Trees ( the World has not
better (...) the Ash; the White, the Red and the Live Oak: but the Cyprus Tree
grows to an (...) ^ness, as also the Walnut, and Hickery or American Walnut
already expressed. (...) stately and tall Cedars, both White, and Red, that cover
the Earth. And the (...) Asp, and Poplar, that grow to an incredible magnitude:
besides several other a^ (...) that I cannot at present remember. There is also
the Birch, the Beech, the Will (...) the Alder, the Elm, the Sicamore, the
Mulberry, and the Fig Tree; but they (...) ^where: and the Maligatoon, and
Peach is common, without Cultivation; yet no (...) Fruit is observed in Europe
than what naturally grows wild in America. Vines (...) themselves to inamour
the Trees in every Wood: and Strawberries strew thems^^^^^ (...) Fields. But
Violets, I had almost forgot them, because the Inhabitants depress th^^ ^ing
them under foot; yet they, with various other Flowers, perfume the Air. (...)
sprout up so plentifully in every Plantation, that the Planters themselves are
the (...) with to make Fences. And where all other Roots and Fruit Trees thrive
to ^ the Orange Trees, Limon Trees, and China Orange Trees, Quince Trees,
Cherry Trees (...) Pear Trees, and Prickle Pears, that bear twice a year. Then
there is the Almon^ (...) over to plant, and Tamarinds, Eldern, Goosberries,
Curran Trees, Rassberries, Pomegranats; and some say Plantins, and Bonano's.
Certainly this Climate is destin^^ (...) the Native American, and with the
Blessings of Heaven to refresh the solicitous (...)

This I should think (with other Advantages) were enough to compensate the
(...) and Industry of the Setlers, besides the natural propensity of Love the
Natives h^ (...) Souls lived only in the Bosom of the English by natural
Instinct, because when to (...) themselves and services to fish, and hunt their
Game for a Trifle; to fell Tim^^^ (...) Corn, and to gather in their Crop: as
also to Pilot, and convey them from o^^ (...) to another. So that in many
respects, the simple poverty of these indigent Nat^^^^ (...) (...) the Law of
Kind (and Humanity) to be sweetened, and encouraged; if because (...) ^^^sider
their moral Civility, and innate Simplicity: which I hope the English Inha^
(...) ^^fortunate Southern Latitude will consider, and mingle with so much
Discretion, (...) ^tion of Piety, as not to contrive them Hypocrites (fatal to
the Practice of New-(...) (...) cause cause when designing to convert them to
Christianity.

Here in these parts you may expect to meet with abundance of Navigable Ri^^^^
(...) their Soundings I shall particularize more in my next; as also of their
Rivulets, (...) ^staline Streams are clear and transparent. But their
imbellish'd Meadows, fertile, (...) ^ing Savana's, are guarded with pleasant and
solitary Woods; besides delicious Fi^ (...) ^^stures that direct to Admiration.
Which to numerate, as also to frame a Catalog^ (...) ^rious Families of Fish,
and their store; whose prodigious increase here to inse^ (...) However, some of
them are Shad, Sturgeon and Salmon, omitting Whale, which a^ (...) in these
Seas; so is the Seel or Selk, the Bottle-Nose, and the Porpus, besides many
o^^^^ (...) Fish: but the Shark to admiration, wants Courage here, as indeed
all other Ra^ (...) ^^^^tures do, for if they see but the Face of an Infant,
they immediately fly. Anoth^^ (...) Drum, Porgee, Bass, Boneto, Dolphin,
Albechore, Sheepsheads, Oldwives, Catfish, Cav^ (...) and Mullets the largest
in America. Trout also they have of two foot long, be^ (...) the Eel, and the
Perch; with several other fresh water Fish omitted (without co^ (...)
Catalogue. And their Shellfish are Crabbs, better than those in England; but
(...) have none that I hear of. However, Cockles, and Mussles they have; and
Bank^ (...) ^tains of Oysters (and some with Pearl) that seem to barocade the
Crieks. Beside^ (...) Prawns and Shrimps, in the brackish and salt Waters, but
Crawfish in the freshes; (...) ^rious Entertainments, both to the Native, and
fortunate Planter. But their An^ (...) Turtle, Bever, Otters, Manitee,
Alegators, etc.

And their Fleshes are Beeves, Veals, Porks, Stagg, and Fallow Deer, Raccoons,
Apos^ (...) Lamb, Kid, Hare, Rabit, etc. But Ravenous Creatures are Wolves,
Foxes, Bears, Pan^ (...) And their Venemons Creature is the Rattlesnake. Then
there is Wild Fowl to (...) as Signets, Swans, and Wild Turkies of incredible
weight, besides teems of Geese, a^ (...) sorts. There is Pheasant also, Cranes,
and Heronshaws, the Woodcock, and Teal, wi^ (...) Poot, Morefowl, Curlue, and
Covies of Partridges; besides Plover great store, gre^ (...) There also are
Turtle Doves, Feldivers, Sea Larks, Snade, Levericks, Widgins, and (...)
^berless; besides the Mockbird, with diversity and variety of Singing Birds,
and ot^^^ (...) Fowl, that I cannot account for. Moreover, they have plenty of
Dunghill Fow^ (...) and Hen, the Goose, the Turkey, the Muscovy and English Duck
and Drake. Wh^ (...) Savana's are crowded with Deer, and large and stately
Herds of Cattle patrole t^ (...) as Sheep the pleasant Pastures; and where
every Field is replenished with Corn, (...) Gardens in Asia, and Europe
enriched with choice Stone Fruits; but Almon^ (...) Aprecock-Trees,
Malagatoons, and the Mustin Plumb (the richest Stone Fruit in Eng^^^^ (...)
diverse other Trees, as the Bone Crittongon, and the Burgamy Pear; besides
Pippi^ (...) ^mains, Golden Russitins, Harvey, Lady-finger, and Red-streak,
with various other (...) now sent over by the Honorable Sir Peter Colleton
Bar. one of the Lords Propri^ (...) several Fruit Trees, Flowers, and Roots, by
diverse other able Gentlemen and M^ (...) have already laid a Foundation in this
Southern Latitude of Carolina.

Advertisement. There is one Mr. Nathan Sumers Engineer for Carolina, that has
underta^^^ (...) Engine of his own] with the Lords Proprietors, and others to
unburden, and clear the Ground to (...) ^qation at 12 Pence a Tree, if not
exceeding six Foot Diameter; and 6 d. a Tree from one Foot to (...) ^^ches
Diameter. And that the said Propriators have contracted with the said Sumers,
to secure to hi^ (...) the sole use and benefit of the said Invention, for 14
years, as certifyed.

London, Printed for Joel Gascoin at the Plat near Wapping old Stairs, and R^
(...) at the Rose and Crown in Budg-Row.


