Antisacrilegus: OR, A DEFENSATIVE Against the plausible Pest, or gilded
Poison, OF THAT NAMELESS PAPER, (Supposed to be the Plot of Dr. C. Burges, and
his Partners;)

Which tempts The KINGS Majesty BY THE Offer of Five hundred thousand pounds,
to make good by an Act of Parliament to the Purchasers of Bishops, Deans, and
Chapters Lands, their illegal bargain, for ninety nine years.

By JOHN GAVDEN, D.D. Chaplain in ordinary to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

London, Printed by J.B. for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the Green-Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

ANTISACRILEGVS. OR, A Defensative against the plausable Pest, or gilded
Poison of that nameless Paper (supposed to be the plot of D. C. Burges and his
unlucky partners which temps the Kings Majesty, by the offer of Five hundred
thousand pounds, to make good by an Act of Parliament to the Purchasers of
Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands, their illegal bargain for ninety nine years.
ALthough the Justice and Honor of the King be such, as becomes the Son and
Successor of such a Father (who loved the Church and its just Interests, more
then his own life:) so that His Sacred Majesty will easily command such Satan's
to get behind him, as unworthy of his presence; whose sacrilegious projects
and devices deserve to perish with their money. Yet that His Excellent Majesty
and His two Loyal Houses of Parliament, with all His good Subjects, may see the
craft of that design, and the hook under that bait; it is not amiss to discover
the poison of sin and shame, of dishonor and danger, of impiety and imprudence
wherewith it is fraught, and wherewith it seeks to infect the King, the two
Houses of Parliament, and the whole Nation, only to ensure a few unhappy
Merchants in their sacrilegious adventures.

First, For His Majesty to do, as is there unworthily (because against all law
and justice) desired, is to be Godfather to those spurious and illegitimate
practices, which were begotten from, and nourished most what by tumultuary,
disorderly and violent ways; tending to, and ending so much in the ruin of
King, Church and State; yea, the very Proposers do by their bold proposal
clearly confess, that they have (yet) no Law or Justice for their pretended
purchases, and consequently no very good consciences to keep them, but would
gladly by a new price of iniquity, purchase to themselvas a right by Law for
ninety nine years, whereas they vapored heretofore as if they had the
fee-simple; that was (indeed) Robinhoods pennyworths, at five or six years
purchase, considering the timber, houses and Improvements.

Secondly, By their instancing so boldly in the late Kings forced Concessions,
or rather necessitated deliberations, about granting a Lease of improved Church
Lands for ninety nine years, in order to redeem His Life, Crown, and posterity
(to which redemption all the Loyal Clergy were more willing to consent then
himself) these Proposers do dangerously insinuate, as if the present King His
Son, were in the same distress of life and fortunes, to which fraud and force
had then reduced His Royal Father: Which (blessed be God) is not the present
case of King or Church; For the King is now clothed with excellent Majesty,
and the Church has put off its filthy garments, and rags, wherewith the
Enemies of God, the King, and the Church had deformed her. As for His Fathers
Murderers, and the Enemies of King and Church, they are now covered with shame
and confusion of face, as with a cloak. And certainly it is as impudent, as
unseasonable a desire, since some Purchasers have already drunk the blood, and
eat the flesh of the Kings Father: since they have against all Law and
Conscience destroyed many Houses of God, and greedily gaped to devour all Gods
portion, and the Churches Patrimony; that the Son now happily reigning in
peace, should reward such for their good works, by enabling them with an Act of
Parliament, to strengthen their now wambling stomachs; the better to digest the
Churches Lands and Houses they have devoured: All which His Royal and Martyrlie
Father sought to preserve as much as His Life, Crown, and Kingdoms; esteeming
all injuries done to the Church, to be as great reproaches and insolences
against His God and Savior, so point blank against His Conscience, as a
Christian, and against his Coronation Oath as a King, no less then against
Magna Charta, or the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, by which the Churches
rights are settled, and ought to be preserved.

Thirdly, It would monstrously abate and eclipse, not only the Renown and
Honor of His Majesty, who is the Son of such a Father, but in time it would
shrink His constant Revenues; part of which arise from those First Fruits, and
yearly Tenths, which are duly and cheerfully paid by the Bishops, Deans and
Chapters, out of their Lands and Estates, while in their power, and possession,
and improvement.

Fourthly, This wretched project would be a continued injury and indignity put
upon this Famous Church of England, and its learned Clergy; who have been
formerly esteemed as eminent, deserving, and flourishing, as any in the world:
And all this, merely upon this account and occasion, because it has been for
some years past, insolently stripped and abused, in which its eminent Bishops,
and other Divines, have (like Jewels) been trampled under the feeet of Swine;
men of sordid and sacrilegious spirits, only fit to devour and destroy Kings
and Bishops, things Sacred and Civil.

Fifthly, It would be exceedingly to the dishonor, not only of the Kings
Majesty, to degenerate from the examples as of His many Royal Progenitors,
Christian Kings and Queens of England, who were in all ages nursing Fathers and
Mothers to this Church, (which God has put immediately and wholly into their
protection, under Christ;) and specially, from the incomparable pattern of His
Father of blessed memory, who expressed such holy love, zeal and constancy to
the Rites of this Church. But further, it would be a most uncomely stain and
reproach to the present most Honorable, Loyal, and Religious Houses of
Parliament, both Lords and Commons; whom God has blessed, and eternally
honored, in making them the happy Repairers of our Civil and Desperate
breaches: How can they then with any honor or conscience sacrifice the Church
any longer to these Apollyons and Abaddons; its sacrilegious Wasters and
Opppressors.

Sixthly, This design of the Purchasees, if obtained, would so cruelly weaken,
peel, barkround, and exhaust the plenty, honor, power and authority of this
Church, and its Clergy, both as Christian, and reformed, in all its ancient
Rights, Immunities and Enjoyments (which are as well settled by Laws ancient
and modern, as any civil estates are, or can be) that it would never recover
its beauty and flourishing luster, of late so much deflored; but both
Christianity, and all sober Reformation, would daily decay and wither, by
successive attempts of sacrilege and schism, till all were run to
Profaneness, Atheism, Anarchy, and Barbarity; which ever follow as the
idleness and luxury, so the despicable poverty and tenuity of Churchmen; of
which Greece of old, Germany of late, and England last of all are evident, but
sad experiments.

7. If such an Act of Parliament should pass, without, and against the consent
of the Clergy (who are by Law the Proprieters and enjoyers of those estates,
under God and the King) which consent is never like to be gained, as it cannot
reasonably be asked:) It would make, not only the King and Parliament, but in,
and with them, the whole Nation, shrewdly suspected, if not actually guilty of
that enormous sin and curse of Sacrilege; which even Dr. Burges owns to be
such, though not in the case of Bishops and Cathedral Lands, because it is his
own case and great concern. Let him but have his bargain, with Judas, he cares
not whom he betrays, or what truth and conscience he sells; though it come up
to a most apparent robbing of God, his Ministers, the whole Church, its
reverend Fathers, and most eminent Sons, yea, the whole body and fraternity of
the Faithful in the Land, of that double honor, both for maintenance and
reverence, which agreeably to the word of God allowing, accepting, or
commanding such grateful and honorary retributions of their temporals, to those
that impart things spiritual, has been freely given, piously devoted, and by
the Laws of the Land often confirmed as sacred and inviolable to the Church and
Clergy, in order to promote the Worship and glory of God, with the good of
souls, by the order, peace, plenty, honor, government and authority of the
Church, and its Ministers, both governing, and governed. The poor man Dr.
Burges cries out like Steutor, of the gnats of his own private injuries,
suffered from the Corporation of Wells in his Bishops Lands; yet he can
swallow the camel of his own great purchase of them, though without any Law
to enable him; or any consent of the Bishop or others by Law invested in them;
nay having a canine appetite, he is not yet sick of the sin, but only afraid
to vomit up those sacred morsels, and would fain have a retentive cordial from
the King, and two Houses; who have hitherto, and in them the whole Nation) been
by a special providence kept from that sin and shame; For what ever in this
kind of chaffering has hitherto been done in England, during our troubles, was
but the counsel and practice of some few men, without and against all Laws of
God and the Land, which teach all honest men to abhor Sacrilege, as Idolatry;
as a sin of the first magnitude against every precept of the first Table;
condemned in all ages by all men morally just, as being against the light of
Reason, and natural Religion, to rob God: Therefore detested always by Jews and
Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, by Christians and Mahometans, by all
Protestants and Papists, as not to be dispensed withal, but in a case of
higher charity and necessity, for Gods glory and the Churches good; and this
with unfeigned purpose of making, when able, full restitution, in kind, or in
something equivalent. Which Justice is asserted by the Old and New Testament,
by the Laws of this Kingdom, and of all Empires ancient and modern; by the
Canons of all Churches, by all Councils, Fathers, Church-Historians, and
learned Divines on all sides (as Dr. Burges is forced to confess) being a most
impudent and detestable sin, never to be palliated or excused, seldom or never
pardoned or repented of; because it abhors any restitution; as we see in Dr.
Burges his terrors and clamors; but is usually punished with hardness of heart;
and searedness of conscience in private persons, ever fatal and unprosperous to
Prince and people, justly revenged by God and man to many generations, by
lasting and unexpiable curses; to which the King, Parliament and Nation ought
not to be exposed upon any terms.

Eighthly, Thus to peel and pillage the Church and Clergy of England, after so
many and long exhaustings will give joy and satisfaction to none but the
enemies of the King, the Church and Nation: Either the envious Papists, or the
covetous and cruel Fanatics; who are as the locusts, caterpillars and
palmerworms of this Church; the one hoping to devour what the other leaves: Nor
is there any reason that the best and most of the Nation rich and poor should
be all injured, scandalized and robbed by the Church and Clergies diminution
and undoing, only to gratify a few unreasonable and undeserving Purchasers of
Church lands; who are neither good to the Tenants; nor to the poor, nor to
their Prince, nor to their Savior.

Ninethly, This alienation and long diversion of the Churches revenues, will
much discourage all learned industry and proficiency in this Nation; it will
damp the the spirits and studies of both our famous Universities, which now
begin to flourish again. It will debase and cripple the dignity and authority
of this Church and the Clergy, both Bishops and Presbyters, who of old did many
great and good works: It will much defeat his Majesty's charitable design and
declared pleasure for augmenting Vicaridges out of Church Impropriations; It
will obstruct and dry up the stream of charity and hospitality, which should be
most exemplary in the Clergy; and it will only make way for avarice, ignorance,
anarchy and confusion in the Church, which cannot but endanger the peace and
safety of King and Kingdom, as of late we have seen to our woe.

Tenthly, To answer the temptation of present gain, which as the devil to
Christ in the wilderness, that serpentine paper offers to his Excellent
Majesty, as if the liberal and loyal purchasers would advance 50000 l. for his
Majesty's service.

1. It is a goodly sum indeed, if it came out of their own estates and purses,
which it does not; but it is too sinall a sum to engage any honest man upon so
great a sin as Sacrilege; to which all the worlds gain will not tempt a King,
or any true Christian, who knows how to value his soul or the Church of Christ,
or Gods glory, or his Kingdoms and consciences peace, or his own and the
Nations honor, or his Clergies merit and usefulness.

2. His Majesty deserves and enjoys so much of the hearts and loves of his
people, that he needs not fear any want: nor will he be ever driven to make
use of such crafty Merchants, or to partake of their filthy lucre, who would
fain dravv the King to be their partner, and to crown their Sacrilegious
projects with his Princely Diadem; and while to save the common people of the
Nation a few pounds, His Majesty should contract upon his Throne and Kingdom,
his Conscience and People the sin and shame of Sacrilege.

3. Experience tells us (which Sir Henry Spelman observes) that as no private
Families, so nor any Kings, ever grew more comfortably rich, or lastingly
prosperous by any Sacrilegious practices; from the appearance of which all
severe consciences should abstain, being to the reproach and injury, not only
of the Clergy, who are amongst the best of Subjects; but even of God the giver
of all, and Christ Jesus the the meriter of all we have, or can give to God and
his Church; yea it tends to the indignity of the whole English Nation,
heretofore so generous, magnificient and respectful to its reverend Bishops and
other worthy Ministers, as to entertain and treat them worthy of their holy
labors and high profession, to encourage their Piety, Hospitality and Charity,
with plenty, yea with an honorable superfluity.

4. As His Majesty by this fallacious bargain shall diminish his constant
Revenue, which is retributed to the Crown from the Clergy, in First Fruits and
Tenths; so he will lose those grateful and liberal Subsidies, Aids and Fifteens
which the Clergy were wont frequently to present with thanks and cheerfulness
to the Kings of England; as their most munificent Benefactors and Protectors;
which will in less then a quarter of Ninety nine years, amount to far more then
that sum which those Sophisters and Hucksters do offer, if the Church and
Clergy be preserved in that opulency and freedom with which they are endowed by
God, and good Princes bounty.

5. The stately Fabrics of Cathredral Churches besides the Bishops, Deans and
Chapters houses, which were once the glory of our Nation, of our Cities and our
Church, being now sorely demolished, and barbarously waste, will never be
repaired, but run to irrecoverable ruins, if the Clergy be now deprived of
improving the Church lands or if they be curtailed by such an alienation or
leasing of them for Ninety nine years: All which reparations by the present
advance of the Churches Revenues in Clergy-mens hands, may by His Majesty's
gracious care and command be timely efected.

6. All this (Ampullae) or specious offer of Five hundred thousand pounds, as
it is in truth not one penny out of the Purchasers own Patrimony or proper
estate, so it is not at all in favor of His Majesty, but of themselves; who
having tasted how sweet and improveable the Churches Lands are, do desire to
have their great penniworths made good to them, which in a moral sense is
impossible, unless God and all parties concerned do consent. As for their care
of his Majesty's supplies, it is certain the greatest Enemies to the Church,
are no Friends to His Majesty: Nor is it without great regret that the Crown
Lands are now redeemed out of some of their jaws, who have good stomachs to
both, if they had but the retentive Faculty, and had some Peptick powder: But
if these Projectors have such a zeal to His Majesty, let them present him with
some thing that was and is their own; or at least with the profits they have
made of the purchases of Church Lands and Houses.

7. As it will be infinitely more to his Majesty's comfort, honor and
happiness, to render to God the things that are Gods, who has by miraculous
mercies rendered to him the things that are his, as our Coesar and rightful
Soveragine: so the Godly Bishops and other dignified Clergy men, who are or
shall be entrusted by his Majesty's Grant and Seal in their respective estates
and rights, by Law due to the Church, these (no doubt) will hold themselves
forever so obliged to his gracious Majesty, as the great Patron and Restorer of
the Church and Clergy, that they will study in all ways of piety to God, and
Loyalty to his Majesty, to express their gratitude in such sort as shall be
most becoming their duty, and most acceptable to his Majesty. And certainly
one pound thus retributed to his Majesty by the Clergy, as is the rightful
owners and possessors of those Estates, will thrive better and do his Majesty
more good with their prayers, then ten thousands taken from them, or pretended
to be given to his Majesty by others, who have been, and desire still to be the
Purchasers and improvers of the Church Lands and revenues to their own, not to
the Kings or Churches benefit, whose Sacrilegious depredations, acquisitions
and oblations can expect no blessing from God, or men, on giver or receiver.

8. To conclude, That the Reverend Bishops, and others of the Clergy who are
concerned in these Lands, may not seem less equanimous and condescending, by
all meet ways, to the quiet of Church and State, It is not to be doubted but
they will upon such reasonable terms (as his Majesty and all persons of reason
and honor shall approve) make such agreements with these pretended Purchasers,
or rather Morgagees of Church Lands as are under any Capacity or Loyal merit of
a fair composition, that whatsoever they are out of purse upon a due account,
they may have reimbursed either in moneys or in such equivalency of Lease and
Tennancy, as the Clergy are by Law enabled to make.

And however in so notorious a case as this was (where the known laws of God
and man were most evident) there was, Caveat Emptor written in great Letters,
that is sufficient caution or warning given to every wise and honest man, to
take heed of such Sacrilegious sales, purchases (which can no more be justified
in reason, law or conscience) because the office of Bishops and use of Deanes
and Chapters, were without and against law taken away, (as the learned Dr.
Burges accutely pleads in his case) than Ahab and Jezebel could justify the
taking possession of Naboths Vineyard because he was now killed) yet because
the delusion was strong as well as the temptation, and many now Loyal Subjects,
might possibly in the simplicity of their souls be engaged in such unjust
bargains, care may be had that they shall sustain no loss, though they get no
great gain, which equability will satisfy all soberminded men.

As for others, whose gain is their God, whose apostasy has made them
desperate Enemies to the Church and Clergy of England, whose covetous and
contentious ambition is a bottomless and unsatiable gulf of perdition, aiming
in their despair and hypocrisy, to swallow up or imbroyl a new both Church and
State, King and Clergy all things sacred and civil, if they had power equal to
their rage, despite and malice. These men's proposals and clamors are not to be
regarded by pious honest and resolute men, farther then to be constantly denied
and severely suppressed; Notwithstanding that they be as importune as Dr.
Burges himself who with his Diurnal Libells and Pamphlets runs to the City of
London and Wells, grining and grudging, that he is not satisfied with his
beloved purchases of Church Lands, as he well deserves, being a person of that
repute and worth, that besides other old and new reports of his virtues, he is
by a decree in Chancery May, 1. 1657. adorned with this Elogy upon record; As
an Author and prosecutor of so great injustice and oppression, as are utterly
unbecomming a man of common honesty, much more a Minister of the Gospel, whose
conversation should be an example (as the decree speaks) of piety and Justice
to others.

If this Belwether be such a Cretian and Borborites, who was the gracious
Author of that infamous Libel, called the Anatomy, being the Epitomy of Dr.
Burges his falsity, folly, and scurrility, not worth a sober man's answering or
reading; what shall we think of the rest of that heard, which of latter years
have been fatted with the Church Lands and the estates of other men, much
theirs, and his betters, who never needed any compurgators for their innocence
and credit? In whose behalf that Boanerges or great zealot for the reforming of
the Church of England, (in order to keep his Bishops Lands by keeping out the
Bishop of Bathe and Wels and all others, of that Cathedral, from repossessing
their own estates) has for so often filled and killed the world with the
poisonous cramb of his Paradoxes; That Sacriledg, (in all men's sense but his
own is no sin; And that the selling and buying of Bishops and Cathedrals Lands,
is no sacrilege, But this Mountebankry is now grown stale and scorned even by
the vulgar; nor will it serve to keep him from the Justice of Gods and man's
Laws, which require restitution of his own fine new Houses and Gardens in liew
of of these good old houses of the Bishops, Deans, and others which that
dilapidetor of the Church has pulled down.

Nor will it serve his turn, to cry out that his conscience is so sore grieved
with the colic of the Covenant, that he cannot endure the return of Bishops,
Deans, and Chapters: Indeed his fits and gripes arise from the just fear he
has, that these his rivals may now drive him out of the Babel which he has
built, and dispossess him of his unlucky Purchases, which to attend by any
means this Proteus will rather disguise himself into Presbytery and
Independency, contrary to his former hue and profession, then return to a
wellconstituted Episcopacy which is (certainly) more consonant by far with the
law of the Land, and the genius of the people of England, then either of the
other pitiful novelties and much more agreeable to his so Sacred Covenant,
since in that he expressly engaged himself not only against his so feared
Prelacy and Popery, but also against Schism and Superstition; of both which
those seditious innovations in Church and State, are as vehemently suspected
and charged by learned and godly men, as Gehazy was with Naamans Leprosy, when
having stolen his undeserved fees for his Masters miracle, he went out of
Elishas presence, as white as snow: which blessing may in a few years, more
befall this Black-defender, that Sacrilege (that is selling of Church Lands
against law) is no sin; Whom all sober minded men will leave to be punished
with his own manners; yet so as to follow his deplorable soul, with such
prayers as Christian Charity will permit, for those that have not sinned the
sin unto death, by willful and known apostasy; and by opposing of most evident
truths, such as these are, that God and his Church are not to be robbed.

FINIS.
Books written by Dr. Gauden, and sold by Andrew Crook, at the green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. HIeraspistes, A Defense for the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of
England.

2. Three Sermons preached on public occasions.

3. Funerals made Cordials, in a Sermon preached at the Interment of the Corpse
of Robert Rich, Heir apparent to the Earldom of Warwick.

4. A sermon preached at the Funeral of Dr. Ralph Brounrig Bishop of Excester (
December. 17. 1659.) with an account of his Life and Death.

5. A Petitionary Remonstrance in the behalf of many thousand Ministers and
Scholars.

(...), sive Medicastri, Slight healers of public hurts, set forth in a
Sermon Preached in St. Paul's Church, London, before the right honorable Lord
Mayor, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council, and Companies of the honorable
City of London, Febr. 28. 1659. being a day of Solemn thanksgiving unto God,
for restoring the Secluded Members of Parliament to the house of Commons, (And
for preserving the City) as a Door of Hope thereby opened to the fullness and
freedom of future Parliaments: The most probable means under God for healing
the Hurts, and recovering the health of these three British Kingdoms.

(...), Gods great Demonstrations and Demands of Justice, Mercy and Humility,
set forth in a Sermon preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at their
Solema Fast, before their first sitting, April 30. 1660.

ANALYSIS, The loosing of St. Peter's Bands; setting forth the true sense and
solution of the Covenant in point of Conscience, so far as it relates to the
Government of the Church by Episcopacy.


