The Bloody Court; OR, The Fatal Tribunal:

BEING A brief History, and true Narrative, of the strange Designs, wicked
Plots, and Bloody Conspiracies, carried on by the most sordid'st, vile, and
Usurping Tyrants, in these late Years of Oppressions, Tyranny, Martyrdom, and
Persecutions: DISCOVERING,

I. The Poisonous Asps, King-killing Basilisks, weeping Hypocrites, and
devouring Caterpillars, who in their Damnable Treasons have far surpassed the
Powder-Conspiracy, secretly contriving, but openly acting the Murder of our
late Gracious King Charles, the ruin of all the Royal Issue, the everthrow of
all our Laws, the blowing up of all Parliaments, the subverting of the whole
State of Government; and the setting up of a consused Babel, watered with the
blood of the KING and His People.

II. An Exact Description of these hard-hearted Belshazzars, infamous
Impostors, Luciferian Brats, wicked Schismatics, cruel Hypocrites, desperate
Usurpers, Damnable Blood-suckers, both of King and Nobles, who with Iron Hands,
and Adamantine Hearts, would also have pulled our present Lord and Sovereign
out of the Arms and Embraces of His Loyal and Liege Subjects.

III. The Bloody Tragedy of all Tragedies, against King, Lords, and Commons:
the several Scenes, presenting their most horrid Villainies; and the most
barbarous and Tyrannical Massacre that was ever heard of since the World began,
cons^ted amongst the Grandees of the Independent Swordmen, against the chief
Royalists and Presbyterians, both Nobles, Gentry, and Citizens; with the manner
how it was prevented; and the exposing of these B^ff-Grandees, and ins^ing
proud Officers, to their Needles, Hammers, Lasts, Slings, Carts, and Flails;
and all true Subjects to enjoy their Rights.

Printed for G. Horton; And published by a Rural Pen, for general satisfaction.

The Bloody Court; OR, The Fatal Tribunal.
THe Crown of England was the ancientest Christian Crown in the World and that
which had those two famous Pillars, Religion and Law, the purest and best in
the world to under-prop it, which made it so Renowned: But our late Usurping
Tyrant, and his King-killing Basilisks, holding a Confedaracy with the Popish
Faction, endeavored a supplanting of the Magistracy and Ministry, the Laws of
the Land; and the Religion of the Church of England, had not the Honest
Royalist, and Sober-minded Presbyter proved a strong Defense and Fortress
against that Blood-sucking and Iesuitical Facti^n, who lay so occultly at the
Helm of Government, and pretended (so cunningly) to act all for the Protestant
Religion: yet under the Vizard of Hypocrisy and Rebellion, they pretend a
Reformation* but through a Sea of innocent Blood, as we shall plainly describe
in the following Historical disc^urse, with is their setting up a High Court of
In^ustice, and a pretended Council of State, to be two during High-Courts: The
one, for the ordering the great affairs of the Kingdom; the other to judge and
determine matters Criminal. Here old England became visibly in its Government a
new Spain: And it is worthy of observation to note, That Corne^ Joyce, having
with a party of soldiers (by Order from Cromwell) seized on the Kings person at
Newport in the Isle of Wight, by breaking open the door in the night when the
King was in Bed, and taking him thence, and bringing him over the water to
Hurst Castle, Colonel Harrison was by Cromwell sent with a strong party of horse
to guard the King, from thence to Windsor. And immediately the^ their bloody
Court was erected: and the Trial of Our gracious Sovereign proclaimed: which
terrible Echo, resounded with so much horror and detestation* in the ears of
all Loyal hearts that they abhorred the very thoughts of so monstrous and
barbarous an Act. And notwithstanding, all Remoras being removed (wh^ right
under the proceeding of the Popish F^ in the ^tting in (...) that ever was
committed upon the face of the Earth, since the ^ring of our blessed Lord and
(...)) to work they go, having the King in their clutches again he being the
only Protestant King in the World; this good King had neither Wife nor
Children admitted to come near him, nor Friend, nor Chaplain, nor Servant of
his own, wherein he could take the least comfort, either in discourse, or in
beholding their countenances: He had no body to speak his mind unto, no body to
sympathize with him, or so much as to bestow a sight upon him, in his solitary
and disconsolate condition, but like another David, when his Wife and Children
were gone, and he had no House to put his head in; Then did those about him
speak it openly, That they would put Him to Death, and that not in a passion,
but soberly, as if it were a pious meritorious work, to kill the only pious
Protestant King in the World.

The good King through his great sufferings and unheard of afflictions both of
body and mind, wherewith God was pleased to exercise him, became a pattern of
patience, and will be so to all posterity; For under all those reproaches which
he heard with his Ears, and read with his Eyes, against his Crown, Dignity,
Person, Name, and Posterity; notwithstanding the violence offered to him in the
midst of the Night, in breaking into his Chamber, and taking him out of his
Bed, carrying him partly by Land and partly by Sea to Hurst Castle, from thence
to Windsor, from Windsor to St. James; in all which he was not heard so much as
to speak evil of his Adversaries, or to use a bitter word, or demean himself
impatiently; but as a Lamb leaving to the slaughter, so meek was he in those
merciless Butchers hand. At St. James he was kept until the Scaffold were
erected in Westminster Hall, where it was reported that not only the Officers
cast foul reproaches of Tyranny and Murder into his face, daily and hourly, but
often times the Common-souldiers by blowing of Tobacco (which he could not
endure) by beating of Drums at unseasonable hours close by him, did extremely
abuse him; besides there most uncivil words to his very face, yet was he
patient under all, being abused and reviled, he reviled not again. At last
Colonel Tomlinson was the Kings Jailer, whose high commendations above all
other men in the Army, was this; That he dealt civily with the King.

On January the 20th. 1648. The pretended High Court of Justice sat, a certain
man called Bradshaw, a Counselor at Law, who being a man of a fluent Tongue,
and bold, and it seems always a bitter man against the ^ing, was found out,
and by promises of great preferment and of ^^^matteas, was easily persuaded to
be the man to act the part of a Judge, or rather of a God, and take upon him to
Judge and Condemn the Protestant King: This Fellow they made a Searlet Ga^on
for him, that he might look like some body above his Fellows; they gave him
also a strange name, they Died him in Red, and dipped him by the name of my
Lord President! yet he had his name before he had his Red coat, for it seems
they were in such ha^^ to dispatch this pions king, who stood in the way to
hinder their designs, that the business was come to the last day, ere the
Tailor, as I take it, had done that garment, which made him the Scarlet
colored Beast (he was full of Blasphemy before) this Blasphemous Beast was
made the Judge, and one Cook, a Fellow that had formerly ^ed out of the
Kingdom, whether his knavery, or Poverty, or both drove him, I cannot tell,
but one or both I am sure: This Fellow (as I am informed by a Gentleman of
worth) was forced beyond Sea to beg for his Food; being an Englishman, and
having Latin enough to beg his living by, he resorted to the Colleges of
English Jesuits, where like Perfius's Parot, his Belly taught his Tongue his
Fluencie. I mention this only, what intrest the Jesuits had in this fellow by
pre engagements: This Fellow, when he asked for Bread, they gave him Scorpious
doubtless, which made the Popish Faction choose him above all others, to be a
Solicitor General to manage a Charge of Treas^^ against a Protestant King in
his own Dominions: Be consident, a true Protestant dares not be so base a
Traitor, nor any, but an Apostate Englishman, be so base a scandal to his
Nation, but they were hall fellow well met at this Court; here might a man have
beheld the juice of that Toad Mariana, swelling up each Villain in the Court to
spet Venom in the sootiess Face of his Royal Majesty.

My intention in this short Discourse is not to eatch Women's Affections, but to
inform man's Judgments, otherwise it were very easy, I think to make the
seniest heart to spring a flood of Tears, or split in shivers, to read this
Tragedy.

Turns Natures order upside down, transform how you can to make a prodigy, it
cannot he so horrid, or so dismal a spectacle, as here I could not present the
Reader.

Could you see a company of ugly filthy Goal-birds, with their Fer^ors on, rise
up, lay hands upon the innocent Judge: and clap their Fetters on his Legs,
place him at their Bar, call him the Male^^or, and pass the Sentence of Death
upon him? Could you see this Judge which patience submit to the ugly and unjust
Sentence of thefs Bloody Rogues, and meekly suffer himself to be led to the
place of Execution, and there have his innocent Head s^bered from his
Shoulders? Yet there is ten times a more horrid sight to be seen in this, then
that can be: But I must pass it over, least when I get into it, I know not how
to get out, only take these sew touches, which is well worthy of observation.

There was never so much Majesty and meekness seen together in any man that was
but a mere man, ^^ue^ the World was made that we can r^^d or ho^r of, as was in
this Ki^^; this cause much the more, by how much be i^^u^ed his Enemies
reproaches, which were mo^^ bitter and cruel: He had so much Majesty at his
first appearing at the Court before them, that he made his Iudge^ tremble at
his apo^ar^^^^, and so much meekness in his replies to their reproaches, that
it then thawed the frozen Bawels of those rigid Clowns his Judges, to a kind of
inward re^^nctancy; ask some of their Consciences whether this is not true?
they do confess it.

It should seem some of them had been enquiring of Lilly the Sorcerer whither
they should take away his life, to whom he rep^^ed. That if the Head of his
Staff fell off, His Head would fa^l off also: And the ^^ry first day the King
was brought before them, they h^d Bemi^ched the Head of his staff to fall off,
which made them that were his Judges, confident of success in their Treason.

They drew a formal Charge against the King, wherein they charged him as a
Tyrant, a Traitor, a Murderer, and a Public Enemy to the Commonwealth: After
the Charge was read, Bradshaw desired him that he would answer to his Charge.

The King with an amiable grave countenance beholding his Enemies, and joining
with it such meek language* so full of deep and solid Reason, made his Enemies
admire and applaud him, and his friends to weep bitterly for him. The King
would not (because in Conscience he could not) acknowledge their Authority; if
he had, he had betrayed the Liberties of his People; For if the King should
have granted (which was the only thing they desired) the legality of their
Court; what Subject durst have denied it? Therefore the King said (and that
truly) he stood for his Peoples and Liberties, and the Peace of his Country,
not allowing to have his Subjects cut off illegally.

It was admirable to see this Heroic Prince bear up indauntedly under all
thoso discouragements with which he was oppressed: He had at his Right hand
Cook calling for Justice against the Traitor, the Murderer, the Tyrant, and the
Pub^ick Euemy of the Kingdom; on the Right hand and on the left, at least
^^^enty Halberteers; directly before him Bradshaw s^^^ ^ily and p^rt ^^^ptuosly
interrogating, revi^ling, and sla^^e^ing of (...); behind (...), in
Westminster Hall, there were thousands of Soldiers, who when the King turned
his face, and looked down on them, they cried out aloud (being taught before
hand what to say) Justice, Justice, Justice.

The King has brought Four rimes to his public Trial before these
Bloody-minded-men, and still benied their Authority, and proved it (as well he
might) to be no legal Authority, whereupon the two next days they sat not
publicly, but privately in the Painted Chamber, where they were drawing up the
Sentence to Murder the most spotless and innocent King.

I should have mentioned in due place, that when the Commons had Voted the High
Court of Justice to sit, they adjourned themselves until their time of sitting
was out; and also how Cromwell a little before they took this Traytorous
Enterprise in hand, called for a Fast, to seek God in a business of so great
concernment: This Fast the House kept, and the Soldiers at White Hall. At the
same time did the Presbyterian Ministers Fast and Pray to prevent the mischeifs
that Cromwell was acting against the Church and State, the Magistracy, and the
Ministry of England. After Cromwell had done Fasting, they presently procee ded
to the Trial of the King; He and Ireton who had promised the King to establish
him, and they were the veriest Knaves and. Villains that ever-lived (They said)
if they did not perform every tittle that they promised him; these two errand
Knaven and Villains (from their own mouths I judge them so were there in my
sight at the Court of Justice to take away his life.

The Citizens of London and the Presbiterian Ministers (for mond ^lse ^irred to
save the Kings life) hearing that they were sitting in the Painted Chamber, to
draw up the Sentence of Death against the King, went boldly to General Fairfax
and acquainted him with the sin, and the dangerous consequence of such a horrid
Murder: The General was fully convinced of it, and thereupon resolved to call a
General Rendevous, and in the head of the Army to Declare against it; in the
mean while he resolved to pot to the High Court of Justice, and stop all their
Proceedings against the King.

Therefore he sought for his Lieutenant General Cromwell, and ^^ding him, told
him, he was much troubled and unsatisfied in his mind about the proceedings of
the ^ich Court of Justice against the ^^ng and therefore came on purpose to
ve^^^e t^^^ to prec^ed no further until the House ^^tiand sat again: Crom^el
told his General, That he also had the same trouble upon his spirit concerning
the saving of the Kings life, they were now about his lift, he did confess, and
what to do he knew not; only (...) said, he saw God answeting their prayers,
and going before their ^^^e^ts: They had sought God by Fading, and those of
^c^nt^^^ opinion had sought God by Fasting, but God seemen to cross their
prayers, and they seemed (meaning the Presbiterians, to him to he in the dark,
and deserted. Let us therefore (said he) as we have seen the Providence of God,
answering our prayers hitherto when we have sought him so let us before we
pro^^^^ any further in such a weighty business, go first to God in prayer, and
wait; ^^rth^^s God may be seen in his Providence whilst we are at prayer: the
General was content to use all pious means: Hereupon Cromwell stops the General
from prohibiting the Court of Justice, to proceed any (...) against the King
until prayer was done in the mean time Cromwell privately sends Ireton from
White Hall to the Painted Ch^^^^ (to them there drawing up the Sentence) to
^^nish it, Seal it, and ^^^thwith disperse themselves: whilst Ireton goes,
Cromwell keeps the General at prayer, and holds him there (...) than upon his
knows) almost two hours, till Ireton returned again and th^^ Cromwell (who
prayed all that while) drew to a conclusion; Cromwell pretending now in all
haste to go to the Court of Justice, to stop proceedings against the King, was
told by Ireton in the Generals hearing, that they had signed the Sentence
against the King, and were then, even then newly broke up, and gone to their
several homes, Cromwell pretended that this was immediate Providence, and an
eminent and gracious return of prayer and we ought not in any wise (said he)
but to admire and be silent, and wait upon the Providence of God, and see what
the issue will be, for certain it must be glorious when it comes in the Arms of
prayer. With such and such Saint ^^^e ^ror^ssions, did by cozen the honest
General, and made him return, fru^trate of his purpose, under pretense of using
holy means to attain his own purpose.

Cromwell by this Religions cheat haring put the business past recalling,
pretended to those Ladies and Gentlewomen that solicited him about the
preservation of (...) Kings life, That none was s^ desirous to save the King as
he, and therefore gave out, that the worst they should (...) to him, was only
to bring him on the Scaffold to ^er^^^^ him, that he might yield to those
things that were for the good of the Kingdome^ Thus the Officers of the Army
had leave to tell their Soldiers* and ^hen thought no otherwise, as they
solemaly vowed and swore afterward.

But to the H^^ory in order as it lies: January the 27th. being Saturday, the
H^^h Court of Justice (as ^^e called themselves) met, and now Bradshaw had got
on his Red^coat, and (...) he comes, attended with 67 of is party that sat
with him: a ^angst whom were (those two Sons of Perdition) Cromwell and Ireton.
The King came from Sir Robert Cotton 's house G^^rded with Soldiers, and the
Mace before him; when he came into the Court and turned himself about, looks
down the Hall, and every way about him; the Soldiers (who were now taught a
new Lesson) cried out, Execution, Execution, in the Kings Ears; to astonish him
with the horrid thoughts of sadden death.

The King perceiving by the Red Gown on Bradshaws back, and by the cry of the
Soldiers, that they intended that day to pass their Sentence of Death on him,
desired to be heard; and the rather, because it did conduce exceeding much to
the good of the Kingdom, for the peace of it and the good of the People in it;
which he protested he aime^ at more then his own particular good: Therefore he
desired to be heard (before they passed Sentence on him) before the Lords and
Commons in the Pain^ed Chamber: there he had* something to say to them which
^ap^y concerned both and that which would be worth the hearing it not, he gave
them leave to be the Judges, and lay the blame on him: However such a delay (he
said) could not be prejudicial to them and this demand he thought, being it so
much concerned the welfare of the Kingdom, and the life of a King it might
easily be granted him* but it they refused to grant him this reasonable
request, he would protest against them as men that were not real for the
Liberty of the Subject and Peace of the Kingdom.

The Court withdrew for half an hour* and then returned again with this Answer
to the King. That they had been too long delayed by him already, and therefore
notwithstanding all the profers of Peace to the Kingdom, and Liberty to the
Subject, they were resolved to proceed to Sentence and Judgment.

The King professed it was the Kingdoms welfare and peace, more even his own
life, that he look (...) at chasfly; and a delay of a day or two ^^^th^r night
give Peace to the Kingdom whereas an hast^ I idgement way bring that trouble to
the Kingdom, which the Child anbo^a ^^ay repent it; And therefore (said the
King) I do again out of their duty (...) o^^ to God and my Country, desire
that I may be heard by the Lords and Commons in the Painted Chamber; to this
Bradshaw the President replied, This was but that he had said before, and
therefore the Court desired to hear what he would say before they did proceed
to ^entence; this I say (said the King) that if you will hear me, I do not
doubt to give satisfaction to you, and to my People, and therefore (...) do ^e
q^^re you (as you will ad^^^er it at the Dreadful day of Judgment) that you
will consid^r it once again.

The Lord only knows what the King had to say to them, but it was doubt^^l^
something of great importance, and that which lay within his Breast, which he
would f^^^ h^^ve r^ve^led before he died; but these unreasonable any
Bloody-mi^ded men, whose only design was to drink his innocent Blood, would
not hear him, but after they ha^ expro^^hed him, called him the greatest of
Tyrants, and used many Blasphemens Speeched against him, caused a Bold Fellow
to stand us and read a Sentence, which was to sever the Royal Head of Charles
Stewart, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, from his Body: After
it was read, said Bradshaw (standing up) this is the Sentence and Judgment of
the whole Court, at which the Court stood up: Cromwell and Ireton rising up, the
two foremost and readiest in the Court, though they knew themselves the very
hinderers of the setiing the peace of the Kingdom, and the chief causers of the
Kings ruin, in dissuading him from Treating with the Commissioners of shoth
Kingdoms.

The King after Sentence stood up vo speak, but Bradshaw told him that after
the Sentence he might not speak, neither w^u'd he hear him, but gave command to
the Go^rd to withdraw the Passoner: The King said that he might speak after
Sentence and then he would have spoke, but the ^a^rd opened the B^r where they
put the King, and Bradshaw rese to depart, so that they slighted the Kings
words: Whereupon the King turning himself to come forth, said, If I your King
an^ ^ot suffered to speak for my self, what Justice can my People expect to
have?

These were the last words the King spoke in Westminster Hall, as the King
passed from the C urt through the Soldiers, the Soldiers with a loud shout
tried, Execution, Execution, and with such fierceness, that I which steed neat
the King, tren^bled with fear, least they would have Murdered him in the H^ll,
but it seems it was but to fright him, and distemper his well-composed Spirit:
This was the hurry of all about him immediately after the Sentence: Is the King
condemned? What? Is he now going to his Execution? Is it to night or the morrow
morning? Thus they tried in his Ears on purpose to am^ him, some they say,
reviled, and mocked him, and others with indignation spit upon him, yet was he
not disturbed in his Soul so much as to tread one foot awry, or to show the
least discontent in his Majestic and Royal countenance.

He was carried from Sir Robert Cottons to St. James, where he had the liberty
of his Chaplain allowed him, who spent that last Sabbath of his on Earth with
much comfort and joy together, all that Holy day he spent in Holy Meditations,
as Hearing, Reading, and Praying, and trimming up his Celestial Spouse (his
Soul) for her Celestial Bridegroom* which he every hour looked for.

The Lords Day being done, he spent the most part of the long night in Devout
Prayer, never putting of his clothes: a worthy Lady told me, that a Soldier
which Giarded him, by stealth, heard the King alone at Prayer, who prayed so
sweetly, so fervently, and so charitably, that he thought if ever any King had
communion with God on Earth, it was he, he did confess his sin and his Families
and Peoples in with much debasedness of Spirit, and prayed heartily for
Remission, and for those his Persecutors pardon and for establishing of the
true Protestant Religion: After this manner spent he the night.

The next morning being very desirous to see his Children that were in England,
with much ado they were permitted to go to visit their imprisoned and condemned
Father.

At this time they (...) through the Kingdom in a Pamphlet, that the
Presbyterian Ministers such as Mr. Calamy, Mr. Case, Mr. Love, Mr. Jenkins,
etc. that they were content to have the King Tried, Condemed, and Deposed; but
not Beheaded: (...) I suppose, that same malicious knaves or ignorant fools
brought (...) his for (...) saying, That the Presbyterians brought his Neck to
the Block, and the Independents cut it off; but the (...) did that (...)
themselves, and (...) Hugh Peters's Sermon of binding Kings in chains and
Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and (...) the Imiprisoning. Trying, (...), and going
about to Behead the King.

The Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of G^ocester being come to weep in their
condemned Royal Fathers B^some, the King with pleasant countenance and voice
blessed them, and (...) speaking thus to the Lady Elizabeth.

SWeet heart, I am glad you are come; for though I have not time to say m^e^ to
you, yet I have that to say to you which I have not to say, or leave in writing
with another for you; for su^^ is their cruelty toward me, that they will not
permit me to write to you, nor any of my children. The King s^^ing the
sorrowful young L^dy weep most ^it^er^y and torment her self wit^ grief he out
of pity to her* sa^^: I pray thee do not grieve nor torment thy self for me,
for though I shall be put to Death to morrow, yet the Death that I shall dye
will be a Glorio is Death; for I dye for the Laws of my Kingdom and the
Liberty; of my People, and the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion,
in which I would have you well grounded, and therefore admonish you to read
Bishop Andrews Sermons, Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy, and Bishop Lands book
against Fisher, which will ground you against Popery.

I have this day forgiven all mine Enemies, and I hope God will forgive them,
and I do command you, and all the rest of your Brothers and Sisters to forgive
them; and tell my dear Wife your Mother, that my thoughts have never straied
from her, but she has always been next my heart, and my love shall be the
same to her to my last minute: I charge you and your Brother to be obedient to
her, and be sure to love your Brothers and Sisters, to whom I would have you
send my Blessing, with commendation to all my Friends: And my dear Daughter,
God Almighty preserve thee from all my Enemies, whom I charge you to forgive,
but never to trust them; for they have been most false to me, and false to the
Parliament that entrusted them, and I ^ear to their own Souls; and now thou art
parting with thy Father (my dear Daughter) do not go away grieving from me,
for though I dye, I shall dye a Martyr, and I doubt not, but the Lord will
settle my Son in my Throne, for which I am this day thrown, and and you my
children will be more happy, then you could expected to have been if I had
lived: All this and much more he said to the Lady Elizabeth, instructing the
young Duke his Son, to learn betimes to serve and fear the Lord, and he would
provide for him: It would have drawn water out of a Rocke-heart, to have seen
the sad parting of this Solitary, Condemned, Imprisoned King, and his dear
Children.

The poor Lady went away weeping, not only Tears, but Blood, and Blood in
great abundance, so that the Physicians concluded, that she would bleed to
Death.

The King sadly parting with his beloved Children (for they parted never to fee
each other more). he forth with betook himself to private o^^^es, knowing the
time of his departing out of this World drew on apace, not having many hours
more to live; this night also he spent its trimming up his Lamp for to meet his
Bridegroom, who was near at hand, not putting off his clothes all night; he
altogether neglected his body for the good of his precious soul.

The next morning, as if the day of Judgment had been co^ue, they awaked him
with a Trumpet, not to tell him the Resurrection was come, but to raise him up
to go to his Grave this sound was to him the less terrible, by how much the
less it was unerepected, for he was quickly ready: This was on Tuesday the
30th. of January 1648.

About Ten of the C^ock, with a party of 500 S^u^diers before the King, add a
party of 500 behind him, and about 30 Partisans on each side him, he was
Guarded through St. James Park to White Hall, Dr* Juxon being allowed to go
alonge with him as his Chap^^in.

The King had prepared himself for the Sacrament, resolving to eat a s^^^^tual
Brookfall before he took his long jeuruey to the spiricual Jerusalem.

Dr. Juxon at the Sacrament following the Protestant Liturcy of England, t^^o
the Lessons appointed for that day, the second Lessen b^ing Matthew. 27.
Providence so ordeving it that Christ would not only give himself slain (to
this Royal Martyr of his) in the Sacrament for his support in his sufferings
but lay before his eyes the pattern of his ^wer safferings for him to follow.

The King asked, whether that were the Lesson appointed for the day, the
Bishe^^ told him it was, where the King exceedingly refo^ced, as seeing the
glorious hand of his Savior speaking as it were from Heaven to him, and
resolving that doubt which he had in him, whether he had bess refuse to submit
to the punishment as he did not submit to the guilt, he there prieci^ing how
his innocent Savior submitted to the punishment, who had no guile faund in
him, rese^ved (being a sinner) to submit willingly to the Hand of God, and to
lay down his life without sturg^ing, as his blessed Lord and Savior had left
him a patter^: With much devotion, ^oy, and spiritual li^eliness, he was
observed to receive the Sacrament, after which there was a sudden messags same
unto him, as it on purpose to disturb him, that he man speedily parpace himself
for the Glass was turned and he had but that hour near to live, which message,
was as an Arrow that through the heart of the Bishop, and the rish that loved
the King: whereupon the King said to the Bishop, My Lord, do not you pity me,
well, after one hour is expired, I shall pity you, and all the People in my
Kingdom.

As he came through the Banqueting, house, there they had placed his C^ffin in
his Eye, purposely to deject him, and strike him with terror when he came on
the Scaffold and saw the Block, the Pullies, and Devises, which were made to
bring him, as an Ore to the slaughter, and to force him to the Block, in case
he resused to loy nown his Royal Neck there on: He lifted ^p his Eyes towores
Heaven and said, I am a Sinner, and willing to submit my self to the punishing
Hand of GOD; but not to the Unjust Sentence of Men.

He made a Sp^ech up^^th ^^^^^old, out of which I shall only recite this
^assage, because I will not be tedious.

The Peoples I therty, He proves consists in Government, for the maintenance
of their Government, he says, he was condemned.

Sirs, says he, it was for this that now I am come here; If I would have given
way to an Aroitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power
of the Sword, I needed not to have come hither; and therefore I tell you, and
pray God it be not laid to your charge, That I am the Martyr of the People.

After his Speech, he called for his Night ca^. and putting it on, prepared
himself to suffer that punishment his Enemies had Judged him unto. The Sun
shined that morning very clear without intermission, until the King came to the
F^tai Block, and lay down, and then at that instant a Dark thick Cloud covered
the face of the S^n, which for a time so constimeed, insom^ch, that a Gentle
woman ^anding br^^e to behold this Dreadful Tra^edy; cr^ed out, Look, look,
Sir, the Sun is ashamed, and hides his Face, as loathing to see this Florrid
Murder! immediately upon her words the ^atal Blow was given, such a one against
Christian Religion, as all the D^vtis in Hell could not strike at once, so
dreadfall a peruicious blow ag^in.

This Bloddy stroke being struck upon the Royal Neck of the only Protestant
King in the World, it seemed rather to fall upon the People th^n the King; for
so soon as it fell upon his Neck, the People cried o^t with so grievous and
doleful a cry. as I n^vec heard before; it raised a flood of tears, which
spr^ng out of the Eyes of all that had Ears to hear and Hearts to understand
the Treason, from the Noble to the Beggar; I observed that day, was a weeping
day; I searce saw a Shop of the thousands I beheld that day, wherein I saw not
weeping Eyes, with Hands wringing each other to express the anguish of their
Hearts.

The Presbyterian Congregations in the City of London for the most part
assembled together; all, or the most part of the night before the King was to
suffer to pray for him, if it were the will of God to pray him out of trouble,
however to prepare him for his sufferings, and to carry him through them with
the comforts of the Holy Ghost: Never did King go to Heaven in a greater Cloud
of Prayers and Tears, then this King; and never was their greater mourning for
the loss of any King then this: I think there was scarce a Protestant in the
World, to whom the true Relation came, but shed tears for him; I have talked
with Travelers who can tell more then this, how much the King was mourned for,
especially when they saw his Book, which is Translated into all Languages
almost, and sent into every Country.

At this time there was a consultation held amongst the Grandees of the
Swordmen, concerning a Massacre (...) the chief Royalists and Presbyterians,
both Noble, Gentrey, and Citizens, of the chief of whom they had a List, as
also some in Prison: This was (as I was by several hands informed) carried in
the Affirmative, until one (more politic then the rest) rose up, and told
them. It was the ready way to have their own Throats cut; since now they had
the Army at London, and the Army divided into Levellers, and others, which
Levellers were falling off more and more, and therefore this Blade, like
Achitophel, gave Council wisely, faying, That they had time enough to deal with
them hereafter, without the running of so desperate a hazard.

This was the stopping of that Bloody Massacre and there was good ground for
it; for Lilburn, Osburn, Overton, Prince, and Walwin, perceiving themselves
cheated of their design, and that Cromwell called them in only to keep them
quiet, not to yield to any of their demands; and perceiving that Cromwels
designs were to bring old England into the Spannish Mode, that is, to set up a
Council of State to manage the Affairs of State, and an Inquisition, or High
Court of Justice, to Judge in matters Criminal; (...) into what a Tyrannical
road he was got, like open-hearted men did declare to the World, That the way
was Tyrannical, and against the Liberty of the People, and did protest against
Cromwell as a deceitful Seducer, and a subtle Hypocritical Traitor.

These Libellers (as they basly called them) did lie as a cross Bar in the
Popish Factions way, which hinored from wedding the Blood of the Protestants,
as they intended.

However they showed their intentions* for within a Month we had News from
several parts of same Ministers that were shot for praying ^r the King, and
Preaching for the Covenant.

Or, Calton, a Pious, Gra^e an^ ^^aru^ed Minister of London, was within a Main
so after the King was out off, appreben (...) a L^^aytor, and ^^^yt into.
Prison, for praimor that God would ^^rifore the late Kings Son to his I^^st
Right; after they had out off the Parter (...) King, they pro^^^ded to ^^t off
the ^^^at Protestant Pa^^s it of Europe a of peclaily those that had op^osen it
any (...) heretofore the Pop^^^tion: They had three insure M^^^es of the Land
^^^old, Du^^ Ha^milton, the Earl of Holland, into the Lord Capel; these three
who were sincere Protestants and protect^es of the Dri^odot Government, and
Laws of the Kingdom these had their Heads chopped est in one was upon one
Block Hamilton in Holland they owen a grut^^ too (...). over since they broke
the Poor^ desion, in making up the breach (...) the two Nationa in 1639 no
being shite ^^nents of procuri^ (...) Ma^ent to the over thr^ King of the Po^sh
F^^ction, (...)

About this time those of the Lower House, (...) Telves the Supreain Authority
of the Nation, (...) as a Free State, sent to the (...) of London (...) about a
R^conciliation and A^^^e (...) betwixt, them (...) Th^^ they would not take
away the Church Re^en a^^ but father ^^grease them.

The M^^ster of the (...) made this (...). That before they knew in what, and
how far they would require them to comply with them, they would give no posi^^
answer.

At this thur O^^erton, Prince, W^^lvin, no Lilburn, who were of the Levelling
party, were ca^^ one a our of Cromwels a^^^ctions since I had no lise of them
before he called them waints and now he call^^ them Devils, and Giddy headed
Fellowe^; what ^u^^r: they ope^^ly Declared against the present Po^^e^, as
^llei^^^, Tyran^^ical, and coutrary to the Liberty of the People of England;
for which they were I ^^prisoned in the Tower, which much ^^laged ^he (...)
party, whereby Provideuce so ordeced it that they laid over to the World in
Hele Printed beeks, the secret under hand Plotting of Cromwell and ^^eron with
the Popish Faction wai^^ Popish P^irty, to prome^^ themseives to the Crown.

FINIS.

