The Loyal Citizen Revived. A SPEECH MADE BY Alderman Garroway, AT A
COMMON HALL, On Tuesday the 17. of January, 1642.
Upon occasion of a Speech delivered there the Friday before, by Mr. Pym, at
the reading of His Majesty's Answer to the late Petition.
BEfore we enter upon the business of the day, I must in discharge of my duty
speak freely to you of the last days work which lies so heavy upon us, that if
we find not some way to free our selves of the scandal and dishonor of that
day, farewell the reputation of this Council, and of this City. We sent a
Petition lately to His Majesty, by six worthy Members of this Court, if you
will believe them, they received a very gracious answer back from His Majesty,
and if you will believe most wise men, they brought a very gracious answer back
from His Majesty, with directions by a Servant of His own, that the same should
be communicated to the whole City, from whom the Petition was presumed to be
sent; a circumstance as gracious as the matter itself. See now how we have
requited him: His Messenger stays ten days at the least before we can vouchsafe
to speak with him: whereas ours stayed not an hour for admission to His
Majesty, and but a day for an answer. Upon the receipt of our Petition, His
Majesty spoke very graciously of the City, very affectionately of the most
considerable part of it; when his answer is read (an answer I must tell you,
worth another manner of debate) Strangers are admitted to make bitter invective
Speeches against it, and the King that sent it; Whilst no honest Citizen; who
have only right to speak here, durst speak his Conscience for fear of having
his Throat cut as he went home. Think (Gentlemen) what an encouragement we have
given His Majesty to Treat and Correspond with us, whilst he is thus used: I am
far from undervaluing both, or either House of Parliament, I have been often a
Member of the House of Commons, and know well my duty to it: but though their
Privileges are infinitely grown and enlarged since that time, I hope they have
not swallowed up all other men's; though they are the great Council and Court of
the Kingdom, yet there are other Councils and Courts too, what do we else here?
And though they have a great liberty of Language within their own Walls, I
never heard that they might speak what they list in other places. In my time
when there was any occasion to use the City, as often there was, the Lord
Mayor, or Aldermen, or some trusted by them were sent for to attend either
House, but for Members of either or both Houses to come hither, and be present
at Our Councils, and govern here by Privilege of Parliament, was never heard of
till of late: you will say it is a great honor to us, that those Worthies take
the pains to come to us, when they might send for us, it may be an honor too
great for us to bear: and truly I believe it has been so chargeable to us,
that we ought not to be ambitious of such honor. Mr. Pym (who has been a very
costly Orator to us) told us (and his Speech is since Printed for our honor
too, to show how tame a people we are) that there were many things in that
answer of great aspersion upon the proceedings of Parliament, and so forth.
Truly I know no such thing, if we Petitioned for Peace, we were to expect His
Majesty would tell us by what means that Peace came to be disturbed, and then
prescribe us a means for our reparation. If any man's guilt has made himself
concerned in it, though he be not named, he is his own Accuser.

He told us that there was no occasion given by any Tumults which might justly
cause His Majesty's departure, and this he said was the opinion of both Houses,
and his proof was, because His Majesty came into the City without a Guard, and
Dined at the Sheriffs next day after his coming to the House of Commons, and
returned back again to White Hall, where he stayed some days. I am willing to
believe both Houses as far as I am able, and if they had declared that it had
been lawful to beat the King out of Town, I must have sat still with wonder,
but when they declare to us matter of Fact, which is equally within our own
knowledge, and wherein we cannot be deceived, they must pardon me if I differ
from them. If they should declare, that they have paid us all the Money they owe
us, or that there is no Cross standing in Cheapside, could we believe them?
Why, Gentlemen, neither of these is better known to us, than that there were
such Tumults at Westminster, as might very well make the King think himself in
danger. We all well remember what excellent company flocked by White Hall every
day, for a week before the King went to the House of Commons, and for His
coming to the Guild Hall the next day, when he did us so much honor, to
vouchsafe us so particular satisfaction, and came without a Guard, to show how
much He trusted in our Duty and Affection. (I pray God the deceiving that Trust
may never rise in Judgment against this City) we too well remember the rude
carriage of many people to Him, as He went to the Sheriffs to Dinner, which was
not so much as reprehended by any Officer; and we all know what passed the
night following, when an Alarm was given, that there was an attempt from
White Hall upon the City, and so all men put into sudden Arms, and if by the
great industry and dexterity of our good Lord Mayor, (Sir Richard Gurney) that
Hubbub had not been appeased, God knows what might have followed, if you will
belive some men, they will tell you the Design of those, who gave that Alarm,
was no less than to pull down White Hall. There is no question but there was
cause enough for His Majesty to remove from White Hall, and how quietly he
stayed after at Hampton Court, and at Windsor, cannot be forgotten, not to
speak of the Army by Land and Water, which accompanied the Persons Accused to
Westminster, the next day after His Majesty's remove, I think, the danger of
which was so great, that no honest man could have wished the King had run the
hazard of it by staying.

His Majesty seems to be sensible that the Government of this City is now
submitted to the Arbitrary Power of a few desperate persons, to which this
Gentleman gave us this Testimony from both Houses, that we had in most of the
great occasions, concerning the Government of the City, followed their
direction: Troth Gentlemen, would they had furnished us with a better Answer.
Have we our Charter by the Grace and Favor of the two Houses, or by the
Goodness of the King? Have we those Privileges with Foraign Princes, by which
many here have gotten such Estates, by the power of the Houses, or by the
Protection of the King? Why should we then govern the City by direction of both
Houses? I am not willing to speak slightly of any persons gotten into
Authority, only we may say, there be some amongst us we did not think two years
ago to have met here, and yet we were wont to see an Alderman coming a dozen
year off. I cannot tell what you mean by Arbitrary power, but I am sure we are
governed by nothing we were used to be governed by. I have been Lord Mayor my
self, in a pleasanter time than this, and should have some share still in the
Government; before God, I have no more Authority in the City, than a Porter,
not so much as an Aldermanbury Porter. If to be Governed by People whose
Authority we know not, and by Rules which no body ever heard of, or can know,
be a sign of Arbitrary Power, we have as much of it, as heart can wish.

To the Kings charge of our Contributing for the maintenance of the Army which
had given Him Battle, we were told that diverse practices were made against the
Parliament before they made any preparation for their defense. By practices I
think they mean Fears and Jealousies, for all the particulars mentioned by Him,
we know, and are understood by all the Boys in the street; but we are sure
there were Ten thousand men Raised and Armed out of this Town, and the
Neighbor Counties, before the King had seven hundred. To the danger that the
Kings Person was in (at the thought whereof every honest heart trembles) the
Gentleman told us they were sorry for it, I dare not tell you what I think
their sorrow was. But (Masters) if you knew how much your Estates and Being
depends upon the life and safety of our good King, you would no sooner
apprehend Him in danger, than you would run to His rescue, as you would fly
from the Plague and Beggary. But that reproach of maintaining the Kings
Children here, I confess made my heart rise, I hope it did so to many here: Is
our good King fallen so low, that His Children must be kept for Him? it is
worth our enquiry who brought Him to that condition. We hear Him complain that
all his own Revenue is seized and taken from Him; Is not His Exchequer, Court
of Wards, Mint here, his Customs too are worth somewhat, and are His Children
kept upon Alms? How shall we and our Children prosper if this be not remedied?

They will by no means endure that His Majesty be obeyed in the apprehension of
the Lord Mayor, and the other three Gentlemen, for it is the sense of both
Houses that this demand is against the Privilege of Parliament, and most
dishonorable to the City. For the first I dare not speak my mind, though I
must confess my self not able to answer the Kings reasons in many of His
Declarations upon that point; but for the second, (under the favor of both
Houses) whether it be dishonorable for the City, whether it be fit be done or
no, we are the best, indeed we are the only Judges. I will take the liberty to
speak freely my Conscience in this Case, as a friend to Justice, as a lover of
these men, and as a Servant to the City, and as all these I protest to God, if
I were now Lord Mayor, and the other three were my Father, and my Brothers, I
would satisfy the King in this point. Did His Majesty ask to have them put to
death merely upon His Accusation, or have them sent bound hand and foot to
Oxford, where it might be in his power to proceed against them in an
extraordinary way, it might seem unreasonable: but to apprehend them to keep
them in safe custody, that His Majesty may proceed against them according to
the known Laws, under which they were born and bred, where if guilty, they must
be left to the Justice of the Law, and His Majesty's mercy, if innocent will
receive an honorable acquittal, seems to me so just in the King to ask, and so
necessary for us to yield to, that the denying it implies a doubt in us of the
Innocence of those whom we will not submit to Justice. Here is a way to find
out the Kings Evil Counselors! If these men do their part like men of good
Consciences, submit to the Trial of the Law, which is the only Judge of Guilt
and Innocence, and are found clear from that heavy charge His Majesty accuses
them of, how gloriously will these men live hereafter, and the King cannot
refuse to deliver those up who have wickedly conspired the destruction of
honest men, but if we shall only cry out that the King is misinformed, and dare
not trust our selves upon a Trial, we may preserve our safety, but we shall
lose our reputation: Thus much for Justice, for the Gentlemen's sakes now: This
way you see, a way to honor and safety too, if there be innocence; but do you
think after a months longer enduring the miseries which are now upon us, men
will not more importunately and impatiently enquire after the causes of their
sufferings, if they shall find that the denial to give up four men (who it may
be are not of any known merit too) to be Tried by the Law, being accused of
High Treason, and conspiring to take away the Kings life, incensed our Gracious
King against us, and kept him from being amongst us, whereby our Trade decays,
and such violences and outrages are every day committed; I say, can any four
men bear the burden of this envy and malice? Will not some stout bold persons,
incensed and made desperate by their, and the common sufferings, tear these men
in pieces? We have been all young men and Apprentices, let us remember the
spirit was then amongst us; would we have suffered all our hopes to have been
blasted, and destroyed by any four, or fourteen men? Let us not flatter our
selves, there is the same courage still in the City, which at some time will
break out to the ruin of more than these men; but I thank that Worthy that
told us, that it is against the Rules of Justice, that any men should be
imprisoned upon a general Charge, when no particulars are proved against them;
How insensibly in other men's cases do we accuse our selves; why, how many of us
within these six months have been committed upon a general Charge? How many
persons of Honor and Reputation are now imprisoned in this Town, when
particulars are so far from being proved against them, that they are not so
much as suggested. Was ever any Charge so general as to be a Malignant or
Cavalier? yet you hear all such imprisonments are against the Rules of Justice;
my opinion is, that for Justice sake, for the Cities sake, for their own sakes,
these four men should quietly submit themselves to the Trial of the Law; if
they refuse, that they be delivered up to the hands of Justice.

Mr. Pym told us, there was no proof that my Lord Mayor, and the other persons
named, were countenancers of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries. Where
should this proof be made? Do we not all know this to be true; are they not all
so much countenanced, as there is no countenance left for any body else? Did
not my Lord Mayor first enter upon his Office with a Speech against the Book of
Common Prayer? has the Common Prayer ever been read before him? has not
Captain Venn said that his Wife could make Prayers worth three of any in that
Book? Oh (Masters) there have been times that he that should speak against the
Book of Common Prayer in this City, should not have been put to the patience of
a legal Trial. We were wont to look upon it as the greatest Treasure and Jewel
of our Religion, and he that should have told us he wished well to our
Religion, and yet would take away the Book of Common Prayer, would never have
gotten credit. I have been in all the parts of Christendom, and have conversed
with Christians in Turkey. Why, in all the Reformed Churches there is not any
thing of more reverence than the English Liturgy, not our Royal Exchange, or
the name of Q Elizabeth, so famous. In Geneva it self I have heard it extolled
to the Skies. I have been three months together by Sea, not a day without
hearing it read twice. The honest Mariners then despised all the world but the
King and the Common Prayer Book; he that should have been suspected to wish ill
to either of them, would have made an ill Voyage. And let me tell you, they are
shrewd youths those Seamen, if they once discern that the person of the King is
in danger, or the true Protestant professed Religion, they will show themselves
mad bodies before you are aware of it; I would not be a Brownist or an
Anabaptist in their way for -- But we are told of an Army of Papists who will
root out our Religion; for my part, I am sure I am not suspected for any
affection to Papists, yet I confess at this time, I have not the least fear of
danger from them, and the truth is, the Bugbear is grown less terrible to every
body. We know from the beginning of this Parliament, the discovery of Plots by
the Papists, and what those discoveries have cost us, and yet to this day not
the least probable Charge objected against them. When the King was at York, no
discourse here, but of the Papists being there in multitudes, when it is well
known, His Majesty took all possible care to prevent the resort of any Papist
to the Court; and I have been assured by very honest men, that in a month there
was scarce the Face of one Papist there. When he first raised his Army, did he
not by Proclamation forbid any to come to him? -- But hark you Gentlemen, where
would you have these Papists be? can they live in the Air, or in the Water?
Beyond Sea you will not suffer them to pass; if they stay at their Houses they
are Plundered, it is good Justification for Plundering, that they are Papists.
Are they not the Kings Subjects, and should they not fly to Him for protection?
Is there any Law that says the Papists must not assist the King with Men, Arms
or Money, when he is in distress, and when he conceives Himself to be in danger
of His life? Let us look about us, if this world hold, not only all the
Papists, but all the Gentlemen of England will find it necessary to carry all
they have to the King, and venture it in that bottom.

But both Houses have declared that there has been no Plundering by the
direction of Parliament. Here I think they would be willing to admit the King
to be a part of the Parliament to save their honor, otherwise if Plundering
signifies the coming with violence into ones house, and taking away his Goods
without his consent, sure there has been much Plundering, even by the direction
of the Houses; but have they ever punished Plundering in the worst sort, if
they have not directed it? Will a Declaration of both Houses repair the fine
Wainscot, and the goodly Leads of honest George Bynions house? Let me tell you,
the time has been the loss of such a Citizen would have been talked of in
another way -- I wonder what kind of Government is preparing for us, when they
will not allow that the imprisonment of our person is the taking away our
Liberty, or the taking away the twentieth part of our Estates, is the
destruction of our Property; and did you mark what a notable reason was given
for this; the same Law that does enable them to Raise Force, does likewise
enable them to require Contributions. It does indeed; yet one might be without
the other: but I would these Gentlemen had chose another Auditory to have
convinced with this Argument; the Country people will be no more couzened by
the City, when they hear what kind of Oratory prevails over us. We shall be
shortly told when they have a mind to our Houses, that the same Law which gave
them Authority to take away our money, gave them power likewise to do the other
too.

The King tells us, if we shall hereafter Contribute any thing for the
maintenance of the Army, which He says is in Rebellion against him, (He pardons
what is past, mark that,) He will deny us the benefit of his Protection with
Foreign Princes, which He will signify to His Foreign Ministers, what remedy
have the Lords and Commons found for this now? Sufficient to do the business,
they declare, That this is an excess of Rigor, and Injustice beyond example,
and therefore they hope His Majesty will be induced by better Counsel to
forbear the execution. A very Sovereign Declaration, but it is ten to one if we
do not obey His Majesty in the Injunction he has laid upon us, He will use the
excess of rigor, I know not how little you, that Trade only within the
Kingdom, may think your selves concerned in this, but I say whosoever
understands the Trade abroad, and the benefit of being a Subject to the King of
England, will not run this hazard; for let him be assured in the instant the
King disclaims him, he is ruined; and therefore you who have Estates abroad,
look to it.

Gentlemen, I have troubled you very long, but in good Faith, the manner and
the matter of the last days work, has lain so heavy upon my heart, that I
should have thought I had forfeited this Gown, and this Chain if I had been
silent; and that I had betrayed the Liberty of that famous City, which I am
sworn to defend. One word I had forgotten to mention, the caution which was
given us of such Messengers as His Majesty should send, that we should observe
them, that they might be dealt with as Messengers of Sedition. God forbid we
should live to see any Messengers sent to us from our Gracious King evilly
entreated, I would be loath my self to outlive such a dishonor. If His Majesty
shall vouchsafe us the Honor to send to us, let us use and defend His
Servants, as Persons sent to us for our good; if it shall be otherwise, Fire
from Heaven will consume this City. Let us not be wrought upon by fair words,
to Contribute or Lend more money for the maintenance of this Civil, Bloody
dissension, or bring desolation and confusion of this glorious City for the
support of four men, who if Innocent will be safe: but let us remember the
happiness and flourishing Estate we enjoyed, whilst we yielded obedience to our
Royal Sovereign. Let us not upon the general discourse of Evil Counselors
Rebel against a Prince, upon whose Person, Malice, and Treason cannot lay the
least blemish, but must confess His Religion, Justice, and Charity to be so
transcendent, that if He were a Subject would render Him most amiable. Let us
consider that if He be oppressed, there can be no end of these troubles, but we
and our children shall be perpetually weltring in a Sea of blood; whereas if
His Enemies be overthrown, the whole Kingdom will within a moment to be
restored to all the calm Pleasure and Plenty of Peace. And therefore if we
intend to enjoy what we have, and that the younger men shall grow up to the
same Estate we enjoy; if the memory of our Forefathers, or the hope of our
Posterity can move any thing with us, let us lay hold on the Kings Mercy, and
submit to every Proposition in His Answer.

FINIS.

