The true Case of the state of Sir JOHN GELL, Prisoner in the Tower: Accused of
High Treason, and misprision of Treason.
With a short Argument thereupon.
THat John Barnard, with one Pits (by the name of Smith) desired Mr. Andrews to
join with them in a plot, to surprise the Isle of Ely.

That Andrews was thought to be somewhat inclinable thereunto: Barnard comes to
the Lord President Bradshaw, and acquaints him with it.

The Lord President bids Bernard go forward with the plot, as Bernard declares
in Court at the trial of Andrews.

That Bernard did go again with Pits, to Andrews, and told him, that if he
would draw an Oath of Secrecy, and sign and seal the same, then Bernard would
help him to two hundred pounds, to bear his charges beyond Sea, to get
Commissions to raise men for the effecting the said plot; and that both Bernard
and Pits, did promise to sign and seal the Oath of secrecy likewise.

That Andrews (being in necessity) upon Bernards motion) did sign and seal the
Oath aforesaid.

That Bernard and Smith did sign and seal the Oath also.

Then Bernard desired Andrews to write a Letter to some Persons of Note, to
subscribe the Oath; Andrews thereupon writes a Letter directed to Sir John
Baronet.

That as soon as this was done, Bernard had Officers ready, and seized on
Andrews for high Treason, and then brings the Letter directed to Sir John
Baronet, to the Lord President Bradshaw.

That the Lord President kept the Letter, and lets Bernard and Pits have a Copy
of it.

That Bernard and Pits brings the Copy (as they say) to Sir John Gell.

That Bernard and Pits both say, Sir John Gell did refuse to Act in the same
Plot, and so burnt the Letter.

That the Letter was brought to Sir John Gell (as Bernard and Pits says) on a
Saturday-night after ten of the Clock.

That Master Spittlehouse a Messenger had a Warrant the next morning early
(being the Lords day) to apprehend Sir John Gell.

That Sir John Gell has for the space of above five months been Close
Prisoner in the Tower, and now to be tried before the high Court of Justice for
Treason, and misprision of Treason.

That it does clearly appear, that the Lord President was privy to all these
Proceedings.

The Argument.
Upon the whole matter, here must needs appear a a foul Conspiracy, and foul
practice, against the Life and Estate of Sir John Gell, by Bernard and Pits, to
the knowledge of the Lord President; as appears, thus:

1 THe Letter was directed to Sir John Baronet, what was that to Sir John Gell?
2 The Letter was delivered by Bernard to the Lord President; why then a Copy
sent to Sir John Gell, unless it were to ensnare him? 3 The Warrant was made to
apprehend Sir John Gell; why not to take Sir John Baronet, to whom the Letter
was directed? Then had Sir John Gell been never questioned. 4 It does appear,
that the Lord President knew that Bernard and Pits would deliver the Copy of
the Letter to Sir John Gell, or else why should the Warrant be made to take Sir
John Gell? 5 The pretended Letter was delivered Saturday night, after ten of
the clock, and the Warrant to take Sir John Gell, was the next morning in the
Messengers hands; so that it is more than probable, that the Warrant was made
before the pretended Letter was delivered; for that the Council of State seldom
sits of a Saturday-night after ten a Clock, and on Sunday morning to be sure
they did not sit: now let all rational men judge, what a Snare here was laid,
(and by whom) to catch Sir John Gell: Is this Justice to make a Warrant to take
a man before any pretended Crime be committed!
Again, Sir John Gell does deny that he received any such letter or Copy of
letter: and for that the High Court of Justice, has no color of proof, but
the oaths of this Bernard and Pits who are no evidence in law; neither is their
testimony valid by the Common nor Civil law, for that they are both perjured
and scandalous: 1. Perjured, they are twice over in this copy. 1. For that they
entered into an oath of secrefie, with an intent to break it, and did break it.
2. For that they have sworn they delivered Andrews his letter to Sir John Gell,
and the Lord President says it was but a copy, and it will be proved, that the
Lord President had the letter, and that it never came to Sir John Gell; now it
is evidently seen, that they are both already perjured in this very case; what
men in the world ought to believe these witnesses? And then for forgery and
subornation, Bernard has been very frequent in; as in forging or countenancing
the forgers, of several Acts of Parliament, and other deeds and writings
against Mr. Brown, formerly Clerk of the Parliament; and for his subornation, he
the said Bernard did offer to John Benson, a large sum of money, to swear to
the articles he had against Mr. Speaker, although he knew well that Benson did
not know any word in the articles to be true.

Again, Barnard has been a Cavalier in arms against the parliament, he is a
known Papist, and a reputed Jesuit; a contriver of plots to set the nation at
variance, and to make the Parliament and Council of State odious in the eyes of
the people, as will appear by this practice, and by the articles hereafter
resited; which articles were long since delivered to some of the Members of
Parliament, under the hand of Mr. Stephen Sprat; which being well considered,
you may see who is the traitor.

To the supreme Authority; the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
Articles humbly exhibited against John Bernard, Gent. now called by the name
of Captain Bernard, for safety of the Parliament, and on behalf of this
Commonwealth, by Stephen Spratt.
1 THat the said John Bernard did speak to Col. William Eyres, to join with him
the said John, to raise five hundred men to cut the throats of the Parliament;
or words to that effect.

2 That he the said Bernard, did say to William Learner, that it would never be
well for England, till thirty of the Grandees sitting in this Parliament, were
cut off; and that the only way for freedom, was to raise the people to
destroy the Parliament; or words to that effect.

3 That the said John Bernard did say to Richard Parham, that he did prosecute
Mr. Speaker, for no other end, but to throw a bone amongst the Members of
Parliament, to set them at variance, to destroy them, or words to that effect.

4 That it has been the daily practice of the said Bernard, to foment and
create disturbances and distractions in Parliament, and between the Parliament
and people, since England was a fr^ee Commonwealth; and to that purpose, did
speak to William Lazinby, to assist him the said John, to raise fourscore men,
to seiz upon Mr. Speaker, and to cut his throat.

5. That the said Bernard is reported to be a Papist, and one of a Jesuitical
practice, and has been in Arms for the late King against the Parliament, and
the better to bring about his traitorous Design, he did not only foment and
raise Articles against the Speaker of this Parliament, but against many other
Members of the same, and did go to and fro showing the said Articles to several
People, to raise the Spirits of the People against the Parliament.

By these Articles the World may judge whether Bernard be not as great a
Traitor as ever yet was heard of in these Times; and therefore consider of how
dangerous a Consequence it will be to take his Testimony for Evidence against
any who has been for the Parliament; if this man be believed for a Witness, and
let pass with these wicked practices, the Parlaments best Friends will be in
danger; he may as well conntrive Plots to ensnare the Members of Parliament one
after another, as he has already done! or he may put the same Trick upon any
Member of the high Court of Justice, or any other Person; where such foul
practices go unpunished no man can be safe; for instance, when he had the
pretended Copy of the Letter, directed to Sir John Baronet, he might have made
whom he please Sir John Baronet, he might as well have delivered the Letter to
any Sir John who had been or is now a Member of Parliament, as well as to Sir
John Gell, and so he might have brought into trouble whom he pleased.

And then for Treason, there could be no Treason unless there had been some
real Design against the Commonwealth, but in this pretended Plot there does
not appear any, because the Contriver never intended (as may be supposed by his
Discover,) that it should ever come to pass! so it does appear, that this was a
mere feigned Fiction or Resemblance of a Plot; not to hurt the Commonwealth,
but to betray and ensnare particular Persons for Bernard's Gain.

And the Act was not made to prevent and punish Fantasies, Fictions, or Plays,
but real and wicked practices, and pernicious designs to stir up a new and
bloody War, and therefore it can be thought no less than a piece of pure
Justice for the Parliament, to refer this business to a Committee to examine,
and report, that they may see what Cause there is to try Sir John Gell, before
they give way for his Trial.

And for misprision and Concealment of Treason, there can be none, where there
is no Treason (for without a Principal there can be no Accessory) and
misprision or concealment of Treason is only to know of Treason, and not to
reveal it to the State, which was not intended Sir John Gell should do, for
that there was not time enough for him to reveal it, between the time of the
pretended Delivery of the pretended Letter, and the granting of the Warrant to
take him.

Again, further it could be no misprision or Concealment of Treason in Sir John
Gell, because it was known to the State before it was known to him; as it
appears by Bernard's testimony in Court, the Lord President knew of it: Now, if
it should be misprision of Treason not to reveal Treason after the State knows
of it, then it is misprision in all men that hears of this (pretended Treason)
and do not go and reveal it to the State; but it is no misprision nor
concealment of Treason for any not to reveal Treason to the State, when the
State knows of it before; and they did know of it; for Andrews was seized at
Gravesend, before the pretended Letter was brought to Sir John Gell.

And if it shall be objected, that Andrews was the principal in the pretended
Treason, and Sir John Gell the accessory, and Concealer of it, then the Answer
will be thus:

That nothing brings Sir John Gell in question, but the Letter which Bernard
says he delivered (from Andrews directed to Sir John, Baronet) to Sir John
Gell; which Letter was brought to the Lord President, and a Copy pretended to
be afterward delivered to Sir John Gell; so that he received nothing from
Andrews: if he received any thing it must, be from Bernard, and known to the
Lord President: which makes him not to be accessory, to Andrews his Treason; if
Sir John should be guilty of misprision or Concealment of treason, then Bernard
must be the principal; but Bernard is not charged with treason; therefore Sir
John not guilty of misprision, or concealment of treason.

If it should be objected, that Andrews delivered the Letter to Bernard,
directed to Sir John, Baronet, with private Instructions, to be delivered to
Sir John Gell, as Bernard swears he did; then answer, What man of common Reason
will believe Bernard, who is so foul a perjured Traitor, and a party to the
pretended Plot.

Again, (if that should be admitted) Could Sir John Gell prevent Andrews from
sending him a Letter, or Bernard of bringing it, Sir John Gell not knowing of
the Letter, and therefore he could be no party in the plot; What if Bernard
should bring a Letter from a Traitor to any Membr of Parliament, or high Court
of Justice, (as it is like he will do many, if he be let alone) and have a
Sergeant at Arms ready to attach them upon Receipt of the Letter, before they
can reveal it; are they therefore ever the more guilty of treason, or
misprision, or concealment of treason; no, nor Sir John Gell is not guilty of
treason, nor misprision, or concealment of treason, neither did he ever receive
any Letter or Copy of a Letter from Andrews, by Bernard or any other person, as
will appear by these following Lines, written and subscribed by the hand of a
dying Man.

I Colonel Eusebius Andrews, being this day to die, by God's good providence,
finding by the testimony given by Jo. Bernard (which God forgive) against me
upon my Trial, that the matter of his Averment concerning the delivery of a
Letter by me written unto Sir John Gell, as disposed to the hand of him the
said Sir John Gell, in Case the Court upon Trial of Sir John Gell, shall give
credit thereunto, may tend to the Destruction of the said Sir John; do in my
tender and Christian desire, as much as in me lies, to prevent the hurt
intended to the Innocent, protest before God, that I my self was examined to
the Original Letter, by me to him written from Gravesend, which was at the time
of my being confronted with Sir John Gell, in the hands of the Lord President
Bradshaw; and that the Lord Bradshaw demanding of him, where the Letter was, I
then said, he did never receive it, and Sir Henry Mildmay had nere discovered
the said Letter, if the Lord President had not given him a hint, and that the
Letter Original was not directed to Sir John Gell by me, but to Sir John
Baronet, but not to Sir John Gell,

Witness the dying hand of Eusebius Andrews.
Aug. 22. And whereas it is reported, that Sir John Gell has gotten a great
Estate by the Wars; this let the World know that a great part of the County of
Derby-shire, has, been examined against him; many of them by the Committee of
Accounts formerly sitting in Cornwall, (London) and others by the Committee of
the County, and no manner of misdemeanour could be found against him, which he
ever did act against the State, and therefore he does refer his Friends and
Enemies (if any Conscience be left in them) to his late Vindication published
in print, which here follows, in haec verba;



The Vindication of John Gell Barronet, set forth by way of protestation;
against several Scandals and Calumnies, cast upon him, by some malicious
Enemies.
WHereas several Scandals and Calumnies are cast upon me, by some unworthy,
malicious spirits, who seeks my ruin; That in the time of war, when I had
command in Derby-shire, I did get to my self, a great estate, by taxing the
County, as also by plundering, and getting into my hands the Estates of several
delinquents, and other great sums of money, which I should receive in the said
County, and thereabouts;

These are therefore, in the presence of the Almighty God, by Protestation,
without any equivocation, mental Reservation, or secret Evasion, That neither
directly, nor indirectly, I got to my self, or to any other Person, for my use,
by way of tax, receipt, plundering, or otherwise, one penny, or pennies worth
of the money, or goods of any person, or persons whatsoever; nor for above five
years service, and some thousands of pounds out of purse, never did receive the
value of one hundred pound, But all taxes, receipts, and other public money
were paid to, and received by Mr. Nathaniel Hallowes, Mr. Jervis Bennet, and
Henry Buchston, who were Treasurers of the County, one after another; and
without all question they being men of honest and known integrity, will
justify me in this my Protestation; to the truth whereof, I do call the great
God of Heaven and Earth to witness; and upon this issue, I will cast my self
upon the Parliament, avowing, that if any thing be proved, contrary to what I
have here published, I will be willing to forfeit and loose all that is near
and dear unto me.

JOHN GELL.

FINIS.

