PUBLIC GOOD Without Private INTEREST: OR, A Compendious Remonstrance of the
present sad State and Condition of the English Colonie in VIRGINEA.

WITH A Modest DECLARATION of the several Causes (so far as by the Rules of
Right, Reason, and Religious Observation may be Collected) why it has not
prospered better hitherto

AS ALSO, A Submissive suggestion of the most prudentiall probable ways, and
means, both Divine and Civil (that the inexpert Remembrancer could for the
present recall to mind) for its happyer improvement and advancement for the
future.

Humbly presented to His Highness the Lord Protector, By a Person zealously
devoted, To the more effectual propagating of the Gosp^l in that Nation, and to
the enlargement of the Honor and Benefit, both of the said Colonie, and this
whole Nation, from whence they have been transplanted.

Qui sibi soliim se natum putat,
secum solus semper vivat,
Hoc solum habent homines cum deo commune,
Aliis been facere Synes.
To do good, and to communicate, forget not:
for with such sacrifices, God is well pleased,
Heb. 13. v. 16. LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh, and are to be sold at the
Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To his Highness, the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The humble Petition of Lionel Gatford. B.D.
Most humbly shows.
WHereas your Petitioner, upon your Highness gracious dispensation for the
exercising of his Ministeral function etc. (a favor never to be forgotten by
him or his) did endeavor the procuring admission into a settled Cure of souls,
but was denied it by some Commissioners clayming authority under you. Your
Petitioner (being willing to interpret that act of theirs, as well as all
things else that happens to him from men in the most charitable sense he can,
and knowing Gods hand to rule and overruled, as he pleases in the most
seemingly accidentals amongst mortals) began thereupon to consider with
himself; whether God might not in his mercy design him, to what some men, in
too much unkindness had doomed him, viz. to some more Apostolical way of
preaching, either from house to house, here in his native Country, or (if he
had but the Apostles gift of tongues) throughout the whole world habitable
abroad. For he could not think, that God had called him to be a minister of the
Gospel, and enabled him im in some poor measure for it, and honored him with
so long continuance and good success in it (to the praise of his grace only be
it spoken) to that end, that, when he had so long served him, as a public
teacher of men, he should at the last, end his days in the private teaching of
Children; though he undervalues not that his present employment by preferring
that other before it; nor will he receed from it (God inabling and your
Highness permitting him) till he have educated those that are or shall be
committed to his care and tuition, if their friends shall require it. Whereupon
your Petitioner casting about and making inquiry, in what Country or Nation he
might do God most service; poor neglected despised Virginea, and the English
Colonie there, with the adjacent heathen inhabitants of the same continent,
came often and often into his thoughts; and his bowels yerned toward them;
especially, after that he had understood, from some men of honor and honesty,
their present sad state and condition, and the fair hopes and probabilities of
doing God and them very much service there. Only the prime (...), whereby he
conceives, he may most prudentially judge of the likelihood of his success in
undertaking ought for the good and benefit of that people, will be your
Highness assisting or not assisting in the information of what is already
experimentally found to be the grand hindrances of that colonie's prospering
amongst themselves, and the main impediments of the Gospel's fart har
propagating both amongst themselves and amongst their neighboring Indians, and
are here with humbly presented unto you: For unless those things complained of
in this Remonstrance be redressed and the Government (as is therein humbly
desired) be put into good hands, skillful to manage it; and such a public
profession of Religion, both for Doctrine and worship, be established, and such
a fence of discipline set about it, as that both those, who would remove from
hence thither, may before hand know what Religion they may there enjoy, and
when they come thither be assured to enjoy it; and the Heathen also thereunto
adjoining, may from the very eternal order and beauty thereof, as well as for
the unanimous, constant profession and practice of it amongst those of the
Colonie, be fairly united and sweetly drawn to the same Christian communion
and fellowship with them; it cannot be expected, that either your Petitioner,
or any other, how zealously affected soever they are to the advancement of Gods
glory, and the propagation of the Gospel of Christ should leave their preaching
and other Ministration here in their own native Country that so much needs
them, though they should be allowed to preach no where but in bonds and
fetters, or in caves and other hiding places, (which they fear not, so long as
your Highness shall retain the Sovereign power solely in your own hands) and go
into Virginea to labor there in utter impossibilities, or to be thrust out
from laboring, when any probabilities of doing good should be offered them,
only upon the distaste or suggestion of any turbulent or vicious persons that
shall complain of them to a Governor, as indiscreet and vicious as themselves.
If a preacher had Saint Paul's immediate call to bear Christ's name before the
Gentiles, as well as Gods own Israel, or were otherwise as well assured, of the
like call; all seeming impossibilities of doing good, and all affrighting fears
of suffering evil would soon vanish, and he would account it honor sufficient
to suffer for Christ, where his preaching of Christ, should be rejected or
rendered succesless. But, where a Preacher is to conclude his call to any
people, as well from the door of hope, that is opened to him for his glorifying
God, and doing good to men, as from Christ's inward knocking at the door of his
heart by the motions of his holy Spirit (not discernable from the impulse of
his own Spirit, but by the concurrence of Scriptural exhortations and
persuasions, or clear deductions from thence, tending to the same ends without
any by ends of his own) there it would be deservedly reputed little less than
madness for any to undertake the preaching Christ to the Heathen, when the
wicked lives and unjust perfidious, cruel, bloody practices of those, that call
themselves Christians, and profess the same faith with that Preacher, lie in
the door, and bar up the way against his entering into them and their opening
unto him: and it would be more possible for him to remove Mountains, than any
to remove that impediment of scandel, unless your Highness set to your helping
hand, and reform by your power and authority, derived to some pious prudent,
upright Governor under you, as well as the Ministers of the Colonie endeavor
it, by their faithful preaching and holy conversation.

May it therefore please your Highness, in compassion of that great Colonie,
and in commiseration of so many thousand souls, both Christian and Heathen, as
that Colonie and continent, wherein they are seated, abounds with, to vouchsafe
your best skill, and to exercise your utmost power (for the work needs and
deserves both) for the effecting that great and glorious design, the
preservation of that English Colonie from sudden temporal ruin, and the
saving both them and their neibouring Indians from eternal perdition; the sole
and soul desire of your unworthy Petitioner, and the only crime of his ensuing
Remonstrance. And your Petitioner which thousands of thousands more shall
incessantly pray for your Highness etc.
TO THE Candid Reader.
HE that sets himself to do any good, Luke 14.
especially for the public, must not only set down first and count the cost,
whether he have sufficient to finish his work, least, after he has laid the
foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,
saying, This man began to build but was not able to finish: but he must be sure
also to arm himself both against himself and what his own flesh and blood shall
object, and against the Devil and all Devilish men, and what those wicked
Spirits can suggest or belch forth, for the hindering or retarding him in his
work; least otherwise he be fowly foiled in his undertaking it, or fall off
shamefully and disgracefully from it, before he have perfected it; and so both
lose his Crown, which is promised only to him that overcommeth, Rev. cap. 2.
and 3.
and pull scorn and contempt upon himself for his weakness and apostacy, and
render the work it self for the more difficult and dreadful to others, that
would happily otherwise have labored successfully in it. Now for the cost of
this present undertaking its easi to be valued, so far as it yet concerns me:
For all that I undertake, is but the representing of the present sad condition
of the English Colonie in Virginea, with the rational causes thereof, and the
probable means of its relief and redress, unto one, that is known to have
sufficiency both of skill and power, and what else is requisite for effecting
and accomplishing what is humbly desired of him, or soberly intimated to him.
And although this cost me somewhat more, both in expense of time and labor,
for the composing and framing both the Petition and the Remonstrance than to
merit the ambitious time-crack of being autoschediastical or extempore (for I
dare not present ought to man, that cost me nothing) yet it cost me so little,
that I think it not worth the computing. For some Planters in and Traders to
Virginea, that are of known credit and reputation, furnished me with the
collections, and other Persons of honor undertook the procuring both them and
my Petition access to his Highness; and if I have, or can thereby but lay the
foundation of an happy reformation of that declining Plantation, the honor of
proceeding so far, will, in my account and in the estimate of all honest men,
much outweigh the scoffs and mocks of all Sanballats or Tobiahs that shall
malign the finishing of the building. And I hope God will stir up the Spirits
of some zealous Haggais and Zachariahs to incite and encourage some noble
Heroic Zerubbabels and Joshuas to perfect what shall be left unfinished by
those worthies, whom I, that am less than the least of the Lords Prophets, and
unworthy to be called a Prophet, have called upon and incited to appear in this
honorable and pious work. And for what mine own flesh and blood could object
against this undertaking, though the objections were many and seemingly strong
(especially when they were backed by others, that would have made me believe,
they love me as well as I can my self) yet God (to the glory of his grace be it
spoken) enabled me either to remove or leap over them all: and I was, and am
confident, that seeing I do not in this work seek my self, but the glory of
God, and the good of so many souls, if I should chance to lose my self in it,
I should find my self and that both infinitely comforted in that loss, and
superabundantly recompensed for it. The chief thing then, that remains to be
done by me, is the arming my self, or rather the daily supplicating of God to
arm me, against the fiery darts, that Satan and his accomplices, wicked men,
shall cast at me to beat me off from this work, or to affright me in it. And
(praised be the Lord) I have been so acquainted with their envy and detraction,
the two prime poisonous barbed arrows of their Hellish quiver, in some other
undertakings, that God has honored me with, and carried me through; that I
only so far fear them and the rest of that invenomed sheaf, as to betake me to
the armor which the Lord of hosts has counseled me to make use of against
them, and to apply me to those holy means which he has prescribed both for the
getting that armor and the girting it on, as also for the exercising and
managing it to the best advantage. I know that envy and detraction are as
constant attendants upon every good action of note and eminency especially, as
the devil himself is a diligent malicous observer of it; that to eat out the
very heart of it, if its venomous tooth can reuch it; and this to grangrene
some of the more exterior useful comely parts of it, if the vitals escape its
poison. But if God please to preserve the undertaker, and to prosper his
undertaking; let the Red Dragon himself cast forth a whole flood of poison
after him and that which he travails with, he can no more hurt him or hinder
his effecting what he undertakes, than he could the woman clothed with the
sun, and her bringing forth her man-child. Rev. 12.^
And for my part, seeing envy makes the best works the object of her
malignity, I shall be so far from being troubled at the envy of any, that I
wish from my heart the work may but prove worthy of such Spirits envy: And for
detraction, if there be so much good in the work, as is capable of men's
detracting from it, so that God may have the glory of that good from those that
have any goodness in them, let as many wicked ones, as please, glory in that
their own shame: I shall repute it no shame to me, to have all the glory of all
the good taken from me, when there is not the least due to me: and it will be
honor sufficient, as well as comfort to me, that I have done any thing whereby
God may be glorified on my behalf. Yet because I would not willingly give the
least occasion to any to sin so highly against God and their own souls, I
shall do my endeavor to prevent all such folly, so far as a faithful account
of my appearing and proceeding in the business may do it.

Upon what grounds I undertook this work, I have declared to him with whom I
dare not dissemble: And what encouragements I have had, both from God and good
men, to go on with it (so far at the least as to make trial how it will be
relished or disgested by those who have power either to crush it or crown it)
are fitter for mine own breast to retain, than for this, or any other paper to
publish. This every one, that knows me, will I hope believe, that certainly I
had some friends of worth and credit who furnished me with the particulars of
this Remonstrance (as I before hinted) or else being a stranger to Virginea and
the affairs thereof, I neither could have known them, nor would have rceived
any information concerning them upon trust, much less have presumed the
presenting them to his Highness: And the truth is, There is not one particular
mentioned by me, to which I cannot produce a sufficient testimony for the
confirmation thereof, by such a number of witnesses as the Lord himself
approves for the establishing of every truth: And for the most they are so well
known to every Planter there and trader thither (especially those that trade in
their own persons) as that he must have very little aequaintance with either,
or give little faith to both, that shall doubt thereof, farther than to enquire
of them which all unsatisfied persons are desired to do. And whereas you will
find some very fowl acts particularised, and yet the actors or committors not
named; charge that, if you please, upon my charity, who though I had their
names given me, (as there was reason I should) and that by those that are
neither afraid nor ashamed to have their names known, if it shall be required
by any that have authority so to do; Yet I thought it my duty to silence them;
that so the Persons that are guilty of those horrid crimes, may be the sooner
invited to repent of them, when they shall see, that upon their repenting, as
God has promised their transgressions shall not be mentioned unto them by him,
nor ought to be by others, so there is the best course taken by me, that I
could, that they themselves shall never be upbraided with them; as knowing, that
often times the open disgracing men for some fowl facts makes them the more
impudent in those sins, and the more obdurat against all persuasions to turn
from them.

As also, that this discovering their sins and yet covering their names may
assure them, that it is the detestation of those crying crimes, not any hatred
of their persons, that occasioned this complaint: and therefore, if, upon the
telling that such and such sins are committed by some, they find themselves to
be the men that committed them, (as it is desired they may) there will be no need
to say to any of them as Nathan sometimes was constreined to say to David, Thou
art the man: and if themselves then please but to confess with David one by
one, I have sinned against the Lord: I shall intercede with the Lord so far as
I am able, that he would please to say to their souls, one by one again, what
Nathan said to David, The Lord has put away thy sin: and if they shall be thus
ashamed of what they have done, it is all the shame is wished them for so doing.
But, because by those wicked deeds, they have given great occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, let them beware, lest if they do escape the
judgment of men, the severe judgments of God do not seize upon them in some
remarkable manner, here in this life, for others to take warning thereby, and
for the taking of those enemies of the Lord from their farthar blaspheming
thereat.

Besides, if all this will not quiet some Spirits, that shall find themselves
concerned in this Remonstrance, as conceiving that the publishing of such
particular crimes will cause an inquisition to be made by many after the
particular names of those that committed them; (as indeed all men are generally
too inquisitive after other men's sins, and too busy in proclaiming them) or it
may be, his Highness himself may, upon the information of such crimes heing
committed, command the names of those that committed them to be given in to him,
that justice may proceed against them; Let such know, that if any private men
shall inquire of me the names of those whose particular crimes are complained
of in the following Remonstrance; I can (through his grace who sets a watch
before my mouth and keeps the door of my lips) commond my tongue silence as
well as my pen, but I have no power over the tongues of other men farther than
to beseech them to be as careful of preserving others good names, as of their
own; and that care of others will increase and enlarge the honor of their own:
and where any deserve to have their names stink and rot, that they would suffer
them so to do, without their raking too much in the noisome filth and loathsome
putridness and putre of them. But, if his Highness command me to give him, or
any deputed by him, either any or all their names; that so judgment may be
executed upon some of those Zimris and Achans, those Colonie-destroying
offenders, to the better appeasing of Gods wrath gone out against that Colonie,
and for the more happy prevention of the like provocation by others, I fear the
displeasure both of God and his Highness too much to disobey that command. And
if their names or persons do suffer thereby, they may blame themselves, who
were so audaciously wicked as to do that to others without blushing at it,
which now they are ashamed or afraid to hear of, from others, with so much as
being named to have done it; and take it ill to have those detestable acts of
theirs but mentioned before one that has power to punish them, which they
never stuck at to perpetrate before him, that has power to damn them for them.
But I forget my self and the work in hand too much, in laboring thus long to
satisfy those that are enemies to both. Apologies to such do but raise more
jealousies, and sharp rebukes are fitter charms for such Spirits than soft
answers.

There are indeed some persons of honor and integrity yet living, that had the
unhappiness to be Governors when some of those horrid facts were committed by
some of the Planters; And so they might in justice be charged upon their
account (so far as the not prohibiting, oppugning, and punishing them could
contract the guilt of them) should not I be so just as to give others that fair
account thereof, which I received from those who abhor to justify the wicked
or condemn the righteous. Most true it is what Salust says, That in cujus manu
est ut prohibeat, jubet agi, si non prohibet admitti, In whose power it is to
prohibit a crime, he commands it to be done, if he do not prohibit the doing
it: or, as Seneca expresses it, qui n on vetat peccare cum possit, jubet, He
bids a man to sin, that does not forbid him when be may: And he, that does not
withstand a wicked man in his wickedness, or punish him severely for it, if he
have power, does both animat him in his wickedness, and encourage others to do
the like: and is thereby as really guilty of that wickedness, as if himself had
committed it. But it is as true, (say their compurgators) that those worthies,
(whose innocence alone I desire to vindicate, leaving all unworthy Governors
to answer for themselves) had not that just power of prohibiting, oppugning,
and punishing iniquity and the actors thereof, at least not that due liberty of
exercising their power, that men of their place and authority should have: but
were so limited and bound up, by the over-straightness of their investors, that
armed them with that power, or by the dissenting of their assistants, that
should have stood by them, and acted with them, in the execution thereof; or by
the insolency and tumultuousness of those upon whom justice should have been
executed, That, although they abhorred and abominated those barbarous acts, and
the wicked contrivers and actors of them; yet they were constrained, for the
better preservation of the publik peace and safety of the Plantation, as well
as their own persons and subsistence, to forbear that forcible withstanding,
and judicial punishing them, that they should, and otherwise would have
practiced and proceeded in. Such is the inseparable unhaippiness and mischief
that constantly attends both the Governors and Governed, where the power of
the Governors depends upon the favor and pleasure of the people, or is
manacled and fettered by any Plebeian Tribunes, or overawed by any insulting
Ephori. Nevertheless, that the resplendent eminencies of those Governors, or
my high esteem of their vouchers, may not so mislead me, as that whilst I am
willing to excuse them from the guilt of others sins I should unwitingly pull
upon my self the guilt of theirs, I humbly beseech those Governors, that as
they desire to appear just before men, so they would much more labor to acquit
themselves before God. And therefore if they know ought by themselves (as they
needs must) more than others can charge them with, they would not rest upon any
man's justification of their actions, much less presume them thereupon
justifyable before God; but earnestly and humbly beg of God his gracious pardon
for what he knows they have failed in or been guilty of, either by their
omitting or neglecting to exercise that power, that he had put into their
hands, or by their otherwise partaking with others in their sins, as well as
for all their other transgressions; and that will not only comfort their
souls and quiet their Spirits against all that have been or shall be objected
against them; but also add very much to their honor amongst all good men and
exceedingly indear them to God himself the fountain of all true comfort honor
and goodness.

Then for those friends of mine which pretend to be friends also to the work it
self, but not to my under taking it, though I love their reproves better tha^
I do others praises; yet I would not willingly deserve that favor from them.
It may be (and the truth is I have been told as much by some, that I believe
cordially love me) they may fear that my appearing in this business may be
reputed by some that wish me well somewhat improper and a little Heterogeneal
to my professon as a Minister; but to such my humble request is, that they
would consider both my profession and this work a little better.

If the showing a people their transgressions and their sins by my pen, when my
voice, though lifted up like a trumpet cannot reach their ears; or if the
showing those transgressions and sins to others, that have hands long enough to
reach and correct them, when they can neither be first shown to themselves, or
if they were, would certainly be to very little or no purpose, as to their
amendment.

If when wrath is gone out against a people, the calling upon others that have
power to help pacify that wrath by executing wrath upon those that provoked it;
when the party that so calls upon others has neither power nor commission to
do it himself.

If to give a people warning when they are hastening to ruin and destruction,
and the supplicating others to contribute their utmost for the preventing it,
if it be possible.

If the seeking after, not one sheep, but a whole flock, that are gone astray,
and in danger to be lost for ever; and the desire to bring home to the same
fold with them and after them, millions of souls more, that never yet were of
that fold, but have promises from the great Shepherd that they shall one day
be brought into it.

If the complaining of poor injured, oppressed, inslaved Christian servants,
under most unjust, cruel, tyrannical, unchristian Masters, to such as have more
power over those Masters, than they have over their servants, though both must
remember that themselves have another Master in heaven, to whom they must give
account both of themselves and of their servants.

If the putting in mind those that are within the pale of the Church to walk
honestly toward them that are without, and to let their light of holy
conversation so shine before those especially that sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, as to invite and allure them to love the same light that they
profess to walk in, and to embrace that true light which came to be their
light, and lights every man, with all the light he has.

In a word, if the trusting in God, who has the hearts of all men in his hands
to turn as he please, and so hoping that his Highness heart will be inclined by
that God to this great and glorious work, upon his right understanding it; and
that somewhat the more, because he knows, that he that supplicates his
assistance therein, never sought any great things for himself, and abhorrs to
beg ought of him for others, but what he believes upon good grounds to be just
and honorable for him to condescend to; If these and the like acts and crimes
to these, be reputed as unbecoming me, or unbeseeming my Ministerial function,
I must confess it is my desire (not to say ambition) to serve God by my Ministry
in these ways which are reputed unbecoming and unbeseeming. And if God in his
mercy do but approve of me and my Ministry, or rather my execution of that holy
office (for the office it self has God for its institutor, and and will
assuredly find him its protector and defender as well as avenger) I do no
farther regard man's approving or disapproving either, than to give no just
occasion to any by any offense in my life to be offended at the exercise of my
Ministry, nor any just cause to any by the exercise of my Ministry to be
offended with my person.

And as in my preaching the gospel, I have carefully and faithfully endeavored
with that great exemplar of Preachers Saint Paul, 1 Epist. These. cap. 2. v. 3,
4.
to speak nothing of deceit or impuritie, or guile; but, as I have been allowed
of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, Act. 24.16.
so I have spoken, not as pleasing men but God, which tries our hearts: So I
have, with the same holy Apostle, in all things else, and in this particular
business in hand, exercised my self to have allwaies a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward man. But if I have unwittingly said or done ought
that does justly offend any sober knowing man, (as who lives and does not in
many things offend both against God and man) I shall upon my knowledge of it
meekly acknowledge it, and humbly crave Gods and his pardon of it: as I shall
also freely forgive any, that shall through weakness or ignorance take an
offense at me or at any of my words or actions, when there is no offense given.
Wherefore I earnestly beseech you that are my friends, and all others, that are
friends to the public good of others, that, Phil. 2.
if there be any Consolation in Christ to be wished by you unto me, if any
comfort of love, to be expected by me from you, if any fellowship of the Spirit
betwixt you and me, if any bowels of mercy toward that poor Colonie which I
appear for, and toward those miserable heathen Indians, that I long after, yom
would, instead of quarrelling me, or this my undertaking, fulfill my joy,
conceived at the hope of succeding in this great work, and be like minded with
me toward it, having the same love both to the reforming and purging those
Church members of Christ, the English Christians, and to the incorporating into
Christ's Church the Heathen aliens, their Indian neighbors. And so being of one
accord and of one mind, let nothing be done by any of us through strife or vain
glory; but in lowliness of mind, let us each esteem other better than
themselves, and look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others: And thus the same mind will be in us, which was also in
Christ Jesus; and we shall in him conquer all oppositions, difficulties, and
seeming impossibilities; yea and be more than conquerours through him that
loves us. To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit be all the Glory and honor
of this and all other my actions and undertakings.

A compendious Remonstrance of the present sad state and condition of the
English Colony in Virginea.
THat Virginea is a most fertile soil, and abounding with almost all things
necessary and useful for man, even above the most of nations; and that it is
capable of producing any thing to introduce trading to and from all other parts
of the world; and would, if well employed and improved by the Planters,
exceedingly advance the Manufacture of this Nation, by taking off from hence
and consuming there, very great quantities of all sorts yearly, in regard of
the multitude of its inhabitants, both Planters and Natives; That it is also a
Country, which (by the reason of the vastness thereof, and the Natives former
readiness to part with such portions of their right and interest therein, unto
the English, upon very reasonable terms, as they can upon all just occasions
fairly desire, and to live with them and amongst them, so far as they may in
wisdom and prudence be admitted) may, in all probability, afford very
peaceable, pleasurable, prositable, and every way comfortable habitation and
other requisites, for the greatest Colonie that ever yet the sun shone upon;
And above all other advantages, that the Native people thereof are very
inclinable (at least did profess so to be, till they were much scandalized by
the wicked lives, and very much abused and oppressed by the unjust dealings of
the Planters) to receive and embrace the Gospel, and to submit to the English
government, are all things so well known to your Highness, or may soon be, by
what has been already published by some that have lived amongst them, and will
be farther attested by others that do most constantly reside there, and are
ready and willing to give your Highness a more particular assurance thereof, if
they be required so to do, That it would be superfluous, as well as too too
tedious to give you any farther relation thereof. But that a Colonie, Planted
in such a Country 60 years since or more, and that by Christians, and those of
the same Nation and profession of faith with us, should in all this time make
so little, very little profit or benefit of such a land, in respect of what it
would yield, if well husbanded; and be so far from increasing the trade thither
and from thence, that at this present it is much worse than it was many years
since; and (which is a grand shame and dishonor both to our Nation and to our
Religion) instead of converting or civilizing any one of the Natvesi, so as to
retain that civility or profession of Christianity in due perseverance, they
give them all too just occasion to be scandalized at the very name of
Christianity, and to abhor and detest their Government, as well as manners.
This your humble Remonstrant presumes is neither known to your Highness, nor
will scarce be credited by you at the first hearing: But if your Highness will
vouchsafe to make a strict inquiry into, and examination of such particulars,
as may evince and evidence the truth of all those foul errors, gross
miscarriages, and crying crimes, whereby the said Plantation is brought, not
only to a very low and despicable condition, but very near its period and utter
ruin; Your humble Remonstrant will, upon your command, furnish your Highness
to your full satisfaction; as he does for the present suggest some of the
chiefest of them; and begs your pardon for presuming to offer with them his own
submissive conceptions for their redress.

The Errors, miscariages, and crimes, whereby, not only the good and prosperity
of the Colonie or Plantation in Virginea is retarded and hindered, but the
Colonie or Plantation it self is very likely to be speedily ruined, may be
reduced to these four heads.
1. The Errors committed by those that transmit persons over into the Colonie
2. The miscariages of the Planters there, both toward the Indians, and amongst
themselves especially, in their Planting and settling. 3. The injuries and
overfights chargeable upon the Traders thither. 4. The great neglect and
contempt of Gods ordinances, worship and service, throughout the whole
Plantation.
I. The Errors committed by those that transmit persons over thither are
principally these.
1. They seldom make choice of good sufficient Governors; who, as they ought
to be able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetcousness; so they
ought to be men of more than ordinary public Spirits, preferring the public
good of the Plantation before their own gain or private interest; and such as
have traveled and been used to trade and commerce with other Nations, as well
as in their own; whereby having knowledge of the commodities and profits of
several Countries, they may be able to introduce the planting of such in that
Colonie as the foil and climat is most proper for, and the trading therein with
other Nations will bring most advantage by. And though there have been some
Governors transmitted thither so qualified in the most and chiefest
qualifications, yet they have been so very few, and their refidence there of so
small continuance, that either they wanted time to work any reformation amongst
them, that was considerable, or else other inexperienced, indiscreet, careless,
covetous Governors soon pulled down, or suffered to ruin, what any knowing,
prudent, careful, generous Governor had builded, or at least laid the
foundation of.

2. The Ministers and public dispensers of the Gospel, which are sent into
that Plantation, are, for the most part, not only far short of those
qualifications required in Ministers 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. but men of opposite
qualities and tempers, such as either by their loose lives, and
un-Gospel-becoming conversation, or by their known weakness, and unsufficiency
of understanding and parts, do not only not gain or win upon those that are
without, the Indian heathen, but cause to go more astray, and lose, many, very
many of those that pretend to be within, the English Christians.

3. The people that are sent to inhabit in that Colonie, are the most of them
the very scum and offscouring of our Nation, vagrants, or condemned persons,
or such others, as by the looseness and viciousness of their lives have disabled
themselves to subfist any longer in this Nation; and when they come thither,
either know not how, or will not betake themselves to any sober industrious
course of living. And, if they chance to get ought to maintain them in their
licentiousness and wickedness, fall to practicing their old abominable
practices there, as much or more than ever they did here. So that if they come
to be rulers or officers in the said Colonie, whereby they are rendered more
conspicuous in their true colors, their idleness and otherwise evil examples
do not only corrupt and taint others of the same Colonie but cause the very
Heathen to loath both them and the very profession of Christianity for their
sakes. And can any Colonie expect to prosper, or to obtain any blessings from
God upon themselves and their Plantation, when they sin more against God and do
more provoke his wrath and indignation, than those heathen whom the Lord
removed out of the same parts of that Land, and gave it them to possess? No,
it is to be feared, that as it will be more tolerable for those heathens in the
day of judgment, than for them; so some more intolerable judgments will
likewise without speedy repentance ere they are aware, be inflicted on them in
the day of Gods visiting their iniquities, than ever those Heathen felt, whom
God Cast out before them. And it must be Gods infinite mercy to this sinful
Nation, if, besides our other crying fins, This our sending out such from
amongst us, that so dishonor Gods name amongst those Heathen, and cause them
to blaspheme it, and his Gospel to be a reproach to them (far beyond what could
have been done by them, had they been kept and punished here, as they ought to
have been) do not so inflame and increase the fiery wrath and indignation of
God against us, as that he therefore cause too many of us to be cast forth or
led forth captives into some heathenish, barbarous or Idolatrous Nation to be a
curse and a reproach amongst them.

4. That very many Children and servants sent into that Plantation, that were
violently taken away, or cheatingly duckoyed without the consent or knowledge
of their Parents or Masters by some praestigious Plagiaries (commonly called
Spirits) into some private places, or ships, and there sold to be transported;
and then resold there to be slaves or servants to those that will give most for
them. A practice proper for Spirits, namely the Spirits of Devils, but to be
abhorred and abominated of all men that know either what men are, or whose
originally they are, (even his that made them) or what their relations are,
either natural, civil, or Christian. A practice condemned by the very Heathen,
and a Law called Lex plagiaria, made by them against it. And if it should be
tolerated, or connived at by Christians, and known so to be of the Heathen,
Let it never be expected that any of those Heathen should turn Christians. For
they may well conclude, That they that will take by force or fraud those that
are Christians either children from their Parents, or servants from their
Masters or any of any relation from their friends and relations, and sell them
for slaves or servants to others, will never make any conscience or scruple at
all, either of taking away by force, or surreptitiously stealing, or otherwise
unjustly possessing or selling those Heathen themselves, or their children,
servants, goods, lands, or ought else they can lay their hands on. And if they
should become Christians, they are foretaught by sufficient examples, that
their being Christians would be no security or protection to them or theirs.
And how this diabolical practice does, in this and many other respects, cry
unto God for vengeance in the cries, and moanes, and complaints, and
lamentations, made by those poor inslaved children and servants and by all
their Parents, friends and relations, may be more eafily gessed at than
expressed; and may, in probability, be enough of it self, to pull a curse and
vengeance upon the whole Plantation. Amos 2. v: 6. Joel 3. v: 6, 7, 8.

II. The Miscariges of the Planters toward the Indians, and amongst
themselves, are chiefly these.
Toward the Indians.

1. The Planters generally keep neither their word nor their faith with the
Indians; whereas the Indians very seldom or never break their word or faith
with them. Thus iniquity is not only folly, but sometimes a vary contradiction
to it self, as well as to reason; for some that call themselves believers, are
real infidels, and prove themselves so to be, and worse, when some that are
real infidels, prove themselves to have more faith than such hypocritical
believers. And it would be found presumption, not faith or charity, in any, to
believe or hope, that such dishonourers of the Christian faith, should ever
prevail with the poor unbelieving Indians to believe Gods word or his promises,
declared to be his by them whose word and promise they have just cause not to
believe. Or if God should make such fowl falls of such false Christians to be
an occasion to his own raising up those unbelieving Indians, and bringing them
to Christ, as he did the falling of the Jews to be the riches of the gentiles,
Romans 11. it is to be feared such a calling in of those Indians, would be the
utter casting off of those Christians; which the Lord of his mercy forbid. And
for the Indians fidelity to the English, take that for a memorable testimony
amongst many, and indeed it may stand for many: when the Masacre was made by
the indians upon the English in that Colonie, They assaulted, no persons, nor
invaded any man: offessions or goods, that they knew had bought their lands of
them, and covenanted with them, for them and made good their covenants.

2. The Planters have taken the Indians goods from them by force when the
Indians have come peaceably to trade with them. An act to be detested of all
that love peace and truth, much more of those that have any desire of the
propagating of the Gospel of peace and truth amongst those with whom they trade.

3. The Planters have turned some of the Indians out of their places of abode
and subsistence, after that the Indians have submitted to the Colonie, and to
their Government, and have taken up their own lands after the custom used by
the Colonie; As they did otherwise also very unchristianly requite the service
which one of the Indian Kings did them in fighting against other Indians, that
were presumed to be enemies to the English and to draw toward them to do them
mischief. For that when the said King desirous to show his fidelity to the
English, if not in obedience to some of their Commanders orders, did adventure
too far with his own Indians in the pursuit of those other Indians, and thereby
loft his life in that action, as some report (though others thought him to be
taken alive by the enemies. His wife and children (that were by him at his
expiring, recommended to the care of the English (as some of his servants have
given out) or, to be sure, ought to have been taken into their special care
whether so recommended or not, and might have been such an advantage either of
reducing that whole family with their friends and allies to the embracing the
Christian faith, or at least such an endearing them to the English, as they
have never or seldom had the opportunity of) were so far from receiving the
favor and kind usage merited by their father, that they were wholly neglected
and exposed to shift for themselves. And though it be alleged by some, as to
the former part of this grievance, that that portion of Lands, which was taken
from the said King before his death by an English Colonel, was acknowledged
openly in Courtto be with the consent of the said King, and that he was
satisfied for it; Yet it is generally believed, and by some stoutly asserted,
that the said King was affrighted and threatened into that acknowledgement, by
the said Colonel.

4. The Planters have by their several and frequent acts of injustice and
cruelty exercised upon the Indians, in invading their rights and assaulting
their persons, made the Indians in a manner to despair of ever living peaceably
by them, or having any fair converse or commerce with them, as by their not
suffering the Indians to hunt in those woods, or to fish in those rivers,
wherein they challenge a right, and are believed by diverse sober and discreet
men of the Colonie to have a right as well as themselves; as also by not
permitting the Indians, though single, or but two or three in a company, to
approach near to any of the habitations of the English (unless it be of some
few of the better sort and rank, who have more civility and humanity, and know
better how to improve that advantage) And, if any of the Indians do chance to
come into any of their Plantations, and are taken, the English oftentimesty
them alive to trees and burn them to ashes, or else otherwise murder them,
without showing any cause, farther than the pretending that the Judians are not
to be trusted, though (as I but now said) in their faithfulness and firmness to
their promises they much surpass the English.

5. The Planters did lately, viz. Anno 1656, (when a numerous people of the
Indians, more remote from the Colonie, came down to treat with the English
about settling of a Peace, and withal a liberty of trade with them) most
perfidiously and barbarously (after a declaration of their desires and
intention) murder five of their Kings, that came in expectation of a better
reception) and brought much Beaver with them to begin the intercourse of the
commerce. This unparalled hellish treachery and antichristian perfidy more to
be detested than any heathenish inhumanity, cannot but stink most abominably in
the nosethrils o^ as many Indians as shall be infested with the least sent of
it, even to their perpetual abhorring and abandoning of the very sight and name
of an English man, till some new generation of a better extract shall be
transplanted amongst them; as also cry incessantly in the ears of the Almighty
for his avenging those bloods upon those English, who made their calling
themselves his their prime advantage of betraying those poor wretches lives
into their bloody hands; and by their murdering their bodies did (as much as
in them lay) slay also their very souls and sacrifice them to the Devil; as
they have likewise by that complicated iniquity, (unless the detestation
thereof, by the rest of that Colonie and this Nation, be openly manifested in
the sight of the surviving Indians in some exemplarie punishment of those
murderers) beaten off many thousands of thousands of souls from embracing
that faith which would save them.

6. To justify all these and many other of their matchless iniquities and
impieties, especially their rapines, murders, and all sorts of cruelties
exercised upon the poor Indians; some of the Planters, having usurped the
office of public preachers, have Proclaimed from their speaking-places, That
the Planters are the Saints, that have just right to whatsoever the Indians
call theirs; and may, when they have opportunity and power, turn the Indians
out of all their lands and estates, and take them into their own possession. So
far have they extended that opinion dominium fundatur in gratiae, and so much
have they abused, that Apostolical compellation of Saints, in those parts: your
Highness cannot but know the danger of their conjunction in these.

Amongst themselves.

1. The Planters, some of them, have not only dealt unjustly and inhumanely
with the poor heathen Indians; but to the farther dishonor of this Nation, and
the greater scandal of our religion professed by them, they did lately commit a
most heinous outrage, and bloody fact upon some of their own English Nation,
that had seated themselves in Maryland; and that not upon a sudden provoked
boiling of their own blood, but, (so far as circumstances could demonstrate
their intention) out of a Cain-like thirsting after their brethrens blood, and
a sordid coveting of their estates; and what less can the Indians from thence
infere, than, that if the English invade each others possessions, and shed each
others bloods for them, surely the poor contemned Indians cannot hope for
either justice or mercy from them; and therefore why should they scruple the
cutting of their throats or driving them out from amongst them, who so little
scruple the cutting each others or any others throats, and the turning them out
from cohabiting in the same country with them?

2. The Planters (out of covetous desire to take up great Tracts of land)
disperse themselves very far from each other in the Country, and usually take
up more land by an hundred parts, than they are able to manure or till, or make
any use of: rendering themselves thereby both useless to one another, and the
more unserviceable to the public; besides the exposing themselves to be cut
off the more easily by the Indians, when they shall take that occasion, which
is too often given them, as well as understand this advantage.

3. The Planters observe no just order in taking up their proportions of land,
but run up, one after another, all along by the rivers sides; whereby they not
only prejudice others, that come after them, in their Planting and seating
themselves; but do very much discourage them from planting and settling
themselves at all; because they cannot have any tolerable convenience of the
Rivers.

4. The Planters do generally regard the planting of nothing but Tobacco; and
that they plant so excessively, that they cannot (confidering their number of
servants) make it up as it should be. And too many will not give it the dne
making that they might; and do, for the most of them, pack it so falsely and
cheatingly; that the Traders thither, finding themselves so abused and cousened
by them, and that, upon their complaining there of no justice is done them,
(because most commonly the parties guilty are the judges) are very much
disheartened and discouraged from trading any longer with them. And if the
Planters themselves do at any time bring, or send over upon their own account,
any considerable quantities thereof, it proves usually so bad, and of so little
worth, that all charges defrayed, they can scarce get more by it than their
labor for their pains: whereas when some of them, that have been careful to
have their tobacco well made, and as well pact up, have brought over of the
same, six hundred pounds have been offered to one of them for one years profit
of his plantation.

5. The Planters do seldom employ their minds and parts about ought save the
procuring a present subsistence and livelihood, and the purchasing of strong
waters, or some other such heating liquors, as may inflame their Spirits, and
intoxicate their brains; and so continue their old accustomed debaucheries
contracted in England.

6. The Planters in the generality, do most basely cheat, and unjustly deal
with all that trade with them, in case either themselves, or any that come into
those parts to trade with them, happen to die there, or have any estates there
when they die: For that all the estate that is found in the deceased's hands
(be it whose it will be) is apprised by certain apprisers at half its worth:
And the apprisers for their pains take in a manner what they please; and the
rest of the estate is put into the hands of any that claim any interest
therein, under a pretense to keep it for the true proprietors; who seldom get
ought thereof, upon their demanding it, but are enforced, for the most part, to
spend the full value thereof, and sometimes if they will not bear that abuse,
twice as much as its value, before they can recover ought. And usually they
lose both the principal estate, and all the charges expended for the regaining
it. Which practice alone, if not speedily remedied, will deterr all traders
from adventuring thither, and destroy all trade there, and so ruin the Colonie.

7. The Planters, many of them do very much abuse and oppress their poor
servants, by not allowing them that lodging and food which is meet, causing
many of them either to ly all the time of their servitude in ash heap, or
otherwise to kennel up and down like dogs, where they can find room; scarce
feeding them fo well as our scornful servants here in England feed our dogs;
though men of honesty and conscience do discharge their consciences there in
the good use of their servants, as the like do here.

8. The Planters suffer much, and complain exccessively of the heavy and
unequal taxes laid upon them, which taxes in a great part are pretended to be
imposed for the levying and raising of force to secure the Colony and defend
them against their enemies; when as they are spent and imbezled by the officers
or largesses of the assemblies of the Colony in intemperate drinking, and other
riotous and luxurious practices, so industry and temperance are discouraged,
and idleness and licentiousness are maintained, if not countenanced; which
cannot but soon overthrow the best of Plantations.

9. The Planters do exceedingly miscarry in not settling head Towns in each
County, that the people of that County, and all others that desire to trade
with them, might be drawn together, and manage their trading in some certain
places; and not run up and down from house to house; especially when the houses
are at so great a distance from each other, as there they are, and not above
two houses together in any County except in James Town.

The Injuries and oversights chargeable upon the traders to Virginea are more
discernably these.
1. The Traders do very much Injury to the Plantation in Virginea by not
victualing their ships sufficiently for the passengers which they transport; in
so much that many of the passengers are all most famished, before they reach
thither, though the passage be otherwise fair and within convenient time: and
many die soon after they arrive there; which brings an ill report upon the
Country, as though that killed them; when their death is to be attributed to
their ill usage and diet at sea, arising from the wretched covetousness of
those that set forth ships for the transporting of passengers, merely for gain,
and that gotten chiefly by pinching and starving the carcases of their poor
passengers. Now, if they that are slain by the sword are better than they that
are slain with hunger, Lam 4. v. 9. Then surely they that kill men by starving
them, deserve more to be hanged, than they who kill men by the sword, or
otherwise quickly dispatch them. Besides, the starving of men designed for a
place, where men are far more precious than they are here, and may, through
Gods inabling them, prove much more serviceable both to God and man than here
they can be, aggravates that iniquity not a little.

2. Another wickedness, which some traders thither have practiced upon their
passengers (scarce ever heard of before, much less practiced by any that call
them selves Christians) is this, When a storm or tempest has happened at sea
in their passage from hence thither, or they have otherwise miscarried, through
the default of the Master or Pilot of the ship, so that their passage has been
tedious and dissicult; Some of those Masters have laid all the blame upon some
of their passengers; and not only accused them for witches, but executed some
of them as witches, by their own authority, and without any legal trial and
conviction. Now if heathen mariners in a desperate death-threatning tempest at
sea, (after that they knew that it was ray sed for one of their passengers
sakes, and was acknowledged so to be by that passenger himself, and were
desired by him to cast him overboard, and promised thereupon a cessation of the
storm) were notwithstanding both unwilling and afraid to cast him over, left
themselves should lose their lives for casting away his; or that his innocent
blood might be otherwise required of them, and revenged on them, Jonah 1. How
will their tender heartedness and fear of shedding the blood of one innocent
passenger (as they reputed him) rise up in judgment against the
hard-heartedness and deep blood-guiltiness of those Christian mariners
(undeservedly so called) who upon a small tempest or other miscarriage at sea,
or out of a covetous desire only to gain a little the more by their passengers,
rashly and impiously impute the cause of that tempest or miscarriage to some of
their passengers; and thereupon, both accuse, judge, and execute them without
any examination, trial or conviction of them; or without the least legal power
to do either unto them; not allowing them so much mercy as Jonah had from the
merciless waters, nor affording them so much bowels of compassion, or liberty
of Gods miraculous preservation, as Jonah found in the belly of Hell?

3. The Traders do very much abuse and cheat those of the Plantation, by
imposing one shilling per Hogshead upon all the Tobacco that comes from thence;
and without the payment thereof, will not take their Goods aboard; which is
done upon the pretense of defraying the charge of destroying the Tobacco
planted in England. And this has been practiced two or three years last past;
whereas they have not this last year destroyed the said Tobacco, nor satisfied
those whom they formerly employed in that service for some years before, but
keep the Moneys so raised and collected by them, in their own hands, to a very
considerable sum. And although the destroying Tobacco planted in England, will
not much benefit the Plantation in Virginea, because the less Tobacco they
plant there, the more of other better Commodities might be there planted and
traded in, to their greater profit and advantage: yet the not suffering any
Tobacco to be planted in England, but fetching it from other parts of America,
will much advance our English Navigation, and increase the Customs and Excize
here at home.

4. There is one thing more, that is found by experience to have hindered the
English Colony in Virginea very much in respect of the Traders thither; which
your humble Remonstrant is very tender of mentioning, because it reflects too
much upon a late revived Law of this Nation; and therefore it shall be only
propounded to your Highness better consideration, to examine and judge, whether
the Planters in Virginea do suffer more thereby, or the Merchants of England
gain more: and so whether it be not more for our Nations honor and profit to
continue it, than it would be for that Plantations advantage to take it off. Or
whether there may not be some expedient found out for the easing of that
Plantation in particular, without opening a door to a worse grievance or
inconvenience to this whole Nation in general. The thing complained of by the
Planters, is the prohibiting of Foreigners to trade thither. By which
prohibition sa they). the English Traders thither will have the Tobaco at their
own rates, and sell their own goods and commodities transported thither at
their own prices insomuch that whereas, when the Dutch traded thither, the
Planters bought shoos at 12. l. of Tobacco; since they were prohibited, the
English made them to pay 50. l. of Tobacco for the like: and so in proportion
for other commodities. And then, if any of the Plantation sent Tobacco hither,
they had the freight thereof for 4. l. per Tun, but upon the prohibition of the
Dutch they sometimes paid 14. l. per Tun, and most constantly 8. l. or 9. l.
per Tun. And whereas the Dutch would then give the Planters 3. d. per pound for
their Tobacco, and give good bills of Exchange for it, (which Tobacco would
yield them 6 d. and 7. d. per pound; and so the Merchant was enabled to pay
freight, excise, and customs, and get tolerable gains) since that, the
Tobacco, for the most part of it, will not yield above an half penny per pound
there; and when it comes to England, it will scarce pay the freight and
custom, by reason of the want of that vent which it formerly had, before the
Dutch planted Tobacco in their own territories; which they did not till that
prohibition. So that by this means (say the Planters) the Plantation is in a
manner ruined, at least soon will be, if there be not a prudent and timely
prevention thereof, as your Highness also suffers also not a little in your
customs and excise, and the traders themselves by their trading. The
redressing of all which, if possible, without worse prejudice to That
Plantation or this Nation, is a work worth the undertaking and skill of the
best and most prudent of both Nations, and the sole aim of your Remonstrants
presenting it to your Highness.

IV. The great neglect of Gods ordinances, worship, and service throughout the
whole Plantation may be ascribed to these original and some far other
additional causes.
1. The Ministers of Virginea, too many of them, are very car^less and
negligent in dispensing Gods word and sacraments, at also indecent and slovenly
in their manner of dispensing them. And as their carelessness and neglect of
dispensing Gods Ordinances occasion the people of the Colonie to disregard and
disisteem them; so their slovenly and indecent dispensing them, cause both them
and the Heathen to scorn and contemn them.

2. There are not a few of the Ministers, whose wicked and profane lives cause
the worship and service of God, not only to be slighted, but to be little less
than abhorred, when they officiate therein; As there are also diverse, whose
insufficiency and inability to stop the mouths of gainsayers, occasion too
many of the people of all sorts to open wide their rude, profane, blasphemous
mouths both against themselves and all others of their holy function; as also
against their very office it self, and those holy Ordinances about which it is
conversant. And thus (as the prophet Jeremie sometimes complained cap: 23.)
From the Prophets -- is profaneness gone forth into all the Land. And the true
original causes of both these miscariages in those Ministers is this, The
greatest part of them are such as went over thither not out of any design or
desire to do God and that Plantation, much less the poor heathen thereto
adjoining any service by their Ministry; but out of some by aims and ends of
their own, being indeed such, as were ashamed, or afraid, to live any longer
here in this Nation; or at the least such as sought only to get something for
themselves, having little hopes in these days especially, from the
consciousness of their own unworthiness, to procure any preferment or
tolerable subsistence here: and accordingly they now live and practice there.

3. Those Ministers, That are religious and laborious, such as are worthy of
double honor, both because of their laboring in the word and doctrine, as
also because of their being true shining lights before the people in their holy
exemplarie lives and conversations, have scarce that single honor paid them
that they deserve, from the most; and are dishonored and despised by too many.
Which though it should not, yet it does too much discourage and dishearten them
in the work of the Gospel. And it is but justice in God, that where men sow
sparingly, they should reap sparingly: and where the people grutch to allow
Gods Ministers temporal things, for their enriching them with spiritual; God
may therefore most justly, in a proportionable analogy of punishment, withold
his conferring of spirituals by such instruments upon such ungrateful
receivers, till they have learnt by the want of them, how to value and esteem
them better. For as the despising of Gods Ministers is the despising of God
himself; so the undervaluing of them and their Ministration is the undervaluing
of God himself, and what he confers upon men by them.

4. The Governors of that Colonie have been, diverse of them, too remiss and
slack both in punnishing and removing unworthy Ministers, and in encouraging
and countenancing those of worth. As not long since, there was an instance
given of both. When one that had taken upon him the office of a preacher being
accused for committing of Sodomie, and convicted if not of the fact, yet of the
intent and attempt, was only caused to stand in some public place for a small
time with a paper in his hat, with his crime written therein. When on the other
side, in the year 1655. other eminent, able preachers indeed, were for no crime
(unless for their being of a different judgment, in our late unhappy
differneces here amongst us, from some in power there amongst them, or for
their eminency of abilities and parts, as well as excellency of lives above
others, or at the most but for some zealous imprudency) turned out of their
employments and Livelihood.

Thus Having shown your Highness some of the chief causes of the Epidemical
distempers and maladies, under which the poor Plantation in Virginea groans and
labors, even to the consumption of her Spirits, and her being ready in a
manner to give up the Ghost, the cure is half made, especially if your Highness
please to become their Aesculapius, and take them into your own hands, and
exercise your own skill in correcting and purging out those peccant and corrupt
humors, which have been presented to you: But because your Remonstrant knows
well, that your Highness delights, in all incounters, to be rather in the
reserve for relief in extremity, than to command in the lighter velitations or
skirmishes; he is therefore emboldened (with your Highness favor first
supplicated) to adventure his own weak suggestions, for the leading on men of
more solid judge^^^^ to deliver their opinions; and so to reserve the honor as
well as art of conquering all difficulties to your self, for the preserving and
restoring of that Languishing and dying Colonie.

The most therapeutical and healing medicines, and most preserving antidotes,
that your humble Remonstrant conceives to be most effectual for the curing of
the present distempers in Virginea, and for the preventing their return upon
that Colonie for the future, are these.

1. That Ministers of holy and religious exemplarie lives and conversations,
and well furnished with known and proved abilities, both for teaching and
governing, be fairly treated with, and by all good means and ways invited,
persuaded, and encouraged to undertake that great work of the Lord in
dispensing his Gospel and the precious mysteries thereof in that Nation; An
undertaking of so much honor and glory to God, and of so much credit and
comfort to the undertakers, as that there is not any visible in the whole world
of more, or of more probability of an happy success: because they may thereby
not only recall and reclaim many of their own countrymen and fellow Christians
that have foully erred and gone astray; but also bring into Christ's flock and
fold not a few of the long lost Heathen. And if good Simeon could sing such a
cheerful nunc dimittis at the first seeing and embracing him, that was (and
therefore because he was) a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his
people Israel Luke 1. with what inconceivable, as well as ineffable
chearfullness and exultation of Spirits, may all those resign up their Spirits
into Gods hands, who have not only seen and embraced for some considerable
time, the same Light themselves; but been honored with being the instruments
of the Gentiles seeing and embracing that Light, as well as of Gods own straying
Israel returning unto it? (I mean his mystical Israel; though I also highly
honor the probable conjectures of my reverend and ancient acquaintance and
true friend in adversity as well as prosperity, Mr. Thomas Thorowgood; that
those Indians at the least some of them, in America, descended originally from
the literal Israel of God,) And if they which turn many to righteousness shall
shine as the stares for ever and ever, Dan. 12. where is there the whole world
through, the like probability, or possibility for Ministers to render themselves
capable of that promised reward that there is in that Plantation, and in the
rest of the adjoining parts of that vast continent; whereof that Plantation is
an hopeful door of entrance? Some pious, soul-seeking Ministers in New England
(which is upon the same Continent) have in very few years (as is by diverse
from thence certified) made a very fair ingress into that work, more, even far
more than all the Ministers in Virginea have done in four times as long
continuance of succession, and upon many times more seasonable opportunities.
The Lord of that vineyard recompense the acceptableness and fruits of their
labors into their bosoms, and enable them and their successors to make a
proportionable progress in that honorable and comfortable work; and send the
like laborers into his vineyard in Virginea.

2. That such a Governor be forthwith chosen and sent over as may encourage
pious and religious men both Ministers and others, to remove thither with him
or after him; such a Governor as was before described in the complaint of the
want of such a one. And that he be armed with such power and authority, as is
meet, for the reclaiming and regulating such a Plantation. Particularly, that
he have power derived unto him to make and constitute (with the consent of such
persons of the Colonie, as the said Colonie shall choose for their
representatives) such laws and ordinances, as may be mast suitable to, and
agreeable with the temper of the place and people, and the good and benefit of
the whole Plantation; not forgetting the having an ey and respect therein unto
the Heathen, so far as they may concern them upon any occasion: that so when
they shall hear them, or have cause to try the common equity and justice of
them, they may be induced to say of them, in some resemblance to those laws
which God gave to his Colonie in Canaan, as the Nations about him said of
those. Surely this Nation is a wise and understanding people; For what Nation
is there that has statutes and judgments so righteous etc? And the
Establishing of such laws, and then their due obedience to them, and through
observance of them amongst themselves, will be no small persuasion to those
Heathen, both to submit to their Government and to embrace the same prossession
of faith with them. Or, if that power of making or constituting laws be
thought too absolute and independent for the Governor and people of that
Colony to be entrusted with; That the said Governor, and such representatives,
agreeing upon such Laws between themselves, do first present them, to the
supreme power of this Nation, by one or two or more of them; and then, after
they have received his stamp and impression of approbation, testified under the
broad Seal of England, that they be of full force and power to oblige all the
Inhabitants of the said Colony, to observe and yield obedience unto them. As
also that the said Governor, have full leave and liberty to depute such other
subordinate inferior Magistrates and Officers in the Country, as he shall find
to be fit and able, and that all such Magistrates and Officers, be responsible
to him when he shall require any account from them, as himself shall be to the
Supreme power of this Nation.

3. That there be more care taken for the future, that persons of better
manners, and of more honesty and piety be transplanted thither; both for the
honor of our Nation, and of our Religion, as well as for the procuring a
blessing upon that Plantation, and the averting those curses, which those
wicked and ungodly wretches, heretofore planted there, have in part pulled upon
it already; and do for their sakes farther threaten it. As also that it be made
felony, without benefit of Clergy, for any to steal, and otherwise to ensnare,
any children or servants; and to sell or proffer to sell them here, or to send,
or to attempt, or apparently design, to send them out of this Nation to any
foreign parts to be sold, without particular express license first obtained from
the Supreme power of this Nation, and the knowledge and consent of their
Parents, and friends of nearest relation.

4. That those Planters, who have murdered their own fellow-Planters in Mary
Land, or murdered and otherwise injured, and abused the poor Indians, be
severely and speedily punished, to the full satisfaction of both Planters and
Indians, and to the vindicating of the honor of our Religion, and of the
justice of our Nation, and to the deterring of all wicked persons from the like
barbarous practices. And for the future, that the Laws for securing men's lives
and estates; and for the preserving of peace and justice, be more sharp and
severe, and more strictly executed; especially for the securing the Indians in
their lives and estates, and for the English living more peaceably, and dealing
more justly with them.

5. That the Planters be otherwise regulated and ordered, both in the settling
themselves, and in the planting of Tobacco; and in other husbanding and
mannaging of their Plantations, as the Governor and his Assistants, chosen out
of several Counties by the free Inhabitants thereof, shall from time to time,
for the benefit of the public, as well as the good of the proprietors,
prescribe and order.

6. That there be such free trade allowed unto all that shall trade thither, as
may be for the advancement of that Plantation, and not prejudicial to the
Navigation and Trade of this Nation; which would be a work worthy of the most
prudent of Lawgivers, and the wisest of Counselors, and without free trade
allowed to that Plantation, all their trade there will scarce keep them from
starving.

7. That there be special care taken here, That the ships which trade thither
from this Nation, be well victualled with good provision, such as will be
sufficient for the Passengers that are to be transported therein, (above what
they that belong to the ship lay in for themselves) according to the full
extent of time wherein they use ordinarily to pass; something also being
superadded for extraordinary casualties of hindrance. And when they arrive
there, That some of the Plantation be empowered by the Governor and his
Assistants, to examine, upon complaint made, whether the said provisions, so
laid in, were expended, as was ordered. And if it shall appear by sufficient
testimony, that any Passengers were abused or wronged in their allowance, or
otherwise, that thereupon there be a severe mulct or other punishment inflicted
upon him or them that are found guilty: the one moiety thereof (if it be a
pecuniary punishment) to be given to the person or persons so wronged and
abused, and the other to be disposed of by the Governrur for the public.

8. That there be certain Officers appointed in the Plantation by the
Governor, for the examining the soundness, and other qualities of Tobacco and
other Commodities, growing and arising from that Plantation; and of the just
measures and weights, and the true packing up of all such commodities. And what
shall be found good and marchantable to be admitted to sale; but what shall not
be so, if it be offered to sale, to be forfeited; and the persons attempting to
cheat Traders therewith to be otherwise punished, as the Govenour and his
Assistants shall see cause to appoint.

9. That there be some head towns built in each County, where the Trade of
that County may be Constantly managed, and the public transactions of all
affairs be, as often as need shall require, heard and determined, and so
registered and recorded. And that there be one chief Town or City so seated as
that all ships, both English and soreiners, that Trade to that Plantation may
conveniently repair unto it, and there discharge, if not all, yet at the least
one third part of their lading; and there make due entry both in and and out,
and not to depart the County till they have their dispatch signed by the party
deputed by the Governor for that purpose.

10. That in that City, and in each head Town of each County, as also in all
other places needful and convenient there be erected fair and well built
Churches for the people of God to assemble in together to worship and serve him
publicly, and to communicate of his holy ordinances solemnly and unanimously
and that they be decently beautifyed and adorned both for the honor of our
Religion and for the better inviting and alluring and attracting of the poor
Heathen unto them, and to the performance of those religious offices and
duties, that shall be reverently and devoutly practiced in them; all
superstitious and Idolatrous deckings and trimmings being abominated; And that
there be alo pubick Schools erected for the educating both of the English and
of the Indians Children in good learning and in the true Christian Religion.

11. That there be a certain coin made current amongst them of the Planattion;
that so the business of Trade and commerce amongst themselves may be transacted
with much less trouble and difficulty, than now it is, by reason of the
bukness of Tobacco, the only thing yet used instead of coin in that Colonie.

12. That Forts be built and maintained in all meet places, both for the
keeping off all foreign invasion, and for the preventing or supressing any
insurrection, that may happen to be made by the Indians.

13. That a small Pinnace be set forth and employed to discover the south coast
of Virginea that the Navigation may be more safe; whereas now for want of
knowing that coast, many ships miscarry in their passage thither. And that
every year some select number of able, discreet, well-armed men, may also be
sent out by Land to discover the inland Country, and the nature and secrets
thereof: and where one company leaves off one year, there another company, with
two or three of the former for their guides, to begin the next, and so to go on
till they have discovered as much as is possible. And of what importance and
advantage this would be to this Nation, as well as to that Colonie, men skilled
in Navigation, and that wish well to such noble attempts, especially such
renouned Heroes as have adventured their persons in them, will soon inform you.

14. In the last place (which will actuate and give life and motion and
promotion to all the rest; and without which all other attempts and endeavors
for the good and prosperity of that Colonie, and whatsoever else can be
designed by the most pious and public Spirits that are concerning any
particulars mentioned, will prove vain and ineffectual.) As the great Lord of
heaven and earth must be constantly and incessantly supplicated for his
direction, assistance, and blessing upon what shall be undertaken in this great
and honorable work; so the Governor of that Plantation must be assisted,
supported, and encouraged by a comfortable and honorable allowance, that so he
may spend his time wholly (save what he spends in the more immediate worship
and service of God, and in the refreshing and recreating his toiled body and
Spirits) in and for the public good of that Colonie. And that allowance need
not to be taken out of any stock or treasure of this Nation; but may be raised
and leavied upon foreiners trading in that Country, and out of those moneys
which the English already use to pay willingly, and is by consent of the
Colonie laid upon the inhabitants that come to take up land there. All which or
the greatest part thereof has been imbezled by inferior unworthy men; and
would amount to a very considerable revenue, sufficient to maintain the
Governor in all his necessary expenses about the Government, and afford an
overplus for the raising of forces in time of need against the enemies thereof,
and for the doing of many other public works, and in a few years afford
something to the public treasure of this Nation: and yet all the other taxes
and impositions, under which the people of the Colonie now groan, might be
taken off, which must not otherwise be hoped for or expected.

All those informations and intimations of the present sad state and condition
of the English Colonir in Virginea, and of the true causes thereof; as also of
the several and probably-succesfull means and ways for curing all or the most
of her dangerous distempers, are humbly presented unto your Highness serious
consideration; As the preventing its hastening ruin is devoutly recommended to
Gods gracious mercy and to your compassionate care. And if the ingenuity of the
Indian natives, and the excellency of the Country, superadded to all the other
arguments, may any way invite and quicken your Highness in the endeavoring its
reformation and preservation; be pleased to admit of some few instances of
both, for those many, which might be given, and have been published by others,
of each.

For testimony of their ingenuity, suffer me, after so much tyring your
patience, to recreate you with two or three tragicomical stories, and no
fictions.

When the English complained to one of the neighboring Indian Kings, that some
of his Indians had taken away some of their Hoggs; He assured them, that it was
contrary to his will and command; but they might well forbear the aggravating
that fact so much as they did; for that many of the English had oftentimes
killed and carried away diverse of his Deer. And when the English replied, that
their hoggs were all marked, so that the Indians might know them to be theirs,
which they could not his deer. He presently answered, It Is true indeed, none of
my deer are marked, and by that you may know them to be mine: and when you meet
with any that are marked, you may do with them what you please; for they are
none of mine.

At another time there were twelve of the Indians murdered by the English. For
which bloody fact, the King of those Indians desired of the English, Roanoke
and wampampege are a kind of beads current amongst the Indians for money, and
is as their silver and gold.
that justice might be executed upon the persons that were guilty. The English
yielded thereunto, but, said the English, the satisfaction shall be made
according to your Indian custom by giving so much Roanoke and Wampampege for
each man's life such a quantity. The Indian king told them, that he expected
such justice to be done and such punishment to be inflicted upon those
murderers, as the English used to inflict upon the like amongst themselves. But
seeing that would not be granted; he required that then according to the Indian
custom, so many in number of the English, as there were Indians slain, should
bring that Roanoke and Wampampage and tender it to him: which when they did,
The Indian King, to fright them into a deeper sense of that their injustice,
told them, that he would now slay eleven of them, and send back again by the
twelfth, so much Roanoke and Wampampege proportionably as they had sent for the
like number, that they had slain.

Another time, there were three Indians (whereof two were of great power and
honor amongst them) that were accused for attempting to poison the Governor
of the English or otherwise to assasine him, And the Governor, upon the
discovery thereof required of their King, that their three heads, which were in
that conspiracy, should be forthwith sent unto him, for the expiating that high
offense; or else he and his people would revenge it upon the said King and his
people. The King being unwilling, if not afraid, by reason of the power, and
as some say alliance of two of them, to execute justice in that rigor upon
them all; cut of the head of one of the three, and sent it to the English
Governor by the other two. The Governor being not satisfied therewith, sent
those two with other messengers to their King to know the reason, why he sent
him but one of those heads, when he required all three. To which the King
returned this answer. That he had sent all the three heads, that the Governor
demanded to be sent; And if the Governor were pleased to return two of them
back again, it was to be ascribed to his goodness and mercy and not to be
imputed to any failing in him who had performed what was required.

There is one story more, which I may not omit, because it savours not only of
wit but of more true Wisdom and Religion, than is usually found in multitudes
that call themselves Christians; and that is this. When some of the English
were employed about building an house, and some other work, for an Indian King,
he being by covenant to provide victuals for them, did accordingly constantly
provide for them, what was necessary, the whole six days of the week through;
but when the Lords day came, and he saw the English forbear to work, and
falling to sporting and playing, he commanded that no victuals should be
allowed them: which when the English complained of, they had this answer
returned them; That the King would allow them no victuals on that day, because
on that day they did him no work. To which, when the English replied; That that
day was a day set a part to serve God in, and not a day to labor, or work in;
It was told them again from the King; That if he did see them serve God on that
day, they should have what is necessary allowed them; but he was sure that they
could not serve God by sporting and playing.

Thus may you see, That although Wisdom (as the son of Sirach brings her in
speaking of her self, Ecclus. 24.) had for a long time her dwelling in Jacob,
and her inheritance in Israel, ver. 8. And so took root in an honorable
people, even in the portion of the Lords inheritance, and there grew and was
exalted, and stretched out her branches and cast forth a sweet smell, ver. 13,
14, 15, 16. And after that was transplanted, as the people and inheritance of
the Lord was removed, or a new people and portion chosen, and they cast out:
Yet those Nations, that were not, or yet are not, the Lords people, evermore
did, and to this day do, partake of Wisdoms fruits; and in every Nation and
People she got a possession, ver. 6. (as we call a small portion of ground
taken as the earnest or seasin of the whole) in the souls of many. And that
earnest or seasin may in due time, (through the Lawgivers mercy and favor)
entitle her to and invest her in all the rest, when for the full completing of
that Prophecy, Isa. 11.9. The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the Sea.

Then for the excellency of the Country, If your Highness can but believe, in
these faithless times, either what sundry men of different faith in other
matters, have, as it were with one soul, written concerning this; or what
diverse of approved faith are ready with one voice or mouth farther to attest;
You may, beyond all doubting, be assured, That the Climate of Virginea is
healthful, the Land exceeding fruitful, yielding great plenty of whatsoever
corn or grain is sown in it, and of all other fruits that are planted in it,
and affording very great increase of all sorts of cattle that breed in it, or
that it is stockt withal. The Woods, which are very vast, abound with Deer,
and other beasts, whose carcases, or skins, or both, are very useful and
profitable. The Rivers are infinitely stored with all sorts of excellent Fish,
and water-Fowls; as the dry Land is with other fowls. The bowels of the earth
are fraught with admirable Mines of Iron, Lead, Copper, and (as some say)
Silver: And for the upper parts thereof, besides what it sends forth naturally,
which is much variety of delightful and useful commodities, It would, with a
little labor and industry in planting, and keeping it, be made extraordinary
rich in the production of Silk, Wine, Currants, Rasins, Flax, and almost any
thing that any other Country yields. O that it might but once bear (as it is said
of Canaan, Wisdom 12.7.) a worthy Colony of Gods children; And then Canaan it
self could scarce ever have been said to have excelled it. Which that it may
do, shall be the earnest and incessant prayer of him, who daily prays that the
Lord would incline, and move your Highness heart to contribute your best
assistance to this great work, tending so much to the glory of God, the
propagation of the Gospel, the good and comfort of many thousands of souls in
that vast Continent, this Nations honor, and your Highness highest renown.

Your Highness humble Remonstrant, L. G.

FINIS.

