THE HEBREWS Deliverance at hand.

Declared by me JOSHUAH GARMENT in Clarken-well New Prison.

Tudor rose surmounted by a crown, used as a printer's device

LONDON, Printed June 23. 1651. Aug. 23.

The Hebrews Deliverance at hand.
To the honest Seeker, who waits in love and peace, till peace and love is
estabished in the Earth, in the power and purity of the most High: Many and
various are the reports of the people, but truth is the only jewel; it is not
supposing will stand in the day of God; at the which day it will be known unto
all men, that I Joshuah Garment am the Prophet of the most high God; and then
it will be made known that I am a true sufferer.

IN the year 1631. as I lay waking upon my bed, the glory of the Lord shone
about me, many Angels of light, in light, came unto me, standing before me; the
Angel that first appeared to me, spoke these words unto me, Fear not thou
servant of the most high God, we are sent unto thee to protect thee from the
power of the Devil: then the Angel told me that there should be sudden and
strange alterations in the world, as the taking away of Episcopacy and Kingly
Monarchy; also that the things might not be spoken until I had a command from
God to speak and declare the things; many a time in tears I said, when and how
long Lord? at the beginning of this War in England I expected that God would
bring about his design by this Parliament, and was a Soldier three years; but
then even in the height of my zeal, I was command^d to leave the Army; for the
most high would only by the word of his mouth, and not by the power of man; I
then obeyed the voice of the Lord and came forth of the Army; then suddenly
after the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Thou art within my new
covenant, I will teach thee: The next day following the word of the Lord came
unto me, saying, I the Lord appointed thee salvation from eternity, thou shall
eat of the bread of life: Then at that time I had some bread given me by an
Angel, and I did eat to my great joy and comfort.

I heard one calling unto me, Josherbah, Josherbah, the time draws near that
the Jews, even the Hebrews must be gathered and delivered; Then I was carried
into the South parts of the world, where I was showed a company of gallant men,
very grave and seeming holy; the Angel told me, pointing to them, all these are
hypocrites; amongst the which I saw a great Independent of Gloucester that I
knew; Then the Angel turned me to the right hand, and showed me a poor ragged
traveling despised people, with an innumerable company, saying, this is Levi's
Tribe, and this is the whole house of Israel: Then I knew also that the
Religious men should oppose the deliverance of the Jews, and that the
professors, many of them, should persecute them even unto death, but the work
should go on.

In the year 1650. I saw the man called John Robins riding upon the wings of
the wind in great glory; then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, this
is thy Lord, Isreal's King, Judge, and Law giver; Thou must proclaim his day:
Again, This is the Lord of hosts, strong and mighty in battle, that the doors
and gates must open unto, that so he may enter in: Again, this is the
Melchizedeck that Abraham met in the way, even the Adam that was the first
created man, who is restored, set and sent by God his Creator, with the name of
God his Creator, God Almighty written upon him, even the first man is sent by
God his Creator, to gather and deliver the Hebrews without arms offensive or
defensive, but only and alone in the power of the Lord God his Creator; and
that all men should oppose him, but not prevail: The word of the Lord came unto
me, saying, this is he that shall in the Name and power of God the Creator,
divide the Seas, and lead the Hebrews to their own Land, even as Moses did out
of Egypt; and as Pharaoh could not prevail, but perish, so shall his enemies
perish and not prevail. Therefore my dear breathren, take heed to your selves,
for a great and sudden blow will be suddenly, that will make heaven and earth
to shake; to the confounding of all them that oppose the Jews deliverance; for
I tell you in the name of God Almighty, Creator of all things, visible and
invisible, even in his name that is only wise, immortal, in the heavens; that
deliverance will be this year, and that the manchild will be born this year,
even he that shall come and rule with a rod of iron all Nations, breaking them
to pieces like a potters vessel, and the Nations shall not avoid his
government, for in righteousness he will judge and make war, not with a sword,
but with the eternal word; yet the Kings of the earth must rage and murmur,
fighting against the peaceable multitude that shall never bear arms offensive
or defensive; but in suffering, commit themselves unto God, who will in his
time make love to flourish, to the overthrowing of the gross hypocrites of
these times; for the time is come that the peaceable multitude, that does in
holy fastings, watchings and prayers, now even this year expect deliverance,
and they shall be delivered: the Lord has sworn it, and he will perform it,
for he has said that twenty days before next Michaelmas day the sea shall be
divided, and many Jews that here are in England shall go through on dry foot
toward Judea: and the Lord said, I will gather all the Jews in the world unto
one place, and with signs and wonders in great power bring them through all
countries, bring in the ten Tribes unto us.

Again, I tell you in the name of God, that John Robins is the man ordained by
the Creator of heaven and earth to lead the Hebrews, Dividing the sea in the
power of God his Creator; take notice of what I say, for I am a Prophet of the
most high God, that declare this unto you; I confess I was silent, but being
demanded by a Justice what I said of John Robins, I told him, and now also have
told you the same, that if God is pleased to make men carp at truth, I shall in
patience sit still, till God shows it them as he did to me; knowing that God
only must satisfy and not man; for man may suppress for a time, but not change
the heart, the change of the heart is only the proper work of God, and alone
his work, and in the day of his power he will work and none shall hinder. O
then! who shall stand? not the wise, not the prudent, not them that would be
Lords over men's consciences, but those only that in love and peace wait for
deliverance only from the God of peace and love: remember how the old world
despised Noah, a preacher of Righteousness; the Sodomites slighted Lot, Pharaoh
oppressed Moses and Aaron; and the Canaanites opposed Joshuah, but it was all
in vain: this striving also is in vain, for God will do his work, and the
strivings against the deliverance of the Jews, and against their deliverer is
in vain; God will do his work, and you, even many of you that are now
gainsayers shall be delivered by him that you now scorn; and rejoice in it to
your everlasting comfort.

Consider the strange overturnings that have been in this Nation, contrary to
men's expectations; and now a sudden change will be, to the amazement of all
men, and this change must be effected by the sword of the spirit, not by the
sword of man; for now the time is at hand, Swords and spears must be made into
plowshares and pruning hooks, so that Nation shall not lift up sword against
Nation, neither shall men learn war any more: For when men hear of the coming
of the peaceable man, they shall leave the war, and follow him that in peace
and love is sent to deliver them, and bring them into a full enjoyment of
eternal happiness, every man sitting under his own Vine and Fig Tree, none
fraying them away. Consider, that when the Son of man comes he shall not find
faith on the Earth; Remember, that before his coming men must deny the
resurrection, and say, where is the promise of his coming? and that love should
wax cold; Pride envies, Humility derided, Truces and Covenants broken, uproars
in Nations; but when you shall see the sign of the Son of man in the heavens, O
then we shall mourn, looking on him whom they have pierced, even that Jesus
that died for us; then we shall mourn; I have told you, and also tell you, that
those that seek the gaining of victory over the peaceable people, they shall in
the end fail and be broken. The many and various reports of me are made up by
such that know least of me; my state being kept close from men, is the cause
they so rage and war against me with their tongues, but when the man upon the
black horse comes forth with a pair of balances in his hand, then it will be
known, that the sons of men cannot judge the truth of God by reason and their
accursed wills, but either by inspiration, or immediate Revelation; then a
measure of Wheat for a penny, and two measures of Barley for a penny; then
propriety disowned, and charity embraced; then Faith and Works will eternally
be married; but no Devils faith then, who also believe and tremble, but no
power of God. Then St. James' Doctrine will be good, show me thy Faith by thy
works; not honoring the great, and slighting the small, but showing love to
all, that so God only be glorified and exalted; But what is this to a people
that cannot endure sound Doctrine? that have itching ears, not attained to the
first principles of Religion? But it is my comfort that I suffer for Truth, by
such as cannot judge Truth; It is to prepare for the battle of the Lamb; Haste,
haste, haste, thou man of Sin, thy time is short, God will plague thee for thy
judgeing Truth to be blasphemy; haste, persecute the people that live by water
and bread: but thou shall come to thine end, and none shall help thee; But we
shall in the midst of misery be helped by a little help, and when our Prince
stands up, every one shall be delivered that is found written in the Book: Then
woe, woe, woe, and well away, shall be to thee in that day; for when our God does
us call, O then must be thy woe! fall, fall, thou man of Sin; thy Law is Sword,
thy thirstings is after the blood of those that fear God. Remember thou man of
Sin, that suddenly after thy fathers the Bishops had drawn blood from Mr.
Burton, Mr. Bastwick, Mr. Lilborn, and Mr. Pryn, the fall of them was at hand:
So I, Josherbah, tauquan, tauquan, tauquarden, pistauvah, Jah, pahstauvah, Jah,
achor, ab, sha, bah, Jah: even Moses the servant of the Lord, the Lords Scribe,
Joshua Garment;

I declare unto thee thou man of Sin, that I am the Prophet of the Lord, sent
to proclaim the coming of the Lord; and if thou must like thy Ancestors draw
blood from me, or any other Servant of God, it is for thy eternal destruction;
the Lord has said it, I have told thee the day of the Lord is at hand, that
shall burn as an Oven; then our God will save us, and thou shall be as stubble;
Then bloody Prelates you all must down; your Tything Laws must have no room;
the Lion is come out of the Wood to break thy pride and destroy thy gilded
end, end, end: thy mixture is Iron and Clay, thy Mortar not well tempered, it
is like thy fathers the Bishops, thy end like theirs; Think not thou proud new
Prelate, that Judgment will not seize on thee as on them. I had hopes God
would reform thee, but now I know he will destroy thee, and that suddenly, even
before next March, 1652. But all of you of this Nation, that has and does
strive to protect the innocent, God will give you your reward at the appearing
of Jesus Christ, and then your Enemies shall not stand though in Covenants and
Arms against you; for God does remember your care of his people, some of you;
but those that delight in blood, he has no pleasure in them.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Spirit, three Persons, yet
but one God eternal, not defined, nor confined, not clothed with mortal flesh,
and bone as we are, the only Creator of all things visible and invisible, who
is not the Creation, nor any part of the Creation, whose being is in it self
only, to him only let be all glory, praise, power, praise for evermore, Amen.

All the Nations of the Earth are as a drop of a bucket to him.

Thus I have finished this little Declaration; The grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ be with you, that love his appearing, Amen, Amen, and Amen.

Come Lord Jesus. Joshuah Garment.
Clarken well, New Prison. June 5th. 1651. Farewell.



FINIS.

