The CASE OF MINISTERS MAINTENANCE BY TITHES, (As in ENGLAND,) Plainly
discussed in CONSCIENCE and PRUDENCE.

Humbly propounded to the consideration of those Gentlemen of the Committee,
who are in consultation about it.

BY JOHN GAUDEN, D. D.

TIT. 11.9. That thou may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort, and
convince the gainsayers.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Maxey, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

The Case of MINISTERS MAINTENANCE By TITHES, Humbly presented to the Gentlemen
of the Committee.
GENTLEMEN,
I Presume, it will offend none of you, if you are Godly, with meekness of
wisdom to hear what may be the judgment of other men, who are standers by;
yet as much concerned in those matters you now handle, of public interest, as
your selfs; whose present place and power, as they add not to your, so they
detract not from other men's rational or Religious abilities. Yea such I hear
is the modesty and equanimity of some of you, as not to lay any supercilious
restraints, or tyrannous obstructions in the way of any sober man, but rather
to invite and expect seasonable addresses and discreet discoveries of other
men's sense; however differing from yours; as in other things, so in this of
Ministers maintenance, as it has been many hundred of years by Custom or Law
settled here in England.

In which (as in all affairs of great concernement) violent changes, and
precipitant resolutions (gratifying the present heats and passions of any men)
may soon create many and irremediable mischeifes to the people of this Nation;
But well advised and impartial counsels may (through Gods blessing) by their
Justice, Piety and Moderation, not only prevent those farther troubles and
confusions, which are by many feared, by some threatened, and by others hoped;
But also add much honor, peace and prosperity to these British Churches and
Nations; both as to civil and Religious affairs; In which your and your
posterities welfare is bound up, as well, as that of your brethren.

Therefore in a matter of so much consequence, as this seems to be, (how-ever I
am sorry there should be any occasion for me, or any man to represent anew,
what Truths have been so learnedly and largely handled by able men, and
published to the English world;) yet I hope, I may without offense take leave
(which I humbly crave) with all Christian meeknes, to offer to your wisdom
these following considerations. Which are drawn either from clear
demonstrations of the mind of God set forth in his Word; or from the evidence
of right reason and common equity.

Both which I must in charity suppose to be the rules and bounds of your
purposes and motions; as they ought to be of all wise men's deliberations, Isai.
32.16 17 Gal. 6.16.
resolutions, and actions; Being the only fountains whence truth, righteousness
and peace do flow: And the best defensatives against those temptations, which
usually attend ignorance, prejudice, partiality, and those transports of fears,
envy, revenge, covetousness and ambition, incident to the minds and manners of
frail and sinful mortals, whose momentany follys and sudden miscarriages often
produce lasting calamities, which are far more easily prevented then removed:
when once, as fire or water, they have prevailed to outrages and excesses,
after times may sadly (...) they cannot remedy in this kind; There being few
examples to be found or hoped for, of renewed bounty; restoring to the Church
of Christ, any thing that our sacrilegious rashness, or cruelty has devouted

And least you or any man should be prejudiced, against what ever may here be
offered by me in this point of Ministers maintenance; as if I aimed hereby to
preserve any private benefit to my self by my Ecclesiastical living; I do here
freely offer to relinquish it, (if I be thereto required) in order to confirm
the integrity of my judgment in this point: That you and all men may see, no
private advantages sway me, who, in order to preserve the liberty and
livelyhoods of others, my Fathers and Brethren of the Ministry; had rather
preach the Gospel gratis, (so long as God enables me), then to enjoy the
greatest emolument you or any man can give me. Which I should esteem as loss
and dung, while I see the reformed Religion starved; the Name of Christ
blasphemed; his faithful ministers discouraged, and by most indigne injuries
exposed, either to sordid necessities or uncomly dependances; such as would
move grief and shame to any godly man; How much then would he abhor to be
agent of instrument in such unjust oppressions and diminutions? wherein none
can rejoice or willingly act, but such as are enemies to the reformed Religion,
and to the happiness of this nation; Against both which, there are not wanting
such deep Policies and desperate designs, domestic and foreign, as hope in a
short time to destroy and devour them both. Which miseries, if you in your time
and place, do not study to prevent, but either by weakness or wilfulnes promote,
you shall never want the guilt of great sin before God, and of lasting infamy
before men; The aggravations of both which are to be taken from those
proportions of public power and influence, which any men, at any time pretend
to enjoy and exercise in Church or State; which make them in an higher nature
and degree responsible to God and man for the evil they do, or the good they
hinder; as we see in Eli, in his sons, in Jeroboam, and others. This is
certain, They who undertake to rule others, charge themselves in many respects
with the souls of men, and are accountable before God and man for other men's
both sins and miseries.

BUt here, before I present to your considerations the point of Ministers
maintenance, I hope it will not be expected by you, (or imputed to me, as any
defect, since it is not now my design, to assert the Institution, Calling,
Office, Divine Authority, excellency and necessity of the Evangelical Ministry.
Which some men, to make short work, and to sweep away all stakes at one throw,
do, either absolutely deny to be any where in the Church of Christ; or not such
as it ought to be in this Church of England; so that either no Tithes, or other
settled Maintenance is due to any men, as Ministers; or at least, not to these,
that here claim them as Such.

This is too large a controversy for me in this place to handle; which other
where has been largely done, through Gods assistance, and as I hope, to his
glory, among the children of true wisdom.

Thus much only at present I make bold to suggest to you; Do but as wise and
unpartial men, 1. separate from the Country people, their rustic Confidences,
their Credulity, and Easines, their Peevishnes, Envy, and Antipathy to men of
better breeding and manners; besides their Covetousnes, and what savours of the
Clod, or thick clay, with which they seek to load themselves: Also 2. Take away
from men of finer metal, their desire of novelty, their factiousness, their
listing to be contentious, their vain glory, their licentious inclinations,
their warpings to self interests, which love not to be reproved or restrained
by any severer doct^^^^ or manners. 3. Lastly, sift and search more narrowly
the finer designs and deeper projects of Pragmatists and Politians; the
imperiousnes of whose lusts are inconsistent with those strict rules of
righteousness, truth and holiness, by which they are impatient to be discovered
or checked. Look, I say, but apart, on this dross, which is naturaly in all
sorts of men; And then as Christians you will soon understand, what are the
main grounds of so many men's cavilling and contending against the Ministers of
England, both as to their Office and Maintenance.

It is humbly confessed, as we are men, we are subject to as many infirmities,
as any earthen vessels; and, as we are Ministers, we are liable to more
temptations and oppositions both from men and devils; yet as to the duty,
dignity, and usefulness of the calling, it cannot be denied, that many holy,
humble, wise, and contented Christians have for many ages highly valued, and
sincerely loved it; because they happily profited by it. For this they have
often and unfeinedly blessed God. For this blessedness they now earnestly pray,
that it may be continued to them and theirs: by this they acknowledge to have
received their greatest good, Christ Jesus. And to it they gratefully confess
they ow even their own souls; as to the means, (under God) of their
instruction, sanctification and salvation.

We may not now reproach any men's ingratitude, being so conscious to our own
failings and deformities: It must be confessed, that the people of this nation
ow their troubles to the sins, Ignorance, Pride and Policy of Ministers, as
well as People: we know it is not a time roughly to test but fairly to plead
our cause; whose desire is not to uphold our Calling, that we may enjoy
Maintenance; But to continue just Maintenance, that we may preserve the honor
and blessing of the Calling to Posterity.

For which Ministers do not urge what is most evident by long enstome and many
Laws in this Nation: that they have had and still have possession of that
Maintenance, which the Law has assigned to them; That their title is as good
as any man's by Law to his estate. That, it were an intolerable vexation to put
men to prove by what right they hold those Estates, which their Predecessors
and themselves have without molestation enjoyed for a thousand years.

It rests in those that would dispossess them to disprove their right and
claim; since they are such Ministers, and so invested in their Livings, as the
Law required.

Nor do they plead for their Office and Maintenance that universal approbation,
which all foreign Reformed Churches have ever given to them; neither of which
their adversaries have either invalidated or questioned.

Conscientious Ministers are so ingenuous, as not to desire to enjoy their
Maintenance, by the favor of the Law, if they cannot, before any impartial
Tribunal, first, maintain their Callin^ and Ministry as Christ's, both by
Scripture grounds, and Ecclesiastical examples, conform thereto in all ages,
since Christ's Ascension.

And if these were less pregnant for their vindication; yet the excellent
Ministerial gifts, with which many of them have been endued; The many gracious
works, which the Lord has wrought by them; their Spiritual blessings, which
they have imparted; their sound preaching, their judicions praying, their
decent and comfortable celebrating of Holy Mysteries; their wholesome Doctrine;
their elaborate writings; their Holy living; these will testify for them and
their Ministry.

dead and living would give witness to them, that they are the true Ministers
of Jesus Christ: 2 Cor. 3.2.
The holy and happy fruits of their labors have every where pregnantly sealed
and confirmed the power and authority of their Ministry, however as men they
had their faylings.

It argues gross blindness in men's eyes, to deny the light of the Sun, when it
is present; which is sufficient to prove it self, to men that have sight, and
are willing to see; It is lost labor to assert either Ministry or Maintenance
before those, who deny them upon design, either to save money by having no
Ministers at all; or to get all the Maintenance to themselves, by being the
only Ministers, though of no legitimate succession.

Ministry of England, and its Maintenance. In which number you may be, if you
have that low and modest esteem of your selfs, which best becomes you; who
have little reason, (if you look to the rock whence you are hewn, and to the
hole of the pit whence ye are dug, Isa. 51.1. being but extraordinary, and
temporary Pilots, applied to the helm of this State,) to prefer your counsels
or conclusions before those of your wise and godly fore fathers; nor to advance
your power, before their undoubted authority, by removing those ancient
landmarks which they have set for many generations.

demonstrating, to all that are truly gracious Christians; I take liberty to
proceed more largely, upon their Maintenance; as it is settled in England
chiefly by Tithes.

Touching which there can be but two grand considerations offered to wise men,
or entertained by them.

1. First, that of duty and necessity, arising from Divine precept, strictly
binding; in cases, where the will of God is precisely and clearly set forth in
his Holy Word, either bidding, or forbidding any thing; which cases admit no
dispute, but exact ready obedience from all men under pain of sin and wrath.

2. The second is, that of choice and convenience; wherein Christian Prudence
may use that rational and Religious freedom, which shall in private or
public cases seem best to them; not being precisely determined or limited by
the Divine wisdom; but left to the discretion of wise and Godly men, in their
persons or places; in families or Policies; so as still to regard the main
ends, which the Lord has in general propounded. In such things Christians may
possibly choose and act things less prudent and convenient; yet without the
blame of sin before God; although not without the reproach of Imprudence and
weakness before men.

As to the first ground upon which conscience must be settled; (wherein great
care must be bad neither to multiply sin beyond the Law of God, E^cl. 7.16.
by an unrighteous scrupalosity; nor to diminish them by any loose
indifferency.) Three Quaeres are by sober men to be examined.

men's costs and charges (in case Ministers require it) be expressly commanded
by the Lord? or may by clear and necessary consequence be gathered out of his
holy word?

Answer must be Affirmative. There being many clear places declaring the right
and power of Ministers to claim: 1 Cor 9.6. Gal. 6.6.
and commanding people to retribute such Maintenance to them, out of their
Estates, as is due in common equity and gratitude: such as constant experience,
light of nature, and every man's own conscience dictates, requires, justifies;
So that the Oxes-feeding of the corn he treads; Luke 10.7.
The Laborers hire for his work; The Husbandmans benefit of the ground he
tils; The Shepherds sustenance by the stock he feeds; these are not more
pregnant and necessary claims of justice, than is that of the Ministers of the
Gospel; as the Apostle proves in particular instances: 1. Cor. 9. from v. 7. to
v. 14. and our Savior lays down in one general maxim, Luke 10.7.

2. To those the Apostle Paul subjoines, as a further express declaration of
the will of God in this case of Ministers maintenance; 1 Cor. 9.13.14.
both as to the constant justice of it; and that exemplarines as to the measure
and proportion, which his wisdom and bounty had formely ordained for his
Ministers at the Altar; For whom, as the Lord made a particular and plentiful
provision, even so he has now ordained, that the Ministers of the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. Not upon alms and mere benevolence, after the way of
begging uncertaintie, or shameful sharking and necessity; sparingly and
grudgingly; but, as becomes the Name of God, the honor of Christ, the dignity
of their embassy, the usefulness of their labors in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.8. 1 Timothy 5.17.
competently, comfortably, hospitably, and honorably. Treating them as Parents,
with double honor; that is, Reverence, and ingenuous Maintenance.

good Christians, who wisely weigh and consider the great disproportion, which
is between those Spiritual good things, 1 Cor. 9.11.
which they receive from God by his Ministers, tending to the eternal good of
their souls; and these temporal good things, which they retribute in gratitude
and justice, which are but carnal, only for the outward man, fading,
uncertain; and but for a moment in comparison.

So that whosoever has once tasted effectually the comfort and benefit to be
had in spiritual things, (whereof Ministers are Gods ordinary dispensers) will
never grudge to impart to him that teaches him, of all his good things; Gal.
6.6.
which conscience both of common equity, and Gods express command binds him to;
so inexcusable are those before God and man, who partaking, by their Ministers
pains, of the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, think much to
communicate to them in Christ's Name, and for Gods sake, of those things which
are but loss and dung in comparison.

Military man, or Soldiers, are prone to measure all right by their power, 1
Cor. 9.7.
and to own no other rule of justice, but their will and sword; The blessed
Apostle, to stop their mouths from opening against the maintenance of
Ministers, and to leave them self-condemned, if they grudg at or detain the
salary or pay, which these have for ^warring in a better warfare; 2 Timothy 2.3.
not at their own, but other men's charges, gives that particular Instance,
among others; Who goes to war at his own cost? So that no Soldier may without
shame and self-conviction speak against Ministers maintenance, who himself not
only receives pay, but exacts it; nor as a benevolence, and arbitrary, but and
justice and necessary: When the Soldiers fight gratis, upon their own charges,
and take no pay; then let them declaim against the settled maintenance of
Ministers: Till then; they ought in all equity and honor to plead for them,
and preserve their Rights to them.

Which rights are derived to them from God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who has
the Supreme dominion over all men's persons and estates, who has the assigned
this power and right to them, so far as they are his servants, Messengers, and
Ambassadors in Christ's stead, ordaining that they who preach the Gospel, 2 Cor.
6.20.
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. which Divine right all faithful
Ministers who labor in the Word and Doctrine, may with justice, honor, and
good Conscience, both require and enjoy, without any reproach of Idleness,
Covetousness or oppression: And Christian people not only may in courtesy,
but ought in equity and duty to provide, what is honest, comely, and competent
for them, as God has ordained: hereby expressing the fruits of their faith and
love, their sense of justice, and gratitude both to God and man; their value of
the Gospel, and spirit (...) good things, their taste of the heavenly gift and
treasure; their zeal for the worship of God, and for the honor and service of
Christ, in his Evangelical and eternal Priesthood,

dispense faithfully the mysteries of the Gospel to his flock or people, over
whom the Lord has set him, for which neglect a woe and curse lies upon his
soul: 1 Cor. 9.16.
In like manner it must needs be a great sin and shame in Christians (full of
impiety, injustice, and high ingratitude both to God and man) not to discharge
this duty and debt, by providing a competent and comfortable maintenance for
the faithful Ministers of Christ, 1 Timothy 5.17.
either such as only teach, or both teach and govern well, as good Shepherds
of the flock of Christ.

For which duty there are so many clear and most convincing grounds of equity,
alleged by the Apostle Paul; And to these is added such express Declarations
of the will of God, both in the Law, Numb. 18.23.
under the Levitical Ministry, and in the Parallel Ordinance for the
Evangelical: Against both which pregnant grounds of Ministers maintenance, who
so lists to cavil or blaspheme, he merits no reply, any more than Rabshekah
did from Hezekiah, or Korah, Dathan, and Abiram from Moses and Aaron.

I have done with the first Quere, resolving it into this Affirmative. That
since the Lord has appointed some men by office and duty to celebrate holy
ministrations in order to set forth the glory of God in his mercy, and the love
of Christ in his sufferings, that men might believe and repent to the saving of
their souls; it must needs follow by the proportion of Gods love and care for
the Ministers; That the competent and comely maintenance of these Evangelical
Ministers, (as the servants of the Lord for the Churches good) at other men's
costs and charges (in case they require it) is not only by necessary
consequences to be gathered out of, but i^ in express terms commanded in the
Word of God, which sets forth the will of God in this case; not only as a
positive and temporary precept, but as grounded on eternal and indispensible
principles of piety, equity and gratitude, which hold as firm in the New
Testament, as in the Old; and intend as well the maintenance of those that
preach the Gospel, as it did of those that served at the Altar.

Typical, Judaical, and Ceremonial, appropriated to the Levitical Ministry, or
Priesthood, which by the coming of Christ is changed, and so abolished; that
Tithes may no more now be used by Christians, either Ministers or people, than
Sacrifices or Circumcision?

Negative; Nothing in the word of God appears forbidding Christians by private
or publicks bounty to set a part a Tenth of their increase or substance to the
glory of God, for the Maintenance of Piety or Charity, (both which ends the
Ministry of the Gospel chiefly aims at.) I say, no more, than it is forbiden
or commanded to give any other portion above or below the Tenth. Certainly, if
Christians may lawfully devote a 5, 6, 9, or a 12, 15, 20. part to the glory of
God in a public good, no reason or Religion can be produced against the Tenth
as the only unlawful portion.

2. If any portion or quantity as a fit Medium between Ministers merit and
peoples retribution be specified, intimated, recommended or ordained by God in
the Gospel, sure it is no other, but this of Tithe or tenth, as I shall
afterward prove in the 3. Quere. If none be pointed out or signified, as Gods
choice, then is any one lawful, which is fit; and that most lawful, which is
fittest to attain Gods end: which is evidently commanded; namely, the competent
maintenance of his Ministers under the Gospel, at a rate answerable to that
which those enjoyed under the Law.

3. The scruple some make of Tithes as Jewish; urging that place, that since
the Priesthood is changed, the Law must be changed; Hebr. 7.12.
and therefore no tithes are allowed to the Evangelical Ministry, is easily
answered.

Numb. 18.21. Levit. 27.30. Genesis 14.20. Genesis 28.22. Plut. in Lucul. Diodo. Sic
l. 5. c. 2. Macrob. Satur. l. 3. c. 12. Majores solitos decimam Herculi vovere,
e Varrone. Plin. Hist. Not. l. 12. c. 14 Herod. 1. Clio. Livi Dec. 1. l. 3
as to provide certain and ample Maintenance for the first, and none for the
second. As if there were more excellency in a beast sacrificed, then in Christ
crucified.

appointment of Tithes to be paid, as Gods portion, among the Jews to his
Priests, does not argue any thing so much as this; that they are Gods still
after the Law, as they were his in a Religious right before the Law, when
Melchisedeck received them, as a right of Abram, and Jacob vowed them as a due
to God; from which ancient light of tradition and use among the Holy
Patriarcks, the opinion which many of the Heathens had touching the holiness of
a tenth part of their goods and spoils arose; which they in many places
consecrated as due to their Gods, Jupiter, Hercules and others.

Moses: the institution and end of them in all times depended merely upon
common grounds of Piety, Equity, and Gratitude, both to God and man; The most
wise and just will of God was pleased to accept first from the Patriarck, and
afterward to claim as his own. Levit. 27.30. then to assign that quantum, or
portion of Tenths for his public service, and the sustenance of those men who
were employed in it. Now since the same ends, as to the main, are still
required by the Lord, namely, the Maintenance of his public Ministry under the
Gospel, there is no reason, why Tithes as a proportionate means, should be
abolished. Since there is still an Evangelical Priesthood and Ministry,
ordained by God, and derived from Christ; which men (needing Humane and Mortal
supplys, as much as the Levites and Priests of old did) now exercise, celebrate
and administer; doubtless, as the same necessities now require like supplies;
and a parallel livelihood is by the Lord ordained in the Gospel; so nothing
hinders, but these may be made by the same measure of tenths, upon the same
grounds of equity which were valid among the Jews; Especially, considering the
Ministry of the Gospel is more paineful, more honorable, and not less useful,
than that of old was; Nor is it to be presumed, that God should be more strait
handed to this Ministry, which has the honor to be in Christ's stead, the Lord
of glory: the beloved Son of God.

Prudence and Policy in Church or State, which were used by them, are so far
allowed, and by Gods pattern recommended as best to Christians, according as
they wisely consider the fitnes of them, as means to those holy ends which the
Lord still requires. The sanctifying of a Sabbath or day of rest; Confessing of
sins over the sacrifice; reading and hearing the Law and Prophets explained;
Praying to, and praising of God; Charity to the poor; Relief of enemies in
distress; Reconciling before they come to the Altar with their gift;
preparation before the Passover, etc. So also as to other Laws, Judicial,
Penal, and Political, (which the Jews had and observed by a positive command of
God) Christians may, under a different ministration and form, use and do the
same things, upon those moral and general grounds of Equity, Piety, and
Charity, which are still, and ever will be in force, as they are in this point
of Ministers maintenance by Tithes, as well, yea better than an any other way.

or in general, commanded by the Lord, the same duty in its particular
circumstances, qualifications, and restrictions, (which humane prudence,
according to the liberty granted, puts upon it,) is also commanded, approved
and accepted: and so becomes not only lawful, but necessary in its due time
and proportions; Not absolutely, positively and explicitly, as to every
particular regulation and circumstance, but relatively, consequentially, and
inclusively: where, the duties of preaching, praying, baptising, receiving,
distributing, paying tribute, relief of Parents, honoring God with our
substance, etc. are commanded, without any limitations, as who, when, where,
how long, how much, by whom, to whom, etc. In these cases, not only the duty in
the abstract and general, by explicit precept is injoined; but also, in the
conorete, as it is bounded with convenient circumstances and proportions,
fitted to the main end.

The like justifiableness is most clear in this portion of Tithes, to be
assigned to Ministers for their maintenance; for which we have not only the
general Ordinance, and command of God oftentimes in the New Testament (as I
have showed) which always includes the fittest means for it; but we have also
Gods wisdom and bounty, particularly pointing us, even so as of old, to that
portion which he chose as his, and gave to his Ministers, from which we have no
command to vary or alter; but rather an injunction or divine Ordinance to
continue, since it is still a means no less suitable to the main end then it
was before; and as necessary for the sustenance of the evangelicall Ministry,
as it was for the Levitical.

change of the Law, which (is objected) must follow the change of the
Priesthood; it is fulfilled most clearly, not by taking away Tithes, or utter
abolishing the payment and use of them in the Church, but by the transferring
of them to another Priesthood and Ministry, which is not after the Aaronical,
and Levitical, but after the Melchisedecian and Christian order and succession;
with neither of which, the paying or receiving of Tithes, as an honor to
Christ, and a maintenance of his worship, are any way inconsistent, as the
Author to the Hebrews proves, Hebr. 7.8. but rather most congruous; as a token
of honor to Christ's royal and eternal Priesthood; and a testimony of gratitude
and devotion, from those that worship him.

In which point even of Tithes, the Author to the Hebrews strongly urges, the
Prerogative or eminency of right and claim, which Christ has for ever, both to
the honor of the Priesthood, and consequently to Tithes, as properly belonging
to him, which was long before the Levitical Institution, foreshewed in that
great Type of Christ, Melchisedeck; who bringing forth Bread and Wine, the
Symbols of Christ's body and blood in the great Mystery of the Eucharist,
received in the person and right of Christ, Tithes of Abraham, the Father of
the faithful; yea and in some sort, of Levi, as by an higher and ancienter
right, which sufficiently justifies, (if it do not implicitly command) any of
Abraham's children after the faith, by their paying of Tithes, to own with this
honor and homage the royal Priesthood of Christ, as by a tribute and an
offering which he receives by his Ministers, who are in his Name and stead
ministering holy things now under the Gospel, by whom (and no otherways) he
which lives for ever, now receives Tithes, as was prophetically prefigured of
him; who yet while he lived on earth, received none in Person, because the
Levitical Ministry and dispensation was not yet finished; of which Tribe the
Lord Jesus was not: Nor did the Apostolical wisdom and tenderness require of
the believing Jews any Tenths, while yet the Levitical service, Altar and
Temple were living (neither dead, nor deadly) lest the Gospel might seem a
burden to those that were otherwise charged, and yet they were very grateful
to the Apostles; even selling their estates, and laying the price at the
Apostles feet.

Priesthood, or Priestly office, and Ministry; but only he changed the
Aaronical line, order, and Ceremony of Succession; himself continuing a King
and Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck; so neither may he be
thought utterly to have abolished those ancient Priestly rights to Tithes used
before and under the Law, as a maintenance still of his Ministers, and an
agnition of his Sovereign Priesthood; however he has changed the temporary and
intervenient Law of Moses, which assigned them to the Levitical Ministry: The
channel or course is changed, but not the stream, which is turned another way,
end derived to another cistern. Nothing then forbids Christians (now under the
Gospel) to own this duty to Christ, and discharge it even in a way of Tithes,
dedicating them to his honor and service in the maintenance of his Ministers,
by whom Christ as our High Priest, still instructs, prays for, and blesses
his people.

Lastly, I affirm, There is so little, so nothing, in the Analogy, and Tenor,
or in the Letter of the New Testament against Ministers of the Gospel being
maintained by this portion of Tithes; that there is much more preponderancy to
prove them not only lawful (which is evident) but (for the most part)
necessary, as a right and duty: yea to ingenuous Christians, who are neither
covetous, nor contentious, they will appear the most laudable, wisest,
equallest, and fittest measure or dimensum; 1. As a due which God challenges
to himself. 2. As an honorary right, specially belonging to Christ in his
Priestly dignity. 3. As a grateful retribution of believers to the divine
bounty, of which they have received all, and to which they owe themselves. 4.
As an equitable valuation and requital of Christ's Ministers labor among them.
5. As an imitation coming nearest to Gods ancient command, and pattern under
the Law, and to the devotion of his holy servants before the Law. 6. As the
fruit of tender hearrs, careful and conscientiously jealous, least they should
come short any way of that which the Lord may justly expect from them; and
which by one most pregnant place, seems so expressly to require of them; which I
shall urge in my Answer to the third Question: Which here follows to be
discussed.

Quaere is, Whether the Lord has by any Evangelicall Precept, precisely
appointed any such Quantum or measure, as a tenth portion of increase and
profits to be exactly and constantly paid by Believers to their Ministers; and
these to be yearly required by Ministers as their due, for their livelihood or
maintenance? Or what positive right, as from God, have Ministers of the Gospel,
to plead for their Tithes here in England?

Right or Due, which may be taken in a twofold sense, either as to a particular
precept, explicitly exacting a Tenth in terms, as in the levitical Law; or as
to a general Ordinance including, implying, and referring to a Tenth: We must
distinguish between the letter of the Scripture, limiting to a Tenth, as in the
Old Testament: And the scope, sense, or equitable meaning of the Scripture,
intimating or pointing to, and exemplarily recommending that proportion, in the
New Testament, as the best and most proper means, where it is meet and
proportionate to that end, which God has expressly ordained; Which is, that the
Minister of the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; even so as the Minister of
the Altar, did of the Altar.

Herein although particular circumstances may differ, under different
administrations; yet the main design and general intention is the same; both as
to the end, competent maintenance; and to the aptest means, so far as they are
in our power, and opportunity.

2. But it is urged, if God required a Tenth under the Gospel, why did he not
in any place of the Gospel mention that part by name, as of old he did?

Gods silence in the New Testament, as to renewing a precise command for paying
Tithes by name, to the Ministers of the Gospel, is no abrogating of them, as to
right and equity; the not specifying or exacting of believers a Tenth, was upon
several grounds of divine wisdom; which are evident.

1. It was not necessary; because the rule and measure of gratitude, devotion
and equitalble retributions (to which the Apostle 1 Cor. 9.14. referr^s
Christians under the Gospel) as a continued binding ordinance of the Lord in
this case, is sufficiently set forth in the Old Testament, both by the
Religious bounty of the Holy Patriarcks, as Abraham and Jacob (expressed in
this proportion of Tithes or Tenths, before the Law) And also by the express
command of God, afterward pitching upon this quantum as his, and appointing it
for the fittest medium, which his wisdom and bounty thought good to set
between the covetousness of Priests, who might have exacted or expected more;
and the niggardliness of people, who might have allowed less, if left to their
own arbitration, choice, and free will; (men being naturally penurious to the
true God and his word, as having no love to, or delight in his service; and
only prodigal to their own Idolatrous fancies, as those which they most count
and esteem: Charets and Horses shall be dedicated to the Sun, or the Queen of
Heaven; when a Lamb, or Pigeon, a little meal or cake is grudged as an offering
to the true God and holy Temple. The equity and analogy of Gods former will,
continues in force, and sufficiently binds the conscience to obed^ence,
although a particular precept were not renewed; especially, where Christians
are specially referred to that: which is clearer in this point of Ministers
maintenance by Tithes, than for the Lords days Sabbath, or Rest.

2. The indulgence of God foresaw, and the Apostles tenderness considered, That
an exact or strict requiring or mentioning of the Tenths of all increase, and
profits to be paid to the Ministers of the Gospel in all places, and at all
times, might discourage Jews and Gentiles from the Gospel; yea, and many times
prove very inconvenient to Christians; who must expect persecution; to whom it
might have been a burden and snare in their uncertainties, distresses, and
poverty. A burden, to pay always a tenth of their profits, hardly gotten, and
hardly preserved: A snare also, if they paid them not exactly. Yet this
Indulgence, Silence, Remission, which in the primitive tenderness might be
permitted by the Lord, is no abrogation of the duty or Law; any more than the
omission of circumcision for forty years in the wilderness, was a vacating of
that ordinance of God to the Jews; or the not commanding expressly the Lords day
to be kept as a Sabbath, is any argument against our sanctification of it,
which is only related in the New Testament as a primitive practice.

3. By the Lords not mentioning Tithes in the very term (or qu^ntum) something
seems left in the Gospel to the conscience and ingenuity, both of people and of
Ministers: These, that they may in part remit in times of distress those
rights, as Paul did: not exacting this proportion of Tenths; which they might
otherwise claim and expect as due: People also by so much Indulgence are
invited to show so much the more, a liberal and a willing mind where God
enables them; either occasionally to return; or constantly to settle even such
a maintenance on their Ministers; as comes nearest both to the equity of Gods
will: and the exemplarines of that proportion of Tithes, which he anciently
required as his own, and which we do not find he has in the Gospel remitted;
for then the Lord had left his Ministers of the Gospel to mere uncertainties
and benevolence, which was not even so as he ordained for those of the Altar;
and indeed flatly contradicts the Apostles reddition, Even so, etc.

4. The Divine wisdom saw that in some conditions of Christians living, a Tenth
of the earths yearly increase would not afford a competent, or any convenient
maintenance for Ministers; as in Cities, and populous Towns; so in Castles,
Ships, etc. There some other way, by rents of Houses, or Trades increase, must
equivalently be raised. And here although men now a days would grudg to pay a
tenth of Trades increase or their callings, yet we read of old it was paid by
many Citizens, Merchants, Lawyers and Physicians.

5 Although we do not find in the Practice of primitive Churches, among Jews or
Gentiles, mentioned in the New Testament, that either the Apostles or other
Pastors and Ministers always used this power, or strictly required the just
proportion of a Tenth; which to the beleving Jews (on whom the Charges due to
the Altar still lay for a time) might have seemed a burden; and so to the
Gentiles, among whom not many rich or Noble, but poor and mean people in Cities
chiefly received the Gospel, and this often with persecution: Yet we find in
those days, in stead of exact Tithes and settled maintenance, that which is not
in these days to be expected: Namely, Acts 2.45.
That in those primitive times Christians were willing to sell all, or great
part of their possessions, to bring the price of them and lay it at the
Apostles feet, for their support, and the Churches relief; So fa^ did they, as
then, so afterward exceed the proportion of a tenth part, that many gave all
they had and themselves too, to serve the Lord and his Church.

Those were excusable in their poverty and persecution, if they had come short
of a tenth; and were commendable where they most what exceeded it. Wisdom
teaches us, that necessity dispenses with positive precepts; that different
times requires different counsels and ways; yet always keeping nearest to
Gods rule, and aiming at the same good end.

Those were the purest flames of Christians first Love, and Primitive Zeal;
when Apostles, and other excellent Ministers of the Gospel, were received as
the Angels of God; the feet of those Messenge s of peace were beautiful; Their
persons dearer to believers then their right eyes; The honor of their calling
and Ministry daily kept up with frequent miracles; that the poverty of S. Peter
(Acts 3 6.) when he had not gold or silver, was venerable, by the miraculous
power he exerted to the creple, in relieving him beyond his desire; and it was
also formidable, in the dreadful sentence he thundered against the
sacrilegious parsimony, lying, and distrust of Ananias and Saphira. Tithes need
not to be urged or exacted then when Christians are forward beyond what they
were able; and in the midst of poverty abounded to a liberality.

But alas! we are now sunk to the dregs of time; raked up and buried in the
very ashes or embers of devotion; All is become worse and more perilous, by how
much it draws more of the later days; when the charity of men shall grow
cold; iniquity abound: when men shall be lovers of themselves, of the World and
Mammon, more then of God: Generally seeking their own profits, and preferments,
and not the things of Jesus Christ, and his Church; when miserable forms of
penurious Piety, and sacrilegious sanctity, shall eat out and deny the power of
Godliness; when men shall choose to serve God in away that costs them nothing,
turning Godliness into gain; when the Ministers of the Gospel, the more
learned, holy, able and faithful they are, are forced to hide their faces, and
are covered with that confusion, both from poverty and reproach, which some men
delight to cast upon them; The more beautiful their wings and feet are, which
shine with the beams of the Sun of righteousness, his truth and his spirit, the
more they are forced to lie among the pots, to be levelled to, and buried
among the meanest of the people; Having enough to do to preserve now their own
eyes from being pulled out by those unreasonable men, (ungrateful Ravens) who
neither regard the Mother which bare them, nor the Father which begat them.

So that different minds and manners of Christians may will require different
ways and settling of maintenance for Ministers; The more covetous, ingrate, and
inconstant people are, the more needful it is, and more required by God, that
competent and constant provision should in conscience be urged, and in prudence
established for his Ministers of the Gospel. It was pious in primitive times,
for Christians to pay no Tithes, when they failed not to give much more. It is
impious now not to pay Tithes, when these are all that is settled or may be
expected for maintenance, and hardly this obtained: restore pristine
Liberality, and Ministers shall gain by taking no Tithes.

6. We find in all ages of the Church, either in the intervals, or cessations
of persecution, (when peace, prosperity and plenty, had somewhat slackned, as
the Sun does shining upon fire, the warmth of piety) that the devoutest
Christians in all places, not only gave free will offerings and oblations, but
even the Tenth or Tithes of their profits and and increase both personal and
prediall; out of which the Bishops, and Presbyters, the poor, and other pious
uses were maintained: And this out of not only custom, and bounty, but of
conscience, thankfulness, and duty; O^ig. Hom. in Number. 11. Cypt. ep. 66.
J^ron. in M^l. 3. Aug. ser. de Temp.
as coming up to that proportion, which they saw God of old required, and to
which in the New Testament he referred them. As Origin, St. Cyprian, St.
Jeronimus Austin and others of the Ancients testify.

Which Catholic conscienicous customs among Christians, of paying Tithes to
the Ministers of Christ, came afterward to be settled, by particular gifts or
donations. And at length, in the abating of Christians fervor and bounty,
Tithes were established, by Edicts Imperial, Canons of Councels Ecclesiastical,
and also by particular National Laws or Statutes in every country; which
included the donation, consent and frewil of all Estates and degrees severally
and jointly, who were, as Proprieters of Lands and Estates, related to and
included in any Christian Polity or community.

7. To answer then that Question; what Positive Right, as from God or man, have
Ministers in England to their Tithes?

Answ. There clearly appears (without any violence to Scripture or reason) a
fivefold right which ministers of the Gospel in England justly plead to their
maintenance by Tithes, as here settled in England.

1. That right of Natural Equity and grateful retribution, which every man's own
conscience dictates; which God, who has implanted it in them, requires of
them; and which the Apostle, by many instances in Soldiers, Shepherds, and
husbandmen presses 1 Cor. 9.7. arising from the merit of Ministers labors in
the Church, of which God is the justest valuer, by which they deserve to live
of the Gospel, so as becomes the Gospel: i. e. the God and Savior there set
forth. And so as must be answerable to what their Studies, Pains and Places do
require: The Labourer has Gods right to his wages: which ought to be, not what
a Nabal will give; but what his time, care and pains in justice deserve: The
light of Nature taught all men to value the service of their Priests at an high
and honorable rate. None ever grew so mean and niggardly as some that pretend
to be reformers, but cannot tell where to six, till al is wasted and deformed.

2. Ministers of the Gospel have a Scriptural Right, drawn from the will of
God, expressly ordaining, as I have showed, a livelihood in general; and a power
of partaking of other men's temporal good things; And although the Lord in the
Gospel has not by renewed precept so expressly confined it to this particular
proportion of Tenths by ^^^mes and in terms; yet he has expressly commended to
Christians imitation the equity of the old Law; and referred them to the
exemplary benignity of Gods love, bounty, and care toward his Ministers at the
Altar, to whom he assigned his own portion, the Tenth, binding Christians
inclusively and relatively, in Conscience, yea leaving them without excuse (in
like cases) if they do not estimate Ministers labors as highly, or provide for
them, Even so, as he has ordained; equivalent, parallel, or proportionate,
both in competency and constancy.

Patriarchs of old, who (no doubt) had this measure of a Tenth to be offered to
God; from that traditional Theology, which their Forefathers taught them, by
words and works; as a beam of Gods wisdom; who indulging to sinful man nine
parts, (when indeed he had forfeited all) reserved to his particular honor and
service a tenth: 2. We see the Lord challenges this Tenth among the Jews as
his own; not only by right of creation and donation, for so all is his; but
also by a peculiar and religious claim; that man might testify by paying a
Tenth to the Lord, that he owns and adores him as the giver of all; and that by
this Tenth portion men might have the benefit, as God the honor, of religious
public service. 3. This portion or peculiar reserve of the Lord to himself, we
find he did afterward fully assign and give to the Levitical Ministry at the
Altar, as a fit proportion to maintain them, and to keep up the honor and
Majesty of his service. 4. Both before the Levitical Priesthood or Ministry; as
also after it was finished and changed by Christ, we read, Tithes not only
presented to Christ as honorary, in his Type Melchisedeck, in the History of
the Old Testament; but also challenged in the New, as a due or right belonging
to Christ, in order to set forth the honor and prerogative of his royal and
eternal Priesthood; that not only he had this right before Levi or Aron, but
also beyond them, and upon them; whose Priesthood ceased, after Christ's
appeared; and they ought, as Levi did in Abraham, to pay Tithes to Christ's
Evangelical Ministry; who not dying any more, nor changing his Priesthood or
Ministry, has a perpetual right to receive Tithes, as well from the children
of Abraham by the Faith, as Melchisedeck had in his Type or Figure to require
them of Abraham: And this so long as the visible Ministry of Christ continues
among men on earth; which he has appointed to be carried on by men, is his
Ministers and Ambassadors.

5. The Scriptural right which Ministers under the Gospel have to Tithes, is
yet more emphatically and industriously, upon serious disspute, set forth in
that pregnant place, 1 Cor. 9.14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they who
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Which words, since they are a
conclusion drawn from many Premises, and do import not a counsel and advice of
Apostolical prudence, but an Ordinance of God, an Evangelical Institution,
which binds the conscience by the divine Authority of it; we must not
superficially, but seriously consider the weight and force of it, which lies
thus:

The Apostle intending to prove a right or lawful power ((...)) which himself
and all true Ministers had to an honorable maintenance, 1 Cor. 9.6.
(however he might sometimes in charity and prudence remit the use of it)
having first premised the grounds of natural equity and common justice to be
showed to man and beast, and the light of God in Nature, and in the Law; he at
last brings forth the pattern of Gods own appointment for his Ministers at the
Altar, which was sufficiently known to Jews and Gentiles, to be in great part,
as to the certainty of it, by those Tithes of the Earths increase, which the
Lord first challenged as his own peculiar; and after assigned them, as his
right to his Ministers at the Altar; which the Levites and Priests held, not by
the will, pleasure, and bounty of men, but by a tenure from God, a rent, which
he charged upon all the Lands: Immediately, without any restriction, lessening
or subduction, upon the whole matter, the Apostle subjoyns and peremptorily
concludes, Even so has the Lord ordained, etc.

1. That which is the equity of Gods will, his divine pleasure both for matter
and manner, for quantity and quality, in point of Ministers maintenance under
the Gospel, is there sufficiently declared; you need go no further for Gods
direction, both the end and means hold parallel to that former; it is still
Gods Ministry, and so has his right to his portion; what he then ordained, he
still ordains, That even upon the same certainty and proportion, such as preach
the Gospel (as of duty, office, and authority,) should live of the Gospel; upon
such a portion (at least) of other men's increase or revenues, as the Lord
formerly required, and still does, to himself as God, and to his son Christ,
whom he has anointed to be King and Priest now in his Church; whose Ministry
and Ministers must Even so, be maintained.

2. Even so, not as to all particulars, properly Levitical, which are ceased;
namely the Sacrifices. and legal oblations: but so far as the Tenth of the
fruits of the earth still continues and holds good, to like holy ends, though
under different ministrations.

3. Even so, That the Ministers of the Gospel should enjoy not less liberal,
honorable, settled maintenance, than the Ministers of the Altar had; not of
courtesy given, but out of conscience paid; not of alms, but of equity; not
necessitons, not arbitrary; but ample and permanent.

4. Even so has the Lord ordained: id est, The will of God in this point
(foreseeing the hardness and narrowness of men^ hearts, which may happen under
the Gospel ministry tow^^d their Ministers; has in their behalf declared of
old, and does now by me an Apostle of Christ, renew it as an Ordinance of God,
enacted with Majesty and Divine Authority: Showing that as th Lord does not
expect that men will be better natured under the Gospel, or more large hearted
than before: And as the Lord has not less care or regard of his Evangelical
Ministers, than of the Levitical; so that he has in no sort left their
maintenance now to those loose and general in d fferencies, liberties and
confusions, which the covetous hearts of men are pr one to fall into, in things
of Religion, if they fall under their own will and choice, which in this case
must not be supposed, that the Lord has done; For that were not even so: but
would differ, as much as the tenure of owners to their Lands or Revenues: and
of poor men to their Charity or Alms:

5. Even so: To come short then of that proportion, so far as in Gods
Providence and bounty it still holds; Not to give to the Ministers of the
Gospel, as was given to the Ministers at the Altar, is it not to violate Gods
ordinance?

Sure it is not fulfilling of any donors bountiful will and command; who bids
you so give to a second, as to the first: if, having by precise appointment, as
of due, and necessity, given twenty Shillings to the former; you give only, as
of Charity, and with brow or insolency, but one Shilling, or Penny, or nothing
at all (of that deposited bounty) to the second; To whom the Giver not only
intends, but clearly commands should be done even so, as to the first:

6. Even so has the Lord ordained.) As if the Holy Apostle had said: you as
Christians now under another, easier and more excellent Ministry, as to the
outward charge and form (though the same, as to the substance, Jesus Christ,)
must not suffer covetous, or parsimonious temptations to rise in your hearts,
as a root of bitterness; So as to fancy, that because the former subject of
that Law for maintenance by Tithes; Namely, the Levitical Ministry at the Altar
is changed, and ceased; therefore the Equitable and Moral bond is abrogated.
But though the letter cease to bind you, upon those Rates and Charges to
maintain an Altar Ministry; yet, as then, the Lord ordained an ingenuous, ample
and permanent provision (part of which, by Tithes at least, yet remains in your
power,) so the justice of Gods will still continues; and you are to follow that
pattern of his love and care for his Ministers. which bind you to observe it, as
far as the altered state of Times and Things will bear: Though you offer not
sacrifices; yet you have Lands and Estates, of which God claims his portion a
Tenth: and has ord^ined (as of old,) his Ministers of the Gospel should be
maintained by it, or something equivalent unto it.

7. Even so: That is, you are not to expect any other new Ordinance,
specifying, how much: The Lord has showed you what equitable proportion he
has set between Pastors and People; That the one may know his charge or
burden; the ^ther his wages or maintenance from the Lord; by which he has set
us a limit to covering on one side; or repining on the other; That Ministers
may not think themselves injured, nor people oppressed.

8. Even so: That is, you are not less to value or requite your Ministers under
the Gospel: nor pretend liberty for a cloak of covetousness and maliciousness;
as if, because you have no new precept in the very Term exacting a Tenth, you
did not know what portion to assign to God and his Ministers as theirs; and
therefore will pay nothing; or only what you list.

You may easily see the will of God, both general for maintenance; and
particular how much: he would have you (as in all Reason and Justice you
ought) to treat with equal measures of gratitude and devout retributions his
Ministers of the Gospel, as those were at the Altar; And since, as to many
things very chargeable, then required, as sacrifices and the like, you are
eased; you cannot in shame but pay the remaining portion of Tithes, which may
be applied now to Ministers of the Gospel, as they were to those of the Altar,
without any scruple or scandal since they are of things of natures production,
not of Ceremonial Institution or use; of Gods constant bounty not of his
Temporary disposing.

9. From the strength of this place, not with cavil illuded, but with
conscience considered, Truly I do not see, how any good Christian, when God
gives power and opportunity, can in conscience find any indulgence or laxation
from the strictness of this similitude, or parallel of Divine Ordinance, Even
so: to entertain the Ministers of the Gospel (which are such in the due order,
succession, and authority of that holy office) with that portion which the Lord
has assigned to them; or with some thing analogous, and equivalent thereto
where the Tenth of the earths increase is not to be had, or is incompetent: as
in Cities, etc.

10. Nor may any remissions of this power and right to Tithes, (which the
charity of Ministers, or their prudence at any time does grant, in obedience to
Gods providence, or imitation of the Apostle Saint Paul, and other holy men.)
these I say, may not be any foundation or Pillar, on which to ground any
fraudulent and injurious customs; which make no conscience if they can plead
use, and prescription, to rob God of his honor, and Christ of his homage,
Ministers of their maintenance, and people of the means of salvation; the more
indulgence either God or his Ministers do in some cases allow, Christians
should the more study to recompense in better times any defects; so as may best
express how free and munificent a Spirit they are guided by under the Gospel,
far from the evil eye, or withered hand of sacrilegious thrift.

10. Nor will any Christian, truly conscientious, listen to any covetous shifts
and cavilings which rise from the hardness of men's hearts, and depravedness of
times; either challenging a liberty where God has granted none, or pretending
that as a competency, which is short of Gods ordained allowance; much less
will they go about by a crueller way of Sacriledg, wholly to take away Gods
portion, and substitute what they list in the place of it.

All Pleas then against Tithes, (even as they here appear grounded on a divine
Ordinance) either armed with power, or trimmed with art and sophistry, seem to
arise from loose, or illiberal principles, and resolve into these Conclusions:
1. That the tenth of increase, is too much for God, who gives all to them. 2.
Too much for Christ, who has given himself to dye for them. 3. Too much for
Ministers, whose labors and lives are spent for them. And 4. Too much to be
laid out upon their souls eternal welfare.

They choose rather to shark upon Gods tenth, then trust him for a blessing,
Mal. 3.9.
or fear him for a curse on the remainder; preferring a few pounds, or pence
unjustly gotten, before the peace of a good Conscience; which is only then
true, when a man's ways are nearest conformed to the will of God, expressed in
holy precepts and examples; besides grounded on natural Principles of equity
and gratitude to God and man; To which, both Testaments, Old and New, bear
witness; as they evidently do in this point of Tithes. For which I have proved
this second Right as Scriptural and Divine.

A third right or claim, which Ministers of the Gospel have to Tithes, is from
that Catholic custom anciently observed by believers in all times and places
of settled Churches, who failed not out of Conscience guided by the Word, and
confirmed by Primitive patterns (before the coercion of any Canon Law) to pay
at least a tenth, Am. Mar. l. 27. de Epis. Ditantur oblationti us matronarum.
Procedunt vehiculis insidentes, circumspecte vestiti, etc. Convivia eorum
regales superant mens^s.
oft-times more, of their profits and increase to the Ministers of the Church,
for the support of them and their families; also for those other hospitable and
charitable uses, to which these employed their bounty.

The great plenty of which is evident, by that luxury and superfluity wherein
some Churchmen lived in the days of Ammiaenus Marcelliaus, a grave Heathen, and
learned, for a Soldier, who living in Julian the Apostates days ( Cent. 4.)
tells us, That some Bishops equalled, and often exceeded the sumptuousness and
magnificence of Princes;

S. Austin also complains, Aust. Sermon. de Temp. 219. Hom. 48. Quia discessit
devotio, Dei accessit indictio fisci. Dabis impio militi, quod non dabis
sacerdoti.
that the covetous coldness of some Christians in his time, persuading them to
rob God, and to withdraw part of his portion, Tithes, from the Ministers and
poor, was a grand presage of wars and calamities coming upon them in Africa,
(as indeed they did soon after;) when the hand of violence would revenge the
injury of Sacrilegious avarice; Either the Soldiers rapine, (says he) or the
Exchequers confiscation, will take what was grudged to Christ and his Church.

Since then, most of our best Laws sprang from the root of Customs, and are
daily more confirmed by that authority which the use and consent of wise men in
many ages have given to them, which is always supposed to be grounded upon some
potent reason, however it may be now less apparent; by which custom many men
hold their civil estates and rights; There can be no reason, that parsimonious
cruelty should overruled and antiquate pious, and liberal Antiquity, in this
point and right of Tithes; which in England, as in all Christian Churches, has
obtained the force of a Law, by the long customs, and succession of times;
which the best Christians freely and cheerfully, yet conscienciously observed,
as that which they esteemed to be agreeable to the will of God, as well as
conform to the best examples of their forefathers.

It is true, no guilding of Antiquity, or paint of Custom can commend what is
in its nature evil, or change it into good; but the universal verdict and
approbation, both by judgment and practice of holy and wise men, given to that
which is in it self good and lawful, advances it by the antiquity and
universality of a good custom, to the sacredness and venerableness of a Law;
giving great assurance and confirmation to the consciences and practices of
sober Christians: setting it far above the despite and petulancy of Innovators,
who are given to change; and as Mushrooms, are but of yesterday, either as to
their persons or opinions; against whom, as a grand prejudice and obstruction,
1 Cor. 11.16
the blessed Apostle S. Paul urges the custom of the Churches, which were
guided by the general spirit of wisdom; enough to stay and satisfy wavering
or scrupulous Christians in things, for which as they had not a precise or
special command from God, yet they were no where forbidden; as this matter of
Tithes is not.

4 A fourth right or claim which Ministers have to Tithes here in England, is
from that personal bounty and freewill of Christians in this Nation, who if no
divine rule and precedent had directed them to retribute. Even so much as their
Tenths to Ministers; (which no doubt in conscience they had regard unto) yet,
as proprietors of their lands and estates, they lawfully and commendably might,
and effectually have so far honored God with their substance, Prove. 3 9.
as to have devoted to his Ministers, for a constant retribution of their
labors, the Tenth of their profits or increase arising out of those Lands and
Estates. There is no Title less disputable, then that of free gift, (where
there is no fraud, no infirmity of understanding, an undoubted power upon just
and valuable considerations, and to a good end) such as God not only allows
in general, but rather seems to require in particular; which is the case here
exactly; and hereby is given the proprieters former right, not so much to
Ministers, as to God himself.

5. The Ministers of England have that right to Tithes, and other settled
maintenance, which arises from those Political Laws or Civil sanctions, which
upon mature deliberation, and with public Counsel of all Estates have
established long ago, and often confirmed as just and good, those particular
donations of Tithes made by any lords and owners, as no way prejudicial to the
public good, either for profit, safety, or honor; (to which it is confessed,
all private acts and Interests must yield; being frustrate and invalid, if
inconsistent with a public and general good of a Nation.) These Laws of the
Land, which are the results of public wisdom and justice, have declared
Ministers right to Tithes, every way pious, just and good. Yea, and do enable
them in their several places and portions, even by secular power to vindicate
these rights; both personally to receive them, and constantly to preserve them
for their successors, as a maintenance every way both just and fit; which
right, by the Laws of the Land, as learned Lawyers are best acquainted with; so
I hope some of those Gentlemen are so much lovers of Reformed Ministers, as to
plead their cause, and so valiant as to appear friends to them.

6. In the last place, I may further twist and strengthen this fourfold cord of
Ministers right, (by natural Equity, Scriptural Ordinance, Personal donation,
and public Sanction, which is not easily broken;) by that divine acceptance,
or appropriation, whereby God himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ are invested
into a right; these jointly as one God claim a property, and challenge as their
portion and due, what is once thus by any man, or men, dedicated to their
service, according as they have instituted in the Word. What is given to
Christ's Prophets and Ministers in his Name, is given to God, so that it is now,
Acts 5.4.
(as Saint Peter told Ananias) no more any private man's own, nor in his power;
save only in order to those ends, and uses, for which the Lord has accepted
it; and which he must be thought no less to approve in the particular obedience
or devotion, then he does command or require in the general precept or duty.
Hence that complaint, Mal. 3. Ye have robbed me, says the Lord, even this
whole Nation. For God is not only well pleased with the internal goodness and
equity of his own will ind commands, but also with man's cheerful conformity to
them, both in mind and manners; which is then most comfortable and commendable,
when it comes the nearest unto that equitable rule, measure, and proportion,
which the divine wisdom has set before men; which Tithes evidently are, when
they are so paid to God, and settled for maintenance on Christ's Ministers, as
leaves them no more to arbitrary and uncertain allowances, or niggardly
stipends, then God did leave his Ministers at the Altar; which is the prescript
or pattern to which the Lord refers Christians; who are tied to it, as to an
Ordinance of God, still in force under the Gospel.

I have done with this third Quaere, also, which I thus resolve; That however
there be not so immediate, precise, and explicit command for the exact Quantum
of Tithes named in the New Testament; and however the Ministers of the Gospel
do not claim a proper and immediate right to Tithes by the letter of the
Leviticall Law; Yet they have by the dignity of their Ministry, and merit of
their Labors, from the will of God in his Word, a general and implicit right
by way of equity and proportion; also a particular explicit title to Tithes,
as they are devoted to God and settled upon his Ministers here in England, both
agreeable to, and grounded upon the equity of Gods ancient precept and example
in the Old Testament, as also upon that express Ordinance renewed and
established in the New, which carries a force of equivalency; and whatever
proportion the nature of things may still bear under the Gospel, with those
under the Law; where estates in Lands and the increase of the earth are still
the same, and common to Christians with the Jews. Herein then to imitate Gods
President cannot be unsafe, to come up to the proportion he required of old,
cannot but be honorable; and every way to observe the nearest conformity to
his will, in the largest meaning and extent of that Ordinance in the New
Testament ( Even so, etc.) cannot but be most conscientious and comfortable,
because it has least of covetousness or grudging.

In cases any way dubious, as to practice, it is safest for Christians to be on
the self-denying side; and rather to propend to Gods interest then to their
own: They may sin, as injurious and unthankful to God and his Ministers; as
dishonouring and defrauding Christ of his rights and due, who do not pay the
Tithes or Tenths; but they cannot sin, who doubting between covetous and
conscientious suggestions, to what propotion the Lord under the Gospel requires
the grateful retributions of believers, conclude, by a just paying of their
Tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel, to imitate at once Gods prescript of
old, and to fulfill the utmost, extent of his Ordinance in the New; referring
to what still continued of that ancient provision* which chifley consisted in
Tithes, as a constant maintenance.

Since then, it is most evident, that a settled, competent maintenance for the
Ministry of the Gospel is as lawful now, as it is necessary; and is no less
necessary now, then it was of old; and is as much deserved now, and
consequently just, as of old; The surest way for wise Christians not to err on
the right hand by Ministers craving too much, (devouring whole houses by pious
insinuations,) Nor yet on the left hand by peoples giving too little, is to
take God for their umpire; and the pattern, his holy will, for the standard of
equity between Ministers and people; that neither the flock may deny their Milk
and Fleece, nor the Shepherd flea their skins, and devour their flesh:

Since the bounty of God bestows on men the ten parts, and all they have (yea
and offers Christ also to them) how can they (as Saint Austin urges it) in any
generosity, equity, or gratitude, grudg to retribute one of ten to Gods glory,
and their Saviors honor; who assigning this Tenth to their Ministers
maintenance, returns the blessing and benefit of it, to the good of men's souls,
together with their families and neighbors; yea, and often to the enlargment of
their estates.

If the Lord had not limited his portion to a tenth, godly men would hardly
have contented themselves, not to have given, with Zacheus, even half of their
goods increase to God: The requiring but a Tenth, is not a burden, but an
Indulgence of God, in any gracious man's esteem.

Thus have I answered these three Quaeries, raised from the first general
ground of lawfulness or unlawfulness; sin or no sin, in point of Conscience
regulated by the will and Word of God; From all which so clear resolutions, I
may firmly draw these conclusions:

1. That a compent, comely, and constant maintenance for the Ministers of the
Gospel may lawfully and ought in Conscience, to be raised out of other men's
estates, by such as have a right and power so to do.

2. I conclude that Ministers of the Gospel may lawfully require such
maintenance, as Gods Ordinance, even by a Tenth portion of yearly increase; and
receive what is so raised or charged out of men's estates, without any sin or
shame; (however it be in some cases comely and charitable in them to remit
their right, yea and to preach the Gospel gratis.)

3. I conclude, That necessitous, sordid, and uncertain maintenance of
Ministers, is the sin and shame of any Christians, because they are not
provided for so as the Lord has appointed, but short of the Lords provision,
which of old was at least a Tenth.

4. I conclude, although a Tenth or Tithe is not literally or precisely in
terms concluded in the Gospel, for reasons best known to the wisdom of God, in
Primitive times. Yet this proportion is no where forbidden by the Lord: yea it
is clearly included, specially pointed unto, and exemplarily commended, as the
best pattern and proportion to Christians imitation.

5. I conclude, That the private giving and public confirmation or settling of
Tithes, as part of Ministers maintenance in England which the Law has declared
and ratified, beside the consent and custom of the Nation for many hundreds of
years, as the act and will of all Estates, is a very good work; (hardly to be
amended or imitated in these days) full of noble and munificent piety;
agreeable to the Word of God, both in the general and propounded, and the
equitable proportion ordained, to which the Apostle referrs Christians.

6. I conclude, That for any men by mere will and force to take away the
public maintenance by Lands and Tithes settled upon the Ministers of the
Gospel, in order to the service and worship of Christ, by the will and act of
those who had lawful power so to do; must needs be so far a sin and snare of
rapine and injustice, as by Law they belong to Ministers in their several
places; also a work of high and infamous extortion, against the light of
Nature, violating the will of the dead, which the Apostle Paul tells us, no man
justly can do. Lastly, Gal. 3.15. Mal. 3.8. Romans 2.22.
it is a sin of Sacriledg or robbing God, to whose honor and service they are
set apart and dedicated, in a way agreeable to his will. Where the Donors,
sometimes the rightful owners of those Lands, and the fruits of them, divesting
themselves and their Successors for ever, of any power of revocation,
resumption, or alienation, have invested the Ministers of the Gospel and their
Successors, in the Name, and for the service of Christ, with full possession,
and perpetual use of them; under many curses and imprecations, and without any
reservation.

7. I conclude, That for any private Christians who stands related to the
society and communion of this Nation, and is so bound by the Laws established
(which are the measure and standard of civil justice, giving every man their
due) to pay to the respective Ministers of the Gospel, such portion of Tithes
or profits, as are assigned them for maintenance; for any such (I say) wilfully
to defraud or deny the Ministers their dues, or to encourage others so to do,
can be no other then a fraudulent and injurious practice; no way consistent
with justice, divine or humane; contrary to all rules and examples of holy
men's, piety, equity and charity; scandalous to the Gospel, and reproachful to
that grace of God, Tit. 2.12.
which teaches men to deny all worldly lusts, and to live righteously,
soberly, and holily in this present world.

8. Since it is most evident, that private and particular men in this Nation,
either Landlords or Farmers, are as to Tithes they pay to Ministers, not now
the Proprietors or Donors, as of private good will and arbitrary bounty, but
only Trustees, Executors, or payers of a public debt, laid upon those estates
and lands which they now hold; Only dischargers of a sacred trust, or
Feoffement, reposed in them, by the will of God, and of their Forefathers, and
of the Laws of the Land, (which include all Successors Suffrages, and Consent;)
it follows, that they have no power in nature, Law, Reason, or Religion, to
frustrate, revoke, or abrogate; nor yet to alienate, and pervert from the will
and intent of the Donors, what has been so sacredly and solemnly settled: Nor
have they cause, either to grudg at what Ministers require, as their due; or to
pay their Tithes with insolency, or glorying in their bounty or gifts, which
indeed is none of theirs, any more, then a Legacy is the liberality of the
Executor.

9. I add in the last place, That where such maintenance for Ministers of the
Gospel, is thus settled as in England, in order to Gods glory, and the peoples
good; For any men illegally to deprive people of their lawful Ministers, or
these of their lawful maintenance; for any man to challenge to himself this
maintenance, who is no Minister in the sense of the Law; For any Minister to
enjoy the benefit, who has no lawful civil right and title to it; yea for a
lawful Minister, lawfully possessed of right to the profits, yet not lawfully
to discharge the duties of his place, according to his power; diligently taking
care for the feeding that flock, of whose milk and fleece he partakes; each of
these, I say, must needs be both before God and man (respectively) guilty of
the sins of usurpation, oppression, injurious intrusion, and sacrilegious
perverting that rule of righteousness, which ought by all godly men to be
strictly and conscienciously observed, without any vain dispensations; neither
invading another man's office, rights or profits; nor frustrating, and defeating
the good ends of Gods appointment, and man's Law, by taking the benefit without
doing the duty.

And now Gentlemen, from these first considerations premised, and duly
pondered with their Conclusions; I dare appeal to your judgments and
Consciences, Whether there be any such Leprosy of sin and irreligion, of Jew
or Antichrist on the face of Tithes, as some men petend to be scared withal,
which no Scripture discovers, no godly and learned man in in the Church of
Christ, Ancient or Modern, ever perceived or suspected; but ever approved that
portion, as most proper and convenient, because nearest to the pattern and mind
of God?

2. Whether those eager Petitions against Tithes, as unlawful, unjust,
oppressive, unevangelical, abominable, etc. either for Ministers to receive
them, or people to pay them, as maintenance, have any thing in them beside
their noise and cry; the repeated crambes of hard speeches against Ministers
and their maintenance; alleging nothing of true Scripture grounds, or sound
inferences of right reason?

3. Whether those Petitions against Tithes can in any truth or justice be
esteemed by wise and upright men, as the vote, sense, and desire of the best
and most people in this Nation? and whether it be righteous to act against so
clear mind of God, against the will of the dead, and the living too, in so
great and public an Interest; only upon the suggestions of a very few men
compared to the whole? whether it be not an injury and indignity, to esteem the
most, and best of this Nation so simply ignorant, in so clear a case as this of
Tithes is?

4. Whether the Scruples in Conscience which some make against Tithes, (for
which I have showed so much reason, equity, and religion,) can by wise men be
thought to have any other rise but that of pitiful weakness, popular ignorance,
vulgar prejudice, and preposterous zeal at best? whether in others they carry
not shrewd tinctures of malice, envy, covetousness, and revenge? Lastly,
whether in some they may not be suspected, as the smoke of the bottomless pit,
to proceed from the depths, devises, and disguises of Satan; from profane,
superstitious, or atheistical policies; projecting, by overthrowing Tithes, and
all settled maintenance, to destroy all true Religion, Church, and Ministry,
either as Christian, or at least, as reformed, in this Nation? Whether the
breathings so fiercely against Tithes, do not threaten to make havoc of Sheep
and Shepherd, Pastors and People, Maintenance and Ministry?

5. Whether, since it is so hard as to be next door to an impossibility, to
find or settle any other Basis or fixed foundation whereon to settle a constant
and competent maintenance upon Ministers, save only that of Lands and the
fruits thereof; (for Taxes, Excise, Customs, or the like, as sandy
foundations, will never hold so many years, as this of Tithes has done
hundreds;) whether, I say, the taking these away without substituting something
better, or equivalent at least, in the room, does not inevitably portend the
overthrow of learning, and religion, civility, and Christianity? which is the
work not of reforming friends, but of destroying enemies.

6. Whether men truly conscientious, have not much more cause to suspect the
taking away, or denying of Tithes to be a great sin, then the paying and
continuing of them? This has so much of gratitude, of equity, of conformity to
Gods holy will, of self-denial, that it cannot have any thing of evil in it;
yea the best Christians were ever most conscienciously strict in paying their
Tithes: The other has so much of unthankfulness, unholiness, injustice, and
self-seeking, that it can hardly be a virtue, or among the things either
praiseworthy or comely. The First has much of God and Christ, the other of
Mammon and Belial; nor can that Christian be truly godly, who is in this point
of so combined a duty, either careless to know, or unconsciencious to act
according to Gods rule.

Lastly, I leave to your consideration, whether you have not more cause
seriously to examine, and if you find the guilt of the sin of Sacriledg upon
this Nation, speedily to expiate it by all possible care; wherever Gods
portion, the Donors piety, and the Laws intention, in order to Gods glory, are
made void, or perverted, either by injurious encroachments, hard customs,
fraudulent compositions, or violent alienations of maintenance due to
Ministers, which make so many incompetent livings, that no able man can live
comfortably on them; but Ministers are either by tenuity starved or abused; and
peoples souls are destitute of the means of salvation.

But I leave the Ministers case in this point of their maintenance, which
regards justice and Conscience, to your more serious consideration: against
whom I should, I fear, have sinned, as against God, my own soul, and my
brethren, if I had not endeavored, according to my Talent, to set forth to you
and others so clear a light, both of reason, civil justice, and religion, as in
this case appears; enough to disperse, by Gods grace, all darkness of error,
passion, prejudice, or ignorance, which in this matter of Tithes may have
possessed the minds of some men, who profess to fear God.

Having thus as briefly and clearly as I could set before you the first main
consideration, Consid. 2. In prudence.
touching the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of Tithes, in point of Conscience. I
crave your leave and patience to look to the second, which regards not the
matter, kind, measure, or proportion of them (which I have proved by Gods and
man's laws to be good, lawful and most laudable,) but only regards, what in
prudence, is by some men pretended, for the better ordering and disposing of
them.

1. It is hard to meet with every thing objected (as inconvenient) in the way
of Ministers maintenance by Tithes in England; which are propounded according
to the various opinions men have of themselves, heightened by their passions and
interests.

2. Some complain of those Inconveniences which themselves make: and the
scandals which they lay in Ministers way, by their injurious cavillings, either
deteining, or denying, what is many ways their due. Others cry out of those
burdens and oppressions which themselves least feel, and most impose on poor
Ministers. Every one imagines (as Empyricks do) that a great amendment will
follow, if his advise be followed; Not remembering, that remedies partially and
imprudently applied, prove worse then the disease.

3. Many ears are open to hear the complaints made against Ministers, and their
maintenance; few are willing to hear Ministers complaints against those that
injure and oppress them; In the first, secret hope of saving or gaining opens
men's ears; in the second, fear of cost and charges shuts them; yea, and it is
often a fourth damage to a Minister, to seek to right himself by the Statute of
treble damages.

4. Not that in these things which are in the lower sphere of Prudence, I
presume to prejudg, interpose, or oppose your Counsels, Gentlemen: I know it is
above my place and proportion; No one man may put his private thoughts into the
balance against many, who advise or act as in a public Sphere. I only present
to you both sides of those Vulgar fancies and specious proposals, that you may
see how counterfeit they are; though they be so current, and highly cried up by
those, who take it ill, if all men's sheaves do not bow down to theirs: whose
fundamental error usually is, to consider no man's thoughts but their own, and
not those very much; to think those ways most prudent, which are most popular;
and most politic, which are most profitable.

1. First then, I may assert with truth and justice, against those that are
given to change the whole form and way of Ministers maintenance in England;
That to make alterations without just and valuable compensations; so to shuffle
and confound the change, as thereby to make a prey and secular advantages by
Ministers loss or lessening in their maintenance, is but an unhandsome sharking
upon the Church of Christ; for it is not only the Minister and his family, that
are thereby damnified, but the poor also, and the whole Parish or Congregation.
Certainly, all sacrilegious frauds and fetches, with Ananias, Act. 5.4.
are but mockings of God, lyings against the holy Ghost, sordid cheatings of a
man's own conscience for a little filthy Lucre: A very mean and poor spirited
project, which will be pernicious to many worthy Ministers: And is indeed every
way unworthy, and far below the wisdom, munificence, honor and piety of this
Nation: which has been of old the liberal donor and faithful conservator of
Gods and his Ministers portion for many hundred years. By which Patrimony of
Religion, people had the spiritual, as Ministers the temporal benefits.

2. To alter Ministers maintenance, although upon just and equivalent
compensations, yea and really to more convenience for Ministers and people; yet
to do this without a fair hearing of all sides; without and against the consent
of those, many learned and worthy men, who are invested in the present right,
possession, and use; who are most nearly concerned in the business; This, I
say, will seem hard measure, and is not like to give so general satisfaction;
men are prone to suspect and think themselves injured, though you do them good,
if against their wills: Supposing none can be more faithful to their
interests, then themselves, or such men (at least) to whose wisdom they dare
commit the arbitration of their affairs.

3. The grand project of men, Super-politick, and overwise, is this: Nothing
will be more prudent in order to public Peace, than to bring all Tithes and
Church Revenues into a civil tenure; To take the profits into a common purse or
exchecquer, from hence to dispense them in such convenient portions, as shall
be thought fit; which Plot, pretends at once to case Ministers of the truth, to
gather in, or compound for their Tithes, and will avoid all jangling suits and
differences usually attending.

1. This is indeed a very plausible pretension; which some men so please
themselves with, that probably, they have already laid out what place they
shall get in this new Office. But to look deeper into it: I confess, it is a
project of very great Worldly policy: but how Pious or Prudent it is, we shall
see.

It is indeed a very probable, if not, a necessary way to make Ministers eyes,
tongus, hearts and hands, dependent upon, and servient to the will of any men,
that at any time obtain power and dominion; It will be a means to make always
a necessitous ministry; whose words will be sure to be smooth, supple, and
conform to any thing, that at any time power will command, or bounty reward.
(Men's greatest temptations lying in their stomachs, are extremely sharpened by
fear of want, and feeling any necessities. What will not Jezebels proph^ts say
or do, that are daily fed at her Table!

By this means they that rule at any time, will be sure to have both swords
(Temporal, and Spiritual) at their command; a double Souldery or Militia;
Secular, and Ecclesiastical; which last, shall every week in, every Parish, one
day at least be upon their guard and defense: moving all men, and persw^ding
them to be obedient, both for fear and for conscience. This is the Wordly
policy of this project.

2. But then in the eye of true wisdom, this way appears fully to such as
fear God, and choose rather to imitate his wise and holy example; who would not
have his Ministers of the old, (and no more of the new Testament) to depend
upon men's good will and pleasure for their wages and reward; no nor to receive
(as Philo Iudaeus observes) oblations and dues from the peoples hands, who were
to bring them into the house of God, or the place he should choose; and leave
them there, lest the Priests, as Gods more immediate servants should fall under
the shameful and dishonorable burdens of flattery and servility; but live as
Gods free men, who were to speak his word in his name, whether men smiled or
frowned; whether they did hear or forbear. Better a Minister of Christ feed, as
Micaiah, on the bread and water of affliction; or as the three Children on
pulse; or as John Baptist on Locusts, than they should betray by secular and
sordid dependencies, the honor of God, the majesty of his truth, the salvation
of men's souls, by selling either the truth, or truth speaking, (with all
ingenuous boldness and comely freedom) for a morsel of bread, or any greater
gifts: which blind the eyes of the wise, and vassalate the of spirits the
learned.

3. Nothing will be more imprudent, more ignoble, more debasing Ministers and
People, more detrimentall to learning and religion, more mischievous to Church
and State, to present time and posterity, than venall and vassalated tongues of
Ministers.

Further, Nothing just and virtuous, if oppressed, shall dare to be vindicated;
and nothing vile or vicious, if prosperous, shall be blamed or reproved.

A Minister of Christ should speak, as in his stead, as in the presence of God,
as armed with Thunderbolts; not as charmed with morsels, or muzled with
rewards. Alas! how easy (as we have seen by experience) will poor men (though
Godly, though learned, though able; how much more, if they have any touch of
mercenary softness and weakness?) by such by asses of secular Salaries, and
humane dependances (when they have no tenure, but the good pleasure of
benefactors) be warped, either to politer flatteries, or shameful servities:
so that people will in a short time not know how to believe or esteem either
the one or the other.

4. What man, though never so vain and light, does not abhor the mercenary lips
and tongues of Ministers? when in stead of using that Larchesie, or liberty of
speech, which becomes Gods Ambassadors, they are like Micahs Levite, or
Iereboams Priests, bowing down to any Teraphins or Calves; and like Ahabs
Prophets, saying nothing but what may please, though never so pernicious in the
event, to Magistrates, Princes and People. Nothing will be more fulsome and
contemptible than such Preachers, who serve the Lord, that they may serve their
bellies; and to serve both, they must serve the times, and in them the various
lusts, humors and interests of men, be they never so extravagant; which way
soever they list to model religion to civil power and policies.

5. Not but that Ministers of the Gospel as well (as other subjects) ought
always to bear all due respect to lawful Magistrates, Romans 13.
and those powers which are of God; yea and to bless God for any favor,
liberty, or ingenuous maintenance they enjoy under them, short of persecution.

I only demonstrate how great an abatement and fall it must be in point of
former honor, subsistence and authority, for Ministers to be deprived of those
Livings; in the midst of which they quietly resided, and wherein they were
inseated as fully and firmly during life, (and keeping within the compass of
known Laws) as any other man in his Freehold: for these I say to be reduced
from this legal tenure and propriety, to a mere arbitrary uncertainty; by way
of stipend, and only during pleasure! where after much pains, and various
compliances (which often shrewdly wring and stretch their consciences) they may
perhaps with much soliciting and attendance, obtain some small pension; which
if denied, they have no law to recover: and to get it they must, besides weary
journeys, crouch very low, and own as many masters, (besides their supreames)
as there are Treasurers, Clarks, and Officers, who have any capacity to deny,
delay, or affront the poor men, until they sacrifice as suppliants, some
propitiation to them.

6. Certainly the more liberal, honest, and ingenuous the spirits, speech, and
manners of Ministers are, the greater is the honor and advancement of Religion.
A servile Minister is prone to be the Devils Hackny, who will ride him with a
bit and a spur. Men are as other Creatures taught much to speak as they are
fed. Those will easily have Bridles in Men's Jaws, who put bread into their
mouths.

7. As the minds of common people are, so are their manners: and as their
Ministers are, so for the most are peoples minds. A base and indigent
Ministry, (which follows the people as the tail, not leads them as the head)
can produce nothing but meanness, servility, licentiousness, indifferency,
profaness, atheism, and irreligion in the generality of the people, as is
evident both at home and abroad: where every bit the poor Minister eats, has
an hook or snare in it, which he must swallow: or else he shall be forced to
mingle his bread with ashes, and his drink with tears.

8. Besides, these methods of mercenariness and servility will (as they have
already) render Ministers and Scholars every where Shrubs and mushroomes, as to
all greatness of learning, to all eminency of part, to all ingenuous freedom,
to all virtuous constancy, and to all venerable authority; when they should be
as well grown, well watered, and well fenced Trees in the Garden of God.

3. Yet is not this dependence upon the public box and salary, where more
sense of honor, justice, and ingenuity may often be exspected, so pernicious, as
that will be, which the policies of other meaner spirits do project (for there
is no Mould so deformed and ugly, into which some men do not design to cast
the Ministers of England,) (whom the Lord deliver.) These would have not only
no Glebes, or Tithes, but no settled Pensions, or any constant Maintenance at
all for Ministers; but long to see them go up and down with their bag and
bottle, to their good Masters, and Dames: not like mendicant Friars, who do it
by choice, and so with some honor, but these of necessity, attended with
scorn; where, besides the brow, coyness, the insolences and swellings of the
givers, (which the poor Minister must bear, from those, upon whose alms he
must depend:) his hungry and flexible soul will soon be warpt to the warmer
beams of the liberal hands that drop fatness, and wholly be withdrawn from
any care or regard of the poorer sort of people, who will be either wholly
neglected, or with great indifferency slighted.

Whereas the maintenance of Ministers, as now settled in England, when it is
worthy of able Ministers, gives the poor as great an interest in the labors
and love of their Ministers, as the rich: yea and some portion also they enjoy
of his maintenance, where himself is not one of the poor. The joint and common
interest, which Ministers have in the blessings of the earth with their people,
causes something also of a mutual sympathy, and sense: as to the seasons, as
good or bad; and as to the the hand of providence, toward the fruits of the
earth.

But it is easy to spell what is the meaning of this last project at least:
which is, not to have any able or worthy Ministers in England, to preach,
profess or maintain the reformed religion. The burning and shining lights must
either be quenched or starved; that so the enemies of true Religion, may in the
dark freely enjoy their obscene mixtures of error, ignorance, profaness, and
superstition: which some as earnestly long for, as Thieves and Whores do for
twilight: whose issue among other monsters, will be such a race of Ministers,
as shall be the Creatures of the people, and their contempt too; dependants on
them, and despised by them; as the Giants of old sprung from the earth, and
justly oppressed with it.

4. But it is further urged; Many Godly people greivously complain of the
scandal and oppression of Tithes, both as to their consciences, and their
estates: These in piety and prudence ought to be eased and relieved.

I answer, 1. As nothing is more tenderly to be considered, than the
Consciences of Christians; So nothing is less to be made either a cover to Men's
ignorance, or a color to their covetousness.

2. Pleadings of Conscience serves no Man's turn for not paying Taxes to
Soldiers; why should it be good for not paying Tithes to Ministers? since both
are civil and secular things as to the matter, and the equity of both is
justified in Scripture as well as reason.

3. It is not conscience, but obstinacy and contentiousness, to deny or affirm
without reason, neither proving what they assert, nor answering what is urged,
from common equity, Scriptures analogy, Catholic custom, private donations,
public sanctions, and Gods acceptance: as is in the case of Tithes.

4. It were indeed a zeal according to knowledge to deny paying Tithes, to a
Jewish Priest sacrificing: but not so to pay them to a Jewish Minister
preaching the Gospel. The first is to be abhorred, since Christ is come and
has finished all. The second is to be maintained, that Christ come, and
crucified, may be preached and believed on. The same action may be lawful or
unlawful, according to the different ends, to which it is designed as a means.
He that gives a poor man money to buy him Tools to work honestly, is
charitable: but he that gives so much to a Thief to furnish him with
instruments of violence, and robbery, is blameable

5. As for these complainers in conscience against Tithes, full as good and
Godly men. Ministers and others, complain of these complainers, as weak,
ignorant, passionate, and imprudent: or else very peevish unjust, covetous, and
violent perturbers of the public Ordinance. Besides, for the most part they
are causlesly clamorous and unreasonably importune: since few of these, either
pay any Tithes at all, or any thing else to any Minister of the Church of
England: and if they do, it is full sore against their wills. Their greatest
grief and burden is, that they may not keep their Tithes to themselves, to
which they can pretend no more right, then a Tenant can to detain his Rent
from his Landlord: Nor were they ever heard to complain of the load and burden
of Tithes taken to themselves, were they never so heavy, both in the quantity
and in the injustice.

6. But if it may indeed be a burden to some men's estates, that are weak; or
to their minds, that are illiberall and loath to pay Tithes to their Ministers;
will not the same Plea ly against all Rents and civil charges laid on lands
and estates of poor men! But no Godly man (though poor) will in conscience,
because he cannot in justice, desire or expect, that he should be eased of any
charge or civil burden, by inflicting injuries on other men; least of all on
Ministers, who, as Gods laborers, merit their wages.

7. But people grudge that Ministers should have the benefit of all that cost
and labor, by which they mend and improve their Lands: They could afford them
a tenth of the Rent, but not of their stock and labors. Poor men, how well
they deserve, and how well pleased they would be with a barren untilled,
unimproved Ministry! Let any Ministers stock be never so great of learning and
knowledge; let him daily with great cost in books and pains in his studies,
improve himself for Gods glory, and peoples good: Is there not as much reason
and justice, he should have the benefit of their lands improved, as they should
have of his gifts and talents increased? whereto he is daily intent, by study
and prayer, that his profiting may appear to all men.

8. For that glistering of godliness, which some men make a show of, against
Ministers Tithes; 1. It is no sign of solid and true godliness, to withold
good from them to whom it is due, Pro. 3.27. To deprive the labourer of his
hire; to deny men that honest subsistence which is theirs by the appointment of
the Law, and by the merit of their labors.

2. The first thing required in goliness, is to do Justice, Micah 6.8. Equity
and Piety never clash or interfere; nor is there any fear of sin or
superstition in giving to every one, what is theirs by law of civil society. A
Christian ought to pay his rent to a Turk, Jew, or Heathen-Landlord, though he
knew they employed it to Idolatrous and superstitious uses. And shall it be
urged as godliness, by Christians, to deny the paying of tithes, which is but
as out of their rent, to a Minister of Jesus Christ; which by free gift he
lawfully might; and by law he necessarily ought to do!

3. How can such godliness, and unjustice be reconciled? or how can such
covetous scruplers hope to enter into heaven, whose righteousness is so far
from exceeding, that it comes far short of that of the Scribes and Pharisees?
They paid Tithes of all they had, which Christ, Mat. 23.23. commended, and
joins with Moral and great duties; these of nothing they have. How far from
fulfilling the Apostolical and divine commands, Gal. 6.6. Let them that is
taught, communicate to him that teaches in all good things: These communicate
of no good thing, or only in a disorderly way, to whom they list, and what
they list; neither regarding Gods example and proportion in old, nor his
direction and ordinance in the new Testament.

4. Godly men ought to consider, that the temptation is easy and obvious in
matters of profit, to pretend conscience; it is a Chemistry some men have, to
turn godliness into gain, which will undo them at last. Covetous scruples
usually resolve into men's own profit, as Ice into water; but never into
expenses, or other men's benefits.

5. It were a sure sign of godliness, for men to be rather self-denying in
point of profit, then defrauding others; to pay rather more then less; to be
willing to encourage good Ministers, not to reproach and impoverish them; this
would express a godliness, not in the form of talkative inconstancy, and
thrifty pragmaticalness, but of judicious sincerity, and generous charity.

6. Truly, Godly men might soon ease themselves of this scruple in point of
conscience, that in stead in paying a tenth, they paid a ninth, or sixth; which
at once may satisfy Gods ordinance, the law of the land, the Ministers claim,
and their own consciences; besides their liberality will supererogate, and to
their honor exceed what Ministers could ask, or any man expect of them.

7. It is strange that the complaint and clamor against Tithes should never be
heard till of late, and now so few persons of either estates or eminent worth
are found in it; Is it because men of mean estates and licentious minds, take
confidence to desire any thing which reason and justice deny yet despair of
nothing that numbers and power can reach? or are these in the simplicity of
their souls set on by others more crafty, whose drift is against the Ministry,
more then the maintenance? their aim is not that there be no Tithes for
Ministers to receive, but no reformed Ministers to receive Tithes.

8. The scruple of conscience would lie more direct against these men's
receiving Tithes themselves, as they often do without any check in
impropriations, then in paying them to Ministers; Since the first is but an
aberration or by-blow, alien and hid from the chief intent and end of the
Donors, which was for the maintenance of Christ's Ministers and service; and
however by Law they are made as a lay fee in Hen. 8. days; yet this was first
grounded on the Popes Authority (it may be with no ill intent) who took them
from the rectories or cures, and applied them to Covents or Monasteries; yet in
the Court of Conscience the Popes act was injurious at first, in alienating the
means from the Minister, or Incumbent, from whence in the event have followed
so many poor livings, poor Ministers, and poor souls. How can an injury be made
good by succession, or just by shifting from hand to hand? It is strange these
godly men do not scruple to make good any Act of the Popes, or to enjoy any
favor and indulgence on his account in their impropriate tithes and Parsonages
which they enjoy.

9. But they would not have Ministers Tythe-coveters. O godly jealousy! Nor
would Ministers have any of these cautious objecters coveters of Tithes; which
they then do sinfully and sordidly, when they have no right to them, as they
have not by Gods or man's law: there is no sin is coveting what is a man's own,
by all right both divine and humane. But may they not be as much coveters of
Pensions, as of Tithes? or of benevolences as of either? and most of all prone
to be coveters of other men estates, when they have no certainty of their own?

10. Lastly, I answer to these complainers, If persons in public place shall
always be altering and changing, until men cease to complain, or to project
amendments, they shall never want either work or woe, and never enjoy the fruit
of their counsels or labors. For such is the proud envious nature of man, that
what one plants, another seeks to pull up; what one builds another pulls down;
what one approves, another abhors. Vessels with large sails have not always
answerable blast. Some men's consciences carry little or no science with them;
their cries portend no wool, nor do their complaints intend any reformation:
wise men ought impartially to cast anchor, and fix in just resolutions once
taken, either by their forefathers or themselves, so to bring the public to
the haven of consistence: not to be tossed to and fro with every wind of fancy
or faction: nor may they suffer the waters to be troubled, so often as some men
hope to catch fish; though it be to the Shipwreck undoing and drowning of many
men far their betters every way.

5. But the Country people, or Farmours and Yeomen, are against Tithes: these
would have them taken away.

Answ. 1. It was neither piety nor prudence in Pilate to condemn Christ to be
crucified, that he might please the peoples clamor. Wise men must not regard
what, but upon what ground common people desire, that which threatens any man
with injury.

But Secondly, it is certain, This is not the desire of either the wisest,
best, or most Countrymen; the noise is not the voice of many and great waters,
but of shallow and sudden torrents.

Thirdly, Such as do urge the taking away of Tithes, do it most what upon a
false supposition, and are tempted by a strange, yet vain delusion (which is
like the Jack-daw in the Fable, who hoped he should get the morsel which the
Eagle let fall, when indeed the Fox ran away with it.) Poor men, they flatter
themselves, that if Tithes be once taken from Ministers hands, they will
presently fall into their laps, and rest in their purses. It is pity, and yet
it is but just the country-simplicity should be thus gulled. Wise Farmers are
got beyond these Fairy-fancies; and the event will confute the others golden
dreams, when they shall see Tithes if taken from Ministers, either turn to the
increase of their Landlords rents, as purchased by them; or else required by
others, more severe exactors then ever Ministers were: After this, they shall
have either no Ministers, or at a new charge, when Tithes are gone another way,
as little to their ease, as nothing to their benefit.

None but weak men can suppose, that men in power will ever be so prodigal, as
to remit of courtesy either to Landlords or Tenant so considerable a Revenue:
to which neither of them have any right or title in Law or Equity.

6. Others pretend, as a point of prudentiall thrift, that Tithes are too much
for Ministers, less will serve their turns; part of what they have more then
enough, may help to defray public charges, or ease the people, who by Tithes
and other exactions are much impoverished.

Answ. There is no reason to put the after-burthens of people upon the score of
Tithes, which was long before these civil taxes, and to another end: nor do
they rise out of any private man's Estate, but out of a public patrimony, to
which God is proprietor, and his Ministers are his pensioners.

2. It is a project unworthy the honor of this Nation, which is blessed with a
rich and good Land, to ease themselves by injuring God and his Ministers, or to
repine at that cost bestowed on Chirst.

3. No wise or Godly man ever thought, or by experience found his paying Tithes
to the Ministers of the Gospel, was either moth, or worm to his estate, or to
the public; but rather a protection and blessing to the remaining parts. The
due payment of them is rather, as the Jews observe, a fatning and improving of
men's estates and consciences: usually they get most good by the Ministers
pains, who make most conscience to pay them their dues; which is seldom done
cheerfully and exactly, unless, where the oil of love softens the vigor of the
Law.

4. For the too much, which is objected with as little truth, as much envy, all
experience confutes it, which shows that Ministers in every Country, living
with the severest thrift becoming men of any charity and hospitality, yet dye
poor or mean at best, leaving Widows and Posterity to conflict with many
difficulties, and to find few friends. It is not comely in piety, charity, or
prudence, to object superfluity, where there is seldom competency, and for the
most part necessity. Many livings affording but little livelihood to the
Minister, by that time they are pared with those expenses which are charged on
them.

7. But many Ministers are unworthy of their maintenance, some defective in
abilities, others negligent in their duties, many scandalous in their manners.
These in prudence ought to be looked to, that at least Drones may not devour
the Honey intended for industrious Bees.

Answ. 1. This indeed were worthy of wise and good Men's serious consideration
and reformation. But there is one thing never moved by the Vulgar, which I
humbly propound. Many able, industrious, and most unblameable Ministers are
deprived of all means, and disabled both to do that work, for which God has
enbled them, and to enjoy that benefit which their merit and the Laws have made
but their due. Whose Sequestrations, which seemed but temporary, during the
agony and contest of parties, is become perpetual and total deprivation. These
worthy and distressed Ministers, in justice and charity, ought to be considered
first, since the prime work of justice is rather to preserve a good Man, then
to punish one that is bad.

2. How far the complaint against some Ministers is true, I know not, but I
believe, as to far the major part is very false. What is amiss wise and good
Governors may amend, by wholesome admonition, or severer censures.

But to asperse all, because some may be faulty, or to destroy all for some
men's demerits, is upon no better principle of Prudence, than it would be to
starve men in health, because sick men cannot bear their food; or to deny
laborers their hire, because of some loiterers in the field; or to cut off
sound parts, because some are infected or gangrened.

8. But many things (they say) might no doubt be better ordered in the managing
of Tithes, so to avoid the unkind suits, vexations and differences which often
arise between Ministers and people.

Answ. Truly I think so too: all good Ministers would be glad to enjoy the
real fruits of such sober and righteous wisdom. Let but the foundation stand as
settled on lands, (for other can no man lay, either pleasing or permanent) in
Gods name remedy the inconveniences; which are not many; nor rising out of the
nature of the thing, so much as out of man's passions and infirmities. Nor are
they hard to be remedied; although I take it to be presumption for any private
man publicly to propound any particular way and method, till he is called; and
has first privately propounded it. It is easy to make the matter of Tithes as
quiet and easy a revenue, as any rent in England.

Mean while, grave and wise Ministers do easily avoid unhandsom contentions;
wherein they are rather sufferers then actors; if they meet with people of any
justice or conscience, whose Piety has not eaten out all Humanity; or whose
Religion is not to cozen their Ministers, but rather to give them their due,
both in the merit of their labors in Gods Ordinance and the Laws appointment.

In the last place, the policy and thrift of some men, urge in point of
prudence; That however Ministers bred in Schools and Universities, are less
able or willing to maintain themselves by other honest employments, and also
must wholly depend on their Church Livings; (having seldom any great stock or
estate of their own besides) yet there are now store of gifted men risen up,
who are able and willing to maintain themselves and their families at their own
charges, and to preach the Gospel gratis to the people; so that Tithes might be
well spared as to Ministers, and employed some other way to ease the people.

Ans. 1. I do not despise nor disparage the gifts of any men, whose abilities
in a way of Order and Authority, becoming the honor of Religion, and the
humility of grave and sober Christians, may be really useful to Gods glory, and
peoples good.

2. But it is to be considered, that many of these Volunteers, who obtrude
themselves to the work of the Ministry, out of an opinion of their gifts;
neither know the weight of the work, nor their own weakness and
unproportionableness; else, they would not take the Lamp in one hand, and the
Pitcher in the other; or unequally yoke the Minister and Mechanic together;
which is not to be justified by the Apostle Paul's practice, unless men had that
Apostles gifts who bids Timothy give himself solely and wholly to the work of
the Ministry, without the intanglement of any other Calling, as his business, 1 Timothy 4.15. If private presumptions, enable men, and invest them into places of
Office; what Soldier will not be a Colonel or General presently? what
Barrester will not be a Judge? what mean man will not fancy himself fit to be
Magistrate, as well as a Minister?

3. The Commonness or Cheapness of men that will needs be Ministers, adds no
value or worth to them, in comparison of able Workmen that need not to be
ashamed; no more then Brass Farthings turn to be Angels of gold, because they
are current among poor people.

4. Forwardness to the work of the Ministry, is no Argument of sufficiency to
that work; which well considered, would scare an Angel from it; till God sent
him to be a Ministering spirit for the good of the Church.

5. But these cheap self-sending men easily relieve themselves, making as
little conscience (when they find the work too heavy for them) to lay it down,
and take off their hand from the Plough, as they did to take the one up, or to
put their hand uncalled to the other.

6. Some of these pretenders to extraordinary gifts, are found to be but
Juglers, under disguises; concealing the learned Education they have had at
home or abroad, that they may gain the more applause and admiration from the
vulgar, in order to advance the design they drive; which is to disgrace and
overthrow the Ministers and Ministry of this Reformed Church.

7. It is evident, these free and forward Teachers will endure to take, and
expect to have a good pension for their pains, when once they find such a gale
of applause, as incourageth them wholly to adventure their fortunes in this
Vessel. Nor does it at all trouble them to take the Tithes or benefits of other
men's Livings, if once they can get such a Title to them, as they may discretly
leave their Trades.

8. What the Ministerial sufficiencies of these so free and frugal Masters are,
compared to those which able Ministers have had, and still have, in knowledge
and utterance of Divine Mysteries, it is better other men should judge and
declare, then any of our selves, to you; we dare appeal to your own
experiences, who know both: yea, let the righteous Lord judge between them and
us.

9. It is pity the cheapness and easiness of those men's preaching, (if it be
such) should be the only motive to commend them as a better bargain to peoples
souls: Tithes are ill saved, with the hazard of Truth and Salvation: If the
folly and madness of people will needs have them (though they hereafter scorn
and abhor them) yet there is no reason they should thrust Ministers out of
their places, or deprive them of their rights due to them, and by no Law
forfeited; only to make way for these forward Orators; whom neither preaching,
nor praying, speaking, or writing, have yet so advanced in wise and sober
Christians esteem, as to make them either esteemed, desired, or unpitied.

10. Lastly, Wise men must consider, not what the Vulgar easiness desires or
dislikes in a fit of worldly-wantonness, thrift, faction, or discontent; (in
which distempers they will cast off with murmuring and reproach, both Moses and
Aaron, their ablest Governors, and faithfullest Ministers) but Rulers ought to
regard what is best for peoples Temporal and Eternal welfare (though in the
present fit it displease them;) also what is really for the honor of Religion
the glory of God, and the welfare of a Nation. The disordered Appetites of
people, if humored, (as feverish persons) will soon make them as miserable, as
they are unreasonable.

Conclusion.
Thus have I endeavored as briefly as I could (with your leave and patience,
Gentlemen) to present to your view these considerations touching Ministers
maintenance by Tithes here in England: From which I have sought, in the first
place, with all cleareness of reason, calmness of aff^^tion, and uprightness of
conscience to remove all aspersions and suspicion of any thing sinful or
unlawful in them, having demonstrated the Equity and Piety of them, both in
general as a reward, and in particular, as so proportioned, according to Gods
command or pattern of old, and his reference or appointment to those precedents
in the New Testament, to which the devotion of primitive Christians, the
custom of all settled Churches, the will of the donors, and the establishment
of the Civil Laws of this Nation are conform.

In the 2. place, I have salved the chief inconveniences, and endeavored to
satisfy the pretenses of prudence in point of innovating or altering the way
of this maintenance by Tithes.

Not but that here I well remember, how I have oher where wrote, and published
in another method, my judgment touching this subject. Where being to deal, as
in other grand disputes, with men wise in their own conceits, I was forced with
weight of reason, and some earnestnes of expression many times to bray them in
a Mortar; not out of my own genius or propensity to strive or contest; but
urged by the obstinacy of that folly which has by words and deeds been lately
discovered with most uncomly bostings, and unjust reproaches against the
office, honor, authority, maintenance, and very being of the Ministers of
England; In whose behalf I held it my duty, not to be silent; and so to speak
as might show how much I reverenced their worth, and how little I feared the
petulancy of their enemies, who beyond any example in any Christian Nation,
have endeavored under pretenses of special Sanctity and Reformation, to
disgrace and destroy the ablest Preachers and most excellent Professors of true
Religion in the Nation.

But to you, Gentlemen, as Persons now in power and counsel, I do with all
gravity, modsty, calmnesse, and humility present these considerations.

Not, but that I well understand, by what I have seen and read, how impertinent
and useless such adresses by the Pen, for the most part are to men confident of
their power, byased with prejudices, and transported with passions: if learned
and Godly men should write as many Books as the World would contain, they
should do but little good. The calmest Remonstrances, which Reason, Religion,
Humanity, Christianity, Equity or Piety, Charity, or Conscience, History, or
Experience afford, often prove as the Oration in Tacitus, of Musonius (a grave
and learned Senator) to the mutinous Soldiers: which at first was unwelcome,
next tedious, after ridiculous, at last dangerous to that unseasonable Orator.

This made me sometime think it the best and prudentest way for Ministers to
stand still and wait for the Salvation of God, in an evil time to be silent,
after the example of their Lord Christ to hold their Peace, though they be as
Sheep under the Shearers hands, and by some appointed to be slain; and the
rather, lest some men's cruelty and unjustice against Ministers might possibly
gain some reputation by the reasons publicly offered to them in behalf of
Ministers rights, and publicly refused by them; which must of course be
traduced as weak and unsufficient to preserve their interests, which wilful and
unreasonable men are resolved to destroy.

But I have learned never to fear or despair in a good and just cause, such as
I take this to be which I humbly present before you; Among whom I doubt not but
the distressed Ministers of this Church shall find some friends.

However, you have invited us not to betray our cause by our silence; lest
present and after ages should suspect us unable or ashamed to justify what we
do or desire. By the pregnancy of reasons, which I have here recorded, and with
all due respect tendered to you, this age and posterity may judge the obstinacy
of that folly, which will determine of things, it understands not; and the
violence of that fury, which will cut in sunder that knot by force, which with
justice and good consciene it cannot untie.

But I must presume (till I find the contrary) that you as Gentlemen and
Christians will bear the words of Truth and soberness; That your Counsels and
designs are not swayed, by vulgar Clamors, and factious discontents, but by
Rational, Equitable, and Religious demonstrations; Looking not only how to
attemper your resolutions to present distempers, and to humor the Paroxismes of
diseases; but also how to recover the health and happiness of this sorely
tossed and afflicted Church and Nation. To which the overthrowing of
maintenance and Ministry will contribute very little.

This confidence has made me once more, in a matter of so grand concernment,
to adventure upon this part of pious importunity; which God knows (in the midst
of many confessed infirmities) ayms at nothing but those great and good ends of
which I shall at last day be least ashamed before God, Angels and men. At whose
great and impartial tribunal, since you also must appear, it higly concerns,
you and all of us, to avoid the contracting any further guilt of Sacriledg upon
your souls and the Nation. Which of all crying sins is least taken notice of by
men in power; seldom pardoned, because seldom repented of; and seldom
repented of, because true repentance requires just Restitution.

If the fear of God be before your eyes, you will not be as a people that
strives with the Priest. Nor will you treat so many learned, grave and holy
men, with a Soldierly roughnes, Nabalitick churlishness, and fanatic fury. But
remember your, and their God; your, and their Judge, your and their Savior; To
whose labors, love, and faithfulness you and your Forefathers owe the
reformation and vindication of true Religion hitherto. However they are now
looked upon us as afflicted of God, and forsaken of men, yet their judgment and
reward are with the Most High

Nor has any oppression or fear so far disordered them, but that their wisdom
remains with them; as persons very sensible of right reason, justice, honor,
and religion; both in its doctrine, and its fruits; in its profession, and its
power, which makes men by grace and holiness like to God, not in words only,
but in deeds.

To which that you be not strangers, how can you further cast us off to Vulgar
condition and scorn; exposing us to fight with beasts, and to be trampled under
the feet of unreasonable men, who threaten as you may easily know) the utter
ruin and extirpation of the Ministry of this Church, and the Reformed
Religion; which I beseech God of his mercy to prevent, and if it be his will,
by your means.

No work is indeed more worthy of those that would approve themselves, holy,
zealous and good men, then a serious and effectual regard toward the distressed
ministry of Christ in this Church, to hear their complaints, to lay to heart
their burdens, their discouragments, the incompetency and wretchedness of
their maintenance in many places. Hence the decay of their parts, studies,
reputation and authority among people. This draws after it the neglect and
contempt of all Holy ministrations and duties; This portends the ^uine of many
souls in England and in Wales too; as it is this day, by the sad desolations
and darkness, which is come upon many places; especially in Wales.

The Glory of your God, the Honor of your Savior, the Souls of your poor
Brethren call for from wise and Godly men speedy, and real endeavors to setle
by some means that so often in vain promised competencie of maintenance; which
will require and bear that competency of Ministers abilities in every place,
which is necessary.

That so the order, honor, and beauty of the Reformed Religion, and the Church
of England, which is grievously shaken, battered, and threatens to fall, may be
restored and established; That the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, may with
power and authority be propagated; which is never to be done by arbitrary,
weak, and disorderly teachers; by ambulatory pensioners, by vagrant and
inconstant journeymen, whose feeble and unfrequent strokes, will never be able
with a touch and away, to forge peoples hard hearts either to faith, or
Repentance; to true knowledge or devotion: That there is in all reason required,
to so good and great a work, able, grave, and godly Ministers, every where
comfortably residing, who by the instancy of sound Preaching, by ferventy of
judicious praying, and by the constancy of holy living, may guide people in the
way of true happiness.

But I have done, committing your hearts to God, who is the best guide and
severest searcher of them.

I only leave this last sigh or groan of the Ministers of England, with you;

If all pleas of piety and justice, of merit and gratitude, of Laws divine and
humane, of honor, learning, and civility, offered in behalf of the able, and
faithful Ministers of England, both in respect of their maintenance, and
Ministry, their aliment, and employment, shall on all sides find a deaf ear,
which is resolved to desert and destroy them, rather than with patience to hear
them, or with justice to preserve them and their rights; If neither the wise,
nor the strong, nor the great, nor the good delight further in us; If for some
men's follies in this our Israel, we must be made as the tail and not the head,
fitted to be cut off root and branch, in one day; if our ruins must adorn the
triumphs of our enemies, if the cries and tears of our distressed families must
be made the Music and Wine of those who have a long time hated us, and our
Reformed Religion; if there be no remedy to be found either in men's justice or
compassion, but we must at last come to the fiery trial.

Yet we shall (as we have cause) lay our hands on our mouths, and either be
silent with humble astonishment; or say no more but, It is the Lord, let him do
as seems good in his sight. What ever hard measure, or injustice, may be in
the Instruments, there can be nothing but Justice in his permissions, and there
may be mercy in his punishments; which will then appear, when his fatherly
strokes are so sanctified to us, as to make us turn to him that has smitten
us, and has been smitten by us.

FINIS.

