THE R: Rd FATHER IN GOD RALPH BROWNRIG L^. B^. OF EXETER.
Who Died aged 67. December: 7th. 1659.

portrait of Ralph Brownrig

A SERMON PREACHED In the Temple-Chappel, at the FUNERAL of the Right Reverend
Father in God, Dr. Brounrig LATE Lord Bishop of EXCETER, who died December. 7. and
was solemnly buried December. 17. in that Chapel.

With an account of his LIFE and DEATH.

Both Dedicated to those Honorable Societies, by the Author Dr. GAVDEN.

2 Cor. 4.18. The things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are
not seen are eternal. (...). Plato. Aliud est vivere moriturum cum Platone;
aliud mori victurum cum Paulo. Hieron. Ep. Nepot. LONDON, Printed by J. Best
for Andrew Crook, at the Green-Dragon in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To the Reverend Dr. GAUDEN, these present.
SIR,
YOur Sermon preached at the Funeral of the late eminent Bishop of Exceter,
has been and is of that general acceptance, that those that heard it, or have
heard of it, do consent in their earnest desires of us to write unto you for
its publishing; The honor in it due to that learned Prelate, as a memorial of
him, the great benefit which will arise to the Church both in the present age
and future, the seasonableness of the manifestation of his judgment in several
subjects, and the happy fruit which may be reaped by the Reader, in the
imitation of his exemplary life and pious conversation (to Gods glory and the
good of souls) these do sufficiently of themselves bespeak your inclination to
it: But we do also make it our request, that you will be pleased with all
convenient speed to print it, which as it will satisfy the expectation of your
many other Friends, so will it much oblige

Your very affectionate Friends and Servants N. Bernard. Edw. Young. Tho. Buck.

Gray's Inn. Dec^^b. 23. 1659.
TO THE Honorable Societies OF THE TEMPLES.
HAving endeavored (Honorable and worthy Gentlemen) if not to adorn, yet at
least to do some right to the memory of the reverend and renowued Bishop
Brounrig, by those (justa Parentalia) praises which are most due to his
accomplished worth, for his holy obedience to the Word of God, for his
conformity to his blessed Savior, for his loyalty to Sovereign power, for his
love to his Country, for his compassion to the Church, for his zeal to the
Reformed Religion, for those sighs, prayers and tears, by which he encoutred
the sins and miseries of this Nation; for his exemplary merits to all that were
or would be good: and lastly, for his particular favor toward me (of which I
am ambitious to express a most grateful sense:) Yet I find still something of
further duty and discretion incumbent on me, which must be discharged by this
Preface or Epistle, to which your name is inscribed; wherein first, I am to
justify my own so large and liberal commendation of the Bishop. Secondly, I am
to give an account of your particular merit, as to this Dedication. Thirdly, I
am to crave your patrociny for my vindication.

. For the first, My own Veracity, as to what I have wrote, ((...),) without
envy, flattery or partiality of this excellent Bishop, I believe I have the
attestation of all good men, who either personally knew, or have been fully
informed of his worth; if they have eyes able to behold and bear the
resplendency of all moral virtues in an excellent man; of all intellectual
abilites, in an excellent Scholar; of all sound Divinity in an excellent
Divine; of well chosen, well handled, well applied and well practiced Texts in
an excellent Preacher; of all gravity, prudence, circumspectness and candor in
an excellent Governor; of sincere and operative graces in an excellent
Christian; Lastly, of all these concurrent, completed and cumulated in an
excellent Bishop; who was indeed ((...)) in in all points of humane and divine
perfections, such as he should be.

. All ingenious persons who are not overgrown with the Antiepiscopal Jaundise
(who have not envious, odious, jealous and implacable eyes against all Bishops,
and most against the best;) will readily subscribe to what I have written; Yea
I know, there is such a cloud of witnesses, as forbids me solicitously to avow
my own integrity and truth on either side.

. First, For my self, I am as much an enemy to flattery, as a friend to
civility. Parasitisme differs as much from just and comely praise, as Devils do
from good Angels; The first is black as hell, the second beautiful as Heaven. I
fear nothing (whatever I do, or say, or write,) more then that base fear, which
either prostitutes to servile adulation of vice: or is overawed from just
commendation of virtue, even in Bishops; I do profess (with Greg. Naz.
commending St. Cyprian, (...); I have spoken and written as to the verity, and
eminency of the pattern; nothing to any compliance or partiality, I was not to
dress up an Ulyssis with Homer; or an Aeneas with Virgil, after a poetic
freedom, and flourish of invention, but to represent to the unworthy world, a
most worthy Bishop, and to reproach the imprudence, and ingratitude of the age,
by letting it see in this particular, what an admirable Bishops it had
extirpated, what accomplished abilities it had suppressed, what useful merits
it had discountenanced; not only by not rewarding, but by depriving of such
rewards, as they had both deserved, and obtained by Gods blessing, and the
munificence of the Prince and Nation; I was to set forth a chief Pastor of the
Church, conformable to Christ's cross, as well as serviceable to his flock;
having not only the crown of crucified affections, but also crucrifying
afflictions, yea and of crucified virtues, by the indignities of the world; nay
and of self crucifying graces too, by his own humility; for while he was
eminent in all men, that had eyes to see true worth, yet in his own eyes he was
nothing, and Christ was all in all to him.

. Secondly, They knew not Bishop Brounrig, who knew not how far he was from
either active or passive flattery; As he abhorred both, so he needed neither;
He was far above them, being so full and overflowing with real and solid
worth, that he was not capable (as lanck bladders) of any empty and aerie
distentions; he had as Plato says of one Gorgias, (...), A soul and life that
wanted fictitious comendations no more, then burnished gold, or polished marble
does need any paint, or coloring.

. Such deceitful decorations, and spurious praises, are for their Sepulchers
who affect to be reputed worthies, when they have done nothing worthily, who
would be recounted for great Rabbis and Reformers, when indeed they were but
Abaddons, and Apollyons of all things civil and sacred; ambitious, when dead,
to be called Patriots and Fathers of their country, yea Saviors and
Preservers of Religion, when they have sought to sacrifice both fathers and
children, to the Molochs, Chians, and Remphans, Idols and Images, which they
set up, and their fathers never knew; There are that hope to be venerated, as
the Devils in India, not for the good, but for the mischeife, they were able to
do.

. For my part, I would not for a world, profane those sacred texts, of The
righteous perish, or The memory of the just shall be blessed, or Blessed are
they that dye in the Lord, or Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints, and the like, by preaching them over those whose doings are as
noisome as their carcasses; who deserve to be buried with the burial of an
Ass; Though violent and vile men, should make their graves with the rich and
the Noble; yet their Monuments built with untempered mortar, made up of the
bones and blood of men, will sooner rot then their corpse.

. No flattering Confectioners can make Mummy, to impartial posterity, of those
abominable livers, whose names are written in the dust, and deserve to perish
as their own dung; when they give no evidence to the present age, by their
piety or repentance, that the name of God is gravn in their hearts, or their
names are written in heaven. No venal pens, and mercenary tongues can keep
after ages from cursing and detesting their memories, who like Nero, or
Hierostratus, or Raviliaac, or Borgia, and other monsters of men, seek renown
by their enormities, and study to equal their vilanies to their abilities:
whose dying is not times digesting them to mature honor; but its spewing them
out to everlasting shame and abhorrence.

. But where useful virtues and real graces do appear in any, never so poor,
afflicted, desolated, (as the Martyes and Confessors of old, and latter ages
were;) every just man and ingenuous Christian, will be not only ready to bring
sweet odors and spices to their burial, but they are ambitious to embalme their
names and memories to a perpetuity of honor; Though proscribed and banished,
though undone and destroyed by the injuries of the age, in which they lived; as
were Ignatius Cyprian, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Boethius, and many others among
the Christians, yea and among Heathen too, as Epaminondas, Aristides,
Themistoeles, Scipio, Affr. and others; whose ungrateful Countries did not
hinder the gratitude of posterity, as to persons that deserved longer life and
better usage.

. Yea, not only among the Heathens, such ecstasies of admiration transported
them to the superstition of an imaginary (...), or deification of the dead;
(whose deserts they thought purchased for them an immortality, Divinity or
Godship of a lower form, lesser edition, and latter creation;) But even
Christians at first indeed, with moderation and caution, (afterward by an
(...), or excess of veneration) did canonize those as Saints, or divi, holy,
honorable and happy men and women, who by exemplary piety and patience, had
sealed to the truth and peace of Christian religion; hereby recommending the
imitation of their graces and virtues to all men, both good and bad, to reprove
the one, and improve the other.

. For not only well disposed persons are well content to see themselves
encouraged by the commendation of those, whose worthy steps they follow; But
even those, that are no great valuers, or followers of virtue themselves, no
nor praisers of it in others, while living, are yet content to lay aside the
poison of their envy, and sting of their calumny toward them when they only
live in their deserved reputation for goodness; whose rewards even vicious men
are prone to fancy they may more easily obtain if they have but a mind to
commend them, when dead.

. Nor is this fallacy without some show of reason; For virtue is prone to adopt
those for her children, who have any value or respect for her even in others;
As by pitying, so by praising, we are secretly allured to practice things
praiseworthy; As evil speech corrupts good manners, so good speech is apt to
mend evil manners; yea, as to smother, or calumniate, or coldly commend
another virtue, argues little consciousness to it in ones self; So it is the
surest token of grace, and virtue, to love, admire and adore them, First in the
highest perfection of the Divine Idea; Secondly, in the clearest image, or
representation of them, Jesus Christ; Lastly in the more familiar instances of
them among mankind, where they are (like the Sunbeams, in watery reflections,
infinitely more remiss indeed, and less glorious, than in the original, but
yet more visible and condescending to humane capacities.

. And such they were in this Ilustrious Bishop, however he were eclipsed by the
fatal darkness of the times; yet the pregnant demonstrations of his worth, were
publicly attested, as by that love and reverence which all good men paid him
while he lived; so by that honorable and ample concourse of many Eagles to his
corpse and Funerals, which were attended by Noblemen, by Gentlemen, by Judges,
by Lawyers, by Divines, by Merchants and Citizens, of the best sort then in
London; These flocked to his Sepulcher, these followed the Bier, these
recounted his worth, these deplored their own and the ages loss of him; These
reproached those who had occasioned, or cast any diminutions upon such
extraordinary merits, and such accomplished Bishops; For he was not the only
Phoenix of his age and order, who had been deplumed, and almost reduced to ashes
by the inordinate, flames of the times.) But I need no more to justify any so
ample commendation of this excellent Bishop, whom none could with truth or
Justice disparage.

. My second work in this Epistle is, to give the world an account of your
particular merit, as to this Dedication, wherein I am commanded in modesty, not
to insist upon your so propense and unanimous favor expressed toward my self,
(which chalengeth its proper time, and place, for my thankeful acknowledgment)
because the present Subject affords me reason more than enough; Nor could I
have been other than extremely injurious, both to the Dead and the Living, (the
venerable Bishop, and your honorable selves) if I should have dedicated this
work to any other than your selves; Since not only to you they were by me at
first, for the main, delivered by word of mouth, (which I know more coveted to
hear, than well could, by reason of the great crowd and concourse, of
attendants, who may claim of me this Justice, and compensation, of their
defeats) but to your honorable Societies, above all men living, the venerable
subject and occasion of my labors, this reverend Bishop (next God) did chiefly
bequeath and dedicate himself, both living, dying, and dead.

. If he had lived longer, you had been that happy Society, which should have
been honored and blessed, with his presence and residence, with his praying and
preaching, with his grave counsel and holy example: The golden remains of his
precious life and strength, were yours; he was so just and grateful, as to own
and requite your love and respects to him, who had so highly deserved of him.

When he dyed, and was to put off his earthly Tabernacle, those exuviae
mortalitatis, which are due to the grave; It was inter novissima vota, one of
his last desires, that as this mantle of Eliah's soul, was likely to fall among
you, so it might be deposited in your Temple, or Sanctuary, as an expectant of
a blessed Resurrection.

. This request you not only ambitiously entertained, but honorable
accomplished, being loath, that so great a Prophet, should be buried among the
graves of the meaner people; though living, he was almost levelled to them, by
some men, I fear of more preposterous, than pious spirits, who seemed most
impatient to own the vast differences, which God and nature, education and
grace, age and experience, learning and industry, besides our Laws, and the
universal custom of the Churches of Christ, had made among the Ministers of
Christ, for the good order, and welfare both of Presbyters and people, grudging
that any civil respect or reward should be proportioned to their worth and
usefulness in the Church.

. It became your learning, Justice, and wisdom, to descern and own the
advantages, and discriminations, that were so evident in this excellent Bishop,
who are not only Trustees and Guardians of his Urne and ashes; but Conservators
of his better self, living Monuments of his excellent soul, Admirers of his
rare endowments, Imitators of his worthy example; All which were by him, and
now by me devoted to you above all men, among whom he had his last hospitable
and honorable reception; You, by a generous civility (in an age pitifully and
plebeianly Antiepiscopal,) durst invite, own and entertain, with public
respect, such a Bishop, whose eminent and unspotted worth every way made him so
much more, the object of some men's envy and despite, as the highest Towers and
trees are of the rage of tempests.

. For many have more patience toward Bishops and Ministers of his degree and
persuasion, who are less commendable, or more culpable, than to those, whose
eminency in goodness becoming Bishops and Divines, makes their injurious malice
wholly inexcusable; Some spirits are most eager to cast that Episcopal salt on
the ground, which has best savor in it; and least of popish or popular
fatuity; that greater esteem may be had of their inspired arrogance, which by
parity tends to Ataxy, division and confusion, as it is at this day; Sunt
tempora inquibus maximis virtutibus certissimum est exitium: Tacitus observes,
that the worst times can least bear the best laws, and worthiest persons; whose
exemplary virtues are the daily Satyrs and Sarcasmes of unreasonable men, and
manners.

. Some Schoolmen think, that the presence of a good Angel, is an augment to
the torture of Devils, exasperating the regret and sense of their hell,
deformity, and misery, by the others beauty, glory, and felicity: it is
certain (Mat. 8.29.) that the evil and unclean spirits, could not smother the
great terror, even to torment, which they had seizing on them, when the holy
Majesty of the Messiah, though veiled under the cloud of humane nature, and
infirmities, gave check, to their Demoniac malice and mischief; Thus are the
best ministers, either Bishops or Presbyters, men of the greatest learning,
piety and constancy, most unwelcome, (as Micaiah to Ahab) to men of high minds,
of heady passions, of giddy spirits, of impotent prejudices, of popular
principles, and of licencious Practices, who affect things of vulgar ambition,
and plebeian arbitrariness, being unpatient of any thing authoritative, and
settled either by civil, or ecclesiastic constitutions, and customs in Church
or State.

. Hence (then) is the Crown of your Honor, more ponderous and illustrious;
That you so far owned and expressed your esteem of this learned and religious
Bishop, who as much deserved and enjoyed the applause of all good men, as he
patiently endured the envy and injuries of others; Him you kindly invited; Him
you civilly received; Him you highly honored; Him you greatly endeared to you;
notwithstanding the long and many diminutions, yea disgraces he had suffered as
a Bishop, more to the detriment and dishonor of the public, than of his
private comforts; For it is certain; that every Christian Church and State in
all ages, has wanted, and ever will such excellent Bishops, as wise and
exemplary Goverours, more than they can want public rewards and
encouragements: but as it was said of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, in Italy,
Aequiori animo sua pertulit damna, quam alii sua lucra: No man deplored the
public distractions more, and his own depressions less, than this wise and
worthy Bishop; he still enjoyed himself in an holy and happy tranquillity, as
much, nay much more, than any of his destroyers, whom he lived to see driven as
chafe too and fro, with every wind, till they were hurried to Democracy, to
Stratocracy, to Anarchy, both in Church and State.

. After many Tragedies, which he had seen and suffered, it was a great reviving
to his age, to find the noble respects of your honorable Society, shining upon
him, and in him, upon all worthy Bishops, and Episcopal Divines; You were
desirous to be his Diocese, to own him as a Father in God; And as you deserved,
so I know he intended you the best recompenses he was able to give you, out of
the rich treasury of his learned and pious soul, if God had spared him life and
health; As you have the honor to be the eminent orb, and public Sphere, in
which this great Star of learning and religion, of Episcopal desert, and
dignity, last moved, both in and out of this world; The Mount Nebo, to which
this Moses was to ascend, and there to dye; So it is but just you should have
this Monument of singular honor, and renown, so long as the name and memory of
Bishop Brounrig survives, which I presume will be very long; (For he had (omnia
victura et sempiterna, praeter corpusculum,) all things living and lasting to
eternity, except his body,) especially, if I have in this work (which is thus
Dedicated to you,) done him and you, the present, and after age, that right
which I intended, and of which I have thus given the world some account as to
your particular merit toward him, which was my second undertaking.

. My last work in this Epistle is, to crave your patrociny, for my vindication,
both against Romish partiality, whose design and interest is to decry and
destroy all Reformed Bishops; and also against those immoderate Antypathies,
which others have taken up, against all presidential Episcopacy, and Diocesan
Bishops; though never so reformed in Doctrine and Manners; Yea and
circumscribed by good Laws of Church and State: Not that I fear the wit, which
is not overgreat, or the spite which is not very small, of those unreasonable
Episcopomastix, whose malice is as blind, as it is bold, against all Bishops,
good and bad, precious and vile, Popish and Primitive Episcopacy. They shall do
well to try their Teeth on this file, to confute any one particular, which I
have averred of this excellent Bishop, who (together with many others, his
reverend Brethren, (of the last edition and perdition) now with God, (as Usher,
Hall, Morton, Davenant, Prideaux, Winniffe, Westfeild, Potter, and others,)
were as far from being drones, and idle bellys, Tyrants and oppressors, Popish
or antichristian, as those are, who are the most unjust calumniators of them,
and their Episcopal dignity; which has been so ancient and universal in the
Church of Christ, and is so necessary for the polity, and well being of any
Church, and was by themselves so abundantly deserved, yea and worthily managed.

. I well know how provoking a thing it is to some men's eyes and ears, to read
or hear the praise of any man, who is not of their party, and faction; There
are many, who have no patience to behold a Bishop carried to his grave in
peace, and laid in the bed of honor; It is their Hell to see a pious Prelate
conveyed to Heaven; as it was Dives his regret, to behold Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom; Some have sought to make the very name of Bishop a crime, and to render
the order, degree and honor of it odious, when the first is Scriptural, and
given to Christ, first; next to the Apostles and their chief Successors; the
second is Ecclesiastical, of Primitive, Catholic, and Apostolic use.

. There are, that wish all Bishops out of the world, with all their hearts; but
withal they would have them buried in silence, and obscurity; For they are
scared to see them walk after they are dead, as much as Herod was, least John
Baptist, (whom he had beheaded in a most wanton and frolic cruelty,) had been
revived in Christ; Some are afraid, least while the names and merits of our
excellent English Bishops remain, they might recover damages, for all the
losses they have sustained; but in this I can secure their Excexcutors and
Administrators, that if they can give God and their own consciences, a good
account, none of these good Bishops, who are now departed in peace, and have
seen the Salvation of God, will ever trouble them, being got above the
affronts, injuries, indignities, and indigencies of this world.

. I know the formation of such a Statue, as must resemble, Bishop Brounrig, so
burning and shining a light, must needs dash the unwelcome sparks and
strictures of his well known worth, in all Antiepiscopal faces; just as an iron
flaming from the forge does, when wrought on a firm anvel by a strong arm. It
is the misery of many, virtutem videant intabita bescantque relicta; first to
want worth in themselves; next, not to be able to bear it in another: If envy
against worthy Bishops is to be burst in pieces, this piece will do it; if
sober moderate minds are reconcilable to venerable Episcopacy (as I believe
many, nay most ministers and people now are) this will further invite and
confirm them to study the Churches peace, and the honor of the Reformed
Religion, no less than the comfort of their own calling, by returning to such
temperament and patterns of Episcopal presidency, as were to be seen in Bishop
Brounrig, and in many others of his order in England; in which were as worthy
Presbyters, and as excellent Bishops as ever blessed any Church, since the
Apostles days, for whom we have cause ever to bless the Divine benignity and
mercy to this unworthy Nation.

. I have otherwhere erected Trophies, and inscribed them to several Bishops of
holy, honorable and happy memory in England; yea and I have demonstrated by a
familiar and plain emblem, the vast disproportions that are in all histories
and successions of the Church to be seen, between the goodly floridness, and
fruitful procerity of Christianity in all times, when it was preserved,
protected, and prospered by Episcopal eminency, authority and unity (which kept
Bishops, Presbyters and people in a blessed harmony) compared to the modern
shrubs of novelty, variety, and discord, which later ages have produced.

. Nor could I forbear (upon this occasion) to set forth the industry, learning
eloquence gravitie, wisdom, moderation, patience, unspottedness, and holy
perseverance of this excellent Bishop, by way of pleniary opposition, and full
confutation, of that Idleness, illiterateness, barrenness, levity, imprudence,
riggidness, passionateness deformity and inconstancy, with which some men have
been overgrown, as with a Manage or Leprosy, in this age, by their too great
itching, and scratching against all Episcopacy, even till they fetched blood,
and brought such a festring tetter and sore upon us, as is not easily healed.

. Wherein I have come short of Bishop Brounrigs worth, your unanimous
pleadings, and potent eloquence (full of reason and justice, of learning and
religion, of order and policy) may best supply my many defects, indeed there
was need of another Brounrig, to have described him.

. Wherefore, knowing my own disproportions I thought it the best way I could
take, to relieve them first, by seriously studying of this great pattern, next
by flying to your protection, whose honor is now inseparable from this worthy
Bishops, no less than his ashes are from your ancient Temple, which since its
first consecrating by Heraclius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, (Anno Christ. 1185. in
the 31. of Hen. the 2.) to this day, had never any deposite, of greater
learning, then your famous Seldom, or of greater piety and veneration, than
your and our reverend Brounrig, who as little needs any Apology to be made for
him, as the age greatly needs, repentance, for treating him so much below his
worth, and myself a great Apology, for my adventuring on so great a work.

. If it be necessary for me further to disarm or lessen that envy which
possibly may befall me, for the honor of this service, which I have done to
the name, memory and merit, of this worthy Bishop, and in him, to all good
Bishops, I am willing to conclude, as St. Bernard does in his modest and humble
oratory, upon a like occasion, Dignus sane ille qui laudaretur, sed indignus
ego qui laudem, if the fire of Antiepiscopal anger, must still be fed with some
fuel, Parcite defunctis, in me convertite ferrum, let them spare the dead, and
fix their talons or teeth on me, who am yet living, who am content not to be
commended by them, or any malevolent Reader, yet I am sure this reverend
Bishop, was most worthy to be commended by me, and all good men, which is then
most effectually done, by your selves (O worthy Gentlemen) and all equanimous
Readers, when his piety, prudence, zeal, courage, humility, charity, and
judicious, constancy, in Church and State, are most exactly imitated by your
selves, and others, which is the just and serious ambition of

Your very humble servant in Christ. JOHN GAUDEN.
Ian. 1. 1659.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 8. read are for is, p. 8.l.13.r. audible, p. 33. l. 12. add when
yet, p. 24. l. 4. by for lie, p. 45. l. 1. r. Moenis, p. 56. l. 20. Oracles for
creeds, p. 58. l. 28. (...) for (...), p. 59. l. 11. r. Elisha, p. 62. l. 3. r.
coveted, p. 71. l. 1. r. autedate, p. 105. r. Antisignani, p. 155. l. 9. f.
warp for worship, p. 177. l. 1. r. (...), p. 184. l. 7. r. principles, p. 245.
(...). In Epitaphio, p. 3. l. 4. r. Bonorum.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Ralph Brounrig, D.D. LATE L. BP. of
EXCESTER.
2 KING. 2.12. And Elisha saw it and he cried, My Father, my Father; the
chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof! and he saw him no more; and he took
hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.
. ALthough no man is more ambitious then my self to pay all due respects to
that Reverend and justly honored Prelate, whose Funerals we this day celebrate;
yet I should discover too much ignorance of my own disproportion to so grand a
Personage, to so sad an occasion, and so ample an expectation, as I know
possesses you (right Honorable, Worthy and Christian Auditors) if I had
ambitiously obtruded my self upon this so important a Province, for which many
others might have been found much more apt and adequate than my self.

. But being unexpectedly called to this performance by those worthy Friends of
the deceased, to whom he had chiefly committed the care of his decent
Interment, I durst not be either so ungrateful to the merits and favor of this
excellent Bishop (of which I had great experience for many years while he
lived) or so diffident of Gods gracious assistance, and your ingenuous
acceptance of my endeavors, as to refuse so noble an employment; What is
objectable either by my self or others, as to my defects, may possibly be
supplied, either by those great respects of love and honor which I ever had,
and still have to this Venerable Bishop, or by your Christian candor, or by the
Divine grace, which is the fountain of all holy sufficiency, which as I humbly
beg of God, so I less despair of it, considering my work and design is not to
adorn a Roman but a Christian Funeral: I am to speak (non ad plausum, sed ad
planctum; non ad pompam, sed ad pietatem) not for pomp, but piety; not to gain
your applause, but to amend your and my own lives; as discoursing of a dead man
to such as are daily dying and decaying with my self.

. He speaks best of the deserving dead, who leaves the living better than he
found them; which might be your happy improvement (honored and beloved) if as
you have an Eliah now departed, so you had an Elisha deploring his departure:
you have indeed seen or heard the first ((...), as St. Basil speaks, the
migration and assumption of this great Prophet) you may be most probable to
enjoy the second if you join with me in Elisha's prayer; Verse. 9.
not that a double portion of this Eliah's spirit may be upon me; no, I have
not so immodest an ambition to excel; a decimation will be a great addition;
the Tenth part of the Wisdom, Learning, Judgment, Eloquence, Zeal, Courage,
Constancy, Gravity and Majesty of this excellent Bishop, will make not only a
competent, but as the world is now shrunk, a very complete Minister; I may tell
you the gleanings of this worthy Prelate would be beyond most Presbyters
harvests; and his racemation, or after-gatherings, beyond their proudest
Vintages. However, since Eliah's work is not to be done without some portion of
Eliahs spirit; this is the only favor next your patience, wherein I crave
your concurrence.

. But I must not detain you long in the porch or preface, when I have two ample
edifices with many fair rooms in them, through which I am to lead you.

. The first is in this read Text which I have set before your eyes, which was
indeed the first that came into my mind as soon as I had a summons to preach on
this occasion; The second in that dead Text which is now hidden from your eyes:
In both of them there is, as Christ says of his Fathers house, (...), many
Mansions; but I must not tarry long in any one, that I may give you some
prospect of them all.

. I begin at the first; And Elisha saw it, etc.

The words set forth to us,

First, An eminent person, Elisha.

Secondly, His emphatick actions, which are many.

1. His Vision, as to that strange appearance and transaction of Eliah's
rapture; He saw it. 2. His exclamation, or vociferation; he cried out. 3. His
expressions, 1. As to his private relation and affection; My Father, my Father.
2. As to the public concern, and importance; The chariot of Israel and the
horsemen thereof.
4. The cessation or period of the Vision; He saw him no more. 5. His solemn
lamentation, set forth by rending his own clothes in two pieces.
1. In this eminent person Elisha, though many other things be very
considerable, The person Elisha considered in his succession to Eliah.
yet I shall chiefly fix upon him as the person specially designed to be Eliahs
Successor in the Prophetic Office, both as to ordinary and extraordinary
duties, for the service of God and the Church yet remaining in Israel, although
now among much rubbish and ruin, sullied with Idolatry and great Apostasy, yet
the things that remain are not to be neglected, even those few that had not yet
bowed the knee to Baal. Churches must not be cast off, nor Christians left
without Prophets, Pastors, and Bishops, because of great disorders and
degenerations that may by Heresy, Schism or persecution befall them; those few
sheep must not be left in the wilderness without some shepherds to feed and
guide them.

. Here I cannot but observe, 1 King. 19.16, 19.
not only the care of the Prophet Eliah, but of God himself, by whose special
mandate Eliah was to nominate and anoint such an one as might be meet to
succeed him in his holy function, as a Prophet, yea, as the Father or chief
President and Master, (for so the sons of the Prophets call Eliah) of all the
other sons who were brought up in the ordinary Schools and Nurseries of the
Prophets.

As nothing is more necessary for mankind, The blessing and necessity of an
holy succession of Ministers in the Church.
than to have some to teach them the will of God, and the way of true Religion,
which differenceth them from beasts, and leads them to eternal happiness; so
nothing is more an evidence of Gods indulgence and mercy to any people, than to
furnish them from among their brethren with such an holy succession of Prophets
and Pastors, of Priests and Ministers, of Bishops and Fresbyters, of Teachers
and Rulers in things sacred and spiritual, as may least expose the profession
of Religion to any doubt, disorder, division, defect, interruption or
uncertainty.

When true Religion and the acceptable service of God was first planted in the
single families of the Patriarchs (as rare flowers are in their several fair
pots) then was God their more immediate Prophet and Instructor, The Patriarchal
succession in families
in dreams and nightvisions, in ocular and sensible apparitions by day, in
audable and articular expressions, or in mental illuminations: So to Enoch, and
Noah, and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; yet so, as the holy Fathers of those
families were at once as successive Princes, Priests, and Prophets to their
families, taking care to teach their posterity, children, and servants the true
fear and worship of God, Genesis 18.19.
which the Lord promises himself from Abraham; Josh. 24.15.
and Joshua promises to God for himself and his house.

Afterward, After successioning eater Polities.
when the Church of God multiplied from a family to a grand Polity, or
community (which required those Laws and constitutions, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, together with the execution of them, by Princes, Priests and
prophets, which might best preserve humane society, within those bounds of
honesty and holiness, and within the enjoyment of those blessings which might
answer all just and good desires, either as to the enjoyment of their lives,
estates, and liberties in peace, or as to the serving of God, and keeping
communion with him in those holy ways of his worship and service which he
required of them for their good, as well as his own glory) then was it that the
Lord either by special designation, or by settled succession, furnished his
Church with such Princes, Judges, Priests and Prophets, as he saw necessary for
them.

Yea, Ecclesiastical order and succe^^^on most necessary.
whatever scambling and confusion in Civil and Regular Magistracy men's ambition
brought on the state of the Jews, yet the Church order and polity of Religion,
was so fixed in Aarons family, as to the constant Primacy of the Priesthood,
and in the Tribe of Levi, as to the inferior offices and services, that it
continued many hundred of years after their Kings, and after their Captivity,
inviolated among the Jews; nor was that sacred Order and Succession quite
depraved in Israel, till a most unreasonable and detestable reason of state
policy, laying aside all true sense and conscience of piety, 1 King. 12.31.
set up golden calves for gods to the silly people; and consecrated the meanest
of the people to serve them: Meet Priests indeed for such brutish gods.

When the great Prophet Moses was to leave the world, Moses his care for
succession.
yet he leaves the Church this legacy of comfort, as to the divine care and
providence for a succession; The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet
from the midst of thee of thy brethren like unto me, unto him you shall
hearken; which as it was most eminently and consummatively fulfilled in our
blessed Savior (as Philip tells Nathanael, John 1.45. Acts 3.22. Acts 7.37.
and as St. Peter with St. Stephen convince the Jews, who was the great
inspirer and compleater of the Prophets, and their Prophesies) so it was also
fulfilled in those intermediate Prophets, which followed Moses, even to John
Baptist, whom God sent successively to preserve, reform and restore true
Religion in the Church.

The Priestly, Prophetic, Ministerial successive authority as necessary as
magistratick.
and Ministerial Office is not less necessary in the Church, than the Princely
and Magistratick power is in the State, unless men judge their souls eternal
interests less precious than those of their bodies and estates: Yea for the
most part, Gods Providence has so distinguished them that when there were the
best Princes, yet there were added to them, eminent Prophets, besides the
constant Priests; as in David's time, where Samuel, Gad and Nathan were employed.

And here in the great revolt, and sad Apostasy of Israel, from Gods and David's
house, yet the Lord is not wanting to send an Eliah, and when he is to be gone,
order is taken for the appointing Elisha to succeed him; the Ordinances of
heaven, 1 Kings 16.1^.1^.
of night and day, summer and winter, of Spring and Harvest, Genesis 8 22.
are not more necessary by the successive motions of Sun, and Moon, and Stars,
than those Ministers and Ministrations are, by which true Religion, and an
autoritative order in the Church are maintained in present, and duly derived to
posterity.

Hence our blessed Savior, Our blessed Saviors care of succession in the
Church. John 20.20.
the great Minister and Fulfiller of all righteousness, before his ascension
took care for the Apostolic confirmation, Consecration, Mission and
Commission, as Stewards and Ambassadors in his stead, to be sent by him as he
was by his Father.

The Apostles also before their departure had the like care, as is evident in
the history of the Acts, and in the charge that St. Paul gives to Timothy and
Titus, within their respective Provinces and Diocesses to commit the
Evangelical, spiritual power and Ministry, as a sacred depositum to faithful
and able men, that may as Bishops and Pastors, 2 Timothy 2.2.
as Presbyters and Teachers, both instruct and rule the Church or flock of
Christ committed to their charge, according to the several proportions and
combinations of those Ecclesiastical Societies, over which not only many
Teachers were ordained, but also some one Father or Angel was constituted and
owned by the Spirit of Christ, as the (...), Rev. 2, and 3, chap.
chief President over them, the head or center of order and union; the
principal Conservator and Dispenser of all Ecclesiastical power and authority,
which Irenaeus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Origin, and all the Ancients counted
Successiones and successores Apostolorum; having the same (...), gift and
character in ordinary which the Apostles had, either as Presbyters or
Presidents in the Church.

. Succession signalised by some visible ceremony.
That this might be done the more signally and conspicuously, so as all might
take notice of the solemn trausaction, in a business of so sacred and great
importance to the Church, there was not only due trial to be made of men's
abilities inward and outward for such undertakings; but they were to be
invested with the Ecclesiastical power, and admitted to the exercise of those
sacred Ministrations by some evident ceremonies, as tokens of Gods Ordination,
the Clergies approbation, and the peoples acceptance of them. So little is God
an enemy (as some have strongly fancied) to all decent ceremonies in Religion,
which are shadows indeed of good things, with whose substance they well agree.
We see that not only Sacramental mysteries even in the Gospel, as well as under
the Law, are set forth by them, and clothed all over with them, as to the
outside or sign; but also the Ordination of Priests, Prophets, and all Church
Ministers ordinary and extraordinary have been adorned by them: Elisha is first
anointed by Eliah, ^ Kings 19.19.
after this Eliah casts his mantle upon him, even that mantle which afterward
fell from Eliah ascending, and was as an emblem of his spirit, with which
Elisha was to be clothed. So our Savior breathed on the Apostles, Ioh. 20.21,
22.
when he said, Receive the Holy Ghost: So the Apostles used imposition of
hands, to denote their ordained Successors, 1 Timothy 5.22. and 4.14. Heb. 6.6.
which ceremony the Church of Christ in all ages has observed, in the
successive Ordinations of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, as one of the
fundamentals of the Churches polity, order and power. Not that these outward
Rites and Ceremonies are of the essence of the duty of the divine power, but
for the evidence of that order and authority which is necessary, that there may
be nothing dubious, or doubtful, or confused; or upon bare presumptions and
conjectures in the Churches sacred Ministry; but such an authority as is both
powerful in its efficacy, and pregnant and signal in its derivation and
execution, that none might undertake the work, who is not constituted to be a
Workman, nor any withdraw from it who is rightly furnished for so worthy a
Work, as the Apostle calls the work of a Bishop, either the minores Episcopi,
which are orderly Presbyters, or the majores Presbyteri, which are the paternal
Bishops.

We see Eliahs spirit falls on none but his anointed Successor; The spirit and
power follows the lawful succession.
nor was any so fit for the appointment and succession as Elisha; a man indeed
of plain breeding, of a country, yet honest way of living, which is no
prejudice or impediment when God intended to furnish him with Eliahs spirit, 1
Kings 19.19.
with extraordinary gifts and endowments, with the power from on high, as
Christ did his fishermen when he made them fishers of men; Luke 5.10.
This was in one hour more to their improvement than all Schools and
Universities, all literature and education, all languages, arts, sciences, and
Scriptures. But when these special gifts which were miraculous, are not given,
nor needful in the ordinary ministration, propagation and preservation of
Religion, there reading, and study, and diligence, and education, and Schools
of the Prophets, are the conduits of Gods good and perfect gifts conveyed by
holy industry and prayer to those that study to show themselves workmen that
need not to be ashamed, 2 Timothy 2 15.
when once they are sanctified or set apart by God, and the Church, as here
Elisha was.

In whom doubtless God and Eliah had seen something that expressed a very
gracious and sincere heart, by an humble, holy, Elisha's fitness to succeed
Eliah.
and unblameable life: We never find that men of lewd or scandalous lives are
called to be Prophets of God, or allowed to be made Preachers, and Bishops of
the Church, wherein the ancient Canons of the Affrican and other Churches were
very strict and circumspect, whom, when, and how they were ordained Bishops,
Presbyters, or Deacons; St. Paul requires that they should be not only
unblameable, but of good report even among the Heathens and unbeleivers, as to
matters of Justice, Morality, and common honesty, as well as sound and orthodox
in the Christian faith.

. Elisha discovers an excellent spirit, and fit for a Prophet of God, 2 Kings
2.2, 4, 6
not only by his individual adherency to Eliah, three times piously disobeying
his commands, when he bade him leave him; As the Lord lives, and as thy soul
lives, I will not leave thee: The love of good company is a good sign of a
good conscience; a very good way to a good life, and a ready means to make us
partakers of spiritual gifts; but further Elisha shows a most devout and divine
soul in him, fit to make a Prophet to succeed Eliah; when first he does not
preposterously and presumptuously obtrude himself upon the holy Office and
Succession, but attends Gods call, and the Prophets appointment of him.
Secondly, When he sees it is the will of God, and his father Eliah, he does not
morosely refuse, or deprecate and wave the employment, as some had done; Moses,
and Jeremiah after (though he knew it would be heavy and hot service in so bad
times, but submits to that (onus, no less than honos) burden as well as honor
God imposes on him.) Thirdly, In order to his support and encouragement in the
work, he does not covetously or ambitiously look to the preferment or honor, or
profit, which might easily follow such an employment, especially if merchandise
might be made of miracles, as Gehazi designed; and of the Gospel, if Ministers
turned Sucklers and Hucksters of the word of God, as the Apostle taxes some
who were greedy of filthy lucre; no, but his earnest and only desire is for a
double portion of Eliahs spirit to be upon him; not that he might have more
glory, but be able to do more good, 1 Kings 9.^4 James 17
with more courage and constancy, with less dejection and melancholy
despondency than Eliah, who was a man subject to like human passions; and
sometimes prone to fall not only into despiciencies and weariness of life, but
even to despair, as to the cause of God and true Religion. It is (as
Chrysologus calls it) a commendable emulation to imitate the best men; and a
pious ambition to desire to excel them in spiritual gifts and graces, which the
Apostle St. Paul excites all to covet in their places; which the more bright
and excelling they are (like the light of the sun) the more they dispel all the
vapors, mists and fogs of humane passions or pride, which by fits darken the
souls of holy men.

I cannot here but own my desires, The defective and dubious succession of
Evangelical Ministers very deplorable.
and deplore the state of our times, which forbids me almost to hope their
accomplishment, as to any orderly and meet succession of Evangelical Prophets,
and Pastors, Bishops and Presbyters in this Church; our Eliah's daily drop
away, I do not see any care taken for Elisha's to suceed them, in such
complete, clear and indisputable ways of holy Ordination and Succession, as may
most avoid any show of faction, novelty and schism; and be most uniform to the
Ancient, Catholic, primitive, Apostolic, and uniform pattern, which never
wanted in any settled Church either Presbyters to choose and assist the Bishops;
or Bishops after the Apostles to try, ordain, oversee and govern with the
Counsel of Presbyters, and all other degrees, and orders in the Church.

Darkness, disputes, divisions, distractions dissatisfactions and confusions
must needs follow that Army or City, that knows not who are its Commission
officers, or lawful and authorized Magistrates; so must it needs be in the
Church, when Christians know not who are their Fathers, their Stewards, their
Shepherds, their Bishops, or their Presbyters.

There is nothing next the fundamentals of faith, in which the Church should be
more clear and confidently ascertained than in this, the (...), Romans 10.15
Ordination and succession of their Evangelical Prophets; for how shall they
preach or rule unless they be lawfully sent, and set over the household of
faith, Christ's family? and how shall others, as Sons, pay respect to them as
Fathers, if they either doubt or deny that relation? John 10.1
If every one may affect new ways, bypath, and postern doors, or climb over
the wall, or use force and faction to consecrate himself or any other a
Minister in the Church, according as himself, or his party in every family,
conventicle or congregation fancies best, we may look for good store of
Jerobohams calves and Idols, as well as Priests; such as vulgar folly, faction
and presumption lists to set up to themselves.

. But of Eliahs and Elisha's few or none may be expected, when once Ordinations
are various, novel, defective, mutually destructive, spurious, and so dubious,
as no learned, judicious and uprighthearted Scholars or other sincere
Christians can in conscience or prudence be satisfied with them, either as to
holy duties to be done by them, or as to authority inherent in them, or the
succession derivable from them, or lastly as to the reverence and honor to be
paid to them.

. Certainly there is but one regular, authentic Catholic and complete way of
Ecclesiastical Ordination and Succession, as this reverend Bishop sometimes
expressed his sense to me. What that was by Bishops and Presbyters, no man can
be ignorant that is not so willingly; for the light of Scripture, and
Ecclesiastical history is clear as the sun at noon day; and although he, with
others of our learned English Bishops, thought it may be venial or tolerable in
some cases of persecution, necessity, and civil obstructions (which either
Prince or people may sometime put on the Church) for some Christian Pastors and
people to divert to new and by-ways, such as they are permitted to walk in, yet
they desire and approve the better, and more excellent way: yet there is no
wisdom of Reason or Religion for any Church to forsake the good old way, Ier.
6.16.
when they might happily walk in it, only to give themselves the popular and
pitiful pleasure of diverting to such odd broken ways, as possibly may with
much scrambling, scratching and difficulty bring them at last to the same
journeys end with the other; yet so as through briars and thorns. But I have
done with the person of Elisha, as here nominated, and designed for Eliah's
Successor.

Secondly, I come to the Vision, in which we are to consider, 1 The object,
What he saw. The strangefiery apparition of Eliah's assumption.
2 The act, or seeing.


The Object, It; That is all that strange apparition, the wonderful and
supernatural manner of Eliah's assumption by a fiery chariot and horses of
fire, which did gently slide under him, and so took him up that he appeared
tanquam auriga lucis, as sitting in the chariot, driving and managing the
horses of it; like an holy Phaeton, not fabulous and fictitious, but real and
visible to Elisha's bodily eyes.

All which heavenly pomp and parada was no other but a manifestation of the
glory of God, by such Angelick ministratious, in the way of fire, figured like
chariot and horses.

The Observation in general is obvious from Scripture histories, Of Gods glory
manifested by fire.
How God is pleased to make his special presence and glory appear to men by way
of fire, Exodus 3.2.
either First, immediately, and in mercy; so to Moses in the bush, which was on
fire, yet consumed not: an emblem, First, How God often chooses to reveal
himself, not in the ways of worldly wisdom, and power or greatness, as in tall
cedars, and strong oaks, but in shrubs and bushes, weak and contemptible means:
Secondly, Of the state of the Church in this world, which may seem to be all on
fire by persecution, as the bush or three children in the furnace, yet is not
burned or wasted thereby. Thirdly, To show there is most of Gods presence,
where the soul is most inflamed with the love of God and zeal for his glory,
which is a fire not consumptive but refining; not predaticious to any, but
propitious to all true Saints; destructive to nothing but our sins and
corruptions which are our dross.

Or secondly, Mediately, Angels appear in fire. Psalm 104.4 Heb. 27
God makes use of the Angels as Ministering Spirits, in the similitude of
flaming fire.

In both, to show, not only that spiritual purity, activity and potency which
is in God, and proportionably in the holy Angels, but also how terrible he can
be and will be at last to the wicked men and Angels too, to whom he will be as
a consuming fire; the breath of the Lords anger kindling the fire of Tophet
with everlasting burnings which none can quench.

From the renown of such fiery apparitions and Gods appointment of holy fire,
Levit. 6.12. and 5.24.
which first came down from heaven, to be ever kept alive on his altar, The
Heathens had those high fancies of fire, That it was a god, and the Conqueror
of all things; so worshipped by the Caldeans, and venerated by the Romans,
which their Vestal virgins were to keep unextinguished, that they might have
this emblem at least of their gods and their souls immortality.

Secondly, The different events of Gods fiery dispensations. 1 Penal.
either in judgment or mercy, for good and evil, for preservation or
destruction.

His Justice rains hell fire from heaven upon the impudent and preposterous
sinners of Sodom and Gomorah; Genesis 19.24
unnatural lusts are punished with preternatural fires.

He destroys Nadab and Abihu by fire, for offering with culinary, N^mb. 3.4 and
10.3
common or strange, and unconsecrated sire their incense and sacrifice; to show
that he will be sanctified in all that draw near to serve him, which they must
do after his own prescriptions, not man's inventions, in the matter, essence and
substance of his worship. He blasteth some of Jobs flocks with fire or
lightning, Job 1.16
which came from the aerial or first heaven, by Gods permission, of the devils
impression.

He sends fire from heaven at Eliah's word upon those surly and supercilious
Captains with their Fifties who carried themselves to the Prophet Eliah with
such pride, rudeness and irreverence, 2 Kings 1.
as was a reproach to the God of Eliah, and that Prophetic authority with
which he was invested.

Yet the same God (as we have showed) began his first familiarity of talking
with Moses face to face by the vision of fire in the bush. 2 Propitious.
He after continued the visible sign of his presence and perfection to the Jews
in the wilderness by a pillar of fire shining in the night. Exodus 40.38.


So to Prophets, Ezekiel. 1.4. and ^.2.
and other holy men, as to Manoah, as to Eliah, God manifested his acceptance
of their persons, sacrifices and prayers by fiery apparitions of his glory, yet
in a way of mercy.

So here again in Eliah, a fiery messenger is sent to take him out of this
world, not to his torment or consumption, but to his honor and consummation:
This chariot and horses are sent for him, as those Joseph sent to Jacob to
bring him out of a land of famine, Genesis 45.27
to a place of plenty.

Divine Omnipotence often makes different use and ends of the same methods and
things; Same death, but different fates of good and bad.
the death and departure of good and bad out of this world may seem and is most
what the same, as to the visible way and manner; but vastly distant as to the
last fate and end; as the fool (that is the wicked) dies (says Solomon) so
dies the wise (that is the holy and good man) there Eccles. 2.15, 16
is one end to them both; by sword, or plague, or famine, or sickness, or
prison, or torment; the fire of feavors, and the fire of fagots consumes
martyrs and malefactors, Gods witnesses and the devils witches; yet it shall be
well with the righteous that fear before God, Eccles. 8.13
Luke 16.^2
but not with the wicked; Lazarus died, and Dives died; the one on the dunghill,
the other on his purple and imbroidered bed; but the Angels carried Lazarus to
Abraham's bosom to a refrigerating fire, and the devils attend Dives as a
malefactor to hell, that is to a scorching and tormenting fire; wicked men are
swept as dung from the face of the earth, by whatever death they die, never so
placid and pompous, Job 20.7 Mal. 3.17
without any horrors and pangs in their death; but good men, as Gods Jewels,
are made up and laid up in his best cabinet, be their deaths never so horrid
and painful; Tares and wheat are both cut up by the same hand; but the one to
be cast into unquenchable fire, Matthew. 13.20
the other to be gathered into everlasting Mansions. As the terrors of God and
afflictions, even to death it self, in what way soever God orders our
glorifying him, Romans 8.28.
become blessings, and work together for good to those that love God; so to
wicked men, Psalm. 6^.^2
their table is a snare, their prosperity cumulates their misery; the blessings
they enjoy, or rather abuse, (sour as sweetmeats in summer) curses; to one,
death is as the blastings of the breath of Gods anger to consume them; the Lord
is not in that fire which devours the ungodly, save only in his power and
vengeance, which gives this cup of fire and brimstone to drink, Ps. 11.6. To
the other it is as a gentle breath, or sweet refreshing gale, when God takes
their souls to him as he did Moses's with a kiss, as some Rabins interpret that
(...), Deuteronomy. 34.4
Moses died, super os Domini, at the word, or upon the mouth of the Lord.

This way of Gods providence to Eliah, The Analogy of Eliah's departure to his
life.
by fiery chariot and horses to take him out of the world to glory, is
remarkable for two things.

First, The Analogy and proportion; the Talio or recompense wherewith God
testifies his approbation of Eliah's temper, as to that high and heroic zeal,
which he ever showed to the glory of God, and true Religion; he had (...),
flagrantissimam animam, a most flaming soul, not to be quenched or damped in
Gods cause^; he was as a sacred Salamander, impatient of any cold, or lukewarm,
or halting, or dough-baked constitution in Religion; he had not only wrought
miraculous execution of Gods vengeance by fire, 2 Kings 1.
to chastise the military insolence of some, but he had pleaded Gods cause
against Baal and his Priests by fire which came down from heaven, and decided
the controversy, whether the Lord or Baal was God; a fire not to be
obstructed, 1 Kings 18.17
damped or quenched by all the effusion of water upon the Sacrifice and Altar;
giving hereby a reflexive character and commendation of the magisterial, and
irresistible, and unquenchable zeal wherewith Eliah carried on the interests of
God and Religion, against all the terrors and threats of Ahab and Jezebel, also
against the ungrateful levities and Apostacies of the people of Israel; many
times God suits men's deaths to their lives and tempers, as he did this mild,
but majestic Bishops; such as are of meek and calm spirits often die without
any great pain, sometimes without any; yea, I have been very credibly informed
of one Mr. Lancaster, a very mild, grave, and worthy Minister, who died about
twenty years past, that there was so loud and sweet a consort of music heard
by him, and those about him for above half an hour before he died, that the
good man owned it as a signal token of Gods indulgence to him, thus to send for
him, and to sweeten his death by so heavenly an harmony, with the close of
which he gave up the ghost. On the other side, men of high choler, of
unmortified and unsanctified passions, do not only give themselves much trouble
in life, but many times their deaths are full of no less terror than torment,
especially if they die in their vigor, or before time and infirmity had much
mortified and emaciated their natural strength and temper.

Secondly, The honor done Eliah by this fiery convoy.
The manner of Eliah's departure by chariot and horses of fire, was a notable
instance of the great value and honor which God would set upon him, as his
Prophet, of whom the world was not worthy, and yet it thought him not worthy to
live; 1 Kings 18 18
Ahab the King hates him as a public enemy, and troubler of Israel; Jezebel
the Queen abhors him, a woman implacably desperate, the Court Parasites are all
generally to the same tune, except good Obadiah; the common people (as always)
are pleased with any liberty, (that lets them plough and sow, buy and sell)
novelty and apostasy, hating all men that are out of favor, persecuted and
unprosperous, though never so pious; On all sides good Eliah is driven to fly
into wildernesses, to prefer wild beasts before vile men (Quorum societas omni
solitudine tristior) whose society was more sad than any solitude; yet this
poor, yet precious man, 1 Kings 19.4
who was even weary of life, and petitioned to dye out of a despondency of
mind in desperate times, God not only sets miraculous marks of his favor
upon him, by frequent intercourse of Angels to him, and by working wonders by
him and for him, while he lives thus persecuted and despised of men; but he
must not die an ordinary death, either with that squallor, pallor or pain which
usually attends the sordidness of sickness, and those languishings with which
the souls of poor mortals usually take their leave of their bodies, as
prisoners do of their sad and nasty prison; no, such an extaordinary pomp and
honor must be had at his vale and departure, as shall declare him to all ages a
man as high in Gods favor, as Solomon was in David's, 1 Kings 1.33
when he ordered his designation to the Crown, to be signified by setting him
on his own Mule, 1 sther 6.8
or as Haman fancied himself in Ahasuerus's when he chose the Royal Robe, and
Horse, and Crown to express to the people whom the King delighted to honor:
There is an Embassy of Angels sent, a Troop of the host of heaven; Gods
immediate guard, or a triumphant chariot and horses of fire, such as the divine
Majesty is pleased to own and use for the special Harbingers, Convoys and
Attendants of his glory; these must, as ministering spirits wait upon Eliah, as
a person greatly beloved of God, and now to be highly honored beyond all
mortals, at his decessit; which must not be by the common way of death, but of
such a transport and change to glory, as might be to others a presage and
preludium, as of the ascension of Christ, so of the general resurrection, when
Christ shall appear in flaming fire to take vengeance of ungodly men that obey
not the Gospel; 1 Thessalonians. 1.17 2 Thessalonians 2.8
but to make a general assumption of the godly to himself, first into the air,
then into the Empyrean or highest heaven of glory, to be ever with the Lord;
Psalm. 116.1^
so precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, especially of
his Prophets and faithful Ministers; and such honor in time shall they all have
in their several degrees and proportions, how scurvily and contemptuously
soever the world notes them for a time, as it did the very Son of God, who was
first crucified and then ascended to glory; not in Eliah's fiery chariot, but
in a cool and refreshing cloud; to show the different spirit which Christians
under the Gospel, Acts 1.19
as followers of Christ, must be of, from that of Eliah under the Law, Luke
9.54, 55
as our Savior told his Disciples, when they urged the practice of Eliah, for
a president to justify their hot spirits, thirsting for fire from heaven to
execute their revenge, which he tells us is now to be done by Christians with
prayers and patience, with a quiet departure, without any more ado than shaking
the dust off their feet as a witness against those that refused to entertain
them and their doctrine. Luke 2.1
As Christ came into the world in a time of profound peace, when Augustus had
shut the gates of Janus, so he continued all his life, and at last left the
world without any perturbation of civil affairs.

But it is time for me to wind up the contemplation of Eliah's fiery rapture,
Eliah's rapture not to be envied.
with some useful meditation, which teaches every good Christian to admire
indeed, but not to envy, or repine at this so glorious and miraculous
assumption: As we say of thunderbolts, Poena ad unum, terror ad omnes, The
stroke may fall on but one, yet the terror upon many; so are these peculiar
indulgencies of God to one holy man, the ground of general comfort to all: If
we have the same graces, we shall attain to the same glory ( alia via, but ad
eandem patriam) by another road, but to the same home and house of our heavenly
Father. James 2.22
Abraham was called the friend of God; so is every one that is a true son of
faithful Abraham, though kept at greater distance, and used with less
familiarity; Noah and Lot, the three children and Daniel, had signal
preservations; so may thou proportionably expect, Matthew. 17.5
and have, if thou have the same God; Peter, James and John saw the
transfiguration of Christ; but all the Apostles, and all true believers rejoice
in that news as a pledge and glimpse of glory whereof they shall at last be all
spectators and partakers. 2 Cor. 12.2
St. Paul had his high rapture to the third heaven; so has every good
Christian, whose soul is no stranger to the holy ecstasies of humble, judicious,
fervent and devout affections.

Many Martyrs had their fiery chariots and horses which carried their souls by
flames of fagots to heaven, The parallels to Eliah's rapture.
as that of holy Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, and Angel of that Church, when St.
John wrote the Spirits letter, Rev. 2.8. whose body the modest fire would not
touch, while his soul was in it; the executioner was forced first to kill him,
before he could burn him. Ardor affectuum, claritas fidei, charitatis flamma,
candentes gratiae, certitudo gloriae, hi sunt ignei currus and equitatus, as
St. Bernard: The holy fervor of our love to God, and our charity to others, our
unfeigned faith, and refined graces, our earnest desires and blessed hopes to
depart and be with Christ, Phii. 1.23.
these are the fiery chariots and horses of every sincere Christian: Daily
reading, meditating on the Word of God, with holy ejaculations of our spirits
to God, and warm inspirations of Gods Spirit in us; these (as St. Jerome
commends to a Lady this circle of devotion) are as the chariot and horses of
fire, to carry thee up to heaven yet alive and in the body; these are as Jacobs
Angels ascending and descending; there are (...), sacred fevers, or holy
calentures in which every good Christian must take care to live that so he may
die in them. It is to be wished by every good Christian, ut nec vivat nec
moriatur sine febre; take heed of earthy, lukewarm, cold and dull tempers
living, lest when we die our hearts be as Nabals, or Achitophels, dead,
desponding or desperate within us. No chariots or horses of fire, no good
Angels, no inspirings or aspirings can be looked for at last by those that only
mind things earthly, sensual, and devilish. The ancient word of the Church was
Sursum corda, Col. 3.2
and that (...), lift up your hearts; look upward, set your affections on
things that are above, where Christ is; he will give his Angels charge of thee,
to be thy conducters to heaven, as here they were of Eliahs; for where the soul
is, Luke 16.
there is the man, as the historical parable of Lazarus and Dives imports, when
one is said to be in Abraham's bosom, and the other in hell, long before their
bodies were raised. Carry God while thou live in the chariot of thy zealous
soul, and thou shall not want his chariot and horses of fire to attend thee
when thou die.

Secondly, The act or intuition.
Having thus seen the Object, we are now to consider Elisha's Vision, as to the
act or intuition it self, He saw it; he was (...), an eyewitness, by a real
view, and ocular perception; not by another relation, or any imagination, or
inward apparition to the fancy only; This is here so emphatically set down, not
only to assure the truth of the transaction, but because it was the only
condition, upon which Elisha's having a double portion of Eliahs spirit did
depend.

It shows the high esteem Elisha had of that spiritual gift, The value holy men
have of spiritual gifts.
which would at once enable him with power of Prophecy and Miracles; therefore
he would not part from Eliah one step, no nor have his eye off him one minute,
or wandering in the least twinkling from him; not that he had so rich a
blessing, and great a boon barely for a look, or cast of his eye: No, but as
Tostatus, Peter Martyr, and others observe, Intention oculorum animi intentio
exprimitur; Lam. 3.51
the eye affected the heart, and the heart the eye: Elisha makes here an holy
use of his bodily eyes, not only to expiate the usual vanity of them, but
farther as a means appointed by Eliah, to convey that expected blessing of his
spirit upon him; He was loath to take Eliahs place, and undertake his work as a
Prophet of God, unless he had his spirit, if it might on any terms be had.

To which end his eyes lie compact, are made capable to serve him; therefore he
fixes them unmovably upon his Master, lest any surprise should defeat him of
Master and spirit too; as the eyes of our bodies often occasion much mischief to
the soul; so if we look well to them, they may be instruments of much good;
Numb. 21.9
Such as would have the benefit of healing, must look up to the brazen Serpent;
Zach. 12.10
so look to Christ thou must, whom thy sins have pierced, if thou will be
healed of the stings which thy lusts have made upon thee. They were ordered to
look to the Temple and Mercy-seat in prayer, ^ Kings 8.48
who desired to have their petitions accepted; these were types of Christ, on
whom the believing and devout soul must always keep their eye habitually
intent, but especially in holy duties, that they may enjoy not only the fancy
and form, but the spirit and power of the duty.

David's prayer was good, Psalm. 119.37
Averte oculos Domine ne videant vanitatem, Lord turn away or divert my eyes
from beholding vanity, by keeping them intent to better objects; he had avoided
much sin and misery if he had done as he prayed, in the case of Bathsheba.
Accordingly was the Churches practice, which eyed God as solicitously and
reverentially, Psalm 123.2
as a servant or handmaid does their Master and Mistress.

Jobs piety would not stand to the courtesy of his eyes, but made a covenant
with them, Job 31.1
and bound them on all occasions to their good behavior; knowing, that as
nothing is more suddenly or dangerously moved than the eye, which is in every
one as the center, disposed to behold the worlds vaste circumference and
hemisphere at once, and prone to turn the glory of all the creatures to sin,
shame and vanity.

As the eyes are fenestrae animae, so, Portae paradisi aut inferni, the windows
or ports of the soul by which it lets in or goes out to heaven or hell: Either
as the Dove which having seen the squallor which the deluge of sin has made on
all things sublunary, returns to it self and to God (as Noah's did to the Ark)
or else as the Raven it finds some vile carcass, Genesis 8.7, 9
and fixes so on it, as never to retun again. Eyes are either full of the
stars of heaven, or the sparks of hell: Eves eyes dazzled with the forbidden
fruit, betrayed all other senses and faculties of the soul.

It was not without cause that our Savior in other things not inclined to too
great austerities, Matthew. 5.29
yet in this of the eye is so strict and severe, even to pulling it out; even
the right eye, rather than to perish by the extravagancies and blastings of
those ignis fatui, foolish flashes and offensive flames which reside in, or
flow from the eye. Certainly it had been good for some to have been born blind,
and not to have seen the light of the Sun, which has filled their eyes with so
many, not motes of vanity only, but beams of inordinate lusts, and vicious
debaucheries. We read of one Mavis an Asian Bishop, when blind, he was
reproached by jeering Julian, that his Galilaean Jesus did not restore him to
his sight; he blessed God that he was so happy as not to see such a monster of
perfidy and apostasy as he was.

If the eyes which are the light of the body be sensually darkened, Matthew. 6.23
the whole body must needs be very dangerously dark. O how can we hope with Job
to see our Redeemer with these eyes, so vain, so proud, Job 19.25
so wanton, so polluted, so prostitute; they had need be well washed with the
eye water of penitent tears and these with the blood of Christ.

As Solomon advises to look to our feet, so to our eyes, Eccles 5.2
especially when we attend upon God in any holy duty and service, lest he pass
by us (as Job speaks) and we discern him not; Job 9.11
lest holy duties vanish out of our sight unminded, without any impression of
the Spirit of God upon us by their means, a blessing not to be expected by
those that are not diligent expectants, and vigilant supplicants for the Spirit
of God in hearing, reading, praying, receiving; yea in all the occurrences of
providence to us for good or evil, in which Christ bids us still watch and pray
lest we fall into temtation, Matthew. 26.41.

. The good in all duties is the Spirit, which goes with them as with Ezekiels
wheels, and is given us to teach us a right use of them. Loose looks, and
wandering spirits, lose Gods good Spirit, which is the life, and soul, and
heaven of every duty; unless this move, there is no formation or new creation
in us. Roaving souls, and scattered eyes have but a phantasm and show of
Religion, the mere husk and shell, which is at once the satisfaction and
delusion of Hypocrites: The spirit (as St. Bernard observes) of a Sermon, a
Prayer, a Sacrament, is lost while we are unattentive, looking and thinking of
something else. Eliah had vanished, and Elisha been defeated of the desired
blessing of his doubled spirit, if he had been roaving but one moment; his
vigilant intention fulfills the condition, and obtains the augmented donative
of his spirit.

2. General; The Vociferation or crying out.
I have done with the Vision, both the object and the sight of it. I come to
the Vociferation and crying out; In which we are to consider, First, The
((...)) Pathetick manner. Secondly, The ((...)) emphatick matter.


First, 1 The manner
The manner is with passion and commotion of Spirit, as in a business sudden,
and of importance, which justifies no less than exacts from him this pattern
of earnestness and vehemence, answering the wonder of it with a deserved
astonishment.

Calm and even-spun tempers of mind do not become holy men at all times, and
at all occasions; Pious pertuhbation of spirit when seasonable.
there are pious perturbations, which are as it were the ecchos of devout souls
to the louder sound of Gods voice; vehement yet sanctified passions, as of
Love, Joy, Desire and Hope; so of Fear, and Terror, of Admiration and
Dejection, of Horror and Consternation, yea, and self-despair, as St. 2 Cor. 1.8
Paul says of himself, are in some occasions and instances of Providence, not
only comely, but commendable; especially in the extraordinary appearances of
Gods glory, or dispensations of his providence and power.

So there fell upon Abraham an horror of great darkness at one time in his
converse with God; Genesis 15.12
So upon Job, to the abhorring himself in dust and ashes; Job 42.6
thus Moses, exceedingly feared and trembled, Heb. 12.21
no less than the whole Congregation of Israel, when God gave the Law from
Mount Sina; thus he broke the Tables which God had given him, when he was
transported with just indignation against the calvish Idolaters; Phineas by a
commendable zeal brake the usual bounds of native modesty, Numb. 25.8
slaying Zimri and Cosbi; (...). David greatly feared when God smote Vzzah for
his rash touching of the Ark; 2 Samuel 6.8
other times he forgot the gravity of Kingly Majesty, in an high zeal and holy
frolic of dancing before the Ark; and the same David more than once roared for
the disquietness of his soul. Psalm. 38.8
We read Ezra tore his own hair, as a distracted man; Ezra 9.3
and Nehemiah the hair of others, Neh. 13.12
out of a pious impatience, to see the deformity of Religion unreformed; Genesis
27.38
yea Esau himself, though a man of a cursed and fierce spirit, yet cried out
with a very loud and bitter cry, when he was supplanted of his Fathers
primogenite blessing.

A Stoical restiveness does not become the Saints and Servants of God: Job 4.14
Eliphaz expresses well the terror he had, when a spirit from God passed
before his face, Fear came upon me, and trembling which made all my bones to
shake (Steteruntque comae and vox faucibus haesit) the hair of his flesh stood
up. Judge. 13.20, 22.
Manoah and his wife fell with their faces to the ground, and cried, they
should surely dye, because they had seen the Angel of God doing wonderfully by
fire. Holy men, highly beloved of God, Dan. 8.17, 27. Dan. 10.8, 17
as Daniel, grew pale, dispirited and half dead in some of their visions. Good
Josiah rent his clothes when he heard the book of the Law written, 2 Kings 22.11
and the terrors of God there set forth against a sinful people.

, Of holy Quakers.
God calls sometimes not only to fasting and mourning, but to fear and
trembling. There are some holy Quakers (not such as affect to act a part like
the old Sybils in their frantic correptions, and Diabolical possessions, to
amuse the vulgar, to no purpose, as to any holy motions or improvements of
their own or others souls and lives) but humbly to conform themselves to that
posture, gesture, passion and perturbation, which the hand of God upon them
does really, rationally, and religiously require.

. Christ's holy passions and ecstasies.
Yea, we find the Son of God our Savior Jesus Christ (who enjoyed the
greatest serenity, and exactest harmony of body and mind) did not carry on an
Apathy, but answered in his temper the stroke and tune of the occasion;
sometimes he rejoiced in spirit; otherwhile he grieved, sighed, weeped, Ioh.
11.38
groaned; yea, he expressed his just anger and indignation: Sometime he was in
such holy ecstasies, Mark. 3.21
that those about him thought him beside himself; Mat. 26.36
In his Agony also he began to be (...), surrounded with sorrow; Mark 14.33
nay ((...)) to be amazed and perplexed with the horror of that cup he was to
drink mixed with man's sins and Gods wrath.

. When God smites, it becomes us to feel his strokes, and express our sense;
sullen and stupid souls argue a senseless temper, an hard heart, and a seared
conscience. God that has planted all affections and passions in us, knows how
to use and improve them, as a skilful Lutenist strikes on all strings, and at
every stop; Though our passions are indeed grown wild and sour naturally, like
crab-stocks; yet grace can graft fit cyons on every one: The holy improvement
of our constitutions.
yea and make use of men's complexions and constitutions to the advantages of
his glory: So Solomon an amorous Prince, when penitent for his extravagancies,
or possibly before, in his best estate, is the penman of that holy Song, which
is a cipher, and signifies nothing in the Bible, unless we understand the
mystical sense of it, which is to present Christ the most lovely object, and to
engage the soul to be passionately enamored of him, Cant. 5.8
even to be sick of love, impatient of his absence; that the froth and folly of
our love which perishes upon perishable objects (as fire on straw or stubble)
may be fixed on that excellency which is eternal, and worthy of that affection
which is the gold and jewel of our souls, most precious and most durable, whose
satisfactions are our Heaven and happiness, Ier. 9.1
as its defeats our hell and misery; In like sort Jeremy, a man of sorrows,
naturally sad, weeping and melancholy, fits the sad times he lived to see, with
a most pathetick Lamentation; Psalm 88
so Hemans Psalmody is still to a doleful ditty and tune, as sorting with the
sense and experiments of his dark spirit, and sad constitution.

. Gods choice of fit instruments
God not only uses but chooses instruments fit for his work; especially when
they are to work things out of the fire, and are to contest with hard metals,
Isai. 48.4
he makes their foreheads brass, and their hands steel; he furnishes them with
such high and undaunted spirits as will do his work, and sometimes (as men)
they may a little over-do it, as Moses did at his smiting the rock. So the
(...), which Beza and others observe in Luther and Calvin (both men of hot,
quick, and choleric complexions) did so far adapt them for the rugged business
they were to do as good and great men, which was to help to cleanse an Augaean
Stable, to bring the Sun of Christianity back again the degrees by which it was
gone down in these Western Churches, to relieve oppressed Truth and Religion,
against infinite prejudices, and potent oppressions; and although in some
things they showed themselves to be but men, and needed grains of allowance (as
did Sampson) yet their adversaries found them such Giants as brake the gates,
and carried away the bars and posts of great Babylon, beyond their recruiting
or recovering to this day, though all power and policy have been used.

The great impression then which Elisha found and expressed by this his crying
out, is not only justifiable but commendable and imitable in parallel
occasions, when they are real, unwonted and wonderful, in whch Good men do not
deserve blame, if they seem to forget themselves while they remember God, a
great and terrible Majesty; it is meet for us to hear the voice or rod of God,
and who has appointed it.

Secondly, 2 The matter or words of Elisha.
But passions alone and their expressions by crying out, or any outward emotion
and disorder, which signify no more than interjections, or broken and
inarticulate sounds, but (as the leaves of the barren figtree without fruit, Of
rational and religious exstasies.
or as clouds without water) these are neither the intents, nor usual effects
of divine manifestations, and extraordinary impressions; for however they may
give some exstatick terror and amazement at first, by the newness, suddenness,
and wonder of them, so as to discompose a while both Reason and Religions
clearness; yet they are not considerable further than God is discernable in
them, and glorified by them; as that vision of Moses and Elias on the mount
with Christ at his transfiguration, Luke 9.8, 9, 10
which gave St. Peter such a present shake and astonishment, that though he
spoke of making three Tabernacles and staying there, yet he knew not what he
said; that is, he did not well consider the unseasonableness and
unreasonableness of his proposals; yet afterward upon composed reflections and
calmer thoughts, 2 Pet. 1.17
he makes a very holy and excellent use of that vision, to confirm the faith of
Christians in Christ, as in the beloved Son of God, which voice we heard (says
he) in the holy mount, coming from the excellent glory of God the Father.

. Why Elisha thus cried after Eliab.
Elisha's cry is not vox and praeterea nihil, a bare clamor insignificant, as
one scared and forehared; but his wisdom remained with him; he cries out as
still importune and eager for the blessing of the doubled spirit; that Eliah
might see he saw him crying now at the instant of his departing, which was the
compact and agreement, and he now laid claim to the accomplishment, using this
potent Charm of My Father, my Father, as begging his last blessing that he
might be heir of his spirit.

Here we may observe, O^ holy transports and impressions.
still preserve the good man as to grace, and the man as to right reason; they
do not speak either evilly or uncivilly, or senselesly, or unadvisedly with
their lips, whilst heart and senses divine Creeds or impulses do affect; either
they pray or praise God; either they fear or rejoice before him, either they
admire or adore, and set forth the glory of God; as Balaam himself did when he
was in his Prophetic trances, and was over-byassed by Gods Spirit against his
own covetousness and ambition. So the poor Shepherds at the Angelick Quire and
Hymn, Luke 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
visibly appearing, and speaking audibly to them of Christ's birth, went away
believing and rejoicing, wondering and reporting the truth they first heard of,
and then found true in the birth of Christ. It is an opinion worthy of the
Mohammedan blindness to fancy that mad men are inspired, and see Angels when
they rave and talk wildely; Insani esse hominis non sanus juret Orestes; They
are the madder of the two that do think these harsh strings to be touched with
Gods holy Spirit.

, Of fanatic and frantic deli^ancies.
Certainly all ecstasies of delirancy and dotage, that bring men first to
strange fancies, or to fits of quaking and convulsion, then to vent either
nonsense, or blasphemous and scurrillous extravagancies, these must be imputed
as learned Dr. Merick, Causabon observes, either to natural distempers of
disease and melancholy, or to juggling affectations, or to Diabolical delusions
and possessions, to which some of the Montanists, Maniches, Circumcellians, and
others of the Energumeni of old and of late have pretended, who made first
popular ostentations of special inspirations and correptions or raptures of the
Spirit of God; but afterward the leaves and trash, the toys and impertinencies
they vented by words, together with the pernicious extravagancies of their
actions, proclaimed as loud as the Devil of Mascon to all hearers and
spectators, that their troubles or tempests, with the following dirt and mud,
arose not from the flowings or emanations of the pure spring of Gods Spirit,
but either from the Devils filthy injections, or from the foul puddle of their
own perturbed fancy and corrupt hearts, or overheated brains, possibly
intoxicated with the fumes of some new opinions, and the gallant advantages
they fancy to make by them.

. Of demoniac correptions.
It is an observation which St. Chrysostom makes, that Demoniac correptions, as
those of the Sybils, and other Oracles of old, were (...), with such shakings
and transports, as dispossessed the possessed for a time of themselves, both as
to their reason and senses; but divine Oracles and inspirations greater or
less, like loud or still music, preserve the harmony of the soul, though they
make for a time quick and smart strokes upon the strings of holy men's
constitutions, understandings, passions and affections.

The words of Eliah are (as St. God^ Spirit suggests and utters only words of
soberness and truth. Acts 26.24. Acts 2.4
Paul refuted Festus his supposal of his madness) words of soberness and truth;
they that should then have heard them as now we read them, must confess that
God was in him of a truth; 1 Pet. 1.2.
he spoke (which St. Peter gives as the character of a true Prophet and
Apostle) as the Spirit gave him utterance and guidance; as intentive to the
last object, the fatal signal token of his obtaining the desired Spirit and
blessing; This affected him so highly, as the ingemination imports, twice
crying out, My Father, My Father.

. Expressing first a genuine and great sense of his private love, respect, duty
and honor to Eliah, whose relation and merit was to him as a father, so he had
found him, so he valued him, so he shall miss him, remaining without him as an
Orphan in minority, desolate, and exposed to injuries as well as indiscretions.

We may observe the great ingenuity and humility of Elisha, The filial respects
of Elisha to Eliah as his Father.
though anointed a Prophet, and thought meet to succeed Eliah; though now of
the same order, yet he does not disdain to count and call Eliah his father;
because first his elder; secondly his better, and ordainer; thirdly his
superior in merits, graces no less than in degree and authority, in his power
or place in the Church; Thus the ancient Christian people, yea and the ancient
Christian Presbyters, owned their Bishops as Fathers, The father of the
Christian Churches.
in a precedence and presidency of place, degree, dignity, and authority
Ecclesiastical. Thus did St. Jerome write with respect to St. Austin as a
Bishop, and his junior in age, yet so far his superior, although St. Austins
humility indeed so far Complements with, and cools the others heat, as to say,
that although Bishop Austins precedence before Presbyter Jerome was by
Ecclesiastical use and custom (very old, Apostolical and universal) yet as to
the truth of personal worth, and eminency of merit, Presbyter Jerome was above
Bishop Austin. Had Bishops and Presbyters in our days carried this equanimity
to each other, it had been happyer for both.

. But if Presbyters were clearly of the same (...), adequate (in their holy
Orders and Ecclesiastical Power) as to the main, which is not easily proved,
nor was of old so judged by the Fathers; for even St. Jerome excepts Ordination
as a peculiar belonging to Bishops, both in fact and in right, for ought
appears, as Successors to the twelve Apostles, who were above the Seventy in
point of precedence, inspection, power and jurisdiction; yet the fancy of
equality as to Bishops and Presbyters, was chiefly fomented by some latter
Schoolmen, who urged this (...) of Bishops and Presbyters to advance the Popes
throne and Sovereignty above Bishops, from whose authority Monks and Friars
coverted exemption, as immediately under the Popes visitation, who commonly
were old men, far off, and had dim eyes to see the Monastic disorders:
Besides, the Parasites of the Pope were also to magnify the later device of
Transubstantiating, and that Mass power of all Presbyters so high as none might
or could exceed it, if true; yet still the eminent degree and exercise of
Bishops, as to the Polity and government of the Church, both for general
inspection, and chief jurisdiction, for Ordination and Discipline, for
presidency as well as precedence, authority as order, was never of old
questioned much less denied as Antichristian, being as rational and suitable to
Religious Order, yea and as Christian, or Evangelical, as for one to be Provost
or Master of a College over many Fellows possibly as good men and Scholars as
himself; or for some Commanders to be over Fellow Soldiers; or for some
Citizens to be Magistrates over other Freemen; or for Parents to own their
authority or superiority over their children when they are men and women of the
same nature and stature with themselves.

The levelling of mankind throughout in State and Church, Of levellings in
Church and State.
in Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical power, because in some things they are
equal, is but a policy and project of the great author of confusion; 1 Cor.
14.33
the God of order appointed of old, and approves for ever, different degrees,
ranks, and stations in his Church, according as men are fitted by him with
gifts for government, in such ways of meet superiority and subordination, as
preserves order, and deserves respect; Exodus 6.25
as the Priests of Aarons family, so of the whole Tribe of Levi had their ranks
and orders, their duties, degrees and distances; there were Heads, and Fathers,
and chief Fathers of their Tribes and Families, as well as of others, which the
Septuagint render (...), D^^. ^, 15
Bishops or Overseers of them; and this not only in age and primogeniture, by
nature and years, but (officio and praelatura) by office and authoritative
power; so to oversee not as a bare Spectator, but as Shepherds or Masters of
Assemblies, 1 Timothy 5.19. Tit. 2.15.
who did rebuke with all Authority, yea, and reject in cases of demerit; And
then was it also by St Paul's example and prescription to Timothy and others
among the Christian Churches, who in the worst times never wanted their good
Bishops; nor in good time that love, honor, and obedient regard to them, as to
their Fathers in the Lord, when they were worthy of that name and office.

The name Father is sanctum and suave nomen, Of the Name Father.
its highest sense belongs to God, in comparison of whom none is to be called
or counted a Father, as Christ spoke. Nemo tam pater, Mat. 3.23.
nemo tam pius; as Tertullian, Ambitiosius Patris nomen quam Domini and heri
exigit; God has an ambition rather to be called Father by us, and so treated,
than Lord and Master: Therefore our Savior begins his and our prayer with Our
Father; This venerable Name breaths all comforts; this minds us of, and
binds us to all filial love; this racks us from the sour dregs of servile
fear; 1 John 4.18.
he that can say this proem or first word, Our Father, with true faith to God,
and charity to man, need not doubt to go on in that perfect prayer: Since men
lost their charity to others, and their filial regard to God, and their
reverence to their parents, they have avoided to use the saying or praying of
the Lords prayer, as afraid and ashamed of it, because it binds them at the
very first word to their good behavior, by the bands of piety to God in
Father, and of charity to men in Our, which no factions or schisms, no sinister
interests and ends, no Pharisaick pride or singularity can endure, no more than
Witches can the Creed, or the unruly Demoniack the presence of Christ.

. Yet no man is or can be further happy, than he has and owns God for his
Father, 1. in creation and providence, Father of the whole Family in heaven and
earth. Ephesians. 5.3.
2. In Christ; as sending his Son into the world a Redeemer for all men without
exception, in the value, merit and offer of his sufferings, and in that
conditionate capacity, into which every one is by Christ, put upon his faith
and repentance, to be saved and owned as the brother of Christ and Son of God.
3. And lastly, God is a Father by those special effects of regeneration and
grace which follow that immortal seed of his Word, and motions of his Spirit,
where they fall upon broken and contrite spirits, not upon hard hearts, Mat.
13.5.
or fallow and stony ground, which refuse the reception, and damp the operation
of those holy means that are both able and apt to work the life of faith,
repentance and love in a reasonable soul. This highest account of the name
Father, is only to show how much it imports of honor, love, merit and duty,
being a branch rooted in God, and from his goodness springing to his creatures.

. Why God communicates to men the name of Father.
But this relative name of Father, is none of the incommunicable ones; God is
pleased to lend the graving or character of it to mankind, and to stamp this
paternal honor and Majesty upon some men in natural, civil and ecclesiastical
respects. Hence the first command of the Second Table, or the last of the
first, is that caution to honor father and mother; a duty of piety and
religion, as well as of morality, civility, humanity and polity; God is
concerned, as despised and injured in any indignities offered to any Parents:
It was stoning to death, Deuteronomy. 21.20.
by which God would have the honor of the meanest Parents, though poor and old,
weak and simple, asserted against their sturdy and proud children, while yet
under their roof and discipline.

. Next these, Princes and Magistrates have the name as of Gods and Lords, so of
Fathers; Patres Patriae, and of nursing Mothers; after these the Priests and
Prophets of old were called Fathers: So the King of Israel returns the very
same compellation to Elisha dying, which he gives here to Eliah; thus in the
Gospel St. 1 Cor 4.15
Paul owns his merit so far; though you have had many teachers or instructers,
yet not many Fathers; for he had first begotten them to the faith by his
preaching the Gospel to them; so in the ancient Christian-Churches, though they
had many Presbyters, as Instructers or Consecrators, yet the Bishops were
((...)) by a special honor, as Successors to the Apostles in paternal
inspection and authority, as begetting Sons to the Church by instruction; and
patres minores lesser Fathers, or Presbyters by Ordination, called Patres; then
also Patriarchs were Patres patrum, which by way of gemination brought in the
two first syllables, Pa, Pa, not from the Syriack, Abba transposed, but from
the first syllables of Pater and Patriarcha, or Pater Patrum, into the Church
(as before into the Imperial State, from Pater Patriae) to make up Papa; which
title the Bishop of Rome has monopolized, when of old it was given to other
Patriarchs and Bishops.

. This is certain, The duty as well as d^gnity employed in the name Father.
God that communicates the name of Father to Magistrates in State, or Pastors
or Bishops in the Church, does withal teach and exact the duties imported in
the name Father.

First, Father in Mag^stracy.
Both Governors in Church and State, should delight rather in that exercise
which is Paternal, than despotical; fatherly, than imperious or Lordly, much
less tyrannick; to remember they govern sons, not slaves; and for Gods glory,
not for their own profit, pomp and pleasure; their design and work must be to
glorify God; and by doing good with a fatherly freedom and indulgence, to
deserve the love of others; Although they cannot have it from ingrate and
ungracious children; yet they shall find God a Father to them, when they have
carried themselves as Fathers to others.

Specially Church Governors, which were of old in England, Fathers in the
ministry of the Church.
and in all Christian Churches, Bishops, as chief Fathers, chosen by the
Presbyters, approved by the people, and endowed with estate and civil honor by
Christian Princes; these (as such) must not in their greatest eminency affect
(...), 1 Pet. 5.3
to exercise dominion after the way of the secular sword, and severity over
Ministers or people; but only as Fathers and Spiritual Lords, for edification,
not destruction, with gravity, not austerity, with meekness of wisdom, not
rigidness of passion; yea, and as to that civil Dominion which is consistent
with spiritual jurisdiction, when any are both Bishops and Sovereign Princes
(which may very well meet in one man; for what hinders a Prince, as George of
Anhalt, to be a Bishop or Preacher of his Gospel, who is Prince and Priest of
his Church?) here they must the more make the world to see they bear the double
name of Father to their people; such paternal Bishops we had heretofore in
England, and such indeed was this worthy Prelate; and such Fathers we might
have had still, if that had not been fulfilled among us, Filius ante diem, etc.
some Sons are impatient not to antidate their Fathers death and destinies, or
longer to expect the reversion of their estates.

. It is true, that double honor which the piety and munificence of Christian
Princes and States had bestowed on Bishops as Fathers in chief, and other
Ministers of the same relation, though a lower station in the Church, both as
to ample revenues, and some secular jurisdiction or dignity, to give them
greater advantages to improve their spiritual and paternal authority. more to
the glory of God, and the good of Christian people, as to instruction,
protection and relief; these ought not in any sort to leaven or overlay those
condescending Graces, and paternal tendernessse, which are the greatest
eminencies of any Churchman, and which may with all pious industry, humility,
charity and hospitality be maintained and exercised by them, without any
diminution of their civil dignity, or ecclesiastical authority, as was
frequently evidenced by our learned, religious, hospitable, charitable and
honorable Bishops in England, when they lived both as Lords and as Fathers,
governing and doing good.

. Of civil honor added the Fathers the Church.
So that it cannot be other than a most partial and sinister perverseness in
men of evil eyes and envious hearts, to fancy that no learning, study,
devotion, diligence and prudence in any Minister, or Clergyman, is capable to
merit or enjoy, either such honorable estates and salaries, or such eminent
places and dignities, as Counselors and Senators, as Lords and Peers in
Parliament; to which we see many men's mere riches and worthless money, or their
lower abilities and industries in legal and civil affairs, or their military
hardiness and prowess may actually advance them; yea and this in a civil
intestine War, where victory it self is sad and untriumphant; yet we have lived
to see many shortlived Gourd-Lords, created in a chaos of times, from very
small principles or preexistency of birth, estates, breeding, or worth, and
this in one day, by a kind of superfetation of honor, and these to sit as
right honorable ones in another House, and to supply the vacant Seats of the
ancient Barons of England, which were Peers in Parliament, and consisted of
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who had not either forfeited their honor or
deserted their places and duties, but were driven out by such power as they
could not withstand.

. But not to touch that harsh string too hard; we see the Bishops of England
have had no great cause to envy those that cast them out, as to that honor of
having a place in Parliaments, since from that time the Nation has scarce
enjoyed one good day, nor themselves that fullness and freedom, that honor and
happiness which of old belonged to the majesty of English Parliaments.

. This is certain, that the name of Lord did not (as it ought not to) make a
venerable Bishop of the Church forget his former name, and softer relation of a
Father; the first is now confined much to denote civil order, and secular
dignity; but the second implies not only natural, temporal, and humane, but
spiritual, divine, and eternal endearments; importing that plentitude of
paternal love and goodness, as is never to be exhausted, scarce obstructed; for
what such unworthiness was ever in children, which the benignity and bowels of
a Father is not ready to forgive and overcome? yea and to deplore the justest
miseries which fall upon them; 2 Samuel 18.33
as David did his Son Absoloms death, when by a most popular and prodigious
rebellion he sought to take away both his Kingdom and his life. Of Bishops as
Fathers, if not Lords.


. If we may not enjoy Bishops as Lords in the State, I wish we might enjoy them
as Fathers in the Church; if they be truly venerable for their virtues and
graces, they will not much want honorable Titles, nor that real love and value,
which all good Christians and ingenuous persons are more ambitious to pay to
real worth and useful merits (for Quis tam perditus ut dubitet Senecam
praeferre Neroni, Si libera dentur suffragia?) than to supercilious vanity,
empty formality, and an idle kind of pompous luxury; which are but the rust and
excrements of hydropick and sick estates, or of diseased and dwindling honors:
The eased and dwindling honors: The name of Lord has more of vulgar and
secular pomp, but the name of Father more of spiritual power, and divine
authority; the first has (...), the second (...), or rather (...), as in Gods
name, or in Christ's stead, for the good of the Church.

. To wind up the thread of this discourse, no doubt Elisha's humility and
obsequiousness to Eliah was such, as he would willingly have called him his
Lord and Master, as the Sons of the Prophets call him; but he rather chose the
name of My Father, as more suitable to Eliahs comportment both to him, and to
all the Church of God.

First, Because in this one name, Magistrates and Ministers, Princes Bishops,
Priests and Prophets were as in the fairest letter or print to read or learn
their duty in their dignity, and so to be more sollicitous to do what becomes
them, than to exact the respects of others; which best follow where they are
best deserved, as water flows easiest when the channel is clearest, and a
little descendent or falling.

Paternum est docendi munus, The Officers of Fathers.
etc. the duty of Fathers is to teach and educate their children, that they may
be Fathers of souls, as well as of bodies; to feed and provide for, to defend
and protect, to be bountiful and munificent, to give good counsel and example,
which are the best pillars to bear up authority; to reprove and correct, yet
with love and moderation, having always an intercessor in their own breasts.
Genesis 27.4
Lastly, Father are to bless their children in the name of the Lord, and to
transmit or deliver that by their hands and mouths to their children, which is
truly Gods act and deed; but these are to God, as the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal is to the King; the King grants, but the other legally conveys or passes
the blessing.

. Secondly, The duty of Sons.
Such Sons and Subjects in Church and State as well as nature, that hope with
Elisha to be the inheritors of their Fathers blessing, and Gods by that means,
will from this name see their happiness in that divine indulgence, which has
set over them in Church or State not Pharoahs and Nero's, hard Masters, and
severe Lords, but tender and compasvionate Fathers, whose power and authority
they will justly value, rejoicing in the Fathers superiority, and their own
subjection, humbly desiring and defending their paternal care, benediction, and
comprecation for them, and also dreading their sad imprecations or deserved
curses: for often, as Plato observes, the divine hand sets to the seal, and says
fiat to Parental curses, as well as blessings.

. As the lives of all Fathers, natural, civil, and spiritual, ought to be a
Commentary on the name, and a compendium of the divine goodness; that every
thing they do or say may have a relish and tincture, or politure and guilding
of this sacred, sweet and divine name: so ought inferiors to learn their duty
also by it; to reverence those for Gods sake, who bear the Name and Office of
Fathers in Church and State; to love and honor them if worthy; to pray for
them, and bear with them if bad and froward; Vt parentum, sic principum ferenda
sunt ingenia, (says Tacitus) Parents are forbidden to provoke causelessly their
children to wrath; Ephesians. 6.4
much more ought children to avoid provoking their Parents; rather wink at,
hide, conceal, excuse, palliate and cover, as Noah's more pious and blessed
Sons did, Cen. 9.23
a Fathers nakedness and infirmity: as Constantine the Great professed he was
ready to do the failing of any Bishop or Churchman. Be not curious to be
conscious to their faults, nor forward to complain of them; never reproach them
rudely, but intimate thy sense to them with respect and reverence; We read of
some parents by a barbarous superstition, making their children pass through
the fire to Moloch; but we never read of children casting their parents alive
into the fire, as an acceptable sacrifice to any gods. Had we all done our
duties in England on all hands, we had had (I believe) better days; and not
only our tranquillity, civil peace and plenty, but our religious piety, order
and charity, which are the life of our lives; and the honor of all honors, had
been prolonged in the land of the living, where now our neglect of duty as
Fathers and Sons has divided and destroyed us so far, that like wretched
children, we cannot see the things which belong to our peace, unless it be to
avoid them; much less can we peaceably and cheerfully enjoy them; they are for
our sins, and by our undutiful doings, Luke 19.42
so hidden from our eyes.

. Of a Fatherly condition in Church and State.
How this penal and sad providence of God has deprived us of our nursing
Fathers in Church and State, exposing us either to be Orphans and Fatherless,
vagabonds, under no settled Orders or safe protection; or else betraying us to
such various, strange and numerous Step-Fathers (not fathers in Law, but
without all Law) as have more of Lordly tyranny, and Soldierly insolency, by
mere power, than fatherly benignity or authority by any relation, I leave it to
wise men to judge, and to God in time to teach us our errors and defects; when
our eyes are more open by another twenty years mutations, miseries, burdens,
exactions, Wars, terrors and confusions, possibly we may with the Prodigal so
arise from our husks, and go to our Father, and return to the duty we owe to
God and man.

. If God had taken away the Fathers or Prophets of any people (as Eliah) to
himself, they had been excusable; but for Sons to destroy and extirpate their
deserving Fathers; this seems to be not (Turbo de coelo) a whirlwind or fire
from heaven; but rather the effect of Turba gravis paci, etc. a fire and
tempest from a lower region.

. I fear the end of our fatherless condition in Church and State, will only
turn at last to the advance of his interests, who affects to be Pa-Pa, the
Father of Fathers, the only Sovereign Bishop and spiritual Father, by immediate
and divine right over the Church; yea and to have a Supremacy no less over
things civil and temporal, than Spiritual and Ecclesiastical; though he is a
little more modest, remote, and mediate in this claim, since the scales are
fallen from the eyes of Christian Kings and Princes, as well as reformed Bishops
and Churches.

. This I may conlude, That as men are sooner weary of their sufferings, than
their sins, and more full of complaints what they feel, than what they do; so
we shall never have case and remedy for one, or pardon for the other, till we
do with humble, devout, and affectionate hearts return to that duty we owe to
our heavenly Father, and for his sake to those, that on Earth are justly
invested with the honor of that sacred name: Certainly, no Family can be happy
that has not some who enjoy the authority, and exercise the benignity of a
Father. But I have done with Elisha's cry and expression as to his particular
relation, love and respect to Eliah, My Father, My Father: Pater multis
nominibus, many ways, by many merits, my most deserving and most endeared
Father.

Secondly, The public import and influence that Eliah had to Church and State.
The second part of Elisha's words sets forth the public import, usefulness
and concern, which he imputes to his Father Eliah, by calling him the chariot
and horsemen of Israel. This lamentation is an high Eulogy; this crying out a
loud commendation; this deploration an exstatick admiration, setting forth the
value and esteem he had of Eliah, as to the public interest of Church and
State, both as to honor and safety; In what sense Eliah is called the chariot
and horses of Israel.
for Eliah was at once as a chariot of burden, war, and of triumph: he had
born the burden of the prophetic office, of Gods service, and of the Nations
sins many years: Further, he had fought the good fight of Faith, as a venturous
Soldier and valiant Commander, charging in the very face and front of the
enemies of God and true Religion; he had routed Baal and all his Forces, 1
Kings 18.38.
convinced by miracle the Court and Country, that there was no dispute between
the Lord Jehova, and their imaginary Baal, which was God; he had resolutely
withstood the anger of the King, the rage of the Queen, ventured life and all
upon this adventure, and had been more then Conqueror, as to the miraculous
pregnancy of that true Religion which he asserted; and as to the invincibleness
of his zeal; 1 Kings 1.
not fearing the Captains with their Companies, but justly and sharply rebuking
with fire from Heaven their imperious confidence, who could not be safe till
they gave better words, and showed such respect as became them to the Prophet
of the Lord.

. Sword men may swell, rage, Of ministers oppressed by Military power.
and menace the faithful Prophets and Ministers of Gods Church; but it will be
at last to their own ruin. There is another fire to punish irreligious
rudeness in the sons of terror beside that which Elisha's word fetched down
from Heaven, which will destoy the great and strong, as towe: Isa. 31.3.
the horse with the riders, all that are injurious and impenitent oppressors of
Gods Church and its Fathers in the Land of the living, whose arms and horses
are flesh and not spirit; flashes for a moment, but not lasting fires; they may
refine the Church and Ministers of it by the fire of their thorns, but never
consume them. For these, (as Elisha here expresses it) not only have horses
and chariots of fire to defend them against their enemies, over whom they shall
at last be triumphant, and ascend to Heaven, having more for them than can be
against them; but themselves are among the Angels of the Lord, 2 Kings 6.16, 17.
of his host and retinue, yea of his lifeguard, among the chariots and horsemen
of the Israel of God, with whom Christ has promised to be present to the end
of the world, Mar. 28.20.
so that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them; Rev. 12.
nor need they fear the Dragon and his Angels, when they have Michael and his
Angels to assist and second them.

These words (as some Interpreters well observe) are not spoken to describe the
manner of Eliah's Angelick convoy, but to set forth the personal merit and
import of Eliah, what a complete Army and guard he was, what strength, and
defense of true Religion, of what use and consequence he was to the public
security and happiness.

The expression or words here are not, The words import the me it of Eliahs
person.
as at first appearance when the vision is set forth; Ecce (...), currus
igneus, and equi ignei; But (...) currus Israel, and equites ejus; not (...),
but (...), as the Septuagint, The chariot of Israel and horsemen thereof. Eliah
now seemed to him as a Conqueror sitting in his Chariot of State and triumph,
after he had by his holy valor been as the great honor and ornament, so the
defense and director of the Church, and true Israel of God,

. The useful worth of Gods Prophets and Ministers.
The Prophets and Ministers of God are by other very honorable, yet more soft
and gentle Metaphors often set forth in Scripture as Stewards, and Shepherds, and
Ambassadors, and Stars, and ordinary Angels; but here they are compared to the
chieftains of the Lords host, his principal Forces, his chariots and horsemen.

These (currus and equitatus) chariots and horsemen were in the ancient Militia
of the world (especially among the more effeminate Nations, The use of Chariots
and horsemen.
and in hotter Countries, which; could less endure the heat of the climate, and
burden of Arms) very usual in great number, and in gallant equipage: These (as
Vegetius, Frontinus, Elian and other antique Muster-masters, set forth the
Tacticks of these times) were esteemed as the flos gentis and exercitus, the
flower of a Nation, the crown and glory of an Army; as wings, as shields, as
Bulwarks, as the thunder and lightning of those dreadful clouds, which Armies
are, for agility, swiftness, strength, state, and Majesty, when the weakness of
man (Quantula enim sunt hominum corpuscula?) is grafted on the strength of an
horse; and his burden so discharged upon the horse or chariot which bears him,
that he may longer enjoy, and be a better husband of his strength; In equitatu
vis and salus exercitus, summa belli constabat; of old they laid all the stress
of their battles on the horsemen and chariots; so Xerzes, so Darius, in his
repeated fights with Alexander the Great; if once the horse were routed and
broken, the foot, which were but as the tail and train of those (...), Horsemen
and Charioteers, these were but in lanienam, for spoil and prey, for slaughter
and captivity, till after-ages from the Roman stoutness and Arms learned to
fight more like men on foot, trusting more to their own strength, of which they
were more Masters, and could better manage it, than to the fierceness of
horses, who take up half the man to rule them, and is a vain thing to save by
his much strength, Psalm 33.17
as the Psalmist tells us.

The Scripture gives us many historical instances, The weakness of secular
Chariots and horses alone.
what great Expeditions and executions were begun and carried on by multitudes
of chariots and horsemen; what great defeats the Lord of hosts had given them;
Exodus 1^.7, 9.
as Paroah with his Chariots and Horses which pursued the Israelites into the
red Sea, by a most presumptuous malice, which no miracle could moderate or
humble; So Sisera with his nine hundred iron chariots, ^ud. 4.3.
that is (falcati currus) armed with iron sithes and instruments of execution,
no less than with plates or shields of iron for defense) were scattered and
destroyed, at the blasting of Gods displeasure, both the horses and riders did
fall.

Hence David, a great and good Soldier (ever great, when good; and prosperous,
while pious who received more wounds and detriment by one woman and his own
wanton lust, than by all the Giants and Armies, the horse and chariots he ever
encountered,) he by long experience tells us how far the pride and confidence of
the world was from true safety.

Some put their trust in horses and some in chariots, Psalm: 25.7
but we in the name of the Lord our God. It is better to trust in the Lord,
Psalm 118.8.
than in Princes and their Armies, which easily are discomfited when God
arises against them; one of his heavenly Militia, an Angel, Isa. 37.36
can smite in one night, an Hundred fourscore and five thousand to the ground
stark dead, of Senacheribs insolent Soldiery; yea and one of his earthly
spiritual Militia, his Prophets and Ministers, as Eliah, and after him this
Elisha, so Micaiah and others, by lifting up their hands and prayers, as Moses
and Jehosaphat, to heaven, were able to strike terror and confusion to an host
of men, chariots and horses, 2 Chronicles. 20.22.
when they were a million of men and horses. For these fight in virtute Dei
altissimi, in the power and name of the most High and Almighty God; these
Angels both in heaven and earth God uses as he did Elisha afterward, to give
check to the counsels and powers of Kings, 2 Kings 18.14.
as the King of Assyria confessed, and the King of Israel found it true; while
he had mountains full of Horses and chariots of fire attending of Elisha, 2
King 26.17
and under his command, so that the King gives him this same honor dying;
sensible what a loss it was to Church and State to lose such a Prophet, more
than to have lost all his chariots and horsemen.

. God that is on the side of his true Prophets and faithful servants, as the
visible Fathers and Guardians of his Church and Family, has his great Militia;
and thus sets it forth to humane capacity; Psalm 68.17.
The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels; the Lord is
among them, as in Sinai, when he appeared in terror to give the Law; even so
will he execute it, and avenge the breaches of it by the Ministry of Angels at
the last day. And our Lord Jesus Christ (who is trumphantly ascended on high)
is now Lieutenant General of all power in heaven and earth, Psalm. 8.18
Heb. 2.10
for the good of his Church, the Captain of whose salvation he is; who has
conquered, and is still to conquier, till all enemies are subdued to him; even
he takes care to furnish his Church in all ages with some that are as the
chariots and horsemen of Israel; either such Christian Kings and Princes, or
such Bishops and Ministers, or such religious Noblemen and learned Gentlemen,
or such honest yeomen, and humble Pesants, yet good Christians, that they are
as the Soldiers and Armies of God, in their several ranks and orders; some as
the chariots and horsemen, others as the infantry or footmen: The highest honor
in the Churches Militia is given to the Prophets and Ministers, because they
have most power with God; they open and shut heaven, they bind and loose souls
by Gods command and commission: As every good Christian, so those of the Clergy
above others are either publicum lucrum, or damnum, as they live or die; As it
was said of St. Ambrose Bishop of Millan, he was both ornamentum and munimentum
urbis and orbis; O what gallant chariots and horsemen were those Primitive
Bishops, and other eminent both Preachers and Writers, such as Iraeneus,
Cyprian, Athanasius, Austin, the Cyrils, Basils, Gregory's, Chrysostom,
Epiphanius, Origin, Clemens, Jerome and others innumerable, who did so stoutly
encounter and rout those Amalekites of Heathen Idolaters and Philosophers, of
Heretics and Schismatics, which pestred the Church as Grashopers, and
Locusts, or oppressed it as Tyrants and Persecutors!

Two things from these honorable names which Elisha gives to Eliah, we may
observe,

First, What the Prophets and Ministers of the Church ought to be, according to
their eminency in parts or place.

Secondly, how they ought to be esteemed and treated.

First, 1 What Warriers the Prophets and Ministers ought to be in the Church. 1
Their courage.
What they ought to be to the Church and to their Country; fortes, animosi,
pugnaces, ordinati; bold as Lions in Gods cause, valiant, courageous, ready,
and orderly to fight the battles of the Lord, the good fight of faith; but
bello incruento, sanctis non sanguineis praeliis; by an holy but harmless war;
saintly, not sanguinary; unbloody, unless their own blood be to be shed; they
must make no wounds but on men's consciences. They must be undaunted by any
greatness, policy, or power, that opposes it self against God; as St. Stephen
was, so was Apollos, Act. 6. and 7
so St. Paul, so Timothy and others, who as good Soldiers, sought to please not
themselves or men by ease and idleness, by flattery and chmpliance; but him
that had called them to his Ensign and Standard.

Their armature and weapons were that ((...)) evangelical harness; 2 Their
Armor.
which the Apostle prescrbes of the helmet of salvation, Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 14, 15,
16.
the sword of the Spirit, and Word of God, the shield of Faith, and the
brestplate of righteousness; their fighting must be by preaching, convincing,
praying, reproving, by doing good, and suffering evil.

Their Enemies are to be not only flesh and blood, that is, 3 Their Enemies.
not the persons of men, but the ignorances, errors, malice, policy, pride, and
profaneness of the evil world; yea of Principalities and Powers, of Devils and
evil Angels, 1 Pet. 5.9
their stratagems and devices, their fiery darts and engines; these they were
to resist steadfast in the faith. 4 The execution or slaughter they must make.


The strages, execution or slaughter they must make, is not of men's bodies,
lives, and estates, honors, good names, or liberties; but of their inordinate
lusts, and vile affections, their rude and unruly passions, their damnable
opinions and dangerous practices.

The Captives they are to take, 5 The Captives they take.
are the Reason, the Will, the Mind, the Souls and Spirits, the high thoughts,
and proud imaginations of men, who are detained in ignorance or error, led
captive by their own lusts, and others temptations, men or devils; this
captivity they are to lead captive; Gal. 5.3 1 Cor. 7.22 Ioh. 8.36 Zach 9.12
that is, to make them the redeemed of the Lord, and Christ's freemen, who were
slaves to sin and Satan; these are the Prisoners of hope, whom they are in
Christ's name to set free; this is all the hurt they may do, or intend (as
Prophets and Ministers) to mankind.

Lastly, 6 Their Triumph.
They have their triumphs in Christ, and rejoycings in the Lord, in doing their
duty, 2 Cor. 2.14
and discharging their consciences, by which they may be means to save souls,
Isa. 49.5.
which will be their crown and rejoicing at the last day; 2 Timothy 4.^
and if Israel be not gathered, yet they shall not lose the reward and crown
which is prepared for these spiritual Soldiers, Rev. 3.11
who aim only to save, not to destroy their Sons, Rev. 2.10
fellow-Citizens and brethren in this world and in the Church, as men and
Christians; Nor shall they want their triumphs in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14
nor a triumphant song, even the song of Moses at last, Rev. 15.3
when Pharaoh and all his host, the Devil and his iustruments, being quite
overthrown, the Israel of God shall have its full and free deliverance.

. Thus Christ has had, and ever will have his chariots and horsemen, venerable
Fathers, Bishops and Presbyters under the Gospel, as well as these Eliahs and
Elishas under the Law; Religion now is carried on with less terror and fire
indeed than of old, but with greater efficacy to save souls: As the Sun in one
day thaws more ice than thousands of hammars could break in a year; the Church
is compared to an Army with banners, Cant. 6.4, 12
and her companies like the chariots of a willing people, easy to be
Marshalled, ordered and disciplined, as becomes the people of Christ, which
will not mutiny against their spiritual guides, rulers, leaders; because this
is to rebel against the chief Commander Jesus Christ; who like the Sun of
righteousness is set upon the Evangelical chariot, and drawn by the (Quadrigae)
quaternion of Evangelists, as fiery horses all over the world; he makes his
daily and orderly Ministers as his chariots and horses too, sets them on the
axis of the Law and Gospel, which support the true faith and their authority;
he adds to them the four wheels of good Learning, sober Judgment, honest Zeal,
and potent eloquence into their hearts and hands he puts the reins or bridles
of charity and discretion, Zack. 14.18
upon which is written holiness to the Lord, Glory to God on high, and good
will toward men; Thus becoming all things honest and comely to all men,
speaking a word in due season, Ise. 5.4. 2 Timothy 6.15
and rightly dividing the word of Truth, taking care above all, that they
overthrow not all the honor and credit of their preaching and ministry by evil
conversation, Ne factis deficientibus verba erubescant, lest the solecisme of
of their lives make their Doctrine seem but a riddle or an incredible Fable.

Secondly, In the second place, 2 The entertainment due to those spiritual
Chariots and horsemen
If the Prophets of the Lord, both legal and Evangelical, the Pastors and
Teachers, the Bishops and Presbyters of the Church, are of this use and
importance, for their ability, sufficiency, and dexterity, and efficacy, to the
Church of God, and specially to the Christian World, as the charets and horsemen
are in an army, being Christ's Militia, not fleshly and corporeal, but spiritual
and intellectual, an earthly sort of Angels, which help the Lord against the
mighty, and assist men to conquer themselves first, (who are their own and Gods
greatest enemies) and then the world and Devil: Sure then this holy Army, these
chariots and horsemen deserve to be esteemed, entertained and treated, not as
the lixae and calones, the filth and offscouring of the world, and forced to
lie among the pots and kitchin-stuff of contemp and poverty, but as (Mahanaim)
the host of God and Christ: Psalm. 68.13 Genesis 32.2.
listed and employed in his holy war and service, and so to be used with love
and respect, as men worthy of double honor: Men will feed their horses, grease
their chariot wheels, and pay their Horsemen well to be sure.

. I know the Pannick, blind, and preposterous terrors of vulgar and Plebean
minds are prone (now) to regard one Captain or Colonel, yea, or one sorry
Trooper, beyond the best Bishop, or ablest Preacher in England; Luke 2.4
because as beasts they regard more those that can kill their bodies, than such
as are means to save their souls.

This mistake of poor parasticik people is not for want of ignorance and
meanness of spirit, Whether the spiritual, or temporal Militia deserve best of
the public.
but for want of judgment and conscience, gratitude and common civility; not
considering, that both as to private and public interest of any Church and
State, as well as of every good Christian, that of Tostatus is most true on
this place, Fides and preces Eliae fortiores omnibus curribus and toto equitatu
Israelis; The Israel of God owed more to Eliah's prayers and faith, and
exemplary zeal, than to all the chariots and horses in the Land.

. Not that I odiously compare or disparage the honest way of a Soldiers
employment: First, in a just and lawful cause; Secondly, under a just and
lawful command; Thirdly, when content with their wages and doing violence to
none; Fourthly, when they are modest men, not ambitious to turn all right into
might, and set jus gladii above jus gentis, and lex terrae; Fifthly, When in
other things they are men that fear God, love true Religion, encourage
Learning, and reverence the worthy Ministers, Bishops and Pastors of the Church
of Christ; but when Soldiers grudge at Ministers maintenance, and gape to get
it, when they will needs turn Preachers to put scorns and affronts on
Ministers, when they think themselves necessary, and Ministers superfluous;
when they urge to have Commanders, Councils of War, Discipline, pay and honor
for their Militia, and either deny, or envy, or destroy all these as to the
Ministry: They must give me leave to magnify my Office, and to tell those of
them who understand it, That nothing is more true than that Maxim both of
piety and true policy, Plus debet ecclesia and Respublica Christiana ministris
Ecclesiasticis, quam militibus secularibus; Soldiers may and often do the work of
Mahomet and Antichrist; but good Preachers do always the work of Christ, and of
men's souls, as to their inward and eternal interest; yea as to outward and
secular things of peace, safety, prosperity and victory over enemies; Plus
profuit Moses orans quam Josua pugnans, Exodus 17.20
Moses did avail more by his praying, than Joshua by his fighting.

Yea when the wrath of God is kindled, and the fire of famine, plague or war is
broken out against any people, these chariots and horsemen of Israel, such as
are powerful in prayer, sober in their counsel, exemplary in their lives, are
beyond imagination effectual to moderate, remedy and remove divine vengeance.
When Noah, Daniel and Job stand in the gap; when Jacob wrestles with God, Ezekiel.
14.14
when Moses holds his hands; when Aaron and Phineas intervene between the
living and the dead, exciting the spirits of people to repentance and
amendment, to fasting and prayer; when the Priests and Ministers of the Lord
cry mightily to heaven, Joel. 2.17
and give the Lord no rest, then is it that God spares and heals, and returns
to be gracious to the land.

. If men thought this, they could not easily be so partial and unjust, as to
turn Tithes into Taxes; to grudge the first as the Ministers portion, and
augment the second as the Soldiers pay; good Ministers make a Nation need no
Soldiery; they are the (murus aheneus) brazen wall, the fortification and
ammunition, that destroys sin the great enemy and traitor to all our happiness:
It is as true in the body Politic, Qui militariter vivit misere vivit, as
that qui medice vivit, misere vivit; It is a sad life to live always
medicinally; and so to live always in a military necessity and danger, (besides
the vaste charge that this Physic and these legions of Chyrurgeons stand any
Nation in:) but grave, godly, peaceable and able Ministers, are so far from
being the lancets and leeches, or the phlebotomists, the exhausting pills and
dispiriting purges, that they are indeed the best cordials and restorative of
the safety, honors, beauty, strength, peace, health and happiness of any Church
and State; these help to put things into that posture of charity and peace,
that men may beat their swords into pruning hooks, Isai. 2.4 Math. 4.3
and their armor into plowshears: Once destroy or disband your able and
orderly, your learned and wel-armed Ministers, Bishops, and Presbyters, or take
away their order and good Government, as such, in united Councils and Synods;
withdraw their maintenance and support, you will soon want their help, and
shall never want wars and enemies in Church and State, as our own sad
experience tells us, both the Wars of disputation and of digladiation.

Nor are the Peditatus, The Infantry or foot forces of the Church.
the Infantry or foot-soldiery of this spiritual Militia to be despised as
useless; I mean the meanest of the people that truly fear God, and humbly keep
their ranks and orders both in Church and State; these also do stand in the
gap; these (as Tertullian speaks) quasi agmine facto, ambiunt and gratam Deo
vim inferunt, these besiege God, as it were, with great squadrons or companies,
offering an acceptable force to the Divine majesty; both to disarm his Justice
and to obtain his Mercy: Ministers, Magistrates and godly people together, of
one heart and of one mind in the Lord, do make a royal and heavenly host, a
complete Army both of horse and foot; being under the same Generalissimo, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who loves to see his Soldiers, not straggling and freebooting
in broken parties, and scattered Conventicles, but united and combined in great
Congregations, as the Assemblies of his Saints and Soldiers (not of Sectaries
and Schismatics) under such Commanders both greater and less, as he has
ordained and commissioned.

. If these be the merits, use and public influence both as to Church and State
of Gods Prophets and Christ's Ministers, in their several degrees and stations,
I wonder whence those principles of State policy arose and prevailed so far in
this Nation, as for some men with equal ignorance and injustice to endeavor to
rout and cashier all these settled and reformed forces of the Ministry of
England, either stoping their pay, or taking away the (Antisignani) principal
Rulers and Leaders; the Ecclesiastical colors and Commanders, with the chief
Standerd-bearers of the Church for learning and prudence; which practices and
attempts have already put all the regiments of horse and foot to very great
routs and disorders irrecoverable without a miracle of mercy. Yea some by a
strange kind of fatuity and cruelty, strive to gratify the Papists, Jesuits
and others our enemies on all sides, 2 Samuel 8.4 1 Chronicles. 18.4
by houghing all the best horses, and burning or breaking in pieces all the
best chariots of our Israel, and the nurseries or chief conservatories of them;
the Universities; just as David did those of the Amonites, or the chariots and
horses of the Sun; that in after ages the Reformed Religion in England might
have none but pitiful unarmed Pygmies to encounter with armed Goliahs of Rome.
Of routing and disbanding the Ministry.


. Many fear we are undermined and betrayed by the secret and sinister plottings
of our Romish Adversaries, who have so many Pioneers and Ingineers at work; and
are glad beyond measure to see the havoke made of Protestant Preachers, of
reformed Bishops and Churches; which uniform and united are strong; scattered
are of no great efficacy, though perhaps good Christians; as a single Soldier
signifies not much, though valiant. It may be good yarn or thread that is spun,
but it is not cloth till it be well woven together in one web; it is not an Army
but a rabble without Officers and Order; nor is it a Church; once take these
Pastoral staves of beauty and bands away, or deprive both Pastors and people of
due order, unity, and government; or rob the Rulers, and Laborers of their
settled pay and due enterainment, 1 Cor. 9.7
that either they must go to war at their own charge for naught, or live by
forage and free quarter, or depend upon the arbitrary contributions of people;
which is but a kind of gentle plundering, or living upon not free quarter, but
alms rather, in a way very uncomfortable to ingenuous and able men; no less
than unacceptable to common people, who set no great rate on their souls.
Certainly this new modelling of our spiritual Militia or Ministry, being once
effected, what can be expected but a petty company of mendicant Preachers, a
black guard, and forlorn-hope of ignorant and contemptible Freebooters, men of
little learning, less estate, no respect, and least worth to deserve it, to the
great triumph, joy and jubilee of all these Jesuited enemies of the Reformed
Religion, and the true Interests of this Church and Nation, whose work this
has been many years to make that vile saying of Campian good in his December
Rations, Clero Anglicano nihil putidius.

Doubtless, The necessa^y use of able and orderly Ministers.
a Church may better in the worst of times want any thing than good Bishops and
orderly Ministers; for these in the midst of persecution made Religion good
against all the powers of men and Devils; all the Armies of vain Philosophers,
Atheists, Epicures, Heretics and Schismatics, Heathenish Princes and
barbarous people: when they made no more to bait Christians and their
Ministers, or Bishops to death, than to kill Bears and other beasts in their
Theaters; yet being killed they conquered because united and orderly;
Christianity like a wedg, the more driven home, the more it splits all
Idolatry, and it self continued entire.

But when Pastors and people, Bishops and Presbyters are divided, when the
whole order and Militia or Army is once disbanded or abased, starved and
despised, the very soul is gone from the body, the Sun from the firmament; the
(maenia and propugnacula) forces and defenses are taken away from the Frontiers
and Garrisons, we may, write Ichabod on all foreheads, the glory is departed
from our Israel; for every good Bishop is as the spiritual Colonel of his
Diocesan Regiment, and every good Presbyter under him is as a Captain of his
Parochial Company; the first without the second will be weak, and without
assistance; and the second without the first will be unruly for want of
government; together they are complete.

. What wise and sober Christian does not see by woeful experience, that since
this late rout and disorder has been made upon the chariots and horsemen of
our Israel, we have seen, and heard, and felt nothing but wars, and rumors of
wars; scarce one good day of secure serenity, without black and terrible clouds
hanging over us, as death, full of blood, faction, fury, discontent and mutual
destruction, little of peace, nothing of charity, as far from unity as
uniformity in doctrine, discipline and government!

. Nor have those men's chariots kept their own wheels very well on their axes,
but either driven very heavily, or some of them into the read sea of blood, who
were most active to destroy or disband or disorder our spiritual Militia, or
Hierarchy and Ministry, which was the most-able, complete, wellappointed,
goodliest and gallantest in the Christian reformed world; I might say, without
vain glory, in the whole world: Some defects and defaults, some halts and
extravagancies might be in particular persons; but the order and the march, and
the ammunition, and the maintenance were, as to the main, very worthy of the
honor and wisdom, and bounty, and piety of this Nation and Church, having as
much of ability and courage, and more of public honor and encouragement than
any where.

. Love must not yet despair of this Church.
Nor do I yet despair of the wisdom, honor, piety and gratitude of this Church
and State, but they may in time return to see the prejudices, mischiefs and
miseries, either felt or feared, by the daily incursions, as of all manner of
errors and confusions in Religion, so in civil and secular concernments, which
easily drive, God knows whither, to a thousand shipwracking and desperate
dangers, when once not only the anchors and cables of Religion are broken, but
the Pilots and Masters either cast overboard or kept under hatches and lost.
Nothing holds men's hearts so together even in a National peace and harmony, as
when they all meet in the same center of Religion, and can all say Amen to the
same prayers and praises of God: Nor will any civil cautions and coercions,
keep the public peace, or patch and soder it up, when once the hearts and
heads of men are cracked and broken in pieces, as earthen pitchers, by the
mutual dashings against one another in differences of Religion; where though
men get no conquest or booty, yet they are strangely pleased with a liberty and
animosity only to contest, just as Soldiers do in mutinies, when they turn the
reverence due to Commanders into impudence and insolency.

. But I have done with this Consideration of Eliahs public eminency and
influence, which made him worthy of these appellations of honor and strength,
of safety and defense to Church and State, The chariots and horsemen of Israel;
being only sorry, that so many of my Countrymen seem also to have done with
their spiritual Militia, seeking so to reduce it, as to make it a kind of
Nehustan, to bring all Bishops and Ministers, as wounded and maimed,
antiquated, and exautorated Soldiers to their almeshouses, and Hospitals of
public charity.

. Of Volunteers Preachers and Soldiers, that will serve gratis.
If we could maintain our secular Militia, at the same rate as some propound
for Ministers, that every Soldier and Commander would be content with what men
will give them, it would very much ease the charge of the Nation. But some will
say, there are that will preach gratis, for nothing; which is no more credible
than that any Soldiers will watch and ward and attend their duty, and fight for
nothing; they may do it for a fit of novelty, as Volunteers of a few days
standing, but they will not long stay by their colors, either as Soldiers or
Ministers, if they must do it for nothing. And if they will needs have the
Ministerial order and spiritual Militia quite disbanded as chargeable and
superfluous, that every one may preach and officiate freely that list; let them
withal try the experiment in the secular Militia, lay down their Arms, and let
every man fight that lists; if they will not hearken in reason of State to this
motion, nor ought they in Religion to the other; since men are naturally more
prone to defend their Civil than Religious interests.

These Projectors know well enough, that nothing public is well done, which
is done occasionally and arbitrarily; not as a duty of necessity and
conscience, but of variety and essay, to which neither Ministers nor Soldiers
work must be left, unless we list to leave all things to Atheism and confusion:
The Apostle says expressly, 1 Cor. 9.16
A necessity is laid upon him, and woe to him if he preach not the Gospel, being
appointed thereunto by God, Acts 20.28 1 Pet. 1.3
and the order of the Church: As Ministers are to take heed to the flock over
which the Lord by the Church has set them, so others are to take heed what
they do to these men, so as to hinder or discourage them in so great a work, on
which the eternal safety and good of souls depends, which none but Satan will
hinder, none but unbelieving Jews, or false brethren, deceitful workers and
evil doers will oppose, and seek to oppress, Acts 19.24
by a mechanic kind of malice, like that of Demetrius, or Alexander, 2 Timothy 4.14
the one a Silver-smith, the other a Copper-smith, and both Blacksmiths as to
their covetous souls and malicious spirits against the Gospel and true Apostles.

The Fourth General, The silence and distance of all after their last departure.
Cessatio visionis, the ceasing of the Vision, admonishes me to think of
closing this my discourse; for since Elisha saw him no more, there will be no
great matter more for me to speak of him or his assumption; where the
Scriptures are silent, we must not be inquisitive after, neither prying with
our eyes, nor prating with our tongues; what God conceals and hides, we must
not be curious to discover, or enquire; as those do, who here are much troubled
what became of Eliah, whether he went; whether to Paradise, or Abraham's bosom,
or into some other Limbo, or place of refreshing, or into the third heaven, the
place and state of beatisick vision.

If I should spin this out to a long and fine discourse, Q. What became of
Eliab.
I should but abuse your patience, nor would it be other than a cobweb scarce
worth the winding up; as little would that Query be, which some hotly agitate,
Whence Eliah sent a letter (long after he was ascended) to King Jehnoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.12
of which mention is made in the second Book of Chronicles: Probably it was
antidated, as a Prophetic Prescript before Eliah departed, foreseeing, by the
spirit of Prophecy, the evil of that Prince and those times; or some other
Eliah than the Tisbite might then live, and a Prophet too.

It is enough for us to confine our sight with this dark vail and interminate
Horison; He saw. him no more; This was the period to Eliah, and all the
appearance of charet and horses; as it was with Moses, God hid him; and with
Enoch, he was not, for God took him; so here with Eliah, God withdrew him, to
an (...), a state invisible, out of the ken of mortal eyes, and humane
cognizance, which was a kind of dying, although it is probably thought his soul
never parted from his body, but the body was changed, and made capable of that
new state wherein God set him; no doubt very happy, though not in the highest
state and degree, to which Christ did and will bring him and all his at the
consummation of all.

This we may observe, Miraculous manifestations few and short.
First, That extraordinary manifestations of God to any, are commonly very
short; either external or internal: Rara hora, brevis mora, as St. Bernard
speaks of spiritual motions and joys, that are most signal and emphatick; So
to Abraham, and Jacob, and Moses in the bush; so to Manoah, Samul, David,
Solomon and others; yea the Spirit that descended as a Dove on Christ, Mat. 3.16
and rested on him visibly staid not long, and but once seen; ^oh. 12.29
so the voice that seemed as thunder, Mat. 18 3
testifying of Christ as the beloved Son of God; so the Transfiguration but
once, Luke 22 41
as a glimpse of glory; so the Angel in his Agony made no long stay with
Christ; so St. Paul's rapture was but once, and he tells not of its lasting any
time.

These dispensations are not quotidianae nor diuturnae, neither fiequent nor
continuant, but a touch or or taste, a glimpse or flash like lightning, that
many times it is doubted whether it is real or only imaginary, till the good
event, or some gracious effect on our spirits, gives a confirmation of the
truth of it, as it was in St. Acts 12.17
Peter's deliverance out of prison, which assured him of the reality of the
vision, that God had sent his Angel and reprieved him; God is not prodigal of
these special favors, but for some great design are they indulged; as I have
been assured of some in cases of great darkness of soul, have had such visions
of light as both cleared and cheared them ever after.

Secondly, The period of death to all, visible comforts.
I observe in this lively figure of death which is set forth by Elisha's seeing
him no more for ever, what is that (ultima linea) last period, which we must
expect our selves, and rest contented in, as to our dearest relations; they
must be hidden from our eyes; they go to the (terra incognita) land of
darkness, Psalm. 88.12
and of forgetfulness; which is a place from whence they cannot return to this
mortal view and state; Luke 16.26
there being ((...)) a great and black abyss between the dead and the living;
one in the center, the other in the vast circumference of the world. All our
delectable and desirable things, Friends, Parents, Wives, Children, Princes,
Prophets, Preachers, semel statutum, it is once appointed, they must shoot that
gulf; the shadow of death with a black mantle will interpose between them and
us, not to be drawn till heaven and earth be no more, as the Stage and Theater
of mortality.

Thirdly, Impreve our short vision and fruition of friends.
If we shall see them no more, then it is wisdom to make the best use of them
we can, and do them all the good we may, before we or they go from hence and be
no more seen. Eccles. 9.10
Whatever thy hand finds to do do it with all thy might, says Solomon, when
he had recovered his wits. Leave them not whom thou love without a blessing
before thou die, Genesis 26.4.
as Isaac was solicitous for his Sons; the blessing of pious instruction, good
counsel, kind reproof, noble example, frequent yea constant prayers; nor be
wanting to make that use of their wisdom, parts and worth, who are able and
willing to assist thee; many die from us, and we from them (as I have found by
sad experience) while we delay to tell them our minds, or open our hearts to
them, putting it off till next visit, or another more convenient time, as Felix
did St. Paul, and 28.1.
when we shall never see them more, till heaven and earth be no more.

Fourthly, Acts 24.25 Set not thy h^a^t on what will vanish.
Take heed of setting thy heart on any thing (Quod a te invito abesse potest)
which may leave thee whether thou and it will or no; as St. Austin speaks, not
without penitent retracting of his immoderate love of his friend Alypius, and
his excessive mourning for him when he died; for commonly as sowred vinegar is
made of the sweetest wine, so vehement affections are but the fuel to maintain
or nourish vehement afflictions; as the Bucket of our delights and joys goes
down, so that of our grief comes up full; the highest tide of all comforts
sensible; usually falls into as low an ebb of discontent and sorrow, if our
hearts be too much engaged, or sit not so loose ((...), as Epictetus says) as
to love an earthen pot as an earthen pot, that it being broken, thou may not
seem broken too. This is the law of mutability and mortality in this world;
will thou set thy heart on that which is not, leaning on a reed, and feeding on
the wind! O lay hold the self, and help others to fasten on eternal life; for
this is the only improvement of this short, 1 Timothy 6.12
uncertain, and mutable, yet precious moment, and the only entertainment worthy
of thy immortal soul, which nothing but the supreme, eternal, and immutable
good, that is God himself can satisfy: Take heed life be not done before we
think of living or dying, as we should and would; lest our candle be out, or
but a feeble snuff in the socket before we set to work. Remember upon this
moment depends eternity; Nor is the accurate work of our Salvation, which must
last to eternity, and be seen in heaven, to be done by a dim and foul light.

Lastly, Let us so live here, in our short society on earth, that we may not be
ashamed to see one another at the last day, when all shall appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ; Romans 14.10
that when we must see one another no more on earth, yet we may depart in good
hope to meet in heaven, in the beatifick Vision of God; where it is not only
probably disputed, but strongly presumed by many learned and holy men, that we
shall see and know each other, as Angels do, who certainly are not as strangers
to each other.

Fifthly, The sorrow and show of it in Elisha.
The last particular observable in Elisha, is his sense and sorrow, when he saw
that Eliah was quite gone, and he saw him no more; he does here parentare,
adorn (luctum solemnem) a solemn mourning, after the ceremony of the Jews, by
rending his own garment in two pieces, a custom in that Nation upon any sad
occasion; so the High Priest upon the pretended blasphemy which Christ should
speak; Mar. 26.65.
not that the Jews were such ill husbands in their grief, as to tear their
clothes inconveniently; but at the bosom of their garments was a seam slightly
sowed, which they easily rent in sunder, and mended afterward again.

1. Funeral sorrow, why set forth by rending garments.
This they did to show the deep sense they had of that public breach or rent
God had made by the death of eminent persons; so David when he heard of Saul's
and Jonathans deaths, whom he loved by a rare miracle of heroic and generous
affection, the one being his Enemy, the other his Rival in a Kingdom.

2. Next they would hereby give vent to their grief, and some ease by the
ceremonious and visible renting of it, inviting others by the prospect to pity
and compassion.

3. They set forth the rending of their hearts; the wounds which sorrow made on
their souls; therefore at the death of Christ on the cross, Luke 23.45.
the most dismal and prodigious sight that ever was in the world, to supply the
senselesness and want of mourning in the Jews, the Sun became a mourner, and
the vale of the Temple was rent in twain; to show how much the whole creation
mourned, and the Church was concerned in that Tragedy, so full of cruelty and
blasphemy.

4. Lastly, They hereby humbly testified before God and the world, how sensible
they were to have deserved of his Justice, that either all blessings and
comforts of life should be rent from them, or they from those enjoyments; that
as Jacob said, Genesis 32.10
they were less than the least of the mercies of God; that it was his mercy and
compassion not failing which afforded them any friend or comfort, Lam. 3.22
or relation, or blessing, all which they had often forfeited, and yet they were
not consumed. Notice to be taken of Gods deprivations.


Hence we may observe; First, That it is humane, Christian, and comely to take
notice of Gods Providence in the death or loss of any thing he takes from us,
which was endeared to us.

Secondly, It is lawful and commendable to have a sense of sorrow and to mourn
with a solemnity proportionable to the stroke, breach or wound which God
inflicts by the death of any, whose either worth or wickedness makes them
considerable. Stupidity I told you is no ingredient in piety: Genesis 50.7
Joseph did so for Jacob, David for Jonathan and Absalom, Acts 8.2.
and the Church made great lamentation for Stephen, yet not as men without hope.

Thirdly, This sense of sorrow may be with outward formality, and with ceremony
expressed; yea, solemnly adorned to funeral Obsequies and honorable attendance,
as David at Abners, who followed the Bier, and made a Funeral oration for that
great Captain, 2 Samuel 3.31. yea nothing becomes Christian Funerals better than
holy and religious duties; which from the occasion of the dead may make pious,
apt, and seasonable applications to the living, either to our selves or others.
As the ancient Fathers, St. Basil, Greg. Naz. Nissen, Chrysostom and others
did, in their Funeral Orations for those excellent persons, men and women who
were departed this life, with the honor of dying in the faith of Christ, and
communion of his true Church, leaving noble examples of all graces and virtues
to posterity. Benefit of Funeral Sermons among Christians.


In which as those holy Panegyrists took special notice of Gods hand, and
prayed for his Grace to sanctify the spectacle to the living, that they might
lay it to their heart; so they craved of God, and excited their Auditors or
Readers to such a supply of others in their room, or broken ranks, that there
might be no great or long defects or vacancy in that place they held and filled
in the Church: They also set forth the exemplary riches and pregnant graces of
the departed; that by others remembering what they had well spoken, or done
worthily, or suffered patiently, they might so imitate them that being dead
they might seem yet to live in the life and influence of their holy patterns;
for constancy as Martyrs, and Confessors for Zeal, Charity, Hospitality,
Patience, Meekness, and Perseverance, etc.

This Humanity, yea Christianity allows, nay commands and justifies, when done,
as all things ought in the Church of Christ, to edification not for
superstition, or mere pomp, and vain ostentation, such as by flattering the
dead, and speaking good of those who were (...), haters and hated or abhorred
of God, do either delude or barden the living in careless and secure ways, to
the deferring of their repentance, and hazard of their souls. These wise and
worthy ends being in due and comely sort observed, at the Funerals of our
Christian friends, who are not to be buried with the burial of an Ass, with a
dumb show, as if they might never be spoken of any more, because we can see
them no more: Nor need we to fear the coy reserve and supercilious restiveness
of some who envy others this use and freedom in the Church; the truth is, few
are against who deserve to enjoy; those that are hollow, loose or false in
their lives, love not to be brought to the touchstone at their deaths.

Indeed some men's lives, actions and memories are like their carcasses, best
when least stirred, and most hidden from the sight of others. Psalm. 112.6.
But the just shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and enjoy this reward
(even among men) to have their name as a precious ointment poured out; Eccles.
7.1. Cant. 1.3. Mat. 26.12.
not (...), but (...), not preparatory to, but contemporary with their
interment or burial, that so the sweet odor of it may not only accompany (as
the spices which Mary bought for Christ) their coffin and corpse, but fill the
whole house, the place, the Parish, the Church or the Temple, where they either
lived or are buried.

FINIS.
MEMORIALS OF THE Life and Death OF BP. Brounrig.
I Have done (right honorable and worthy) with the Text read unto you: I know
your piety and civility now expect that I should if not largely comment, yet
fairly paraphrase or gloss upon that Text which lies dead before you; the corpse
or earthly remains of that reverend Father in God Dr. Ralph Brounrig, late Lord
Bishop of Excester. (It were too great an injury to you, at once to lose the
honor of his presence, and the happiness of his example.)

. Of the honor of Bishops, as Fathers and Lords.
I call him ( stilo veteri) a Bishop, a Father, and a Lord (without offense I
hope to those old and new Lords Temporal, who less able to endure the honor and
society of Bishops as Lords Spiritual, have by depluming these very much
moulted their own feathers) nor do I use these Titles by an arrogance, but a
justice, being due to him by the Laws of England (as well as by ancient
Ecclesiastic customs) nor any way (that I know) forfeited by him, or by other
worthy Bishops; who, however hated and despised by the supercilious and popular
spirits of some men (whose neither mind nor manners exceeded such Bishops in
any point of true nobleness and worth) yet God forbid, that one hair of their
venerable heads should fall to the ground, by my neglect of paying that filial
love, respect and honor which I have learned from the Apostles canon, and pious
antiquity, as due to the Fathers of my Ministerial power and Ordination, who
have ruled well, and labored too in the Word and Doctrine.

. Which tribute of double honor has ever been willingly paid to learned, grave
and venerable Bishops of the Church; not only by all humble and orderly
Presbyters, but by all sorts of Christian people great and small, and most by
the best, even by Gentlemen, Noblemen, Princes, Kings and Emperors; who (so
soon as the Church had rest) not only endowed many Bishops with ample revenues,
but added to them those civil honors which made them Peers to the Senatorian
order, or Patrician dignity, ever since Constantine the great's time, which is
now one thousand three hundred years. A very long prescription, and valid
prejudice against modern levellings of the Clergy and Episcopacy.

. Not that I think it the part of a grave Divine, or a reverend Bishop to
affect secular honors, and civil titles, but rather to deserve them, and to
live above them, as the primitive persecuted Bishops did; who wanted not real
honors among good Christians, when they had no favor from Civil Laws, and
Secular Powers.

. But in a Nation professing to honor the Lord Jesus Christ, I see no cause
they should deny that double honor to the chiefest of his Servants, Stewards,
Messengers, Ministers and Ambassadors, which by the rule of Christ is due to
them, as in his stead: Nor is it a great matter if those partake of men's civil
and temporary honors, who impart to them the way of true and eternal honor,
especially in a land of plenty, and so of vulgar petulancy; where no Authority
in Church or State is to be preserved, unless it be adorned with such ensigns
of visible honor and estate, as may not only keep off contempt and insolency,
but conciliate respect and reverence.

. I confess, I cannot to this day understand, by what partial policy, and
unreasonable reason of State, in a Christian and civilized Nation, the gate of
Honor should be open to Gentlemen, to Lawyers, to Soldiers, to Merchants, to
mere Mecanicks, who by valor, or industry, or money, or mere favor, without
any signal merit, may ascend to the honor of Lords, and of sitting in
Parliament as Counselors of public and grand affairs (of whom one day
adventured to bring forth a whole house full) and yet this gate of honor must
be shut against all Divines and Church men only, even then, when they were
worthy to be made Pastors and Bishops of the Church; whose learning, virtue,
wisdom, and every way useful merit is no less contributive to the public
happiness, than any other order of men, yea perhaps more; on which merit that
Apostolical Canon for double honor is undoubtedly grounded; which includes such
Estates as may make them hospitable, and such respect as owns them venerable,
as persons that are styled Angels by the Spirit of God, Rev. 2, and 3. being in
a degree of heavenly service, and holy office above ordinary mortals.

. But I shall not need further to assert the honor of this and such like
Bishops, against the vapor and vanity of some men, who seeing Bishops lightened
of their estates, will (it may be) with more patience endure the empty title of
Lords to be given them. Certainly all just and ingenuous persons will abhor
injurious indignities offered to deserving Bishops, as a most undutiful
sacrilege; when they are satisfied of the many meritorious claims which they
had to true honor, by that eminency of worth which is in them; whereof I could
not have had in any age a more convincing and notable instance, (capable to to
split in sunder (as Daniel did) Bell and the Dragon of Antiepiscopal envy) than
this excellent Bishop, whose Funerals we this day celebrate.

. His public conspicui^ie and eminency.
A person of those ample and cubical dimensions, for height of learning and
Understanding, for depth of Humility and Devotion, for length of all Morality
and Virtue, and for breadth of all Humanity and Charity, that it is hard for me
to contract or epitomize him: One cannot tell, as Nazianzen speaks of Cyprian,
Or. 19. ((...)) whether the variety in allor the excellency in every virtue was
most to be admired in him. He is like an excellent Book full of remarkable
sentences, that has nothing in it, which is not worth noting; He is as a fair,
large and fruitful field, affording both freedom to expatiate, and plenty to
gather; He is as a solid mass of gold, pure, precious, and ponderous; malleable
also to a great extent as well as of great weight and worth; Being always (as
Chrysostom speaks) Innocentia infans, virtute juvenis, obedientia filius,
charitate frater, gravitate pater, prudentia senex, sanctitate Angelus; As a
child for harmlesness, as a young man for vigor, as a son in his obedience to
superiors, as a Brother in his charity, as a Father for his gravity, as aged
for his wisdom, and as an Angel for his sanctity.

. His (...) great renown and public fame.
But the evidence, pregnancy, and general renown of his great endowments and
worth for learning and prudence, for gifts and graces, save me a great part of
my labor; for these were so well known to all the English world, in
Universities, in Cities, in Countries, that in speaking of Bishop Brounrig, I
may fear to be as tedious and superfluous to you (of this present age) as if I
should hold a candle to show you the Sun, which is sufficiently known by its
own light: if therefore I may seem to offend any of you by my prolixity, be
pleased to impute it to the charity and zeal I have for posterity; that they
may not be ignorant of (what many are loath to know and own in this age) the
great worth of our late English Prelates, and Reformed Bishops, nor of the
injustice of that late Sarcasm which joins Prelacy and Popery together.

. He was for prelacy, but for from Popery.
Here was much of a Primitive Prelate, nothing of some modern Popes; here was
the learned industry, and humble piety of ancient Christan Bishops, nothing of
that Antichristian pride, empty formality and impious hypocrisy, which in the
black and blind centuries many Popes (who were but diseased, hydropick,
overgrown and unsound Bishops) have been guilty of, by the confession of
Baronius, Platina, and others of the Romish adhesion; from which also I am far
remote, though a great vindicator of good Bishops.

. As Nazianzen speaks of his commending Hieron the Philosopher; He was willing
to appear so much a Philosopher, as to commend and admire such a Philosopher:
So I cannot but appear so much Episcopal as to commend the excellencies of an
excellent Bishop, which some were as loath to see, as willing to smother.

. Bishop Brounrig was a person of that soundness of judgment, of that
conspicuity for an unspotted life, of that unsuspected integrity, that his life
was virtutum norma, (as St. Jerome of Nepotian) It a in singulis virtutibus
eminebat, quasi coeteras non habuisset, so eminent in every good and perfect
gift, as if he had had but one only. This made him loved and admired most by
those who had most experience of him; He was not like those rough pictures and
unpolished Statues, which at a distance make a pretty show: Near hand, minuit
praesentia famam, their commendation and comeliness shrinks almost to nothing,
but either courtship and formality, or the mere noise and vapor of vulgar
credulity, which is as prone to worship a gay Idol as a true Diety; yea, people
are more taken with complemental froth, than with the most accomplished worth.

. His openness and sincerity of life.
In this Coloss or Hero of learned and real worth, there was nothing dubious
or dark, nothing various or inconstant, nothing formal or affected, nothing
that needs palliation or apology; He lived always as at noon day, never using
or wanting any twilight or shadow. I never heard of any thing said or done by
him, which a wise and good man would have wished unsaid or undone; yet I had
the happiness to know him above thirty years. He always appeared, (as Isidor.
Pelus. speaks of Timotheus;) (...); a sanctuary of sobriety, a magazein of
humanity, a treasury of all virtue, and a superlative object of just
commendations, no less than imitation.

, He was indeed an Evangelical Eliah, potent and fervent in spirit, yet not
with a heat predatorious but propitious. He was apt and able to every good word
and work, having great parts, but little passions; As little subject to the
usual infirmities and transports incident to men of high and rare abilities, as
could be; few cedars of so noble a procerity, ever suffered less tempests, or
enjoyed more tranquillity within themselves: The reason was this: he had no
leaven of pride; at least, not so turgent and predominant, as either to sour
or swell his passions above his gracious perfections; he had the gentleness of
a Father, the potency of a Prophet, the wisdom of a Counselor, the gravity of
a Bishop, the majesty of a Prince, the courage of a Champion; he was like
Sampson, an Army in himself; he was as a Troop of Chariots and horsemen strong
and resolute for the defense of the true Christian and Reformed Religion (with
which this Church of England was once blessed) both against the great Baals of
Popery, and the less Baalims of Popularity.

. So that if I had chosen this Text, possibly you would have commended my
discretion; but (as Jacobs venison) it offered it self unhunted, no other was
thought on by me (as I told you at first) nor could any Jewel in the cabinet of
Scripture have better born the characters or gravings of this excellent person,
and the occasion, than this Text, which I have wrought off before your eyes; my
work now is to set the signet of the Text, thus graven, not upon that dead wax,
or cold clay, which is in that coffin, but on that great spirit, and that
gracious soul, whose goodly shrine and temple that body lately was.

I presume, Just and general Elogies of him.
I may without the envy or frown of any worthy person (here present, to honor
this solemnity) use the words of David at Abners funeral, 2 Samuel 3.38. Know you
not that this day there is a Prince (so St.) Jerome and others interpret that (
Psa. 45.16.) whom thou may make Princes in all lands, of Bishops in all
Churches) I am sure a great man is fallen this day in our Israel; a Prophet, yea
more than an ordinary Prophet; for as Christ said of John Baptist, Among those
that were born of women, few have in all points equalled this worthy Bishop,
this reverend Father, this gracious Lord; who in that true Nobility of wisdom,
virtue, grace and goodness had not many his Peers, even among those who were so
impatient to have such venerable persons, full of prudence, learning and piety,
sit with them, or have any influence in the great Councils of Church and State;
whose presence one would think, by the way of former ages, was esteemed not
only comely but necessary in a Christian Commonwealth; to see (as
Representatives of the Church, and Fathers of the Clergy) Ne quid detrimenti
patiantur aut Ecclesia, aut Ecclesiastici; for if Religion and Church-interests
be left to Laymen only, if they do not make a prey of it while it is worth a
groat, yet they are prone to find other business, and pursue designs of more
pleasure, profit or honor than Religion seems to most of them; and many times
as St. Ambrose observed, to make mad work of Religion, as the Arrians did when
they appealed from Councils of Bishops to the Courts of Princes.

. Ei. birth.
But to avoid all envy and offense in a touchy and captious age, (where all
people will be Preachers, and all Presbyters will be Bishops, and all Bishops
must be extirpated) be pleased to know, that the spring or original of this so
fair, so deep, so clear, so noble a stream of learning, piety and wisdom was at
Ipswich, a Town of good note in Suffolk, where he was born, Anno 1592. His
Parents of Merchantly condition, of worthy reputation, and of very Christian
conversation. When he was not many weeks old, God took away his earthly Father,
that himself might have the more tender and fatherly care of this (now) Orphan,
but most hopeful Infant.

. His youth and education.
By the prudence of his pious Mother, his youth and first years of reason were
not lost or cast away (as the first broachings of a vessel) but (being hardly
repaired if once neglected) they were carefully improved for his breeding in
all good learning, of which he was to a wonder in all ages of his life, not
only capable, but so comprehensive, that he drank in learning not as
narrow-mouthed bottles (to which young learners are compared) by drops, but as
a sponge by great draughts, even in his puerice or minority.

. Indeed, His minority.
when I would search for his minority, or the first source and fountain of that
large fluency of eloquent and pious literature, with which he always abounded,
they are like the (fontes Nili) springs of Nilus, hardly to be found; he scarce
had any Minority (comparatively to others) except in growth and stature; for he
was (...), as St. Paul says of himself, Gal. 1.4.) above his equals or
coetaneans; superior or major in abilities, when inferior or minor in years:
Thus as he grew in age and stature, so he grew also in wisdom and favor both
with God and man, Luke 2.52. He was as the sons of Giants; giantly infants,
giantly children, giantly boys, giantly youths, and gyantly men; or like the
Sun, still the Sun at morning, noon and night, in its rise, height and decline;
he never suffered any lessening or eclipse in himself.

. He suffered no diminutions, but by the darknings of the times.
That fatal one upon this Church and State, which befell him as a Bishop, and
his whole Order, by the bold interposing of popular and headless Presbytery
(which in its due order, not only preserved, as Ignatius observes, an holy
harmony with Episcopacy, but ever had, as the Moon, its light of holy
Ordination and spiritval power from its aspect and respect to primitive and
Catholic Episcopacy, as the Sun) But this sad diminution of him, and other
worthy Bishops, was more a public than a private disaster; which even
Presbytery it self has found; while the populacy or vulgar people, like the
earth do revenge even on that envious Moon the eclipse and injury it did to the
Sun, and to it self; for as Episcopacy was turned into the sackcloth of
mourning, so Presbytery into the blood of war, of fury, of popular and endless
factions; for how can Presbyters keep their union, luster and honor, but in
conjunction with, and subordination to Episcopacy? as St. Cyprian long ago
urged against some heady Presbyters in his days, who lived in the second
Century.

. The best method to take the exaltations and dimensions of this bright star
(which was one of the first magnitude) is to observe his motions from his
ascending to his decline, and the several eradiations of his imitable worth.

When the Nurse of the Grammer-School had fitted him for his Mother the
University, His coming to the University.
he was sent in his fourteenth year to Pembrook-hall in Cambridge; there his
modesty, pregnancy and piety soon invited preferment; He was made first
Scholar of the House, and after Fellow, a little sooner than either his years
or standing in rigor of Statute permitted; but the College was impatient not
to make sure of him, by grafting him firmly into that Society, which had been
famous for many excellent men, but for none more than for Ralph Brounrig, when
Bachelor of Arts, when Master in Arts, when Bachelor of Divinity, when Doctor
of Divinity, and when Bp. of Exceter; for as he fairly ascended every step or
degree; so he was ever thought no less to adorn, than to deserve his
advancements.

. His florid and fruitful wit.
when first he appeared in public to give testimony of his abilities and
proficiency, it is not to be expressed how sweet and welcome the very first
productions of his most florid and fertile soul were, which had the fragrant
blossoms of a most facetious and inoffensive wit; the fair leaves or ample
ornaments of his most eloquent tongue; the most pleasant fruits of Philosophy,
History, Poetry, and all sorts of ingenuous Arts and Sciences, well digested,
accurately fitted to all occasions; these at length raised to Divinity, well
grounded on Scripture, and adorned by the study of antiquity, the Fathers,
Councils and histories of the Church, made him appear as one of the goodliest
trees in the Paradise or garden of God, the University and Church of England.

. His memory and e^oquence assisting his wit and parts.
He had always cum fideli memoria uberrimum ingenium and beatam facundiam, with
an happy memory, wit and words that were full and free, without pumping or
hesitancy; set forth with an elocution or tone which was grandiloquent,
dictatorian and imperial; he was at once profitably pleasant (as Jothams vine
and figtree) to God and man. His great wit was not forced, frothy or affected,
but native, apt and free; muchless had it any thing muddy in it of profaneness,
scurrility or immodesty; but chaste, ingenuous and innocent; still tempered with
such serious, learned and pious mixtures, or such grave retreates and closes,
that it seemed no other, than beauty well dressed, or goodness appearing in a
fair and cheerful Summers day; having nothing of those melancholy clouds or
winter dejections of more gloomy tempers: He made the proof and experiment
good, That wit (which is a kind of gaiety of fancy, and luxuriancy of a ready
invention) is to be reckoned (as beauty and handsomness) among the good gifts
of God, when well used; a jewel too bright and precious to be cast before
swine, or trodden under the foul feet of wanton Poets, of profane and
ridiculous Atheists, who fancy they can outwit God; while yet (non tam credunt
quam cupiunt non esse Deum) they rather wish there were not, than believe there
is no God; being most sadly to be pitied when they seek to make themselves
merry, and the Devil to laugh, by their grieving and mocking God, or playing
with the Scriptures and holy things, which they disbelieve, Quia malunt
extingui quam ad supplicia reparari, as Minut. Felix speaks of the
resurrection) because they choose annihilation rather than penal reparation.

. But here wit was consecrated to the Tabernacle and Temple of God; which, as
we read, was to have the luster and decoration of silver, gold and precious
stones; yea from those, on Aarons Brestplate was the oracle of Vrim and
Thummim. Nor did ever any man make a more ample dedication of the gems and
rarities of wit to good uses than did this excellent person; he was like Aarons
garments, or the vail of the Tabernacle, not only rich for the materials, but
rare for the mixture and composure of them.

I do the rather fix an asterisk of special note and commendation in this
particular, That a great wat is a great temptation, till sanctified by grace.
both as to Gods grace sanctifying so great a wit, and to His just praise who
turned not either wit or grace into wantonness; because nothing is more rare
(as he said of beauty and modesty, rara est concordia formae atque pudicitiae)
than to see wit in an height or luxuriancy, and not to be either rank and sour
(as some tall grass) or to be laid and rot on the ground in sensual debauchery:
Magnum ingenium magna tentatio, as Vincentius Lirinensis observes, yea deplores
in Tertullian and Origin; a wit is a great temptation to pride and profaneness
in ones self, a great bait for the Devils trap, a train for his Mine, a decoy
for evil company; emboldening to sin with confidence of excuse or palliation;
yea, many think their wit serves to expiate something of their wickedness; as
if wit had an indulgence or dispensation to dishonor God, as Jesters and
Buffoones have to droll with Princes; many hope to bolster out their crooked
manners by their quick wits, making a jest of that which deserves tears and
severe repentance; often covering their shame with the fig leaves of an impudent
wit; and like dogs when they are daubed or dirty they lick themselves clean
with their tongues: There is nothing so audacious which wit unsanctified will
not (like Lucifer) dare at in Heaven or Hell, even the highest sins of
blasphemy and scurrility against God; besides the tampering and trucking with
the Devil. Until wit be repressed, pruned and circumcised by modesty, chastity
and piety, it is like a Jew, first an alien from God, and then grows an enemy
to God: It is but a crab till grafted with Grace; the first may serve for sour
sauce and haugoust; but the second only affords sweet meat for eating and
drinking too: Wit like green fruit or sour grapes, is prone to set the teeth
an edge, to breed worms and wind, till it be matured and mellowed with holy
wisdom, as it was in Bishop Brounrig.

. The quickness and floridness of his wit never decayed, but was in a perpetual
spring, and ever green; nor did it mis-become him in his riper years, any more
than smiling and a little laughter does a good man and a good conscience; for
it was ever well tempered with gravity; mixed with good counsel, allayed with
good discourse, and beautified with excellent example; so that it was like a
pretty embroidery or lace on fine cloth or silk; not so costly as comely; or
like incense with a sweet smelling sacrifice: Wit was not his work but his
recreation, not studied and pumped, but native and fluent; like a generous wine
or good liquor that flowers and laughs, as we say, not with a riotous and
cheating froth, but with such a smiling cream and inviting candor, as shows it
is spiritful and pleasant.

. So much did the elegancy of his fancy, and aptitude of his facetious
expressions, make a kind of mannerly, not rude way for his more serious and
weighty conceptions, in private and familiar conversation; but in public and
solemn duties, as preaching and praying, or in determinations and disputations
of Divinity, and the like, no man was further off from verbal joques or
flashes; he never played with sacred Truths or Scripture Texts, nor tossed the
words of it as a Cat does a Mouse too and fro by a lasciviency of fancy, before
he came to his Divinity.

. This wit he judged fitter for a Pillory than a Pulpit, being not more
unsanctified than unseasonable, and at best a kind of White devil, that does
not scare people so much, but does as much hurt both to people and Preacher;
pleasing the tinckling tongue of the one, and the itching ear of the other,
when both may need broken hearts and contrite spirits.

He had indeed wit at will, that is under his command; it was as his Page, not
his Privy Counselor; it was as a natural good voice, a pretty recreation, and
diversion, when one is in good humor; but not a wise man's or woman's business or
main delight, as if they lived like some birds only to eat and to sing, after
the rate of some exstatick Poets, and musing Musicians, who are good for
nothing else.

He that was acquainted with the quickness of Bishop Brounrigs wit, would
wonder the more at his solid wisdom; and he that heard the profoundness of his
learning and wisdom in all points of grand concern, would admire at his wit; so
happy a mixture he had of both, that like a cymeter or sword of good execution
there was weight and edge; the the one had not overlaid the other; his wisdom
was as the load, and his wit as the wheels, giving aptness and quickness to
motion; they were as the Treble Viol and Tenor of different sounds and strokes,
but together they made excellent music.

When King James (the most learned Prince, His public Acts before King lames.
and one of the most learned persons of his times) was pleased to honor the
University of Cambridge by his presence, and to make the learned Exercises of
Scholars the greatest and best part of his Royal entertainment, this person,
(then a youngman) was one of those who were chosen by the University to adorn
that reception of the King: The part he was to perform was Jocoserious, a
mixture of Philosophy with Wit and Oratory, which is there called the
Praevaricator, as in Oxford the Terrae filius; This he discharged so amply
every way that it was to the admiration more than the mirth of the King, and
the other learned Auditors; who rejoiced to see such a luxuriancy of wit was
consistent with innocence, that jesting was confined to convenience, and mirth
married with that modesty which became the Muses: for he set before them such
apples of gold in pictures of silver, so judicious an invention, so eloquent a
judgment, and so solid an acuteness, that if he would Rhetoricate facetiously
to refresh their minds, no man did it more to their wonder and laughter; if he
listed to dispute solidly, no man did it more to their astonishment and
improvement; so that he was like the Cedar and Oak, no less admirable for the
depth and spreading of his worth (the latitude and profoundness of his
judicious knowledge) than for the procerity and height of his copious wit, and
most harmless eloquence, which were still (as in nullius contumeliam) to no
man's reproach or shame, so kept at a most severe and sacred distance from the
Mountain of holiness, the name of God, and true Religion, which if petulant wit
like a beast presume to touch, it is to be stoned to death.

Afterward, His taking deg^ees in the University.
when he first deserved and then took higher degrees, he made all men believe,
that he was more an honor to the degrees he took, than they were to him; and
the University thought it self did then commence when Mr. or Dr. Brounrig was
invested with any degree of honor: So great an expectation all good men had of
him, and so great satisfaction in him; for this he had above most men, Et felix
and eximium, bonorum omnium votis and doctorum expectationi satisfacere; great
expectation is commonly querulous and injurious, as a coy Epicure or squeemish
Glutton, that can only feed on curious dainties; but toward him it was civil
and modest, like a good stomach or honest appetite, it set off and commended
the good cheer he always provided for it: he had so great ingenuity and candor
with his great abilities, that envy it self, as on a smooth and polished globe,
could not fasten its teeth on him.

. I cannot but observe among his other learned and accurate performances in
public, that the subject and Text, Phil. 1.29. was prophetic and prepatory to
his aftersufferings, upon which he chose to preach his Latin Sermon, when he
took the degree of Batchelour in Divinity, Vobis autem datum, etc. To you it is
given in the behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake; which incomparably learned, eloquent and pious Sermon he
afterward was to fulful indeed, by suffering with Christian magnanimity,
patience and charity, as well as he had accomplished it by preaching most
excellently on it; thus quod docuit verbo, firmavit exemplo; he was to make his
doctrine good by his practice, taking up the cross of Christ (as his crown) and
following him.

. His preferment in the Church.
He was afterward preferred to be Prebend of the Collegiate Church of Eli (now
so horridly desolate and ruined, that it may well add to its name the other
words of our Saviors passion, Lamma sabacthani, crying out to the Nation, why
have you forsaken me, and other Cathedrals, which were your glory and your
Saviors honor, even in the sight of Infidels?)

This Dignity he obtained by the favor and love of the then excellent Bishop
of that Seat Dr. Felton, a very holy and good man; he had also a good Living at
Barlow, not far from Cambridge, where in a Country village, this good Scribe
well-instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, brought forth out of the good
treasury of his heart things both old and new, the ancient mysteries and
fundamental truths of Christian Religion, in the modern and more accurate
method of revived and reformed learning, condescending in his Preaching and
catechizing to ordinary capacities, and fitting his net to the fish he was to
catch. He often deplored the disuse and want of Catechizing, as if there were no
babes in the Church for milk, but all must be fed with strong meat which they
cannot digest, or with bones which they cannot pick.

. In the University, Master of Catharine hal
After this he was chosen Master of Catharine Hall; a small basis or pedestal
for so great a Statue and Coloss of learning, piety and prudence to stand upon;
yet then and there this great Lamp began to be set, and to shine in a sphere
more proper for his parts, and proportionate to his luster, who had a soul not
fitted for a cottage, but a College; Nor only for a College, but for a
Palace; nor for a Palace, so much as for a Kingdom.

. God saw him at present more worthy to preside in the Schools of the Prophets,
than to rusticate (as Elisha sometimes did) among plain people that follow the
Plough; not that their souls are less precious, but plainer and blunter tools
will do their work.

. Nor was this change of his Province an effect of his own ambitious stickling
or seeking (as I have heard him tell it) but an influence of Gods providence
upon the minds of some worthy men, who were ashamed in behalf of the University
and the age, not to see Dr. Brounrig preferred and employed in some way most
proper and proportionate to his well-known abilities: And however this offer
met at first with some clouds and oppositions from above, yet at last the good
hand of God upon so good and deserving a person, cleared the heavens, and
dispersed all the prejudices that some (then in great place) had mis-conceived
against him.

When he had quiet possession of that Mastership, it was wonderful to see, how
the Buildings, the Revenues, the Students and the studiousness of that place
increased, by the care, counsel, prudence, diligence and fame of Dr. Brounrig,
who had such an eye to all, that he over-saw none; frequenting the studies, and
examining even younger Scholars, that they might be encouraged both in
learning and piety.

. Fixed now, and rarely fitted for that Academick way of life, his Mother the
University seemed even proud of such a Son: his very presence and speech had a
venerable and lovely majesty with them; his looks were a Law of modesty and
gravity: He did often bear, and discharged most usefully and acceptably to
strangers and others the highest Offices and honors of the University, both
politic, as a Magistrate, or Justice of Peace in his being Vice Chancellor;
and litterate, as a Scholar: Hemade the ( Comitia Convivia) Commencement Acts
to be banquets and feasts; in which he, as Gamaliel, presided a Father and
Maderator.

He kept up very much, His temper in point of conformity to the Church of
England.
as good learning and good manners, so the honor of Orthodox Divinity, and
orderly conformity; he kept to the Doctrine, Worship, Devotion, and Government
in the Chuch of England, which he would say he liked better and better, as he
grew elder; and then best of all, when he saw the vipers of factions seizing
upon her out of the fire of her tribulation, but not able to do her any harm,
either as to confute her doctrines, or to condemn her constitutions, with any
show of reason.

. Neither in her prosperity, nor in her adversity did he endure that any man
great or small out of faction, pride, popularity, or novelty should worship or
recede from its excellent orders: If any out of scruple and tenderness of
conscience, was less satisfied with some things, no man had a more tender
heart, or a gentler hand either to heal any little scratches, or to supple any
wonted obstinacy, or to win any minds to the peace of the Church, who were
capable, ingenious and honest; he drew all by the filken cords of humanity and
humility, Reason and Religion; not by the cart-ropes of rigor and
imperiousness; he would convince, though he did not convert gainsayers, and if
he could not persuade them, yet he would pity and pray for them.

His Judgment as to the foundations and solemn administration of the Reformed
Religion, His fixedness in there formed Religion.
settled in the Church of England (and so in other Reformed Churches which were
for the main consonant to it) was such, that he was unmovable, even to a
martyrdom: Never more offended (as I have sometimes heard him express his
displeasure) than with those men that affected to be Hybridae Religionis,
Mungrils or Mephibosheths in Religion and halters in opinion; a kind of
ambiguous and dough-baked Protestants, that are afraid to own their
discommunion and distance from the Church politic, or Court of Rome, even so
far as they see by Scripture and antiquity, that it has evidently divorced
from communion with the word of God, and Institutions of Jesus Christ, walking
contrary to the judgment and practice of the Primitive Churches; To both which
he always appealed in the grand concerns of Religion; not allowing that policy
which incroached upon truth and piety; though in matters of outward Rites and
Ceremonies he allowed latitudes and liberty, without breach of charity; It was
a maxim I have heard him use, That nothing was less to be stickled for or
against than matters of reremony, which were as shadows not substances of
Religion; As they did not build, so they could not burden, if kept within
their bounds, as was done in Englands Reformation.

. Yea, he had so far both pity and charity for those plain and honest-hearted
people of the Roman communion, as either their errors (presumed by them to be
truths) or their ignorance in some things not fundamental, did not betray them
either to unbelief or self-presumption, or to final impenitence, or to
immorality or uncharitableness. If there were hope to close the ^ad breaches of
these Western Churches, no man was more able and willing to have poured balm
into them: But he feared the gangreen of Jesuitism had festred and inflamed
things to an uncurableness, which he often deplored.

. His temper is latter dispute among reformed Divines.
As for the differences of other parties in some opinions which then began to
grow very quick and warm in England, as well as the Netherlands, he seemed
always most conformed to, and satisfied with the judgment of his learned and
reverend friends, Bishop Usher, Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward, who were great
Disciples of St. Austin and Prosper in their contests against the Pelagians.
Not that he could endure no difference among learned and godly men in opinions,
especially sublime and obscure, without dissentions and distance in affection;
but he wished all men to look well to the humility and sincerity of their
hearts, whose heads were most prone and able to manage points of controversy;
the heat of which is ready to make the fullest souls to boil over to some
immoderation and study of sides. He thought that Scripture it self was in some
points left us less clear and positive as to mysterious not necessary verities,
that Christians might have wherewith to exercise both humility in themselves,
and charity toward others.

. He very much venerated the first worthy Reformers of Religion at home and
abroad; yet was he not so addicted to any one Master, as not freely to use that
great and mature judgment which he had, so as to sift and separate between
their easy opinions and native passions (as men) and their solider probations,
and sober practices, as great and good Divines. He suffered not prejudices
against any man's person or opinion, to heighten animosities in him against
either. He hoped every good man had his retractations either actual or
intentional, that died in true faith and repentance, however all had not time
to write their retractations as St. Austin did.

. If against any thing (next sin and gross errors) he had an antipathy and
impatience, it was against those unquiet and pragmatick spirits which affect
endless controversies, varieties and novelties in Religion, that hereby they
may carry on that study of sides and parties in which they glory; and under
which skreen they hope to advance their private interests and politic designs:
This he saw by experience, was commonly the Scorpions tail and sting of those
opinions, which at their first broaching, and variating from the pristine and
Catholic Doctrine, might seem to have the face of women, modest and harmless,
but in time grew very pernicious to Church and State.

When the clouds of nonconformity (which was formerly reduced to an hand
breadth in the Church of England) began now, His constancy in the late
vertigious times.
partly by a spirit or breath of super-conformity, and chiefly by those
vehement winds which blew from the North, to cover the whole English heaven
with blackness, and to threaten a great storm of blood, which after followed;
yet did this excellent person then hold to his former principles and practice,
not because he was a Bishop, but because he was a judicious and conscientious
man, where he saw Scripture and Law bound him to duty, and to that constancy of
his judgment in matters of Religion, both essential and circumstantial,
substantial and ornamental, which became a wise and honest man. He was too
ponderous a person to be tossed too and fro with every wind of doctrine or
discipline; nor was he ever either so scared, or in so merry and frolic a sit,
as to dance after the Scottish pipe; he had learned another and a better tune,
as from the Catholic Church in general, so particularly from this Church and
State, the Princes and Prelates, the Parliments and Convocations of the
Reformed Church of England, now too old to affect any new jigg, after an
hundred years most flourishing State; the wisdom, gravity and majesty of which
he thought was not now either to be either disciplined or reformed, or
chastened by the pedantique authority, pretended necessity, or obtruded
insolency of any Church or Nation under heaven, much less by any party in it
self, which was less than the authority of a full and free Parliament,
consisting of King, Lords and Commons; counseled as to matters of Religion by
a full and free Convocation or Synod, which he thought the most laudable way of
managing Religion, and most probable by doing good impartially to be blessed of
God, and approved by good men: He saw the Church and State of England had been
sufficient every way for it self heretofore, while united; and was then
happiest, when it enjoyed its own peaceable and Parliamentary Counsels and
results, without any others partial dictates, which were as improsperous as
importune and impertinent.

. For the Liturgy, His esteem of the liturgy of the Church of England.
or public form of Prayer, and solemn Administration in the Church of England,
though he needed a set form as little as any, yet he had a particular great
esteem of it: 1. For the honor and piety of its Martyrly Composers, who
enduring such a fiery trial were not likely to have made a Liturgy of straw and
stubble. 2. For its excellent matter, which is divine, sound, and holy, besides
its method which is prudent and good. 3. For the very great good he saw it did,
as to all sober Christians, so to the common sort of plain people, who, what
ever other provision they had of their Ministers private abilities; yet they
were sure every Lords Day at least, to have a wholesome and complete form, not
only of Prayers but of all other necessaries to salvavation set before them for
faith, holy life and devotion, in the Creeds, Commandments, Lords Prayer with
Confessions and Supplications, admirably linked together, and fitted to the
meanest capacities; the want of which he saw was not supplied by any Ministers
private way of praying or preaching, which in very deed are but small pittances
of piety, or fragments compared to the latitude of religious fundamentals and
varieties contained in the Liturgy; the want of which he judged would induce a
great ignorance, as he saw, and said to me a little before his death, it had
done already among the ordinary sort of people in Country and City, whose
souls are as precious to God as others of greater parts and capacities, whose
appetites were not to be flattered and deceived with novelties, but fitted and
fed with wonted solidities, by which they would thrive and look better (as by
the use of plain and repeated food which is as their daily bread) than those
that delight in greater varieties and dainties, which may seem more toothsom to
wanton palates, but are not more wholesome or nourishing to honest hearts, who
are commonly less licorous in Religion, and best content with what is best for
them.

. Not that he was such a Formalist, Verbalist, and Sententiolist, as could not
endure any alteration of words, or phrases, or method, or manner of expressions
in the Liturgy, to which either change of times, or of language, or things,
may invite; he well knew there had been variety of Liturgies in Churches, and
variations in the same Church; he made very much, but not too much of the
English Liturgy; not as the Scriptures, unalterable; but yet he judged that
all alterations in such public and settled concerns of Religion, ought to be
done by the public spirit, counsel and consent of the Prophets, Prince. and
People. However this was a concluded Maxim with him, That the solemnity and
sacredness of consecrating those Christian mysteries of the blessed Sacraments,
were not to be adventured upon Ministers private abilities, tenuities, or
distempers, but by a public and uniform spirit among Preachers and people, all
should say Amen to the same Prayers, and receive the same mysteries under one
form of consecration, in which nothing should be defective or superfluous.

. His personal and occasional abilities for prayer were answerable to his other
gifts and graces, both for matter, method, utterance, discretion and devotion,
full, fervent and pathetick upon his own and others spirits; not coldly formal
and stark, nor yet wildly rambling, loose and broken; but judicious, apt, grave
and of so moderate an extent, as suited the weight of the occasion, the
capacity of the auditors, and the intensiveness of his own heart; his prayers
were not the labor and product only of lips, lungs and tongue, but of his
spirit and understanding; he minded not the glory but grace of prayer.

As to the Government of the Church by Episcopal Presidency, His judgment of
Church government by Episcopacy.
to which Prince and Presbyters agree, he was too learned a man to doubt, and
too honest to deny the universal custom and practice of the Church of Christ in
all ages and places for Fifteen hundred years, according to the pattern (at
least) received from the Apostles; who, without doubt followed, as they best
knew, the mind of Christ. This Catholic prescription he he thought so sacred,
that as it did sufficiently prejudge all novel presumptions, so nothing but
importune and grand necessities put upon any Church, could excuse, much less
justify the cutting off those pipes, or the turning of that primitive and
perpetual course of Ecclesiastical Ordination, subordination and Government
into another channel. Nor did he understand the method of those new
Vitruviusses, who would seem Master Builders, though they are yet but
destroyers; when they affect to have all timber and stones in the Churches
building of the same shape, size and bigness; when the Church of Christ is
compared to a body which has members of different forms, use and honor, 1 Cor.
12.

. Yet this worthy man had nothing of secular pomp or vain ambition in his
thoughts, merely to bear up or bolster out a formal and titular Episcopacy,
with Goats hair, like Michols image; No, he exacted worth and work: And where
true Bishops did the duties and good works belonging to the principal Pastors
of the flock; he thought they deserved double honor (as Fathers and Governors
among good Christians) both of revenue and reverence.

. Yet he did not judge the principal dignity or authority of Episcopacy to
depend upon its Secular advantages, but on its Ecclesiastical custom and
Apostolic institution; and however no man was more ready to condescend to any
external diminutions, and comely moderations, that might stand with a good
conscience and prudence, as tending to the peace and unity of the Church; yet
no man was more firm, resolute and immovable from gratifying any Sacrilegious
Projectors or proud Factionists or peevish Novellers, to the reproach of the
Church of England, yea and of the Catholic Church in all the world, which had
its Bishops every where before it had its Bible or its Scriptures completed.
In the matter of Episcopacy, he differed little from Bishop Vshers moddel of
the ancient Synodical Government; only he thought the petulancy of men's spirit
in these times, beyond the primitive simplicity, did require all prudent
advantages of Order and authority, which might consist with piety and true
policy; as antidotes ought to be heightened to the measure of the poison they
are to encounter.

. He approved not a leveling party among Ministers.
Only he could never be induced so far to forsake the principle of all Reason,
Order, and Government in humane societies, or to disown the remarkable
differences which God and Nature, age and education, experience and studies,
industry and grace did make between Ministers no less than other men; as to
think that neither work nor rewards of honor and estate may be proportioned to
their different worths; but that the youngest Scholar, yea the meanest
Schoolmaster, if they can but now and then appear in a Pulpit, and take Orders
(as they best fancy) shall presently in all things of public honor and
Ecclesiastic authority, run parallel to the greatest Scholars and gravest
Divines; so that either a beardless and juvenile petulancy, or more aged, but
empty gravity shall in all points be level and justle with the most venerable
worth and accomplished learning of those that are capable to teach the others
simplicity, or even in years might be their Fathers.

. He saw no cause to affect among Ministers, above all Fraternities this (...),
the inverting of all order, that the first should be last, and the last first;
though he subscribed to the rule of Christ, that the greatest among his
Ministers, even the ((...)) very chiefest of the Apostles, should in humility
and charity condescend and demean themselves so, as if they were servants to
all, and the least of all, Mat. 13.11. yet he saw this precept was vain and
impertinent, as not practicable, if none were greater or more eminent than
others, as in age, gifts, and graces, so in spiritual power and Ecclesiastical
authority; not tyrannously usurped, but by the consent of all conferred.

. Those novel interpretations he saw were but wresting Scripture from primitive
sense, to bring in the postern chaos of popular parity among Ministers, which
never was in Christ's, or the Apostles, or after days, nor can be ever without
great disadvantages to both Ministers and people; while Presbyters having no
order or subordination among themselves, must either have no fraternal
communion (living like straggling sheep without fold, flock or shepherd) or
meeting arbitrarily and occasionally, they must be all Sons and all Fathers,
without center or circumference; ference; having no principle to convene or
move them, no power coercive to contain or restrain them; and no regular
authority to reprove or repress their extravagancies in doctrine or manners.

Nor was it his ambition but his conscience and judgment that thus commanded
him to assert Episcopacy, Not ambition but conscience made him Episcopal.
even long before he was, or (possibly) thought to be a Bishop; upon which
account, when I once told his Lordship (after he was made Bishop by the King,
and unmade by the people) that a person ( equestris ordinis, but parum aequae
mentis) had in discourse told me, That he wondered Dr. Brounrig would be made a
Bishop; whom he had heard sometime declare his judgment against Episcopacy:
which report, as I no way believed; so relating it soon after, and the authors
name to him, he with some passion and emotion (as full of a just defiance and
contradiction to such a fable and falsehood) professed he lied notoriously; for
says he, I never thought, much less said, as that lewd person has falsely
averred; I thank God I took the Office of a Bishop with a good conscience, and
so I hope by his mercy I shall both maintain and discharge it.

He was by the favor of King Charles, His being made Bishop^ An^. 1641.
and to the great liking of all good men, made Bishop of Exeter, anno 1641. But
as ((...)) one born out of due time, when that storm was beginning to rise,
which afterward shipwracked the Sovereign and many other gallant ships; the
wall was too far swollen out, and threatening to fall before this potent pillar or
shore was applied to support it: if any single Puissance could have done good,
his shoulders were most probable to have done it, for his counsel and prudence,
his aequanimity and moderation, were equal to his other vast abilities; for he
had not only the verdure and spring of wit, also the summer of much learning
and reading; but he had the harvest of a mature understanding, and a mellow
judgment in all matters Politic and prudential, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

If his excellent temper had sooner been added as an allay to some other men's
hotter spirits; His aequanimous temper.
possibly ( Troja nostra stetisset) we had not seen such deplorable ruins of a
flourishing and Reformed Church; But upon this and other worthy Bishops heads
was this great breach and ruin of ancient and venerable Episcopacy to tumble
by the ((...)) impetuosity and exorbitancy of the times; which at length grew
to so popular a prevalency, that some men would not endure the best Bishops,
nor any moderation short of total extirpation, that way might be made for
confiscation: For Episcopacy was with modest approaches first undermined by
some plausible Pioners, and Ingineers, who pretended, that it did not stand
upright, but leaned toward the Court, and Prerogative too much; that they would
only set it right and so support it; but afterward it was quite blown up; much
over-doing their first pretentions, which were only to reform some
exorbitancies in the use and practices of times or men; to which all wise and
good Bishops easily and cheerfully, together with this worthy Prelate would
have condescended and submitted; provided it were done not by tumultuous
impressions of faction and violence, but by that Parliamentary fullness and
freedom which became the honor, piety, wisdom and majesty of this Church and
Nation; but instead of snuffing some Bishops, all were extinguished; since
which time we have been at blindmansbuff, and in the dark scuffling about
Church Government.

. His loyalty in all times.
And however this excellent Bishop enjoyed not the benefit of the Kings favor
and munificence, as to his Bishopric, or any other preferment, after the
troubles of the times; yet he was ever most unmovable in his loyal respects of
sidelity, gratitude, love and obedience; which he thought were absolutely due
to Sovereign Princes from their Subjects as Christians; a point which I heard
him notably discourse and prove, the last Sermon he ever lived to preach, which
was on the last fifth of November 1659, at the Temple, on that Text, Dan.
6.21.22. O King, live for ever, His judgment of Soverainty and subjection.
etc. Proving out of the Scriptures, and the both judgment and practice of the
Primitive Christians in their sorest persecutions; that they venerated their
Superiors, Kings or Emperors (for an Emperor was but as an overgrown King, that
either had many Kings in his belly, or had devoured their Kingdoms) as
Tertullian in his Apology says, Tertul. Apol. c. 33. Temperans majestatem
Caesaris infra Deum, magis illum commen do Deo cui soli sublicio. So cap. 39.
in the next place to God; as only less then and subject to the Divine Majesty,
as safest for both the Emperors and their people too. Upon any pretext of
religious liberty, he denied any capacity in Christian Subjects (as such) to
resist their Sovereign Princes, for which they had neither Christ's precept, nor
any good Christians practice: There was left them only the choice to obey
actively or passively, to do or to suffer; and rather to suffer than to sin by
doing or resisting in any unlawful way; which Doctrine he had formerly declared
in a Sermon at Cambridge; for which he was immediately proscribed and outed of
his places in the University, and deprived of his liberty. Where first visiting
his Lordship in prison, he acquainted me with his Sermon and his sense of
proceedings.

. Not but that he well understood that some Subjects, not as Christians, but as
( cives) men and Citizens, might enjoy greater freedom than others according as
they were settled by civil compacts, and politic agreements or constitutions
of State; where the Laws of the Land give any stop, restraint or limit to
Princes power and proceedings, by putting some coordinate and cautionary power
into some orderly way and legal procedure, whereby to vindicate or assert the
rights of Subjects; there he judged the great Arbitrator of just and unjust,
lawful and unlawful, was the Law of the Nation, as Man's and Gods Ordinance;
which who so brake ( Prince or People) was a transgressor against God and Man;
who so pursued, was unblameable, in which case the Lawyer was to go before, and
the Divine to follow as to resolution of conscience.

. But for Subjects, who were once by public consent of Laws and many oaths
bound to the limits and enclosures of obedience and legal subjection; for these
to affect a liberty, under pretense of Religion, as Christians, or of any
common priciples, and natural freedoms as men, beyond the established rules and
boundaries of the Laws; this he thought such a fanatic fetch, as would undo
and overthrow all Government; for where is there any Christian State so settled,
in which some men will not quarrel with the Laws as too straitlaced for their
either spiritual or natural liberties, their consciences or conveniences; that
is for their lusts and licenciousness, their ambition or covetousness, or their
revenge and discontents?

. People ungoverned their own greatest oppressors.
He found by reading and experience that no Tyrannies and Oppressions of any
lawful Prince were ever so heavy upon any Nation, as when it turns its own
Tyrant, and falls under a popular self-oppression, by inordinate and immoderate
affectations of liberty, and oppositions to legal and settled Sovereignty, as
was evident in the passionate Apostasy of the Ten Tribes from David's house,
pretending Solomon's exactions; when it is better to be oppressed by one wise
Prince, than to be left to popular liberties, which ruin Church and State.

. He judged as one true God is beyond ten thousand Idols, so was one Lawful
Sovereign, with a wise Council and a settled Law, beyond all the many- headed
and many- handed Hydra's of any popular parity, or other forms of Government
whatsoever.

. For he had observed that warlike and populous Nations are much more crushed
and bruised with their own weight, like heavy bodies (when they fall from an
higher station or posture) then when they are only bastonadoed with a cudgel,
or not mortally wounded with a sword; which blows have as far less pain and
expense of blood or spirits, so greater possibility and speed of recovery.

, Though he was a very learned and well-read Scholar, yet he had not studied
Marianas or other Jesuitish Catechisms, as to those reserves in point of civil
subjection and obedience, by which they allow either one great Pope or many
little ones to dominier over Sovereign Princes, or chief Magistrates, upon any
account of Christ's Kingdom, and spiritual power.

. He was more versed in the Bible of the Bishops translation, than in any Papal
glosses, or others Annotations.

. However being a Father of the Church, he thought it became him to be a very
dutiful and obedient Son to the King, as Father of his Country in England, who
was (under God) Grandfather of Church and State, by a Law that invested him in
a Sovereignty or Monarchy, subject to no power on earth.

. This he judged the safest way as to inward and outward peace, in conscience
and prudence, for men and Christians, for Church and State. Accordingly, when
O. P. with some show of respect to him, demanded his judgment in some public
affairs, then at a nonplus; his Lordship with his wonted gravity and freedom
replied, My Lord, The best counsel I can give you is that of our Savior,
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods: with which free answer O. P. rested rather silenced than satisfied.

When he had accepted to be a Bishop (I think he had sinned if he refused Gods
call to that Office and honor being so able, so worthy, What damps and
distances he found from some Ministers after they saw he was an eclipsed Bishop.
and so willing to have done good as in all times, so in such a time as that
was) the Amphibian Ministers, who could live in Presbytery or Episcopacy, as
their interest led them, when they saw the Northern tempest strong, the tide to
turn, and this good Bishop with others, not likely to enjoy the estates and
honors of their Bishoprics; Then, O then began some of those Preachers, whose
Darling, Crown and Triumph, whose almost adoration and Idol, Dr. Brounrig had
sometimes been, now they began to withdraw from him, to keep a loof and at
distance, to look as strangers on him, and to be either afraid or ashamed to
appear before him; such a reproach and maul his very presence, constancy, and
gravity were to their popular and time-serving inconstancies, that many became
his enemies, because he persevered in the truth they once asserted, and had now
deserted; by the confutation and conversion which tumults and arms had made on
their spirits, more than any new reasons and arguments.

. Others were so peevish and spiteful against him (not as Dr. Brounrig, but as
an unfortunate Bishops) that to revenge their own sin and folly on their
betters, they, after the Lystrian levity, Act. 14.18, 19. endeavored to stone
him and other Bishops, whom they once had reverenced as Gods; consenting to,
and applauding his expulsion out of the House of Lords, out of the College and
University, yea and to his deposition (as much as humane power and malice
could) from his Episcopal Office and Authority, which yet he failed not, while
he lived (as he had power and opportunity) to discharge.

. If he had as a Bishop met with better times, as to Christianity; or worse, as
to Heathenish barbarity, so as to have shined fully and steadily in one of
those golden Candlesticks of the Church, for which he was fitted; I make no
doubt but the most benign influence of so able, so affable, so amiable, so
conscientious, so complete a Bishop, would have wrought as great effects in any
Diocese where he lived, as Gregorius Thaumaturgus is said to have done in his
Scythian Bishopric; where when he came first to them, he found but fifteen
Christians, when he left them he left but so many Heathens or Infidels amonst
them: Bishop Brounrig was as likely as any man to have been a Thaumaturgus, to
have wrought miracles in this age, if they had been so just, moderate and wise,
as to have made use of his oracular wisdom, in grand and public concerns, or
to have trusted to the counsels of such Scholars as much as of Soldiers.

, His public and prudential ability.
Possibly other men and Bishops might have as much learning; but few, that ever
I knew, had his incomparable clearness, candor, solidness, sweetness,
dexterity, eloquence and great reputation; He was (beyond any new feculent, and
intoxicating Must of yesterdays tunning) like an excellent piece of sound,
good, old wine, always ripe and ready for all comers and tasters, fully
prepared for all essays, and to all business of import.

. If he had once had any (moderamen) guidance of the chariots and horsemen of
Israel, the Clergy and Ministers of England, it is not imaginable, what his
gravity, goodness, sincerity, moderation, oratory, and piety would have done:
He would have been far enough from Phaethons fact and fate, to have overthrown
or set all on a light fire; but this was a blessing that this Nation was not
worthy of, being ripe for wrath; fitter for Soldiers to mow down, than
Scholars to plant or water it. Other men's judgment of Bishop Brounrig, before
they played a new Presbyterian game.


. As to the esteem he had on all hands, I my self have often heard (as others so)
Mr. John Pint (who was of some kindred to this Bishop) not only highly commend
him, but even glory and boast of him, so did M. Marshal and those of his
Juncto, while conformity kept them warm; till growing wanton, planetary, and
excentrick from their former judgment and practice (for many years) they
turned the Tables, and withdrew their stakes; these indeed for reasons of
State, playing against Bishops and Episcopacy; while the other, always like
himself, and as became Bp Brounrig, for conscience sake stood constant to
assert it, as I know this reverend Prelate did ever to his last; nor from any
vain glory, pertinacy, pride, or humor of revenge (he was far remote from any
such poisons, but from eternal and immutable principles of Reason and Religion,
of order, polity and peace in Church and State, also from experience of the
blessings by and under Episcopacy, which this and other Churches had enjoyed;
and the either defects or miseries for want of it. He has sometime said to me,
That he held other reformed Churches which had not Bishops, to have verum esse,
a true being of Ministers and other Christians, but it was esse defectivum:
They had as wandering people, esse natural, but not esse civil; they might be
Christ's sheep, but not so folded and under such shepherds, as the Church had
ever used from the Apostles days; much insisting on that due veneration which
posterity and particular Churches owe to the piety, prudence and fidelity of
the Catholic Church in Primitive times, where Churches no more thrived or
lived without Bishops, as Presidents authoritative among, and above Presbyters,
than Christians lived without their heads or hearts.

Yet was he out of love to his native Country, His moderation in the matter of
Episcapacy.
and pity for the Church of England, passionately inclined to any fair and
fraternal accommodations; that humble, orderly and worthy Presbyters (whom he
loved and treated as brethren) might have all their due, and Bishops no more
than was their due by Scripture, by primitive customs, by the Laws of the land,
and by principles of order and true polity among all fraternities of men: He
had so great regard to the judgment and Catholic custom of this and all
Churches of Christ in all ages, that he did not (like some modern Sampsons)
think fit to break those cords or bands asunder at the pleasure of any men
whatsoever, merely upon secular and civil designs; for however he well knew,
that the Church depends on the Civil State for its secular peace and support;
yet he thought it but meet that a Christian State should in things
Ecclesiastical conform to the primitive and Catholic customs of the Church.

Certainly he had been an admirable center for union, His desire of an happy
union between Bishops and Presbyters.
having a strong majestic attractiveness to win even adversaries to the love
or reverence of him; his demonstrations were so potent, his persuasions so
pathetick, his designs so upright and just, his deportment so fatherly and
friendly, that he was capable to rectify even crooked pieces, and to mollify
even stubborn, perverss, and peevish tempers, if they did not with (an high
hand) run quite counter and cross-grained to antiquity and reason, either
toward Rome, or Amsterdam, or Geneva; to superstition, to confusion, or to
popular and prevalent factions, which he thought no less pernicious than novel
to England, by which some men not only seek to dictate very magisterially to
this and all present Churches and States Christian; but they dare to despise
and condemn all antiquity, even to the Primitive and Apostolical times; as if
no Christian Churches were ever well and rightly governed till after fifteen
hundred years; in all which times either long Anarchy it seems, or sore Tyranny
prevailed, until the people of Geneva listing to reject their Prince and
Bishop, could not be composed to any order or polity Ecclesiastic, but by the
prudence of Mr. Calvin; who (it is evident) did not constitute what
Ecclesiastical polity he best liked, but what the temper of the giddy people,
and distractions of times would bear; for Mr. Calvin was known sufficientiy to
be no enemy to Episcopal Presidency, where Bishops would conform to the
Doctrine and life of Christ.

. His great accomplishment for great affairs.
This reverend Bishop was indeed every way a most apt, ample and accomplished
person for great and public affairs; nor was he ever cut out for small work,
having so great and good a soul; he was an excellent Scholar, an admirahle
Orator, an acute Disputant, a pathetick Preacher, an unspotted Liver, a prudent
Governor, full of judgment, courage, constancy and impartiality; an useful
good man ((...)) a grave and great Divine, a gracious and sincere Christian, as
well as venerable Bishop; conscientious in all he did, and humble with all his
indowments, not less full of eminent graces than excellent gifts; indeed every
way such a man and such a Bishop, as no Christian Church in any age but ours;
nor ours, in any age but this, would have laid aside; being a Preacher and
Professor of the same reformed Faith and Confession of Doctrine; nor would any
times but ours have forced by popular storms and tempests a goodly ship fraught
with such rich treasures of worth and wisdom (which are seldom embarked or
laden in one bottom) to come aground, and to lie still in some obscure (yet
scarce safe) corners and creeks, either for fear of Plebean and Military
Hericano's; or for want of fit sails, and fair winds or tides to bring it forth
to the commerce and enriching of the world in Learning, Religion, and a most
imitable example.

Not that this grave and grand Personage, His usefulness in his retirement and
private life.
when thus forced to retire, was useless to those that were worthy of him, and
knew how to value and use him, either as a Bishop or as a Divine, or a
counselor, or a comforter, or a Friend; nor were any people more to be envied,
in my judgment, than those that were happy (as Solomon's domestics) to enjoy
him in any constant receptions or addresses; as some of his friends and many
others often did to their great content; and none either more welcomly or more
deservedly than the liberal and noble soul of Mr. Thomas Rich Esquire; of Sunning
in Barkshire; of whose ready heart and large hand to works of charity, I could
here give a particular and great account upon my motion to him, but that his
modesty has often severely forbad me to speak of it, being satisfied with Gods
reward, which I pray he and his may never want. It is enough to say of that
worthy Citizen, that generous Gentleman, and most charitable Christian, that
his name deserves to be with honor thus registered and engraven to all
posterity, That he was the special friend of Bishop Brounrig: An honor as great
and deserved, as that which the Lord Brook affected to make his
Monumentremarkable to after ages, by his inscribing and Friend to Sir Philip
Sidney.

. Of this Bishops excellent endowments and manners, I may say as Suetonius does
of Augustus his Looks; Forma per omnes aetatum gradus constanti; he was not
only in all ages a very comely person, but did all things at all times steadily
and handsomely: The indignities and afflictions which were cast upon him by the
torrent of times, (as a Bishop, and counter biased to them) yet as a rock in
the sea, or a brazen wall, he endured them unmoved, unmolested; his constant
and judicious wisdom remained with him; while he saw factious and giddy spirits
wasting themselves; while they foamed out their own shame, he enjoyed a bright
and unblemished fame, with a good conscience, having had no hand in the
mutation or misery of Church or State.

. Indeed he was ((...)) as Nazianzen said of Athanasius; to commend him, is to
commend verrue, or wisdom, or health, or the light of the Sun; not that (as St.
Augustine says of another) Casta and magna illa anima humanas lauds aut cupit
aut curat, that good and great soul either living desired, or now departed
needs the sparks of humane praises, to set forth its splendour. Quem caeli
habent laudabilem and laudatum, quid de novo in cipiam laudare super terram! as
St. Bernard speaks, he that is as praiseworthy, praised now in heaven, with
Well done good and faithful servant, is not concerned with our praises on earth.

. But we, and the ages to come which are like to be dark and blind enough, and
the more for his absence, do need the radiancy and beams of such illustrious
and exemplary worth; which the more indignly it was treated and buried alive,
by some men's envy or malice, the more studiously do I endeavor that he and his
deserving name, or rather the instances of Gods glory in him may live after his
death. Paterns of moderate virtues, may, like lesser gems or sparks of
Diamonds, be frequent; but complete ones, like Paragon jewels, are few in any
age; such he was, and so to be valued.

. The truth is, the world was not worthy of such a man (that is, the partial,
plebeian, factious, parasitick, paralitick, giddy, ungrateful world) though it
needed such as Antidotes and Physicians, being very sick and so distempered, as
not to endure any remedy: Having been long surfeited with former peace and
prosperity; poisoned with factions and discontents; yea and cloyed with a kind
of wontedness and satiety of Religion. The concurrence of excellency in him.


. As it was said of old In uno Homero omnes Poetae, and in uno Cicerone omnes
Oratores, and in uno Aristotele omnes Philosophi; in one Honter were all Poets,
in one Tully all Orators, and in one Aristotle all Philosophers, and in one
Varre, Polybius or Plutarch, all the good learning of all learned men: So I may
say, there was in one Bishop Brounrig the quintessence of all good Christians,
all good Scholars, all good Divines, all good Preachers and all good Bishops;
In him one might find the sincerity of the anitent Fathers, and the solidness
of later Divines; the Schoolmen did not exceed him in acuteness; nor the best
Casuists in exactness, nor the soberest Monasticks in devotion and sanctity.

. His liberal and charitable soul.
He had the learning of Nazianzen, Basil, or Jerome; the courage and constancy
of Athanasius and St. Ambrose; the eloquence of St. Chrysostom and Chrysologus;
the mildness and gentleness of St. Cyprian or St. Austin; the charity and
benignity of Paulinus, and Martinus.

sect;. His contentedness and patience when stripped of all etc.
When he could not have common equity from others, yet he exacted Christian
charity from himself to others; he would give de modico, almost de nihilo; of
that little meal and oil that was left him, or by others supplied to him; and
if he could not give de suo, yet he would de se, of his paternal prayers and
benedictive comprecations; nor was any man more exact and faithful in the
distributing other men's charities committed to him, as some good Obadiahs did
of later years; when even among the Prophets of the Lord, good Ministers, then
were so many pitiful objects of charity, to the joy and triumph of the
Jesuits and Roman Priests; as much as to the reproach and shame of the
Reformed Profession which some pretend to, without equity or charity.

When the storms of the times had stripped him of all public emoluments, as to
the revenues and perquisites of his Bishopric; yet aequiore animo sua damna
pertulit, quam alii sua lucra; he showed a greater mind in bearing his losses,
than others did in getting their gains; yea he was more deeply affected for the
wickedness of those that lay under the real guilt, or vehement and just
suspicion of so foul a sin as Sacrilege, than for the loss he sustained by it;
he was prone to say cheerfully, If others had more right to those Lands and
Houses than the Bishops and other Churchmen, in Gods name let them take them;
but they that either alienated, or bought or fold them, had need to have a
better title than either the present proprietors and possessors had by Law, or
the Church and State in equity, or the King by Sovereignty, or the Donors by
their Deeds, or God, as Lord Paramount, to whose glory they were devoted.

In the alienation of these Church estates, he looked more to the hand of God
which was probative and punitive, than man's, which was predatorious and
passionate. I once heard him (after his wonted smiling, yet venerable manner of
speaking) profess that he took it a little unkindly, that those Lords and
Gentlemen (who heretofore had professed an ambition to see him a Bishop, and
did with great courtship congratulate his coming to sit in the House of Lords)
not only that they should be great sticklers to destroy all Bishopss as to
their honor and estates, but that they would not now so much as let him have
their Committee power to gather in the arrears of his Bishopric, which were
due to him before the direption and depraedation, which arrears he said were
now in those private men's hands, who he thought had less right to them, and
less need of them than himself. But he found the predominant Genius of the
times was such, that instead of letting Bishops live in a capacity to be given
to Hospitality, they reduced them to the necessity of getting into some
Hospitals for their relief.

Thus while the Secular Militia, while Colonels and Captains ride triumphantly
on horses and in chariots, The partiality of times, as to the spiritual Militia
of the Church compared to the pomp and glory of the Secular.
get great Salaries and good Lands, this eminent Bishop, who was worthy to be
among the Chieftains and prime Rulers or Leaders of the Church, was (with all
other of his order) reduced from his chariot and horses, to go on foot, as far
as his legs would carry him; or to borrow conveniences of his friends, who were
better provided for easy conveyance of him. It Is true those great Commanders
and these great Scholars enjoy very different estates and esteem now in this
English world (which we must leave all at last:) the great question will be,
Who has the best and surest estate in another world? where it will not be
enquired what a man got here, but how and with what justice; nor what he lost,
but upon what account, and with what patience or tranquillity of spirit.

He had no charge for many years before he died but himself and a Servant (who
was worthy to wait on such a Master:) His (present) fingle life and former
marriage.
Child he never had any, though the Husband of one Wife; once married for a
little while to a worthy Gentlewoman, choosing rather chaste and honorable
marriage, at those years, that to affect such a celebacy as was less consistent
with sanctity; from which chastity is in no condition of life single or social
to be separated. His great grief for the loss of such a blessing at those years
(when about forty) showed his great value of it. I have heard it from his
constant friend and long associate (Dr. Edward Young, which relation is
character enough of his worth) that it was a great part of his friendly
employment at that time (flagrante dolor.) to be as an Angel to comfort Dr.
Brounrig in that solitude and sadness. For great and generous souls (though
gracious) yet are apt to conceive vehement sorrows; being as ships of burden,
they lanch not but in seas of some depth, that is, they love not but where
extraordinary merit and virtue engages them; which being exposed to the common
storms of mortality, must needs toss them with the greater waves; nor can they
always either cast anchor or suddenly make their port as they would.

. I have heard from good hands a passage not unworthy of such a pair, which I
think not a miss to relate; His wife brought him a very handsome estate in money,
and being consumptionary, and so likely to die without child, she desired him
to give her leave to give away by will as she pleased to her friends some part
of that estate she brought him; he most cheerfully granted her desire (if she
would to the half or all her estate;) she having made this essay of his noble
mind, told him with thanks and tears, That she gave all she had to him as her
best friend, and one that deserved much more than she could give him; soon
after she left him and all sublunary comforts.

. After times showed him what a providence it was by so ingenuous a way to have
something of estate cast in to defend himself against the after-injuries and
pressures of life, besides learning and merit; for that estate (I think) was
his best reserve; though the distress of times had shrewdly wire-drawn that
also before he died.

. His reception and welcome to friends.
Being loosed from those silken cords and golden chains of a good wife, and
married no more (adding an honor to celebacy as well as to marriage) he carried
with him no train beyond one servant; this made his motions more expedite, and
his receptions more easy; for many headed guests, like Hydra's either scare
away, or soon eat up their own welcome; especially if they be only as
caterpillars are, fruges consumere nati; only to eat, to chat, and to play; but
this worthy person was so venerable and useful, that he was ever most welcome to
those who well understood, that to entertain him was indeed to entertain au
Angel in flesh and blood, a grand Intelligence, a Cherubick spirit, a Seraphick
soul, a true Saint; both as a Bishop of the Church, and as a very holy man.

. Indeed none could be hospitable to him gratis; he always paid largely for his
entertainments, not only requiting but over-meriting them, His domestic
discourses.
by the many excellent discourses, his elegant and useful reparties on all
occasions; hence it was as St. Jerome speaks of Nepotian, Ita eum mirabantur and
colebant amici, quasi novum quotidie cernerent; he was every day as welcome to
Friends as if but newly come: There was no string in the great Theorbo of
Learning, but he would strike it so fully, so harmoniously and so gracefully,
as nothing was beyond the rational melody of his speech, for History,
Philosophy, Divinity, Morality, for all points and parts of Religion,
Dogmatick, Polemick, Practick, Casuistick, Hermetick (or interpretative of
Scriptures:) The marrow and true sense of the Fathers, the subtilty of the
Schoolmen, the solidity of Neotericks, he had so ready, so clear, and so
percolated from either the authors obscurity, or tedious prolixity, that his
Epitomes, or Quintessences and Distillations of them by his discourses were
more spiritful and perspicuous than the Originals, or the first mass in which
they were diffused.

And although he had this Magazine of classick and authentic learning, His
elaborateness in preaching.
which readily furnished him to speak on the sudden of all things (apt,
ornate, copiose) amply, and handsomely, yet as to his sacred Oratory, or public
preaching; He was very elaborate and exact, not only in reading and meditating,
but in complete writing of his Sermons even to his last; So loath was he to do
that work of God negligently: I hope the world may be happy to see those
accurate pieces which passed his own polishing and perfective hand; though
these printed, must needs lose of the life they had when spoken by him, who
taught as one having authority; and not as popular parasites, or plebeian
Scribes; (I mean not those grave Ministers, who preach worthily to the plebes
or common people; but those that take their aim and directory from vulgar
humors:) This diligence he used, notwithstanding that his very extemporary
discourses set off with the emphasis of his oratorious voice, with the majesty
of his goodly presence, and with that ((...)) power and warmth of his delivery
(who always preached in good earnest, as well as he took great pains) would
have deceived a very judicious Auditory, to have believed they were
premeditated and penned: His design was neither to over-preach his audience,
nor under-preach his matter; but to fit both so, that neither the Text nor the
people should have cause to think themselves slighted. This I observe on the
by, as to his conversation and discourse.

. To his learned and ready abilities were added the blessing of a very happy
historick memory; which by a latitude, commensurate to his understanding and
judgment, had not swallowed up, and crammed it self with all he read or heard;
but having weighed the worth and credit of all historick passages, had
discreetly treasured up so great variety of very remarkable things both old and
new experiments, that he was both by his sufficiency or store (as Condus) in
laying up; and by his prudence (as Promus) in bringing them out, rarely fitted
for all company and occasions, that were worthy of his owning.

. Nor was he a penurious or illiberal speaker; but as ( fons sitientem vincit)
the living fountain overcomes the most thirsty soul; so did he study to show a
Princely and Fatherly munificence in his speech ( Neminem unquam tristem a se
demisit, as was said of that good Emperor) he never sent any one away sad or
unsatisfied, who was not peevish, impenitent and unworthy; none but such could
come nigh him, and not be bettered by him; so communicative and courteous he
was to all.

Among other memorable passages which I have heard from him, A strange story,
related by Bishop Brounrig.
I cannot but here represent to the Reader one story, which being sealed with
the credit and veracity of so grave a person who was ((...)) a man of great
integrity may not be unworthy of observation.

. His Lordship (a few weeks before he died) told me, together with Dr. Bernard,
his very faithful friend, and servant, that his Lordship was assured from the
relation of a Dutch Minister of his particular acquaintance, having lived long
in England, a man of good learning, and of a most religious plain-heartedness
in his life; That this Dutch man coming from Ireland, and being cast away by
storm far from shore, he floated (not knowing how to swim) on the face of the
deep, as despairing of life, and half dead, yet not forgetting to invocate Gods
mercy: After two hours distress, lying now on his back and tossed at the
pleasure of wind and waves, a vessel came by him under sail, and took him up;
when he was aboard the ship, the charitable Mariners helped to relieve him with
dry clothes; and while they were looking on him as a drenched and almost
drowned man, to their great wonder, they saw on the back of his coat toward the
middle, a perfect print of a man's hand, which by its different color showed it
was dry, as indeed it was, like Gideons fleece, when the flore was all wet
about it; This the good man himself, when he had pulled off his apper garment,
saw, admired and blessed God, acknowledging that he seemed as upheld by a
Divine hand from sinking all that time he was floating and helpless on the sea;
this he averred on his faith to God and man, to this excellent Bishop; whose
belief of it makes me think it not only credible, but true and worthy of memory.

He could never be persuaded to set forth any thing of his own in print; Why he
would never Print any thing.
Although my self and others have often moved him while yet he had vigor and
leisure enough; either to take this pious revenge on the age which had injured
it self most, by laying him aside, or to give the better world this great
satisfaction, either as to some elaborate pieces he had made, and by word of
mouth published in Sermons or Determinations, and other Speeches at
Commencements: Or as to his judgment in some grand cases of dispute, in which
he had a great happiness to comprehend things fully, to state the controversy
exactly, and to express himself both clearly and compendiously, full of
Scripture strength, of Councils weight, of the Fathers consent, of Historick
light, of Scholastic acuteness, and inclining to no side but where God and
truth were.

. That which made him more averss to the Press, was, partly a spirit too active
and vigorous to be confined to that tedious and plodding way, which is required
in those that list to write, and not scribble; Next, he was so severe an
exacter of all perfections, in what ever he did, that it was hard for him in a
great work to satisfy himself; without which he had no great hope to satisfy
the learned world, nor pleasure to gratify others; Lastly, he would often
complain (as many wise men have done, and yet added to the number) of the
surfeit of Books, as an incurable disease, in an age whose droppy makes it
thirst and drink the more; He thought latter writings do but divert men, (as
acornes do Deer, from their better feed on grass) from reading the ancients,
who were so far the best, as they were both nearest the fountain of primitive
purity, and remotest from the passions, prejudices and partys, of our later and
worser times; Nor did he believe, that those in England, who most needed the
direction or correction of his judgment, would trouble themselves to read what
he wrote; Since he saw as men act, and fight, so they both read and write,
according to their study of sides, as the opinion or party sways to which they
are addicted: So that he concluded, the antidote or plaster would be quite
lost; The whole not needing them, and the sick never using them.

. This made him wrap up himself in silence, as to any way of printing: Leaving
the debates and scuffles of the times, as to Church and State, either to
younger men, who were more daring, and could better endure the heat and burden
of the day, or to be answered and fully (in time) confuted, by the effects of
their own ignorance, rashness, and folly: which he ever thought would be, (as
they then were) horrid confusion, and bitter uncharitableness; Or at best, a
sottish and lazy superstition, with which common people are (at length) willing
to acquiesce, (as drunken men falling asleep) after they have wearied
themselves with the frolicks of their heady opinions, and intoxicating disputes
about Religion.

. Yet will it not (I presume) be any regret to his blessed spirit, if those
pieces which remain perfected by his own hand, be redeemed from the darkness or
twilight of Manuscripts, and brought forth to the day and sunshine of Printing;
that in their light we may see some genuine beams of that burning and shining
light, which was in the soul of Bishop Brounrig: And certainly if he had (after
the example of the best of Emperors and Heathens that ever lived, Marcus
Aurelius) his ((...)) his own observations, and peculiar reflections written,
either as to Gods Providence to himself, or gracious motions and operations in
his heart: or as to the more large and public dispensations to former and
latter ages, which afford an ocean of matter and meditation to such a studious
and judicious soul as his was, from writers, things and events, they could not
but be very excellent collections in themselves, and of great use to others;
for his spirit was like a refiners fire; what passed through it was the better
by his taking notice of it, and thereby recommending it to others.

He was always (when in health) as cheerful (as far as the Tragedies of the
times gave leave) as one that had the continual feast of a good conscience, and
as content, His cheerfulness in all estates.
as if he had had a Lords or Bishops estate, no less than a Princely mind.

All diminutions and indignities, which some men's pragmatick effronteries were
not ashamed to put upon so worthy and venerable a person, he digested into
patience and prayers; Such as were not worthy to stand under his shadow, yet
sought sometimes to stand in his light; yea and to put out so burning and
shining a light, at least to put it under a bushel, that their farthing candles
might make the better show; but he out-shined them all (like the Sun, nothing
could put a total eclipse upon Bishop Brounrig) yea and he buried all personal
injuries done to him in the grave of Christian charity, when he considered the
indignities and affronts which his blessed Redeemer suffered from people
wantonly wicked, who made a sport to buffet, strip, spit upon, and crucify the
Son of God and Lord of glory. Thus he was in some degree to be conform to
Primitive Bishops, which were poor and persecuted, yea to the great Bishop of
our souls, who for our sakes made himself of no reputation.

This excellent Bishop in his latter years (when motion was tedious, His often
changing his abode.
and noxious to him, by reason of his calculary infirmity and corpulency) yet
was put upon various tossings and removes too and fro; sometimes times at
London, at Bury, at Highgate, at Sunning and other places, to which he was
driven, either in order to repair his crazy health by change of air (Where at
least unwonted objects entertaining the fancy with novelty, seem to give some
ease, either by the pleasure of variety, or by a diversion from thinking of our
disorders and pains) or out of an equanimous civility to his many worthy
friends; that he might so dispense his much desired company among them, that no
one might be thought to have monopolized such a magazine of worth, to the envy
of others. And sometimes it may be he changed his quarters out of an ingenuous
tenderness of being or seeming any burden to those that were most civil to
him; knowing that there is prone to arise in us a satiety even of the best
things; that want does quichen our appetites, and absence give a fresh edge to
our welcomes. These or the like prudential motives suffered him not to fix very
long or constant in any one place, willing to appear, as he thought himself
(and was treated in this world) a Pilgrim and stranger; never at home, nor
owning any home till he came to Heaven, which was his fathers house, where he
should find better natured and more loving brethren than those, that as
Joseph's, had without cause stripped him, and cast him into a pit of narrowness
and obscurity, to dye there.

Yet before he left this world, His last residence in the Temple.
God would have him (as Moses to get up into a mount) to be set in some such
place of prospect and conspicuity, which might make the English world see that
all men's eyes were not so asquint on Bishops, or so blind or blood-shotten as
not to see the eminent worth of Bishop Brounrig; which could not be buried in
darkness, or extinguished in silence, without a great addition to the other
sins of the Nation, and shame of the times. And since some men had taken from
him and others their estates and lands, as Bishops, unforfeited by Law, only to
defray the charges of War, and to ease the taxes; it was thought by others a
better part of good husbandry to make use of those excellent gifts they had,
and were more willing to communicate, than to have parted so with their estates.

. Hence the Providence of God so ordered affairs, that he was about a year
before he died invited with much respect and civility to the Honorable
Societies of both Temples, to bless them as with his constant residence, so
(when his health would permit) with some of his fatherly instructions and
prayers. To show the reality of their love and value to his Lordship, they not
only allowed an annual Honorary recompense to express their thanks, but they
provided handsome lodgings, and furnished them with all things necessary,
convenient, and comely for a person of his worth.

. It was some little beam of joy to his great soul, to see that all sparks of
English generosity were not raked up or quite buried by the rubbish of faction,
when no Nation heretofore either more reverenced or better provided for their
Bishops and Clergy than England: He was glad to see so much courage in persons
of that quality, as to dare to own and employ a Bishop; it being as bold an
adventure as to some men's esteem, to hear a Bishop preach, as for a Bishop to
preach in so public a place. And indeed the nobleness of the Templers carriage
toward his Lordship, had a great resentment of honor, among all pious and
generous minds both in City and Country, who had either known the worth or
heard of the renown of Bishop Brounrig.

. It Is true, the Antiepiscopal leaven and sowreness liked not well the motion or
transaction, but being then much crest-fallen, confounded and dis-spirited, by
reason of their ragged successes in all things civil and sacred, not able to
wind up into any scain or bottom of good order and settled government, the
knotty threads or broken ends they had been spinning for many years, they would
not show their teeth where they could not bite; nor seem much concerned to
oppose, what they had no cause, and no great power to hinder.

. The last Easter Term, 1659. The good Bishop came to his Lodgings in the
Temple, and applied himself to answer the expectations and desires of his
hospitable Gainsses, who were so much satisfied, both with his pains and
presence, that such as could hear him preach rejoiced at the gracious words and
fatherly instructions which he gave them, prepared with elaborate diligence,
and expressed with affectionate eloquence; such as for the crowd, could not
come nigh enough to hear him, yet had not only patience, but pleasure to stay,
and behold him, conceiving they saw a Sermon in his looks, and were bettered by
the venerable aspect of so virtuous, grave, and worthy a person; which at once
frowned on sin, and smiled on goodness.

. This affliction only that noble Society had, that having tasted a little of
that Manna, and honey ((...)) some seven or eight times, they were not
permitted longer to enjoy the full and durable blessings of so sweet, so
plenteous, and so heavenly repast: In which he so dispensed his divine store
and provision, (as St. John wrote to youngmen and Fathers, to children and old
men, in his first Epistle, so) this Apostolic Bishop and Preacher at one
Sermon both pleased the young Gentlemen, and profited the Ancients; teaching
the first there to know their duty, and the second to do it; preparing the one
to live holily, the other to dye happily.

. But this rich banquet was not to last long; a little of Bishop Brounrig was a
great deal for any one congregation to have.

In Michaelmas Term next following his bodily infirmities began to prevail
against the strength and willingness of his mind, not permitting him to preach
in public, save only on the fifth of November, which was his last; though he
did preach in private almost to all that came to him, and were capable of his
converse, even till he was much spent and weary, as I have heard him complain.

God was pleased to exercise him with bodily pains, His bodily pains and
infirmities.
indispositions and distempers, sometimes with sharp fits of the stone, and
hydropick inclinations, which made the chariot of his body (which was somewhat
plethorick and corpulent) drive heavily, though those fiery horses, his fervent
spirits were still agile and able. But under all these God supported him with
his grace; and a spirit as always humble, devout and pious, so for the most
part, sociable, serene and cheerful, till he had lived to his Sixty seventh
year.

Then, with age, sickness increased with great failings of spirit; The Will he
made.
which gave him the alarms of approaching death; but before this, while he was
yet in competent health of body and serenity of mind, he made his Will, which
bears date, as Mr. Thomas Buck his Executor told me, two years before his
departure, A Will much like that of St. Austin, or other Primitive Bishops, not
laden with great and pompous Legacies of money, but rather with testimonies of
a pious, grateful and charitable soul. That little he had of estate, was
distributed either as tokens of respect, love, and gratitude to his ancient
friends, or as agnitions of his nearest deserving kindred and relations, or as
requitals to a well-deserving Servant, or as charitable reliefs to the poor; he
was pauperior opibus, but opulentior moribus, as Chysologus speaks of St.
Lanrence.

. If any man quarrel that he gave away no more by Will; The reason is, he had
no more: He wanted not a large heart or liberal hand; no man was further from
covetousness, which is never so unseasonable as when a man is dying: Nor was he
wanting to be his own Executor; choosing rather in secret to give much while he
lived, than to leave more when he died. If this be his defect that he gave not
great sums as the renowned Bishop Andrews, or other Bishops and Clergymen
sometime did to pious and charitable uses, to Colleges, Libraries, Hospitals,
(when Bishops and other Churchmen enjoyed those rewards and revenues, which the
piety and Laws of the Nation had proportioned to their places and merit) truly
it must be imputed to the injuries and privations of the times; for no tree
would have born more or fairer fruit, as in other so in this kind, than this
fair and fruitful figtree, if he had not been blasted; not by Christ's word as a
Bishop, or as barren; but by the fatal curse of the times. No Christian would
have done more good works of this nature, or more advisedly, than this wise and
venerable Bishop, Si res ampla domi similisque affectibus esset, if his estate
had been answerable to his mind: And yet he had discouragements enough as to
such works and charitable donations, wherein the Sacrilegious sauciness of some
men's spirits, (who dare make bold to take from God, and never ask his leave) is
such, that liberal souls are even nonplust how to place any durable and great
charity, in so safe a way as the Cormorant and Vulture of avarice or public
necessity, and State frugality will not in time seize on it as a prey; and sic
rapitur fisco, quod dabatur, and debetur Christo: One would have thought that
no times would have made a prey and spoil of those Ecclesiastial revenues which
Henry the Eighth's luxury and avaricious prodigality had spared; but we see,
Joel 1.4. the catterpillar will devour what the cankerworm, and locust, and
palmer-worm have left. The pious improvement of his interals of health.


In all his vacancies from pains and bodily infirmities, he was frequent in
preaching; in celebrating and receiving the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
in his private retirements much in reading, (chiefly the Scriptures of later
years) in meditating and in prayer, besides his social joining with others in
family duties; in which as he willingly and devoutly used the Liturgy of the
Church, so far as it was fitted to public and private necessities, so he
either added of his own or admitted from others those pious and prudent
prayers, which more nearly suited with the private devotions and condition of
those that were present.

. His willingness to die in these distracted times.
He had more frequent infirmities, as gentle Monitors a little before his
death, of which he would speak to my self and others in a kind of familiar
sort, as one that by dying daily was well acquainted with death. He would say,
That it was a very cheap time now to die; there being so little temptation to
desire life, and so many to welcome death: since he had lived to see no King in
the State, no Bishop in the Church, no Peer in Parliament, no Judge in the
Land, yea and no Parliament in any freedom, honor, power or being worthy that
name; Omnia miles; all power was contracted to the pummel of their sword, or
the barrel of their guns; the Soldier was all in all, in that black interregnum
or horrid (...), which had neither form nor power of any legal government in
England; in that dark day departed this great light: All Church and State being
reduced to military arbitration and presumption; he saw nothing remained of
order, or honor, love or Law, Reason and Religion, in any public and social
correspondency; yea new feuds and quarrels like boils from unsound bodies were
daily breaking out, and continuing the fires of civil Wars, like those of hell
and Tophet, to be everlasting and unquenchable: There being no thought of the
way of peace, but to avoid it.

. This made him willingly gird (as St. Peter did) his coat to him, that he
might be ready to lanch into that dead sea when Christ should bid him come to
him. He only hoped and prayed that. God would favor him so far with an (...),
as to let him dye without much pain, as indeed he did; For after his spirits
were in ten days decayed and wasted, he slumbred much, yet had vigilant
intervals; at which times he was intent to his long home, and his better
reception by the holy Angels, by a gracious Savior, and a good God; giving
himself to such Prayers, meditations and discourses, as his own strength could
bear, or others kindness would seasonably afford him; thus (as Chrysologus
speaks of Elias) Anima defaecata mortis victrix evolavit ad coelum, being full
of the grace and peace of God, and confirmed in it by the absolution of the
Church (which belongs to all that dye in the true faith, and blessed hope of
penitent sinners) he placidly rendered his holy, devout and precious soul to God
that gave it on the seventh of December in the year of our Lord 1659. in that
vertiginous year, which after three overturns, so reformed the Church and State
of England that there was no form of legal, civil and settled Government in
England: But from fighting at first for King and Parliament, both King and
Parliament were quite driven out by those that having power over the purse by
the sword of the Nation, thought they deserved to have the Sovereign power
also, and could manage it better than those Masters to whom they formerly had
devoted their service as Soldiers.

And thus have I made my observations of this great and good star, or this
constellation rather, of many excellencies natural, intellectual, civil, and
spiritual, from its first rise to its descent.

Of all whose inward accomplishments (and outward luster) his very bodily
presence, His outward presence, figure and aspect.
and visible aspect was a kind of pledge and earnest; He was (...), as Greg.
Nazian. speaks of the Ecclesiastic and majestic looks of St. Basil and
Caesarius. The whole frame of his person had something of grandeur, goodliness
and loveliness in it; his looks were venerable (in vultu omnium virtutum signa)
he had all the good omens and lineaments of great virtues in his countenance;
and truly his life made good his looks: His body for stature and figure, was
somewhat athletick, puissant (paulo procerius) somewhat taller and bigger than
ordinary? yet very comely ( decorae animae vestis, as Tertul. calls it) no man
ever became the Preachers Pulpit, or the Doctors Chair, or the Episcopal Seat
(it was called of old Thronus Episcopalis) better than he did: Carrying before
him such an unaffected state and grandeur, such a benign gravity, and a kind of
smiling severity, that one might see much in him to be reverenced, and more to
be loved; yet what was venerable in him was very amiable, and what was amiable
was very venerable.

. The majesty of his presence was so allayed with meekness, candor and
humility, that no man was further from any thing morose or supercilious, or
savouring of self-fulness and conceit; he was (as (...) so (...)) of so affable
a compliance, and supple a condescension, that although he never forgot himself
as to any indecorum, yet he seemed never to remember himself much in point of
reserve and distance, as to those excellencies which he had above most men; he
was like Gideons fleece, into which the liberal dew of heaven had distilled
insensibly; which filled it, but not swelled it: it was more ponderous not more
proud with its celestial pregnancy and fluency.

. Of men's aspects and looks, indicating their minds and manners.
The veracity of this great and good man's aspect, or the harmony of his genius,
life and manners, to his looks and presence, much verifies what I have often
observed, that most men are as they look, after once they are so fixed by their
habituated desires and designs, that they are come to a conformity with
themselves: vultus animi index, was of old, and still most true; That one may
very much see, how the wheels of the soul, the mind and spirits, the passions
and affections move, by the Index or hand of the eyes and aspect: The souls of
men looking out, and taking air, as it were at these Belconies and Porticoes
which are so near the grand Camera, the Court and presence Chamber of the soul,
the brain.

. I have read of St. Ambrose, Bishop of Millan, that he refused to ordain two
young men Presbyters, Propter periculosos et patrantes vultus; because they had
such committing and scandalous looks; They proved afterward (as they did
portend and he prophecy) profligate wretches.

. I know, where the volatile fluidness of youth, like Euripus is yet unsettled,
or riper years grow so cunning in hypocrisy, as to put on vizards and act a
part, there may be often mistakes; but (...), for the most part take men in the
native and unaffected forms, choler and meekness, simpleness and subtilty,
sowreness and sweetness, levity or gravity, craft and plain-heartedness,
gentlenss and cruelty, petulancy and seriousness, modesty and wantonness,
parsimony and liberality, cowardilness and courage, haughtiness and humility,
anger and favor, falsity and honesty, as they are qualities infused or
acquired and fixed in the inward man, so by a conformity of the fancy, spirit,
blood and constitution to those habits, they have (like the black and yellow
Jaundise) a notable tincture and diffusion in the eye and aspect. Some men
threaten, others invite by their looks; the first aspect of some, as the sight
of a Wolf, puts men on their guard; others command a confidence and give
assurance from the letters of credence and testimonials they carry in their
countenances.

. As the face of Moses shined in his converse with God; and St. Stephens, when
he drew nearer to God; so the countenance of Cain was cast down when his soul
had the black tincture of his brothers blood; Jacob saw Labans envy and ill
will to him in his averse and morose looks: Thus the predominant habits of men's
minds ofttimes leave such a signature on their looks, that (vappa aut vinum
respondet hederae) the liquor within answers to the ivy or bush without; It Is
true, education, custom, company, religion and grace (as Socrates said of
morality) will much sweeten and alter, as men's manners and minds, so their
aspects; and bring them from that which in their Physiognomy is canine,
vulpine, caprine, porcine, lupine or leonine (for so we read some men had
lionly looks) to what is humane, angelick and divine, by an happy
metamorphosis; yet still I find much is to be read, feared and hoped in men's
very countenances, which I cannot but observe (as a venial digression I hope)
from this venerable person; who (quod vultu promisit optimum vita praestitit)
by his life performed what his looks promised; being as Formae decentissimus,
so Ingenio florentissimus, proposito sanctissimus, and vita inncentissimus.

But how goodly a person soever he was, The public loss in his death.
and worthy to be beheld and enjoyed by us longer in the land of the living;
yet now he is (as the flower and goodliness of all flesh) cut down, withered
and vanished, hidden from all mortal eyes, you are now to look upon him only by
reflection backward; for forward he is invisible; Another potent Eliah taken
out of your sight: another reverend Father that has left this Orphane and
divided Church; another wise man and faithful Counselor withdrawn from a
foolish nation and distracted people, from whom God has taken away his peace;
Another righteous man taken from the evil to come; another great Prophet who
could not but foresee and foretell the evils that would (as St. Paul speaks)
follow a sinful generation after his departure.

. This is another of the prime chariots and horsemen of our Israel, of our
excellent Scholars, Divines, Preachers and Bishops, which God has taken out
of an evil world, after Bishop Usher, Bishop Hall, Bishop Morton and others of
later years, who are sufficient to make an everlasting divorce between Prelacy
and Popery; that odious and unjust conjunction of modern calumny put upon the
reformed Bishops of England; all these died, as in the true faith, so in the
foresight and fear of much future miseries impending over us; for though we
have drank deep of the cup of the wrath of God, yet they justly feared we were
not yet at the dregs. If God heretofore punished the sins of King, Lords and
Bishops, doubtless he has a quarrel with Parliaments, Presbyters and People;
For his wrath is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still
against the Nation; If fire break forth to consume the green trees, what shall
become of those that are dry and sear, twice dead, and thrice plucked up by the
root, from their Kings, from their Parliaments, and from their Reformed
Religion; to all which they were more than once solemnly engaged? And how can
we be sit for the peace of God or men?

This holy Bishop went not as the envious and evil world designed, with sorrow
to his grave upon his own account, but rather with joy and blessed hope; he
knew the world was bad enough at best, but now he thought it stark naught and
mad, without sense or shame for sin, even at its worst (Novissima and pessima
tempora.) His only fear and grief was least the Ark of the Reformed Religion
once well settled in England, should at length be taken captive again by the
stratagems of the enemies, and carried either to Babylon, or the house of
Dagon, to popular and fanatic confusion, or to Romish Idolatry and
superstition: this hope yet he had in the bottom of his fears, next Gods mercy,
that fince the most crying and scarlet sins were not the vote, fact or
after-assent of either the most or the best people of the Nation, that perhaps
the Lord would yet return to England in his favor, and require the vengeance
due to his justice, and to the scandal of the Christian and Reformed Religion,
from those who were the chief in evil counsels and actions, violently obtruded
upon the Nation to its great trouble and misery.

. The mourning due to his Funeral.
If tears were venial in any prviate funeral (when Church and State lie a
dying) they might be allowed in this before us, but not for his sake who is at
rest, and of whom we may say, Non illi vita erepta, sed mors donata, as Tully
of Crassus slain before the civil wars ((...), as Naz.) he is a great gainer by
death; but for our selves, as Christ told the weeping women, both as to those
evils that are continuing and increasing upon us, and for these public losses
of so worthy a person, in whom (as Nazianzen says of St. Basil the great) Every
man good and bad receives damage; the first of the good example they love, the
second of that good example they need.

. And if, as in other things some men are pleased to show themselves Jews (that
is, faithless and cruel to Fellow Christians) so in this, you (as the better
Israel of God) list so to imitate that Judaick custom of rending your garments,
truly no ceremony is more agreeable to Symbolize, or to set forth our sad
condition, The sad rents in England religious and civil at his death.
whose rents and breaches are not in two pieces, but as many as the Prophet
Ahiah tore Jeroboams new garment into; and if only our civil and outward
garments were rent, as to secular liberties, estates, peace, and laws, it were
tolerable; But our inward garment, that should be nearer and dearer to us than
our skins, even Christ's coat, yea his skin, nay his mystical body, his Church,
this is torn into more than a dozen pieces, even our religion, yea our very
reformation, is rent into rags; nay our rags pretend to be our reformations;
and our Schismatics would seem our Seamsters, and our renders, will needs be
our reformers and repairers; A condition of Church and State, so deplorable,
that it requires rending of our hearts from sin, more than of our garments; and
weeping with tears of blood, as Nazianzen speaks.

. In the civil wars of England hererofore, yet this comfort there was, that
they had the same religion; They could say Amen to the same prayers; though the
bodies fought, their souls did not.

The misery of our miseries is, that our best medicine, which should heal our
civil wounds, is become our greatest malady; Our Oil is turned to vinegar; and
our Balm of Gilead, into aqua fortis, or the water of jealousy; Civil
scratches and wounds, will in time heal; but religious divisions fester and
grow ulcerous; every one being ambitious in this, to be constant in their
zealous cruelty to the adverse party; the truth is, our wounds are so deep, so
rankerous, and incurable, that nothing but a miracle of mercy can help or
recover us; many have essayed to heal the hurt of the daughter of my people,
but slightly, partially and superficially; as Physicians of no value; the more
we trusted to them, as King Asa, or spent our estates upon them, (as the woman
in the Gospel) the worse we are; O great Physician of souls, do thou undertake
our cure, to whose omnipotent mercy nothing is impossible.

. In the last place, Conclusion of gratitude to the Societies of the Temples in
the Bishops behalf.
I am to close this sad obsequie, and Christian Solemnity, with return of many
thanks to these honorable Societies; First in the Name of the departed, this
great Prophet, this good Eliah, this venerable Bishop; Next in the name of all
his reverend Brethren (Coepiscopi) yet surviving (reliquiae Danaum atque
immitis Achillis.) Thirdly, in the name of all worthy Ministers, (that are not
Acephalists, and rudely Autepiscopal, walking Antipodes to all Antiquity, and
themselves heretofore; Fourthly, in the name of all learned and ingenuous men,
in both the Universities and all the Nation: Lastly, in the name of the blessed
God, and the Son of God, whose servant, Minister and prophet, this holy and
learned Bishop was.

I am, I say, in the name of all these, to return you deserved thanks; that in
the darkness and terror of these last and perilous times, you were pleased to
express the esteem, and respect you had to the worth of this reverend person,
and the dignity of his Episcopal function; Inviting him to such a kind and
hospitable reception, as was very acceptable and welcome to him, because from
persons of your worth; And although (considering his merit and quality,) you
are so ingenuous, as to think it was a kind condescension in him to be your
honorary preacher; yet he esteemed it as an honor and preferment to him; And
the more because, (super omnia vultus accessere boni,) he thought he saw in the
serenity of all your countenances, the propensity of your generous hearts, and
unfeined affections to him.

May you never want a Prophets reward, Peroration and Comprecation.
may your love and respect to him be inscribed on the lasting monument of his
great and precious Name; may his renowned memory, outlast his mortal remains,
which he desired to deposite among you in this Temple; May his excellent
example be to you and posterity, (as his presence was while yet alive) a sacred
charm against all sinful, rude, unchristian and unmanly debauchery; also an
incentive to piety, learning, virtue, and true honor; So will you never repent
of the honor you did him, at the last act of his life; and in him you did it
to your selves, and your worthy Societies, and in that to the whole Nation;
Expiating (for your part) the diminutions and indignities undeservedly cast
upon this and other good Bishops, by those that knew not how to use or value
him, and them; not understanding at what distance themselves stood from the
learned, sacred and useful worth of such venerable men.

. If you please to add to your former favors (while he lived among you) this
last of giving order, and leave to adorn your Chapel with any Monument for
him; you need be at no more cost, then to inscribe, on a plain stone, the name
of BISHOP BROUNRIG. This will make that stone Marble enough, and your Chapel a
Mausoleum.

It only now remains that we beg of God, Supplictaion to God.
whose providence sets before us, by such great examples of virtue, and piety,
the possibility of being really and eminently good; That he would please to
give us grace, to value and to follow them with high esteem, cheerful love, and
constant imitation; that at length we may attain to that crown of glory,
whither this holy man and others are gone before us, ( non amissi, sed
praemissi, as Cyprian speaks) not lost, but outstriping us, as St. John did St.
Peter, to the Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus Christ; who by dying for us, has
suffered, sanctified, and sweetened death, to all true beleivers; To this
blessed Savior with the eternal Father, and holy Spirit, be everlasting glory,
Amen.

A good name is better then precious ointment, and the day of death then the
day of ones birth. Pro. 7.1. (...). Naz. Or. 23. Ille and Deum honoratus satis,
ille opulentus satis adveniet, cui adstabunt continentia, misericordia,
patientia, charitas, fides and super omnia Christus. Lactant. l. 5. Inst.
EPITAPHION. P. M. S.
Augustius solito Virtutum exemplar Sitibi tuisque imitandum velis, Mox
Moriture Lector: Subtus positas ne pigeat contemplari EXVVIAS RADOLPHI
BRUNRICI. S.T.D.
IPSWICI, peramaeni Icenorum oppidi,
Parentibus honestis, Tantoque Filiobeatis, orti.
Infantulum terrestri orbum coelestis tenerius fovit Pater:
Piaque literatura pene ad miraculum imbutum,
Per omnes Academiarum gradus eductum,
Ad Aulae Catharinae praefecturam,
Ad saepius repetitam Procan. Cantab. dignitatem
Ad Exoniensis Episcopatus Honorem,
CAROLI Regis favore evexit:
Quem afflictissimum fidelitate inconoussa coluit
Vir undique egregius: Doctior an melior dubites;
Fama per omnem aetatem immaculata,
immo splendida and magnifica.
(...) olim per biennium, at (...):
Nec conjugii spretor, nec coelibatui impar,
Severus ubique castitatis exactor;
Tam vultus, quam vitae majestate venerandus:
Quod enim vultu promisit optimum, vita praestitit:
Tacita Sermonum, urbana morum sanctitate
non jucundus minus, quam utilis.
Supercilii non ficti, non elati, non efferi;
Humillima granditate cuncta gerens.
Credas nec conscio tantas cumulasse dotes
Naturam prodigam, benignamque gratiam:
Adeo omne tulit punctum; idque levissima invidia.
In Concionibus sacris frequens dominator:
In disputationibus scholasticis semper Triumphator;
Barnabas idem and Boanerges:
Tam pugno, quam palma nobilis:
Suavi terrore, and venerando amore ubique pollens,
Beata uberrimi ingenii facundia,
Honorum omnium votis and expectationi nunquam non satisfecit.
Quadratus undique Deo, Ecclesiae, Sibi constans:
A mobili and rotunda aevi figura penitus abhorrens
Scienter, sapienter, and semper bonus:
Reformarae olim in Anglia Religionis priseae doctrinae,
Liturgiae, Regiminis, Ecclesiae integrae,
Contra Veteratores and Novatores omnes
aequanimus, at acerrimus vindex.
Sero nimis (pro temporum morbis and remediis)
Episcopali sublimitate meritissime auctum,
Bellorum et Schismatum late flagrantium incendia
Optimum Antistitem, una cum Coepiscopis omnibus
(viris ut plurimum innoxiis and eximiis)
Tota ecclesia, Rege, Repub.) mox deturbarunt;
Deturbatum facultatibus pene omnibus spoliarunt.
Jacturam ingenti ut decuit, animo tulit:
de Sacrilegis non spoliis sollicitus,
Queis non minus carere, quam recte uti didicerat.
Tandem, ipsa obscuritate illustrior factus,
Generosae Templariorum Societatis amore allectus,
Concionatoris Honorarii munus ibidem suscepit;
Nec diu (proh dolor) sustinuit.
Quum enim Testamentum condiderat,
Quale primaevi solebant Episcopi,
Gratiarum in Deum, Benignitatis in amicos,
Charitatis in omnes copia refertum,
Anno Aetatis Sexagesimo septimo,
Iniqui, inquieti, ingrati seculi mores,
Jamque merito recrudescentis belli minas
Laetus fefellit:
Et ad meliorem Dominum
(...) Christiana plenus,
Optata (...) beatus,
Libens migravit,
December. 7. 1659.
Haec vero venerandi Praesulis ramenta aurea, Amplissmique viri parva compendia
L. M. C. J. G. S. T. D.
Magnalia ejus, quae nec marmor breve,
Nec Tabula prolixa, nec men's mortalis capiet,
Beatae Aeternitati
Silentio consecranda.
(...).

EPINIKION.
ITe nunc (...), vestros recensete greges;
(Multis Sectarum maculis variegata pecora)
Si quos inter vostros Gigantum fraterculos
(Vilis plebeculae vilia mancipia)
Pares similesve invenistis Heroas
Primaevis nuperisque nostris Episcopis:
Usserium (volo) Mortonium, Potterum,
Davenantium, Hallum, Prideaxium,
Westfeildium, Winneffum, Brunricum,
Alios, meliori seculo and fato dignos;
Extra irae invidiaeque vestrae aleam nunc positos;
Heu tandem pudibundi vobiscum recolite,
Aurea quae in ferrum mutastis secula^; quando
Nec merita praemiis deerant, nec praemia meritis:
Quantum a bellis, a mendicitate, a miseriis,
A rixis, ab hodiernis vulgi ludibriis,
Tranquilla and beata ista distabant tempora;
Quae, molles nimis, nec far, nec frui potuistis,
Icti, afflicti, prostrati Phryges tandem sapite;
Deumque (...), non (...) Authorem
Moribus Catholicis and antiquis colite,
Ut quantum a Papae tyrannide, and plebis (...) differat
Primaeva and paterna Episcoporum Praelatura,
Sine fuco sciant, fruanturque posteri,
BRVNRICI memores Praesulis Angelici.
FINIS.

