Walk KNAVES, walk.

A DISCOURSE Intended to have been spoken at COURT And now published for the
satisfaction of all those that have participated of the svveetness of public
Employments.

BY HODG TVRBERVIL, Chaplain to the late LORD HEVVSON.

Si populus vult decipi decipiatur*

London, Printed in the year, 1659.

GOOD COUNSEL AGAINST COLD WEATHER.
Beloved Brethren,
THough my profession of a Cordwinder be something unsuitable to this
Teaching-Calling, yet my Text is not; I have served seven years Apprentiship in
the one, and full as many in the other; so as being a Journeyman to both, I
hope my words will deserve your attention and patience, for whose sakes I have
traveled many a weary mile, and am now come hither purposely to instruct you,
making choice of these words for my Text, Hewson 1. 2* Now because the times
are bad, and the Winter draws near, (as the old Translation has it) therefore
buy ye wax Boots.

But if we follow the New Translation, according to that of our learned
Mo^o^ulist and noble Commander Coll. Hewson, who is known to be the best and
the ablest Translator of our Profession now living, we shall find the
foregoing part of the text far more agreeing with the coherence of the words
then the other: Now because (says he) the times are dangerous, and the Winter
approaches, therefore etc. Or as he has it more elegantly in his learned
Comment upon Crispine de Act Vampandi, Chap. 18. Now because the times are
wavering, and the winter of our troubles steals upon us, therefore plunder ye,
[mark that beloved, it is a sweet expression* and full of comfort] therefore
plunder ye waxed Boots; As if he should say, Now because the times are fickle,
because the times are wavering, uncertain, perilous, inconstant and changeable
as the Moon: And in the second place, Because the winter draws near, because
cold weather approaches (in which we are like to find cold comfort if we be not
prepared beforehand against it) or rather (as in another place he has it)
because the Winter of our troubles steals hastily upon us, and the wicked begin
to domineer over us, let us be even with the winter and the wicked too, and
steal as fast from them as they do upon us, which is warranted by these words
in the latter part of the text, Therefore plunder ye, etc. But we will follow
the old translation of Crispine, who was too honest to plunder, therefore
(says he) Buy ye waxed Boots.

In which words observe these parts:

1. The time present. 2. The condition of the times. 3. The season of the
times. 4. The benefit or use we should make of the times* 1. The time present,
Now. 2. The condition of the times, They are dangerous, uncertain, wavering
etc. 3. The season of the times, The Winter approaches: Now because, etc. 4.
The benefit or use we should make of the times, Therefore buy ye, etc.

First of the time briefly, Now, now at present, now whilst it is time, whilst
you have an opportunity to get money from the Malignant party; now (even now)
before they rise up again, and force you to fly for refuge to some neighbor
Nation; provide you of Materials to do it; take from them their Horses, Armor;
nay such blessings as neither you nor your fathers before you could either
purchase or enjoy, their waxed boots; and this leads me to the second thing
considerable:

The condition of the times, They are bad, dangerous, uncertain and wavering,
etc.

If the times be bad now, what will they be hereafter? Beloved, Man is a little
world, the world is round, and so are we; the world is an hollow and empty
thing, so are we; the world has his times and seasons, his Winters and and
Summers, his Days and Nights, so has man; he has times of gettings, and his
times of losings; his Summers of pleasure, and his Winters of heaviness; his
Days of joy, and his Nights of sorrow: Seeing then all these sub^unary things
are thus transitory and wavering, let us lay hold of whatsoever stands before
us, let us take all things that comes in our way, furnishing our selves
cape-a-pee, with the goods of the ungodly, employed in these words, Therefore
plunder ye, etc. and this brings me to the third Motive that should persuade,
or rather invite us to do it, Because the winter appreaches.

Now because the times are bad, and the winter approaches, therefore buy ye
waxed Boots.

Beloved, all creatures by natural instinct are taught to provide and lay up
provision against Winter; the little Ant stacks up Corn; the laborious Be
lays up Honey against the cold Winter approaches; and will it not be a shame,
nay a great shame beloved, for man who is a reasonable creature, and has more
strength and discretion then ten thousand Ants or Bees put them all together; I
say, Will it not be a most abominable shame for him to be sent to the silly
Ants and Bees for instruction, whilst he like the simple Grasshopper hops and
skips away the summer of his days in vanity and idleness, and afterward in
the winter of years is forced to perish and starve for want of food? O beloved,
rather do any thidg then starve; the Proverb says, Poverty is the mother of
misery, therefore it is good to provide and lay up something against a rainy
day. Now what season is more rainy then the Winter season? and what is more
seasonable at that time, what better fence in the world for our feet against
the rain, wet and cold, then a pair of waxed Boots? therefore buy ye if ye have
money, plunder ye if ye have none, (for it matters not how you come by them so
you have them) waxed boots. So now I am come to the fourth and last thing, the
benefit and use we should make of the times: Buy waxed boots, therefore buy ye
waxed boots.

Where note, that the adverb therefore, is an adverb of connection* for here it
joins the winter and the boots together* Now beloved, since I have taken the
boots in hand, give me leave to stitch them up in few words, telling you first
how many sorts of boots there are; and next what manner of boots those be which
are required here in my text. For the better explanation of which words, you
are to take notice that there are eight several sorts of boots, I will run over
them briefly, because I see the time hastens: I say beloved, there are several
sorts of boots* First your Dutch boots, they are a people that will not put on
a boot which is not as well liquored as themselves; from whence I gather this
Observation, That drunken men love drunken boots. Secondly, there is your
French boots; O defy them brethren, defy them, they are abominably
contaminated with the disease of their country; how many whole congregations
of ours have they already infected with it? VVitness that lamentable snivelling
and snuffling which of late has spread it self through the bridgefallen Noses
of our ablest teachers, for which no other reason in the world can be given
then their riding the Sisters in these French Pockey boots: Here by the way
give me leave to tell you the several names of this Disease; Some call it
Morbus Neapolitanus, and Morbus Gallicus: First, it is called the Neapolitan
Disease, or the Disease of Naples; for it is observed by our wisest Physicians,
that ever since Naples commidities came over into England, this disease has
been very busy amongst us. Others say it came by another Italian trick, and
that it was brought over by advice of Nich. Machavil in a Florence sil^
Petticoat, under which device it has continued ever since; therefore beloved
have a care* how you meddle with foreign Wenches Petticoats* Latit Anguis in
herba: that is that Serpent the Devil lurks in their holes, and the Pox under
their Petticoats.

Next it is called Morbus Gallicus, and not unfitly, for Gallicus signifies a
Cock, and Morbus a Disease, that is, as much as to say, the Disease of the
cock; and truly it is well known, that the cock is the first part* that is
infected with this disease: But some will say, What do you tell us a story of
a cock and a bull? Why verily beloved, a good cock is a good thing; and bulls
leather is good leather to make waxed boots of; which brings me to the third
sort of Leather, your Rusha boots. Fourthly, there is your Spanish Leather
boots. Fifthly, your Calves Leather Essex boots. Sixthly, your Slints skin, or
abortive Parchment boots. Seventhly, there is your Hell-cart, or Coach-boat.
Eighthly and lastly, there is your right English Neats. Leather boot, which is
the boot intended here in my text for the VVinter waxed boot: Now because the
times are bad, etc. therefore, etc.

So now having shown you how many several sorts of boots there are, give me
leave likewise to show you how to distinguish the good from the bad, (because I
will not warrant all of our Profession to be honest men, since I know some who
can stretch their consciences beyond their Last or their Leather) therefore
that you may not be deceived in your choice of a perfect winter boot, you are
to observe these four qualities.

1. The Grain of the Boot. 2. The length of the Boot. 3. The well joining and
sowing of the Boot. 4. The waxing of the Boot.
First' the Grain of the boot; beloved, there are several sorts of Grains,
there are your Grains of Corn, your Grains of Mustard Seed, your Beer and Malt
Grains, etc. Next there is your good and Physical Grains. Thirdly, there is
your Granum vivens sensibile, your living sensible Grains, (of which sort I
fear here are too many in this Congregation) that is, your Knaves in Grain. And
lastly, there is your Leather Grain, (the principal here intended) which if it
be close and compact, stiff and shining, you may be assured (of the first thing
observable) that your Leather is good.

The next thing considerable, is the joining and well sowing of the boot; By
joining, you are to understand the even cutting and proportioning of the tops
to the upper part, and the vampings to the lower part of the legs of the boots.
This properly belongs to the Master, but the other of sowing or stitching
belongs to his Servant. Now in sowing or stitching, you are to take notice,
that you are not to sow boots as you sow Corn, (in which he is accounted the
best workman who scatters and disperseth his grain best) but you must sow your
stitches close together, first on the inside, next on the outside, if ever you
mean to have your Boots go through stitch, and hold out water when the Winter
comes, and the ways are heavy and durty.

Thirdly, look to the length of your boots; Brethren, a long boot has these
commodities. First, it will keep warm, and cover that which has covered many a
Commodity. Next it will preserve you from fretting and galling between the
legs, (a disease which many a dear Sister is troubled with, proceeding from the
same cause though in a different manner) the man by hard riding, to the woman
by being too hard ridden.

A third commodity belonging to long boots is this; that if the vampings fail,
the leather shrinks, or the seames crack, yet they may be often mended, and the
boots still do good service, which reason alone (if the two former are not
prevalent) are enough to persuade you to buy long waxed boots.

Fourthly and lastly, you must observe the waxing of the boot, in which you are
to take notice, first of the matter, wax; and next of the manner, how to wax
your winter boots.

First of the matter wax: Beloved there are three several sorts of wax. Hard
wax, soft wax, and Beeswax. The first is used for letters, the seond for Bonds
or Indentures: But soft here, me thinks I here some one amongst you object and
say, If soft wax be commonly used for Indentures, why may it not more properly
be used for such boots as we commonly make Indentures in, when you and I, (and
many more here amongst us) come late home from Taverns and Tippling houses? To
this I answer, that such boots ought rather to be termed Dutch liquored-boots,
than waxed boots; since the head and the feet do ever sympathize, so as the one
cannot properly be said to be full of liquor, except the other bear a share
with it also. I rather believe these boots are made of some Horses skin that
died of the staggers.

The third and last sort of wax, is Beeswax, the only wax you are to use for
your winter boots; ah but you will say, how shall I use this wax that you so
much approve of for winter boots: why, you must know that this wax in the
waxing of boots is not to be used simply, but compounded with hard tallow,
which brings me to the last thing you are to observe, that is, the manner of
waxing your winter boot. Beloved, you are first to melt hard tallow with this
wax, then you are to anoint and chase in these ingredients by a good fire, at
three several times, because once or twice will not be enough, by reason of the
dryness of the new boot, which will soak up the first and second time,
whatsoever you lay upon it* I say therefore you must do it at least three
several times, if you mean to have a perfect and sure well waxed winter boot.

So having now run in my boots through all the parts of my Text, and taken
pains to give you many weighty reasons why you ought all of you to be provide
of waxed boots. First because of the times, they are bad. Secondly, dangerous.
Thirdly, uncertain. Fourthly, The Winter approaches, etc. Next also I have
given you Observations and Instructions, that you may not be deceived in your
choice of a winter boot, but may easily discover it; First by the grain,
Secondly, by the well soweing. Thirdly, by the length: Fourthly, and lastly, by
the waxing; and also taught you the several Sorts of Wax, and how in what
manner you should wax your wintered Boots. Give me leave out of the former part
of the Text, to raise this Doctrine: That,

Bad times require good boots. I say bad times require good boots: because the
times are bad, and the Winter, etc. therefore, etc. I shall explain my self to
you brethren, briefly thus. I say, bad times require good boots; for verily
beloved, the times are bad, very bad, and are like every day, for ought I see,
to grow worse and worse; so as I fear, we must all of us e're long, be forced
to fly for our Religion. Now beloved, whither shall we fly? Marry it is a
Question worth your answering, but I doubt there are few or none here, that
know how to resolve me in it; for verily I am as yet to seek my self, where to
run or hide my head, should the malignant party prevail. But perhaps, some will
cry out and say, we will fly to New England, another he is for Geneva, another
he is for a nearer place then both these, he will away to Amsterdam. Truly
beloved, I must confess, I cannot but approve of this place for the best,
being it is not only the nearest, but the safest, and has ever in former
times, been found to be the only Nurse and Sanctuary, for all such as are like
them, Dispisers of Royal Government, and Self-forms of Prayers.

But here will one object, and say. Is not this an Island wherein we now live,
(I had almost said wherein we now dwell, but alas! if the times change, here
will be no habitation for us:) and is not this Island encompassed round with a
great Sea, will not all our shipping then be taken from us, how then shall we
get over to Amsterdam; or what good then will our waxed boots do us?

Beloved; this weak Objection, is easily answered thus. It Is true, that England
is an Island encompassed with the Sea. It Is true, there will be no traveling
out of it by Land, and it will likely prove as true, (if the wicked prevail)
that our Navy will be taken from us. But O thou inconsiderate fool! whosoever
thou art that raisest this idle objection,) have thou not the more need of
waxed boots to pass through this Sea? have thou not great and rough Waters to
wade over, before thou can arrive at thy Journeys end? Now if thy boots be
long enough, (which as I told you before; you must be sure to observe, before
you buy them for this purpose) and the Seams strong and well-waxed, so as they
will hold out water, which you ought first to make trial of, by wading in them
over the Thames, from the Parliament-stairs to Lambeth, or from White Hall to
Stangate, (for one of these ways we must all fly if the Cavaliers prevail) you
need not be afraid afterward to go over with them, to any part beyond the Seas.
So as methinks, this also should be another strong motive, to persuade us to
buy strong and long waxed boots.

But here some incredulous and fearful brother, will make a scruple, and say:
should we grant you, that it may be possible for us, to pass over the Sea in
waxed boots; yet how shall we do now the Winter is come on, the days short, but
the Night and our Journeys very dark and long? I say, how shall we do in these
dismal and obscure nights, to find our way, through so pathlesse and uncertain
an Element as the Sea is?

O beloved be not dismayed, be not cast down with fear! take you no care for
that. Have we not a good and glorious General gone before us, and with the beams
of his bright shining Countenance, will like the Sun, disperse those dark
shades that does cover the Waters. He is our Leader, our Guide by day, and our
Lamp by night, who has carried a living fire in the Lanthorn of his beak;
which neither the highest Winds can put out, nor the greatest Waves extinguish,
because it will ever continue the same, so long as the Splendour of it endures.

But we will leave generals, and come to particulars, for I fear I have been
too tedious in illustrating this Doctrine, wherefore I will only pass to an
use or two, and so conclude.

The first is an use of consolation or comfort. Is it so, That waxed boots will
preserve us from the cold; is it so that with waxed boots, we may pass through
thick and thin; Nay, through Seas of Troubles, why, what a great comfort and
consolation is it, for all those who have occasion to travail through bad and
sad ways, to be provided of waxed boots. Beloved, there are (as I showed you
before) your Summer and your Winter boots. In the one you may travail
reasonably well, all the year long, provided your ways, and the journey be
accordingly. As for example: If you have occasion to ride your Newmarket ways,
your Bansted Down ways, your Tiptry Heath ways, or your Salisbury plain
ways, then these Summer boots will carry you through; these will preserve you
well enough, provided no rain from above, or dirt, mire, and waters from
beneath, do not offend or molest you. But should you have occasion in the
Winter time to travel, your Essex ways, your Dunmow ways, your High Suffolk,
Farningham Castle ways, or those most abominable dirty, miry, and watery
Wishbeech, or Ely Fenny ways; O in what a fine case would your Summer boots
be, when they have been well washed in those filthy ways. How will they shrink
together like parchment against the Fire. Therefore buy you waxed boots.

And this puts me in mind of a merry, but a real story, that I have heard from
a credible person, who I am confident would not tell an untruth, of a certain
young Gentleman, living not far from Newmarket, who was a Suitor* to a fair
Lady, dwelling at Cholchester in the County of Essex. Now this young Gallant,
having never before, traveled five miles from his Fathers House, (imagined the
same the Citizens Wife did, who having never in her life time been out of
London, would needs persuade her Husband, that though she had but twenty miles
to ride, and it was a rainy day, yet they two might ride safe and dry all the
way, under the Penthouses:) So this spruce Blade, thinking all the World was
heath ground, though it was in the depth of Winter, and his man persuaded him
to put on his Winter boots, he would not go thither in any but a pair of thin
Calves leather Essex boots, alleging this reason for it, That he new his
Mistress would love him the better, when she see he came to court her, in a
pair of her own Country boots. Whereupon, he sets forward on his Journey; but
mark Beloved what followed; he had not gone above half his way, before he took
such an excessive cold on his Feet, that he was forced to alight at a poor
blind Alehouse, at a place called Black Chapel, within three miles of Dunmow,
where he had no sooner got a fire made, and his boots (which hung about him
like Chitterlins, with much ado pulled of) but he fell into a violent Ague,
and was immediately compelled to take his bed, where he remained many days
after. But I had almost forgot to tell you, that the poor Alehouse Keeper,
where this Gentleman lay sick, did keep in his house a young water Spaniel,
which he had newly taught to fetch and carry; this wanton unlucky Whelp,
seeking about the house in the midst of the Night, for some bones to eat,
lights upon the Gentleman's boots, which he no sooner meets with, but being
desirous to put in practice, what his Master had so lately taught him, he takes
first one boot, and afterward another, and carries them into the entry: where
finding them wet and soft, instead of playing the Cur, falls to tearing them,
and in short time pulled and knawed them into many pieces. Now it chanced, that
in the morning early, before it was light, the Old man's Wife (who also dressed
tripes for to get a living) was called up by a Butcher, who brought her some
inwards of a Beast fot the same purpose, which she had no sooner received, but
returning back through the entry, she unhappily stumbled upon the Gentleman's
mangled boots, so as letting fall what she had in her hands upon them, groping
in the dark, she took up all together, and carrying them into the Kitchen,
(without lighting a Candle) first cut, and then washed and dressed them all
together, and having afterward well boiled the boots, amongst the rest in a
Kettle, which over night she had set over the fire for the same purpose, she
cast them into her sowcing Tub, where for a while we will leave them, and tell
you what become of our sick Gentleman. Beloved, this Gentleman within few days
after, began to recover, and waxed very hungry, so as calling his Landlord, to
know what meat he had in the House; Truly Sir (quoth he) we have nothing but a
dish of Tripes of my Wives one dressing, which if you please to have, they
shall be made ready immediately. Well! well they are accepted of, and brought
to the Gentleman, who sitting up in his bed, did feed heartily, till such time
as taking up a piece of thin, long, lean Tripe (as he supposed) and finding a
string jagged about the edge of one side of it, he called up his Landlady, and
desired to know what part of the beast that was? the Poor woman searching it,
and distrusting what it was, but not dreaming how it should come there, without
speaking one word, runs down Stairs into the Kitchen, where she was no sooner
come to search for the Gentleman's boots, she finds the puppy dog tearing of the
Vampings, which he had lately transformed them into Slippers. In the mean time
the Gentleman would not be satisfied, but calls for her again to answer his
question, who as soon as she was come to him* he again demands of her, what
part of the inside of the beast that was, he held in his hand. The poor woman,
though fearful and trembling, yet wittily replied, that she believed it to be
rather a part of the outside, then the inside of the beast, meaning the hide,
and begging pardon for her carle^nesse, and the dogs wantonness, desired his
worship to forgive them both, telling him plainly, that that piece he showed
her, was a piece of his worships boots, and that the threads, that looked like
a purl or edging upon the tripe, was nothing but the jags of the Shoomakers
ends which hung about it. The Gentleman at this accident, one while laughing,
and another while fretting, caused the old man to ride away speedily to
Chelmsford, for a strong pair of waxed boots, but what with his delay, (by
reason of his sickness, and afterward for want of boots) to visit his
Mistress, whom he promised to have seen a week before;) she imputing his long
stay, rather to a neglect and slighting of her, than his present misfortune,
immediately contracted her self to another, who had formerly been a Servant to
her, and at his coming discarded him, by which means he lost his Mistress, his
labor, his boots, and had like to have lost his life too, had he not happily
recovered.

O beloved! let this sad example be a Caveat for all you who have Mistresses,
to have a care of wearing Tripes, when you ride a wooing, least you be served
like this unfortunate Gentleman, who for want of a pair of waxed boots* was
first cast into an Ague, next had his boots cast into the Tripe tub; and
lastly, was himself quite and clean cast out of his Mistresses favor.
Therefore buy ye waxed boots; which brings me to the second use.

The second use is an use of Reproof; to reprove all those who are self-willed,
and cannot fairly be persuaded to buy them waxed boots. But to such as these,
examples move more than precepts, wherefore I will only give you one or two
more, and so I will make an end, for fear of tiring your patience. I read of
Alexander the Great, that passing over a River in Alexandria, without his
Winter boots, he took such an extreme Cold in his Feet, that he suddenly fell
sick of a violent Fever, and within four days after dyed at Babylon. The like
I find in Plutarchs Lives, of that noble Roman Sextorius, and also in Homer of
Achilles, that leaving his boots behind him, and coming barefoot into the
Temple of Pallas, whilst he was worshipping on his knees* at her Altar, he was
peirced into the Heel, with a venomed Dart by Paris, (the part only of him
which was vulnerable,) of which he suddenly dyed, which accident had never
happened to him, (as Alexander Rosse, that little Scotch Mithologist observes)
had he not two days before, pawned his boots to Ulisses, and so was forced to
come without them to the Trojan Sacrifice. He also further observes, that that
Achilles (of whom Homer has writ such wonders) was but a Shoomakers boy of
Greece, and that when Ulisses sought him out, he at last found him at the
Distaffe, spinning of Shoomakers thread; now this Boy was so beloved, that as
soon as it was reported abroad, that the Oracle had chosen him to rule the
Grecians, and conquer Troy, all the Journeymen in the Country, listed
themselves under him, and these were the Mermydons wherewith he got all his
Honor, and overcame the Trojans.

But what need I mention foreign stories, being my self an Eyewitness of the
lamentable ends many Suffolk men, in the Seige of Cholchester, who being forced
to keep Centry in that wet and boggy Country, (during which Seige, it was
generally observed for thirteen weeks, not a day passed, in which much rain did
not fall) I say these poor Country Wretches, were forced to stand up to the
kneesday and night, in Cold, Dirt, Mire, and Wet; insomuch, that for want of
waxed boots, many of them dyed suddenly, others had their Legs rotted off; many
their feet gangreened, and after was cut off; and few or none, but had Ulcers,
Boyls, and Iuflamamations, breaking out upon them.

Alas! alas! what would these poor Cripples do to run away, should the Times
change, and the Malignants prevail over us? How must they be forced to bestir
their Stumps for want of Legs, to escape the Enemy? This one comfort they will
have above us, that whenever they are taken by the Wicked, they will not find
them stand complementing, or making legs for pardon; but they shall rather find
them down upon their Knees, begging mercy and forgiveness of them, whose
persons they have turned out of their possessions, and whose houses these lame
Creatures, have for these many years, converted into Spittles and Hospitals.

Thus I have shown you what became of three great Princes, and of many poor
Englishmen, who perished in these late Wars, for want of waxed boots. I should
here give you an account, how and in what manner, you should know the right
shape and fashion of a Winter boot: and likewise show you, what manner of Heels
are the best, the most suitable and serviceable for you against running or
flying times, I shall only name them at present. Beloved, your Polony heel is
good* your Wooden heels better, but those of Cork the best of all; for then
will it be needful for you to make trial of a pair of High heels, and indeed
you will then, and then only, have occasion to run, as though you ran for a
wager; and for this use, your Cork heels are found by experience to be the
best and highest in the World.

Lastly, I should have taught you the art of repairing, stitching, vamping,
underlaying, and mending of your boots, and should likewise have showed you how
to choose the Soles of your boots; and also in a word have applied these things
to the good use of your bodies; but that I see the Glass is run* and the time
has prevented me, I must be forced to make an end, concluding with the words
of my Text, Now because the times are bad, and Winter draws near, therefore buy
you Waxed Boots.

FINIS.

