ANTI BAAL-BERITH: OR The binding of the Covenant and all Covenanters to their
good Behaviors.

BY A Just Vindication of Dr. Gaudens Analysis (that is, his resolving of the
Covenant to Law and Justice, to Duty and Conscience, to Reason and Religion: Or
his dissolving it) against the Cacotomy of a nameless and shameless Libeller
the worthy Hyporaspistes of Dr. Burges.

Also against the pittyful Cavils and Objections of Mr. Zach. Grafton, A rigid
Presbyter.

With an Answer to that Monstrous Paradox, of No Sacrilege no Sin, to alienate
Church Lands, without and against all Laws of God and Man.

Written by the Author of the Analysis.

a round engraving of a dog and a wild boar beneath the moon and stars

Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch.

Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good
report, if any virtue and praise, think on these things.

Votum non obligat nisi ad licita;
Nec astringitur concientia, ubi violatur obedientia,
LONDON, Printed by John Best, for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
HAving had the honor and happiness, after the example of the great Athanasius,
the industrious S. Austin, and our own learned Archbishop Whitguift, and Mr. R.
Hooker, in our former dark and dismal times, to en^ounter with some success the
enemies of this Church, of the King and Kingdom, in those popular and
presumptuous ways, wherein they most pleased themselves: And having lived to
see that the joy of Hypocrites, the prosperity of the Wicked, and the triumph
of Violent men is but short; I further applied my self, since the most happy
restoration of our most welcome Sovereign and in ^im, of all things sacred and
civil, to advance the publiq^^ p^ice in those precedent just and moderate way^,
wherein I saw the Remora's of our happy union did (...) most continue. Among
which, that of the Covenant seemed one of the greatest and most popular: not as
to ^^ose things in it, which are consonant to its general expressions of
Loyalt^, Religion, and Reformation, of limiting all men's endeavors and actions
to their place, duty and ca^^ing agreeable to the Word of God, to the Laws of
the Land, and to the power of godliness; To which all good men will readily
agree:

But the scruple and scandal lies in that one captious particular of it, which
concerns the Government of the Church in the way of Episcopacy, as it stands
established by our Laws, and conform to the Catholic custom of this and all
primitive, ancient Churches, which cannot be presumptuously and wilfully
abolished by any one Church, or any Faction and party in that Church without
the sin of Schism; nor can it justly be oppressed, while that Government only
is under the appointment and protection of the Laws, and confirmed by the Oath
and Conscience of the King, as Supreme Magistrate: Nor can it be done
charitably, while the abolition of Episcopacie must be made the injury and
utter undoing o^ so many learned, godly, and innocent Bishops, with other
reverend Ministers: Nor can it be done prudently, while the extirpation of
Episcopacy, and introducing of an Headless Presbytery, was, and is evidently
to the overthrowing of all due Authority, Or^er, Government, Polity, Unity and
Peace in this Church and State: Lastly, nor could not be done honestly and
decently, because so much to the reproach of this Church and Nation; of our
religion as Christian and Reformed, which hereby are exposed by the factious
humors, and violent novelties of some men, to the highest and most odious
Deformities of Schism, Rebellion, Perjury, Sacrilege, Inordination and
Confusion.

To avoid all which mischiefs so grassant and incumbent on this Church and
Kingdom, and still fomented by some peevish men, none of the most learned,
ingenious or influential; for the learned and sober Presbyters do now all in
Church and State (unite in a just Episcopacy, under a just Monarchy:) but the
others are still stickling against both, under pretext of their once
covenanting, as they fancy, against the horns and hoofs, root and branch of all
Bishops and Episcopal Authority.

Hence I thought it my duty freely to state the oblig^tion of that Covenant,
which some men so urge and idolize, not as to any thing in it which is holy,
sacred, ^ust, honest, or legally necessary (to which all men are tied by moral
obligations, much ancien^er then this of the Covenant) but merely as to the
parts of Episcopacy and Presbytery, as distinct modes of Government in the
Church.

Against the first, and for the second, some men fancy themselves (yea, and
the whole Nation) so strictly engaged by this Covenant, that they may not in
any kind conform to Episcopal Presidencie and Authority, though commended to
them by Scriptural precedents, by Apostolical prudence, by Ca^holick customs,
by universal consent and approbation of all the learned and godly men, ancient
and modern in this and all Churches, beside the long possession it has had in
our Laws of England; as having in it nothing evil, either against the Word of
God, or the rules of right Reason, or Precepts of good Order and Polity, but
most consonant to them all, and so no way to be covenanted against as evil and
unlawful.

For the second (of headless Presbytery) they are tooth and nail most
pertinacious, and pretendedly conscientious, though not commanded of God any
where, never used in the ancient Churches or this, a mere novelty as to the
Church of England, against our Laws, and the very genius of the Nation,
commonly begun by violence, and at best excusable only by necessity: Commonly
attended with many seditio^s injuries, indignities and rapines in Church and
State; and so no way apt to be absolutely covenanted for, as having nothing in
it piously, morally or politically good and necessary.

Yea further, Presbytery, as an enemy to Episcopacy, is as much covenanted
against under the name of Schism and Superstition, as any thing can be, and as
justly; since there is nothing more evident then this, That Presbytery
apostatizing from, and destructive to Episcopacy, i^, as to the custom of the
Catholic Church of Christ, and as to this Church of England, a most notorious
Novelty, and riotous Schism in an Ecclesiastical sense: And as to our Law^, or
National Constitutions (from Magna Charta to this day, which are all for
Episcopacy) it is a Civil Schism, and illegal Faction, as full of superstition
as sedition; as unrighteous as unruly begotten by faction, maintained by force,
nourished by blood and rapine, at last self-shaming and destroying, no less
then confounding all things civil and sacred.

Which is no false or odious reflection, but a true and ^ust representation of
what our late miseries have printed on our faces, heads, backs, sides, hands
and feet, as remarkably as the thorns, and whips, and nails, and spear did
their wounds and marks on the sacred Body of our blessed Redeemer, when he was
crucified with a scornful and wanton cruelty.

So that nothing in the World can appear more full of pride, partiality,
presumption and pertinacie, then for men once befooled with the popular, yet
illegal and in practicable noveltie of Presbytery, to fancy themselves to be
bound by any sacred Covenant, either to pursue such a dangerous, unlawful and
destructive a toy, or to oppose so Apostolic, anciens, prudent, venerable and
experienced a good as is in Episcopal order and Authority, rightly constituted,
and wisely managed, according to our good Laws, and the examples of excellent
Bishops in all ages of the Church.

Hence I concluded, that no Covenant, Vow or Oath could in truth, judgment or
righteousness be taken, either absolutely against the first, as it is good; or
for the second, as it is evil. So that if the Covenant (as to that clause
against Prelacy) were urged against Episcopacy, which is good by the law of God
and man, or for Presbytery, which has no Law for it, nor any necessary good
in it, it must needs be so far null and void, unless it be (as it ought in
reason, justic^ and conscience) regulated by such a sense and interpretation as
is consonant to Scripture, Antiquity, Law, Loyalty and Equity: Whereby not only
Episcopacie in its ancient, legal, paternal and presidential honor, rights and
authority; but Presbytery in its subordinate ^uncture and fraternal
assistance, might be united and maintained.

No man is further, then I desire to be, from any profaning the sacred name of
God, by breaking any lawful Oath, Vow, or Covenant* or bringing sin and shame
upon any men's souls, much less on the Nation. Yea, I vehemently assert what is
for the matter of it, morally and religiously professed in the Covenant; from
which obligations no man can be free or absolved, whether he took the Covenant
or not: But I abhor the childish Imposturage of those, who under fair prefaces
and pretenses, in their covenanting way, seek to wrap up and carry on their
unjust and sacrilegious d^sign^ and while they professed at first to the W^rl^
(...) and ^^^ad, that they only aimed in the Covenant at humble, l^wful, loyal
and honest endeavors, to reform what seemed, or really was amiss in the
constitution or adm^nistration of Church Government in England: From hence (as
Power and Success tempted them) to ma^e a surprise upon King and Parliament,
Church and State; and by the screwings, and insinuatings of Factious projects
and practices, at last utterly to exclude all ancient, venerable and lawful
Episcopacy, and to obtrude upon this so famous and flourishing Church and
Kingdom (without any counsel and consent of a National Synod, or any Civil
Sanction of King, Lords and Commons) the illegal and undigested novelty of
Presbytery, which sets up a p^tty Pope or Spiritual Prince in every Parish,
and puts the grand Polity or Public Government of the Church, into the power
of those young, ra^, rash and heady striplings, who are fitter by far to be
governed, then to govern in thief any thing beyond their Passions and Lusts,
their families and parishes, which in a due subordination to their Fathers,
Elders and Superiors, the Bishops, they may commendablie manage, as honest
Constables under Justices. But in a Parity or Superiority, they would be as
desperate drivers as Phacion or Iehu; their pride, petulancy, juvenility,
faction, and fury would soon set Church and State on fire, as the mutinous
Soldiers do an Army, when they are all impatient to be commanded, and as
ambitious to command others, as unable to command them selves or others.

While I was thus soberlie promoting this just and Christian design, to which I
presumed all men of uninteressed minds would cheerfully concur, to curb the
peremptoriness of Presbytery, and to relieve the oppressed state of Episcopacy,
out comes first a notorious Libeller, the work of an impotent and incontinent
Scribler, animated or inspired (as it seems) by Dr. Burges (the quondam
lay-Bishop and Dean of Wells*) where the Author being afraid to show his face,
or own his name, merits as little regard as his vile Anatomy, which is a
confused Rapsody of Fallacy and Malice, enraged from the jealousy and dread of
losing the great adventure which that wretched person and D, B. seems to have
in some sacrilegious and unlawful purchase of Bishops and Church lands.

After this comes another, as weak and wilful as the former, though not so rude
or raving: But as amicable and civil as can be expected from a rigid
Presbyterian, who resolves not to be quiet, till he and his party rule Church
and State, Kings and Bishops, against all former customs* and present Laws of
this Church and Kingdom. So great a Dictator there is in little Mr Grafton a
person whom I know not, yet I have so much love and value for him, as I find
him a pretender to something Loyal, Logical and Religious, though no lover of
Rhetoric or Bishops.

With what success he has encountered the justice and loyalty, reason and
religion to which I sought to reduce the Covenant, and to which it must either
bend or break, while I opposed the fa^tions, irrational, injurious,
sacrilegious, irreligious and barbarous sense which he and others with the
Libeller seek into affix to it, possessed by a Presbyterian untamed spirit, I
leave to the Readers judgment and conscience.

Who, if an honest hearted Covenanter, has liberty to keep what of it is
lawful and just and is only obliged not to practice what he could not desire
or promise, covet or covenant without sin; that is, to do injury to any honest
man, much less to so many worthy men as the Bishops of England, and other
dignified Clergy men were and are, and ^least of all to the Kings of England,
yea to the whole Church and Kingdom, to the Laws, and to God himself: to the
prejudice of any of these, no Covenant may be taken or kept.

I deferred my Apology awhile first, because I had not time sooner to attend
it: Secondly, because I expected that others of the like bran and leaven would
appear in the cause, and so I might take them altogether: though I find no men
of learning and ingenuitie, but are ashamed to appear in such a cause, which so
foul and notorious a Libeller had so polluted, as a mere Borborites: who
savours so rank of a sacrilegious Apostate, that nothing is considerable that
he can say or do like himself.

He seems to have some irons in the fire, with which his dear friend Dr. Burges
is like to burn his fingers: These he would fain hammer on the anvil of the
Covenant, that is, sacrilege, on what he calls sacred: But the h^t sparks fly
too fast abroad to do much good on it: He will find sober Presbyterians, who
are no Purchasers of Church Lands, and so no way concerned in his sad
adventures, who do very Loyally, Piously, Prudently own, yea and profess to
the Kings Majesty a quiescency under Episcopal Government, as no way
inconsistent with the Covenant, in such a Legal, ^ust, Pious and prudent sense,
a^ only can make it materially la^ful and obliging.

The truth is, the Libeller is such a Cretian Beast, and so greedy of fi^thy
Lucre, that it is pity Mr. Grafton should be cou^led with him: Therefore I have
in most parts of my Reply, severed them as far as their Arguments or
Sophistries differ. For this latter seems a corrigible Errant, the other an
incorrigible Vagrant, who^ the better world is only obliged to thus far, that
he did scare them with the addition of his dreadful Name: Nor need he any
greater Temptor or Tormentor then his own evil manners, and ulcerated
conscience which I pray God to heal and amend. For God forbid, whoever he be,
that he should be out of my charity, w i will he is capable of Gods mercy.

To conclude, if I weary thee, O Reader, know I have first wearied my self: and
have no other excuse but the petulant importunity of these two Antagonists, or
Baal-beriths: The one of which is ambitious to have his will; the other
covetous to preserve his and Dr. Burges unhappy purchase, which are both now
lost gains, unless all England lose again their Laws and Wits, and honor and
Consciences, and Kings, and Religion, and all that is Civil or Sacred, just or
honest, which God defend.

Nor shall I be wanting by Gods help, as I have leisure, to repress the flames
of such Incendiaries, while a few drops of ink will cool their courage, and
confute their fallacy, and make their folly so manifest to all godly wise men,
that they shall proceed no further.

This is cert^in, I have none to fear but God and the King, who abhor to be
flattered: and if any factious or sacrilegious spirits fancy that they are now
so considerable as to be ei her feared or flattered by my speech or silence in
respect of their Cavits and Objections, they will much mistake their mark, as
we^l as their party and interest; which in good earnest, as far as it is
Anti-episcopal, never depended upon any strength of Reason nor sincere
Religion, nor hones^y and ingenuity, but meerlie on Tumults and Armies, on
popular arts, and factious fallacies, which are now God be thanked vanished,
like the midnight shadows or morning dews when the Sun is risen. All wise and
worthy men now see the best and bottom of Presbyte^ie, and the want and worth
of Episcopacy: and after many sad essays of factions, are resolved into the
verity of faith, the sanctity of morals, the solemnity of Devotion, the
authority of Ministry, the eminency of Episcopacy, and the unity of this
Church National, which must be vindicated against all error, heresy, sc^ism,
profaneness, immorality, irreverence, disorder, faction, rigid Presbytery,
Pragmaticks, Independencie and all confusion. The Scene is now happily changed
by Gods miraculous mercy: nor will any thing now take, unless the Factors for
Novelty can find new Actors, and new Visors, and new Armies for their designs.
All the old palliatings and paintings are vanished: nor has Presbytery any
thing by which to recommend it self to the English Nation, but penitent, humble
and loyal submission to the Laws, to the King, and to the Bishops, which are no
more to be extirpated by Presbyters, their Presbyters may be extirpated by
Bishops: United, they are invincible; divided, they will not be very
considerable. A Paternal preheminency of the one, and a Fraternal subordination
of the other, is the center and circumference of this Churches peace, and the
great Confirmation of our Religion as Christian and Reformed,

Farewell.
ANTI BAAL BERITH: The binding of the Covenant and all Covenanters to their
good behavior. OR A just Vindication of Dr. Gauden's Analysis, against the
Anatomist and the Analeptist, the Libeller, and Mr. Crafton.
WHen I first set forth my Analysis or Resolution of the Covenant (so far as it
might any way seem reconcilable, and ought to have been consistent, as with Law
and Justice, so with the Apostolic and Catholic Government, of this and all
ancient, Churches, in the way of Episcopal order and authority (That is least
Mr. Crafton should again mistake my meaning, the prefidency of one chief
Presbyter or Bishop among many, and above all lesser Bishops or subordinate
Presbyters in his Diocese, according to the ancient custom, Dr. Gaudens de^^^n
in his Analysis.
and Laws Ecclesiastical and civil) my aim was only to absolve those soberer
or simpler minded Covenanters from those superstitious and injurious snares, by
which the artifice of some men (most what interessed in purchases of Crown and
Church Lands) sought under the specious name of the Covenant, to captivate
consciences to themselves, and oblige well-meaning men to everlasting
antipathies against that most primitiv^, prudent, and only legal government of
Episcopacy, merely through popular mistakes, and sinister prejudices against
it; (of which no Oath, Covenant or Vow taken in Judgment, Truth, and
Righteousness can be guilty.) It was far from my thoughts by such sober and
true, though to some men s^a^t expressions, as I then used in a matter of so
great concern, to add any spark or fuel to those sad combustions in Church and
State, which had so long exhausted the best blood and spirits of this Nation;
And which were not thereby quenched until the soft dew^ of heaven, and the
liberal, but gentle showers of the Divine goodness, distilled upon this
scorched Church and State, in miraculous mercies, no less unexpected then
undeserved, by a foolish people, and sinful nation; in which too many people
being guilty of Rebellions and Regicides, of sacrilegious and scandalous
Apostacies, must needs behold our blessed change, with as much envy, terror and
regret at our happiness, as they have little remorse or shame for their former
impiety, or present impenitency.

. Mean while all religious hearts were greatly refreshed, filled and
overflowing with joy and thanks for those gracious and wonderful dispensations
of God, not only to the King and his Kingdoms, but to the distressed,
despised, and almost destroyed Church of England; when they saw on the sudden
the person and majesty of the King, so long banished and contemned by men of
blood and sons of Belial, The late happy restauratio^ of Eng^and.
ubt passionately desired, honored and loved by all honest Subjects and good
Christians, restored to his Kingdoms in peace; when they beheld the princely
branches of that royal stock and family replanted in their native soil, the
honor, fullness and freedom of Parliaments in Lords and Commons restored; the
captive, and almost desolate Church of England; which Foxes and Bores had
wasted in a way to be redeemed; the oppressed Bishops and other learned
Churchmen, revived and in some sort repaired; the just rigor of the
long-baffled Laws recovered; the black and bloody scandals of our Christian and
reformed Religion, begun to be removed; all things civil and sacred to put on a
new face, and (as after squaller of the flood) to begin to flourish to the
exceeding joy of all true English spirits, that had any regard to their
reformed Church, and true religion so long flourishing in it.

. After this blessed change of beauty for ashes, of the wine of joy for the
water of affliction, of order for confusion; of Monarchy and Episcopacy, for
Democracy and Anarchy, for Presbytery and Independency. Dr. Gauden thought it
not amiss to endeavor, as occasion was given, with all meekness of wisdom in
truth and charity, fairly to remove any thing which he saw either in the nature
of the things, or in peoples misconceits, might any way hinder the happy
progress, and constant growth of our common peace and prosperity, both in
Church and State; which as no presumptuous sins or insolent usurpations of any
men ought any longer to pervert; so nor ought any private passions, or personal
prejudices, or illegal engagements, or groundless superstitions, or partial
Vows and Covenants any way hinder or diminish; esp^^ially upon any such account
as has no pr^^ise command, or particular institution in the Word of God, The
(...).
nor yet any foundation or injunction in the Laws and customs of this Church
and Kingdom; to neither of which the Covenant could pretend, in any plea of
public duty, right and necessity; either as to its matter, method, manner or
authority; Nor does either the Malipart Anatomist, or the modester Anal^ptist
prove any of them; by which to give the Covenant any precedent validity of
Religion or Law, as enjoined by God or the King, apart from which its
subsequent pressure or bond upon the souls of the takers, cannot be further
considerable, then its general matter was morally lawful, pious, just and
cheerful, unless they think that must be made a maxim in morality and piety,
^ieri non debuit factum vala^; which holds only good in some State policies, or
cases of civil exigency and necessity, where the change or remedy of things may
be more dangerous, then the error and inconvenience which is happened.

(...).
. Neither the Anatomist nor the Analeptist (whom Dr. Gauden does not join now,
or at any time together, as to any exact parallel of their minds and manners
(which may differ as much as white and black, sobriety and scurrility, sanctity
and sacrilege, simplicity and Hypocrisy; but only as to those common notions
and fancies of the Covenant, in which they seem to concur. I know there is as
much difference between an open and ingenuous Writer, and a malicious sculking
Libeller, as between the Letters of Z.G. and C B. or the name of Zachary
Crafton, and Cornelius Burges) neither of them I say can be ignorant, that
those Covenants, Leagues, Oaths, Vows, and Engagements, which sometime
prevailed upon the Nation, in broken and bleeding times (as Simeon and Levi did
against the Sichemites, when they were circumcised and sore) did arise rather
from the violent pumpings of humane power and policy (according to the
jealousies, fears, animosities, The rise of the ^e^ Covenants, and Lea^ue, and
Vows in E^gland.
and interests of divided and prevailing parties) then from the clear fountains
of Gods word, and Christ's blessed Gospel, which are pure and peaceable; nor yet
did they flow from the springs of National Justice, our Laws civil or
ecclesiastical.

. No, they were all foreign and exotic plants, which neither grew among the
Scriptural Lillies, nor the English Roses; but were slips or inoculations,
inlays or off-sets taken from the Scottish thistle, or from the Guisian Garden,
or from the last Bohemian bitter root, which by way of covenant too engaged
that Kingdom and all Germany in so long and dreadful a war, or from the Guenses
in the Neatherlands, who sped not much better with their first covenanting: and
how holy soever some men may yet esteem any of those covenanting patterns, yet
we are sure never any of them has made any access of holiness, or honor, or
peace and happiness, either to the Religion or Laws, the Doctrine or manne^s of
any other much less of this Church and Nation of England, which were and are in
themselves the best constituted, and most deservedly to be admired of any
Church or Kingdom in all the world.

. When first I had a cursory view of that infamous Libel (the An^^t^ry or
rather Cacotomy as I must call it, Dr. Ga^^^^s (...) of the Libel (...)
which sought to give it self some credit by Dr. Gaudens name; I thought it too
great a loss of time to consider it, or the quiver out of which that venomous,
but harmless arrow came; I saw the Libeller under pretended zeal for the
Covenant, was highly concerned in three things; first, To calumniate and
reproach, if he could, Dr. Gauden; next to conceal his wretched self: Lastly,
To contend for the forlorn Dr. Burges, and revenge his quarrel; a client worthy
of such a patron; the proverb (...); And T^rdus sibi malum caca^, but its
beyond conjecture, what black bird laid so spotted an egg; but since he was
justly ashamed of his self, I thought it needless to scare the world by
bringing to light this caca^, this hidden work of darkness: Nor is it worthy of
Dr. Gauden to mind all those scurrilous and putid effusions, which the Libeller
makes of his own froth, filth and folly; It being below any ^^n of honest
employment, to scuffle with umbra's, to sight with ghosts, or to pursue such
Cretian beasts, as are easily like rats, discoverable by their excrements.

. Indeed, I justly for some time disdained to take any exact view of the Libel,
or make any reply to such a pitiful Pamphleter, who hiding his head, or having
indeed neither face or forehead (as a mere Acephalist) showed only the marks
of his fowl hands and feet, sordid with sacrilege, besmeared with blood, and
filthy with all that turpitude which rustic or petulant malice is wont to
suggest, to people of impotent passions, unbridled lusts, of ulcero^^
conscie^^es, and of infamous names, I judged it best not to touch such an
Incubus, such a Borborites, and (...); who frustrates the most resolute
encounters, and vanishes with a stink or evil savor unseen, as unclean
spirits are said to do.

Yea rather I thought it my part, The bent revenge upon uch Libeller^
being fortified with Gods grace and my own integrity to summon and muster up
all those holy charms, those sober graces, and serious considerations, which
best became me as a man, a Christian, and a Minister of Jesus Christ; lest I
should seem too sensible of the Libellers petulancy, or provoked to answer such
a Fanto or Incognito according to his folly; since first his own mind and
manners will most severely punish him. Next there was nothing that this
Scribler could with any truth or probability reflect upon Dr. Gauden that
deserves to infect him with any discomposure, or the least discountenance; no
more then the foam and rage of waves can foil or shake that rock, against which
they dash themselves. Nor did Dr. Gauden fear any evil or sinister impressions
to be made upon any Judicious or ingenuous Reader, who either knew his
conversation or reputation, which (blessed be God) never yet used or needed any
compurgators for his credit, nor any pleas for his Sacrilege, nor any
Apologies for his covetousness and contentiousness, unbecoming a man of common
honesty: Nor could he be blemished, much less battered by the scurrilous
strokes of so trivial a pen, or the choleric barkings of so rabid a Libeller;
whom to rebuke, or seek to reduce to any thing modest, sober, just, and
ingenuous, is to wash a Blackmore, to change the spots of a Leopard, and fix
the variations of Putens or a Polypus, or a Camelion: I found the Libeller had
more malice, and the other as little reason.

. In this just neg^ect of them both, I enjoyed my self for some weeks, after I
had seen both those Replie^ against my Analysis, while my attendance on better
persons and implo^ments gave the little leisure to ^ind* what either this vild
Libeller, or the other mod^^ter Writer replied upon my Analysis, which is fixed
upon their undoubted and eternal Principles of Justice and true Religion. (...).
(1.) That as no man can lawfully covenant, swear* vow and engage himself,
contrary to that duty which he ows to God, the King, the Church, the Laws of
the Land, and the good of his Country: or contrary to that particular justice
and charity which he ows to himself or other men. So (2.) if any man be
surprised and ^amp^red by any such covenanting words, and vowing forms, as may
seem to involve him in such, not only abs^^dities, and irregularities, but
injustices and immorali^ies, either he must find out and keep to, such a
commodious and honest sense of the words, in the fulfilling and executing of
his Vow, Oath and Covenant, as may consist with Justice and true Religion, with
known Laws, and former Oaths, binding indispensably to the morality of duties.
Or (3.) If this cannot fairly be done, he must speedily retract his Vow and
Covenant, so far as he sees it unlawful either in the susception or execution
of it: yea he must repent of his rashness, rectify his inconsiderateness, and
take an holy revenge of himself, by being, as more cautious of such
covenanting, so more zealous to do his duty quite contrary to those snares and
surprises which he now discovers in his Covenant, then ever he was to take it;
so far unadvisedly, as it proves unlawful for him to perform it: so far
unadvisedly ^s it proves unlawful for him to perform it; and only lawful for
him in th^se respects to break it, however in other things just and honest he
may keep it, by virtue of another and higher obligation, morally lying upon his
conscience.

. But at length having a little leisure, and considering that the popular
emptiness of the Analeptist, and the levity or contemptibleness of the
Libeller, were made up by the seeming weight of some objections, and the
impudence of some calumnies, that as St. Jerome says in case of Heresy, so in
that of perjury and blasphemy; No man ought to have such a silence or patience
as may so cut stupid or neglective of his and religious honor: The Libell^^^
(...).
I thought it a right due to my self and to all honest men, tant^ bla^eronis
ineptius acrius coercere; First, To let such a vile Libeller see his ugly form
in a true glass (if he dares to steal a sight of himself in those secret
corners and disguises) where this deaf Adder lurks; and whence it may be, I
shall by some potent enchantments drive him to a more public view, to own
himself and his name.

. After this to let Mr. Crofton understand, how little there is of pious
persuasion in his credulous facility, and popular presumption.

. To which purpose I see it is necessary for me to abase my ordinary style and
language, (...) the Re^ (...), orato^y.
which it seems the paper spoilers cannot endure any more then Spiders or Toads
can sage or fasting spittle, because it savours of something which the one
calls Oratory the other condemns for Rhetoric and luxuriancy of l^ng^^g^; yet
both sometimes vapor in words like I^em^^l^^ ^s wh^^ page 6. the Libeller
speaks of 8 E.^. (...) one already arrived at such herds of good words, and
stocks of figures, rare and florid strains of burnbast stuff, as fulsom as
false; being indeed both of them as far from the true strength and politure of
acute or elegant writing, as the music of a Jews-trump is from the melody of a
Lute: But despairing like the Satyr in the fable to sing or play well, they
seek to break all musical Instruments in pieces which they can lay their paws
upon.

. Therefore to suit this Libellers grosser genius, and the vulgar capacity of
the Analeptist, I will endeavor to entertain them both, with as flat and
downright expressions, as I can descend to: For I see they are better at plain
cudgel-play, then at any way of finer fencing. For the first, you shall see him
in his native colors and clothes (like country fellows with their flail, and
leather doublets) when he appears triumphing and strutting in his Rhodomontado
titles of defiance, in his prodigious raylings, in his sarcastical Ironies; in
his fallacious Sophisms, in his dull argumentations, in his specious
pretentions of zeal, and clamors for Reformation, which he loves as much as the
Devil does holy water; with these glozings does he fawn upon any faction, that
is probable to renew our troubles, and relieve his and his dear D.Bs despair:
With those incongruous agitations does he sometimes strike at the person of Dr.
Gauden, his well known and true assertions, and at his useful variations as to
places and employments for some time, at his silence to D. B. his paradox of
Sacrilege; other while he flies to the refuge of his sacred Covenant, of which
he is more zealous th^^ Jacob was of his gods being taken from him, least it be
either reconciled to Episcopacy, or made Nehustan; for then farewell to all
sacrilegious purchases.

Thus the frantic humor of the man sometimes heats the air, another while
himself, while he lays at Dr. Gauden withal his might and malice, as the blind
and enraged Cyclops did at Ulysses, showing by his various freaks and
inordinate digressions, as void of wit, oratory and method, as of truth and
conscience, how touchy and galled he is, by the sore wounds which his former
presumptuous sins, and now the laws of the Land do give him.

. The title of the ^ibel b^g with bl^sphem^.
The first fanatic fit of this Libeller is to affix to his Pasquil a most true
sent title (the Anatomy of Dr. Gaudens Idolized nonsense and blasphemy.) An
Inscription fit for Goliath, or Rabsakeh, or Polypheusus, or Polypurgonices, or
Damet^s, or such Thrasonick vaporers and Hectors, who fancy that a bold defit
and and challenge is half the combat and conquest; knowing that most
spectators of Books look not much beyond the Title, loath to examine how it is
made good in the Treatise, but presently they go away, as fully informed of the
whole story, as they think they know by the Inscription what is in the
Apothecaries pots or boxes.

. Though nothing is more usual then these popular acts of Impudent
calumniators, Impud^nt aspersions of old upon nnoc^n^y.
and desperate undertakers of a lost cause; Shimei doubts not to brand David
with the name of a man of blood, cursing as he went the Lords Anointed; the
Athenians call St. Paul a babbler, others call him a pestilent fellow and
seditious: Nay the Jewish malice and blaphemy first s^ek to crucify the good
name and credit of Christ; sometimes counting him a Winebibber and a glutton, a
friend of publicans and sinners; yea they c^y o^t of him as a blasphemer; and
when dead, rep^te him a De ^^^er, Naboth is accused for blasphemy t^a^ (...)
stoned, and his vineyard possessed: what w^ll not ^a^^ilegious avarice brand
with blasphemy, if they (...) to question or shake the unjust titles of such
pu^c^^^^rs. Poor Episcopacy, is nothing, and the sa^red Covenant is nothing,
and real blasphemy is not m^^h to this Libeller; but Bishops, and Deans, and
Chapters lands are all in all; The Covenant and E gagement too shall be sacred,
if they will help to keep out Kings and Bishops, from recovering their rights:
This is a better plea and title then any D. B. can bring in Westminster Hall
for his houses and lan^^ at Wells, for which this Libeller is so passionate and
warm an Ad^ocate; operculium pavilla dignissimum; Ti^ pity the po^ and its
cover should be parted.

(...).
. But all this titular pomp and parades signifies nothing with sober and wise
men, yea it is justly suspected, there is little manly truth there, where the
pi^lo^ and idol i^ so full-stuffed with Goats-hair; this is the wonted way for
Quacks and Cha^ts to gull country lo^^: Nothing is more easy then to prefi^
such Labels to the vilest Libels, as those paphleter^ of the same barrel with
this calumniator were in the last years wont to do; when on every Booksellers
stale were laid out, The Antichristianism of all Bishops, and Episcopal
Ordination; The downfall of ^aals Priests; The vanity of Baby baptism* So that
necessity of Reformation; The Divine right of Presbytery: Christ on his Throne;
A voice out of the Temple, and the like. Some men's desperate malice is so
impudent as to brand with black stigma's, and crown with thorns, the most
innocent hands and foreheads; also to adorn with Angelick vizards the most
Hellish Devils; as those cruel Saints did the late murdered and martyred King,
when they thought to justify the outrage of their own Villainy, by calling him
a Traitor, a Tyrant, and a Murderer; titles that this Libeller will not now
dare to own in public, not yet D. B. his great Confident, unless they could
get again into Buff-coats, ride at the head of a Troop of Horse, and make good
that new charge which D. B. lays upon that King of glorious memory, as if he
were fela de se, upon the point guilty of his own death and ruin, by his
obstinate forsaking the Parliament, (when he could not safely, stay at
Whitehal;) and by his following, as he prates, the counsel of some Bishops and
Clergymen, nay indeed, the dictates of his own conscience, according to the
Word of God, the Laws of the Land, and his Oath taken at his Coronation, to
pre^erve the Clergy as well as the Laity, in their rights and immunities.

. Among many other riddles of scurrility and silliness, I could least tell what
the Libeller Q. What the Libeller means by Idoliz d nonsense.
meant by the epithet Idolized Nonsense, unless he feared and found by some
experience, that the solid weight and divine truth of that free and rational
Analysis (void of obscurity, popularity, partiality, Sopistry, or flattery) was
likely to prevail so far to the sati^faction of all ingenious and honest minded
Covenanters, as to redeem them from those Antepiscopal animosities and
antipathies, in which they were cunningly engaged, and still were sought to be
deceived by such deceitful Workers, who hope to make use of the Covenant, only
to keep out Bishops, and other Churchmen from their Estates; and to keep these
crafty Merchants in the possession of their Purchases; else why should this
Libeller and his Bembo D. B. be thus touchy in the point of reducing the
Covenant to such a sense as is not less consistent with Episcopacy, then with
right reason, and true Religion, with Law, and Justice, with good Order and
Policy, with Verity and Charity, with beam of divine goodness and glory, this
Libeller is afraid honest men should too soon discover, too much venerate and
submit unto for his profit and interest: For if the Covenant will not protect
them from honest restitution, and fear the Law from a just resumption of
Church lands, illegally sold, and sacrilegiously purchased (especially by
Ministers of this Church;) yea, and very great Conformists too in times of
yore, altum est, periisti Sacrilege: All is lost: What shall D.B. do for his
money lent and doubled upon public faith!

. The term Idolized, is very improperly affixed by the Libeller to Nonsense
and blasphemy: For who in these days is so blind a Bigot, as to venerate those
Monsters to Reason and Religion? Is it not rather the Idolized Mammon of this
Anatomist, and his Compeer D. B. which parts him upon such outcrys, as
Athaliah, crying Treason, Treason, when she was the greatest Traitor? Is it not
his covetousness, which is Idolatry, that makes him fear least his Dagon of
Sacrilege, set up in the Temple of his heart, and prostituted to the view of
the World by new cases, and strange paradoxes, v^es and r^^^^s, printed and
reprinted, to the nanseum and loathing of all honest men, lest this should fall
before the Ark of God? That justice, honesty, and truth, which ought to
prevail, as in every Christians soul, so in every Christian Church and State;
against which no vain pomp of pretended, illegal, incomplete Authorities, and
so invalid, may any longer take place, or keep possession, against the rightful
owners.

. It is not Idolatry, but pure Religion, It is true Religion which re^eems men
from errors.
and undefiled (which good Christians will highly value, exactly follow, though
to their detriment) which undeceives honest-meaning men of superstitious
snares, and popular surprises, of vulgar mistakes, and pernicious errors;
which brings them out of darkness and doubting to clear light; out of Egypt, to
Goshen; out of partial bands, and politic scrupulosities, to pious, honest,
and prudent liberties, confined to, and consistent with the Laws of God and the
Land; beyond which no Comet, no Ignis Fatuus, lawfully may or can lead Good
Christians, and Loyal Subjects.

. This was the design and work of the Analysis, not Idolized, but justly
esteemed by conscientious and judicous men, for its sober sense, and solid
piety, ^y which it will prevail in spite of all pitiful Libels and Pamphlets;
for Magna est veritas and prevalebit. It Is as gross and a sinine fancy to charge
the world with Idolizing nonsense and blasphemy, under the title of Dr.
Gaudens name, as it was a false and scurrilous reproach cast by the Heathen on
the Jews and Christians, that they worshipped an Asses head; or the pedenda of
their Priests: The forty Libeller may sooner hope to have his Cacotony
Idolized, and himself, when he dare own his name, or show his face as father to
this go^dly b^^t, to be venerated by all his sacrilegious So^^^r^, that by the
impotency of his wi^^ and impudence of his ^^quil Oratory, he can long keep
them in possession of the illegal Purchases, and either by fo^^^ keep out the
Lawful owners of those Lands and Houses, or else, (as in a desperate siege)
rather (...) and blow up all (As D.B. threatens) then fairly ^poi^ the
usurpation: usurpation: This may get the Libeller and his Crony D.B. the report
which Hierostratus had; or the veneration which Cain and Judas enjoyed, who
wanted not those that almost Idolized their name, and memories, for the
atrocity and infamy of then faces; qui ipso scelern molimina, and i^^^mitate
credebanter p^^; a many of latter years were cried up for Saints, upon no other
account, but the insolency, prosperity, and impenitency of their evil actions.

(...).
. For the dash of Nonsense (which this Scribe and Pharisee impute, to the
Analysis as falsely, as he writes sense) he is indeed highly concerned that the
world should think it so, that they might forbear to read it, because he feels
in his fortunes, as well as his covetous conscience, so quick a sense of its
pregnant weight and power, as is sufficient to make even credulous men
cautious, and rash men circumspect, upon the serious and just review of those
things that pretend to Religion, and yet appear in sober sense inconsistent
with our good Laws, with Loyalty and common equity; But can this Stenter hope
to scare any honest men from reading Dr. Gaudens (...) ^^l^y decrying it for
nonsense, and yet own it as Id^liz^d* that is, highly esteemed: who will not
rather feel the quick motions of humane curiosity to read such a pi^ce, as
shall bear Dr. Gaudens name, and yet be traduced by a nameless Libeller for non
sense, yea, and Idolized non sense? The world expects as little nonsense from
Dr. Gauden, as it does modesty or truth and honesty from any such Libellers, or
their Co^^pirators and Favorites, such as D. B. who are asham^d to own what
they say or do; only they are discovered, by doing and writing so as becomes
no men but Monsters of base avarice and impudence, received by no virtue or
sense of honor from those impudicities, which render them at once impudent,
and yet ashamed to be known as Authors of such rare at^hievments, as these
Libellers are; by which the vain calumniator hopes to blind the English world,
yea, and the knowing City of London, with these visards and disguises put upon
Dr. Gaudens Analysis of the Covenant, as if it were not worth reading, being
arrant Nonsense; nor safe to read, being Blasphemy.

. Doubtless in this the Libeller mistakes his mystery of iniquity; for as all
England, The eye of the Eng^^^^ (...) opened.
so chiefly the City of London, has now learned wisdom by their afflictions:
Their eyes are opened by those sharp eye salves which God has applied to them,
and by which he has made all the seals of specious and popular pretenses,
with the filmes of faction and violent Reformation; to fall off. They now
discern those to be but Teraphines and Idols of the vulgar; the machinations
and artifices of crafty Politicians, which (...) cried up for Gods and Images
(...). All honest Citizens and others, (...) interest, as their purchases of
Crown and (...) land^, or their debenturs, do (...) between precious liberties,
and (...) between religious engagements, and traytero^^ con^ederacies, between
such sacred Leagues, and lawful Oaths ^^towed by God, and imposed by due
Anthon of men.

^. It must be very gross nonsense indeed, that any man must now write of the
former policies, projects, and proceedings of some men, and not therein
discover how enterfeiring they were with, and contradicti^^ to the Laws and
Oaths of God and man; so against their own declared Protestations, Promises,
and Proposals, that even the ordinary Reader will easily discern the palpable
cheats and frauds no less then force put upon the Nation; and carried on with,
an high hand against King and Clergy, against Lords and Comment, against our
estates, liberties, and lives, against the order, honor, peace, Religion, just
Reformation and Conscience of the Church and State: And all this to gratify
the ambition, covetousness, revenge and envy of such men, as cared not what
havoc they made of things Sacred or Civil, provided they could get pay, and
make a good purchase of Crown, or Church, or Delinquents lands.

The (...) of D^. (...) c.
. This Libeller justly fears the potent impressions of that pious sense, which
Dr. Gauden is wont to preach and write (beyond any such Scriblers reply) when
he remonstrates and appeals (as he has sometimes done both by preaching and
printing) to the City and Country, to the grand body of this Kingdom, to all
degrees of good men in Church and State, what sense they have of our past times
and Tr^gedies, what advantages the Laws or Liberties, the Peace and Plenty, the
Honor and Happiness of the Nation has gained; yea, what Reformation and
Improvement has been made, as to the Religion, and the minds or manners of
English people, yea, of English Preacher^ too, by all those sacred and solemn,
but now illegal leagues, vows, and covenants, strange oathe and new
engagements; yea, by the horrid ^^cecrations and abjurations taken, proposed
and imposed by some.

If all Estates of this Nation had lost their sense of their sins, seductions,
and sufferings, what made them by Dr. Gandens and other men's instigation^
express so general and great resentments of their, and their posterities sad
condition, that they were impatient to be any longer bafled; when from the City
and all parts of the Kingdom, the confluence of men's just passions, was so
great, and so strong, that like a mighty torren^ or inundation, they bare all
before them that opposed their just desires of returning to their pristine
happy condition both in Church and State.

. These were the motions of men not easily taken with nonsense, or with
blasphemy; with what is void of Reason, and Religion, I believe this Libeller
and C.B. too found, and to this day (as they intimate) feel it to their extreme
grief, how that great Assembly of the City of London, were affected with Dr.
Gaudens pious nonsense, and honest Blasphemy, when preaching at S. Paul's,
before the Lord Mayor, and (...) he did so Anatomize those cruel (...) and
^^^fty Empericks of the times, the slight ^eale^^ wh^ made their profit and
pleasure out of the d^sca^^ (...), and miseries of their Country (...) then
the Humpers at once tremble and rage at the truth and courage of Dr. Gaudens
nonsense How were the Regicides astonished at the sword of (...) mouth, that
Word of God? How were the sacrilegious Merchants of Church Lands app^^ed before
that blasphemy, which being like thunder and l^ghtning, delivered by Dr.
Gaudens tongue and p^n, quite blasted all the glory of their pu^ch^se^^ of
which so seasonable and influential Sermons and Writings, specially that of
the Tears of the Church of England, this Libeller cannot but expres^ a deep
sense in that sad marginal note, p. 1. of his vvretched Pamp^^et, finding in it
to this day no great use of ^^^^^tion, either to himself or his darling Dr.
Burg^^.

(...).
^. For (...) that time, the bloody Babel fell and could rise no more, from that
day many wicked men began to look what rocks and mountains might cover them:
After that all honest and just men dared to express their sense freely, and to
discern the real nonsense and impudence of Dr. Burges his clamorous case, and
important plea for sacrilege, with which (as the Widow) he hoped to weary
out, and tire the just and unjust Judges, to confirm his sacrilegious bargains.
Then did the Golden Caloes, which the purchasers of Crown and Church lands had
set up to themselves, become Nehustan, and fell to powder; about which this
Anatomist, and his dear Benjamin C. B. had so devoutly danced a long time: Such
Gods in our Israel would these regicidious and sacrilegious spirits ever have
to go before them, which should neither know nor punish their enormous sins,
blasphemies, and hypocrisies, being Gods indeed of non sense, having eyes, and
see not; ears, and hear not; and such are all those that sometime cried them
up, and trusted in them, as this wretched Libeller, and his second D. B. who by
this time may have some quicker sense of Dr. Gaudens nonsense, notwithstanding
they have ^ick Skins, brawny Hearts, and cauterized Consciences.

But if this Libeller No such danger of writing non sense as the L^beller tears.
and his copes-mate (whose time is easier known by his ominous Acrosticks, C.
B. (...) D. B. that is the name and number of the Beast) ^ave found so complete
nonsense in Dr. Gaudens Analysis, what pity it is, that this doubty Champion,
and his Squire (like Sancho Panca to Don Quixot) should prodigally lose so much
precious time and va^our, in combating with Nonsense, as he did with a ^indmil.

. Nonsense fights against it self, and must needs ^ll with its own weight, as
sand without lime: The ^riter of nonsense is never likely to infect the ^orld
with heresy, or any dangerous doctrines: This ^lain of nonsense made the
Valentinians and Mani^ces of old so ridiculous, and the Familists of later
^yrs, and the Quakers last of all, whose futility ^^e best confutes, and the
experience which sober ^rn have of their dotage or delirancy

. But sure the Libelling Anatomist sound more of ^s^se in Dr. Gaudens The
Libellers too great sense of D. G's nonsense.
Analysis, then Ixion did of a ^ddess in the cloud he so strictly embraced: Nor
would he have so ^agerly pursued it, and its inno^^nt A^thor, even to the
accusation of Blasphemy, ^^^yphemus did after Ulysses, with his blind and
^^oody forehead) if he had not felt the picquaent darts of (...) ^erse and
reason, Religion and Conscience, in Law and Justice, deeply fixed in his breast
and other men^ too.

^^e Ad quid perdetio haec? What needed this passion and consumption of the
little wit, and less reason whereof this Libeller is guilty. Men of sm^ll
st^^ks must not be prodigal: Dr. Gaudens Sophisty at (...) which is a semblance
of sense, and Reason, and Religion* had been worth his examining: But wh^t p^y^
it that so great an Artist, though unknow^, (...) ^^^i^ful an Anatemist, though
Anonymus, shoul that pen his lipp^^nt eyes, and whet his butcherly knif, and
stretch ^^t his bloody hands, only to cut t^^ th^^at of this Analysis and chop
it in more pie^^ then Medes did her children, and yet exercised that skill or
cruelty upon a simple piece of non-sen, which could hardly at once be guilty of
non-se^c and blasphemy too, any more then natural Ideo, Fool^ and Madmen can;
who being, as the vul^r speak, bereaved of their senses, that is of right ^son,
are not capable of sense, of malice, much ss of Blasphemy: Nor was ever any man
so voic^ of sense in honor, as to challenge and combat ^h those poor
creatures, whose defects are their p^^tection, both from Gods and man's justice.

The (...).
^. But it is the interest and policy of some a^^cious spirits, to charge the
severest and most sca^^ing Truths with Nonsense; when themselves ar^y many
hypocrisies, prasumptions, relapses and apost^es grown past feeling, and given
over to a reprobate sense: Men are loath to own the sense, that is the reason
and religion of that Discourse which they see ^^nds to destroy their lusts, yea
to weaken much their ^ill gotten estates, if they should make restitution with
Zacheus, without which no saving repentance; thus the Athonians pride, counts
St. Paul's reasoning babbling; and carnal men call the wisdom of God the
foolishness of preaching: Festus being moved to a trembling, Act. 24.25. by St.
Paul's preaching of righteousness, temperance, and Judgment to come, was
willing to avoid the edge and dint of those potent expressions, by crying out,
Paul thou art beside thy self, much learning has made thee mad; from the same
sad omen and presage that Dr. Gaudens Analysis may bring all good Christians
and loyal Subjects to a right sense of their duty to God, the King and the
Church, beyond or against which no covenant of humane invention and illegal
imposition ought or lawfully can lead or drive them, this Libelling Rabshekah,
this Anatomising Shimei calls it nonsense and blasphemy; But as the jeastings
of wise men are better then the most serious musings or ploddings of weak and
foolish heads; so will Dr. Gaudens nonsense prove more potent in the end with
all godly and honest men, then the most specious shows of sense and sacredness,
which others pretend: and with great impatience cry up as the Ephesine rabble
did their Diana; with an eye to their gain; fearing that if their Antiepiscopal
sense of the Covenant be basted, their sacrilegious and illegal purchases must
be null and vacated: For if Dr. Burges D. Burges his sacrileg ou^ and (...)
^allacy.
argument be good, the Office of Bishops, Deans and Prebends are abolished
without any law, by a temporary (...) of Lords and Comment, ergo, the (...) be
sold, which fallacy might as we^ b^^^g^^ against the King's and Crown lands: It
will f^llow, tha^ when Bishops, Deans and Chapters are by lawful power
restored, according to L^w, to their Offices and Places in the Church, the^r
^an^'s and houses also must be according to Law res^ ^ed to them.

(...)
The j^stice and wisdom of the just God, and of ^ll j ^t men, possibly the
Libeller may think to be foolish^^ss and injustice (considering how much money
^e and his partn^r Dr. Burges, has laid out upon so no legal or just Title,
Bishops and Cathedral la^d^:) yet the event will declare how little sense (...)
conscience, prudence or piety these purchasers had; when out of regret of their
supine folly in making such non ^ens^y purchases, as to buy what was by Law
another man's, and by no lawful power alienated from them, they will be ready to
blaspheme God and the King, yea to curse themselves, and all those who were the
means to lead them into such palpable snares of Sacrilege, folly, and
injustice, against God and the King, against Church and State, to their very
great los^ and detriment.

The L^beller (...) and r^r^anted.
What sense and secret feeling this Libeller has of Dr. Gaudens nonsense, in
stating the lawful, moral, and only obliging sense that can be made of the
Covenant, he is willing to dissemble; and strives, though in vain, to put on a
show of confidence; but one they easily see, that the Analysis, like Ebuc^s
dagger in Iglon^belly, has struck deep; and is so lodged in his bowel, that
the dirt and filth comes forth, in these imputations of Idolized nonsense and
blasphemy; both which the Libelling Anatomist, and Dr. Burges his dear Pupil,
will then be in better temper, and have more leisure to prove, without passion,
when they have both restored Bishops, and other Church Lands, to the rightful
owners, according to the Law of God and man, and the rules of all justice,
which binds us to give to every one their own, and to do to others, as we
would be done unto: Dr. Burges would have his illegal bargain against the
encroachments of the Corporation or City of Wells; and the Bishop of Bath and
Wells, with the Dean and Prebends, would have their estates from Dr. Burges:
Which once done humbly and ingenuously (without force, or firing him out of his
fine house, as he threatens the learned Dean of Wells Dr. Criton) this blessed
and penitent pair will be much more able, with clearer eyes to discern, and
juster zeal to detest the Idolized nonsense and blasphemy of Dr. Gaudens
Analysis; then will they be best Judges of the honest and only lawful sense of
the Covenant, when they shall hope to get nothing by it; yea, and so far
conform to it, as to maintain the just right of King and Subject, of Church and
State; which will undoubtedly cast out Dr. Burges, and bring in the Bishop and
Dean of Wells to their properties and liberties of enjoying their own according
to Law.

. When I find Dr. Burges, and his Patron this Libeller, The expectation of the
Libelle^s and D. E's repent^nce.
thus clothed with righteousness, and in their right minds, no less then
their rightful houses and estates; when I shall see them more cautious of
making good that proverb, A fool and his money are soon parted; when they have
eyes to see, what is written in great Letters upon all Church Lands and
Estates, Caveat Emplor, as Meant Tekel Perez, was on ^elshazzars walls when they
are as much trembling at that hand writing, which curses every man, yea, every
Nati n that dares rob God, and his Priests, or by the (...) Anal^gy, Christ and
his Ministers, which blasteth a^l sacrilegious and presumptuous purchasers,
with the Apostolical Anathema or Thunderbolt which struck Ananias and Saphyra
dead, and astonished Simon Magus, with, Thy money perish with thee; when I see
them got out of that hand of iniquity, and gall of bitterness, sacrilegious
covetousness and cruelty, which da^es with open forehead comply with, and
countenan^e, yea truck and trade, with those Hucksters, wh^^ labor to deprive
all excellent Bishops, and other learned Churchmen in England, of their lawful,
merited, and well used Estates and Dignities; yea, to deprive this so ancient,
Christian, and reformed Church of England, of that primitive, Catholic and
Apostolic ^o^ernment of Episcopacy, and all those prudent helps of Church
Government, which were by way of counsel and assistance applied to Bishops, in
the Dean and Chapters, as a constant Presbytery.

When I see Dr. Burges his resolution, his recantation; his retreat from the
traverses, with which this Dr^medary has wearied himself: When his prodromus
or Jack^al, thi^ Libeller shall make a new Essay of his will and sense, and
z^al in discovering Dr. Burges his restitution and real repentance; when I find
them both, or one of them, which is as good as both, like I^^bohus, prostrate
at the Church porch, on the ground, and crying out, Calcate me salem insipidum;
then it will be time to examine, what nonsense and blasphemy they really find
in Dr. Gaudens Analysis; which will not be ((...).) like Jonahs Gourd, of a
nights growth, and a days withering; but it will be like Sempervive or
Ever-live, flourishing like Aarons Rod, bearing fair leaves of right reason,
and ripe fruits of true Religion, Justice, and Reason, both before God and man;
nor shall the scratching of any such Bramble be able to destroy its fruit or
floridnes^: to which all ingenuous Covenanters will cheerfully conform; whose
freedom is this, not to be bound by any cords of men, contrary to those
obligations, which Gods laws, and the laws of the Land have upon them. If any
thing as a snare, or surprise, or mistake be put upon them by others, or taken
up by themselves, contrary to these moral and mutable ties of Piety, Equity,
and Charity, they are no more bound to keep and perform any Vow, or Covenant,
or Oath in any such rash and unlawful sense, then those Jews were to make
good their Corban, of devoting all their goods to God and his Temple, rather
then relieve their necessitous Parents; or then David was bound to keep his,
when he resolved (with, God do so to me and mine also) to destroy Nabal, and
all his house; which military and cruel purpose, yea solemn protestation in
Gods name, he piously, cheerfully and thankfully broke, yea, recanted it, at
the wise intercession of Nabals wife.

But the bold charge of Blasphemy, By charging Dr. Gauden with blasphemy, the
L^beller ^e to^cheth ^^e wh le apt of st^^^ty o^ parti^lity
added to nonsense and both Idolized, is of so heinous a nature, and so
reproachful, not only to Dr. Gauden, but to the whole age he lives in, and to
all sorts of worthy persons (who doubtless never took Dr. Gauden for to be so
bold a sinner, as at once to rob God of his glory, and his Church of its
honor; or to blaspheme either God or the King) that the prodigious Libeller,
though he is justly ashamed and afraid to own himself or his name, yet ought
not to^ much to flatter himself in Dr. Gaudens silence for a time* in his own
concealment, as if th^se would keep him secret and safe from the revenge which
hangs over him; Alas the Author of it, is not only sec^ndly suspected, but
evidently known to all the better world at London, and in the Country, to be
such an one as might probably have served A^abs covetousness* and Jezebels
cruelty, in charging Nab^th with Blasphemy; yea, he is prone to think and write
of all Bishops, Deans, and Prebends, as Blasphemers; men not fit to live, and
enjoy their own, but to be either stoned, or starved to death; that he may (as
a spiteful-wasp, who has more of the sting then honey) still enjoy the sweet
hi^es of those Drones, those Idle-bellies, as that Cretian B^rbor^t^s, calls
persons every way so much his betters, that it is to their disparagement to
compare them with such a Mushroom^ who is (besides common fame) upon record in
Chau^try, by a sentence given May 1. 1657. blessed with this Encomium in
Hippeslys case; that he appears to be an Author and Abettor of so great
injustice and oppre^sions, as are not only utterly inbecoming a man of ^ommon
honesty, much more a Minister of the Gospel, whose life and conversation should
be exemplary in all virtue, etc.

Quis celum terrae^ non misceat and mare culo;
-- Si fur displiccat Very.
It would have made an horse break his bridle, Of the Author of the Libel.
and startle to an ecstasy all the sober world, to hear Verres inveigh against
The^very, or Cataline against conspiracy, or Caesar Borgia against luxury, or
C.B. against Sacrilege, or this Libeller against blasphemy, and yet conceal
his name as ashamed of his zelotry, and clamor aloud for the sacred Covenant
(forsooth) and cry out against all as blasphemy and blasphemers that shall so
abate the rigid, factious and unjust sense, by some imputed to it, and
prosecution against Bishops and Episcopacy, as may make a fair and honest way
to their just restitution, to those rights of estate, honor and authority,
which by law are due to them, and only by the will and power of a few men was
taken, or rather beaten or extorted from them.

How ridiculous would this Act and Scene of this Libeller have appeared to all
Spectators who should have seen him (if he durst have been visible) at this
loud outcry of blasphemy, rending his garments, and tearing the hair off his
head and beard (if the last be not lately cut off to disguise him, and the
other as short as his eyebrows) in a most pitteous and hideous manner; as the
high Priest did when he cried out against Christ We have heard his blasphemy,
etc. themselves then most guilty of blaspheming the Son of God, and Savior of
the world, when they kindled most like touchwood or tinder at the imaginary
sparks of blasphemy, as this Libeller does, who if he should rake his own evil
heart, or the Devils skul, can find no show of this fowl leprosy of blasphemy
upon Dr. Gaudens Analysis; save only that Dr. Gauden, in that as in all his
ways, neither does nor ever did bow down and worship either that Covenant, or
any other Engagements, civil or sacred, which any party of men set up in
England, in such words, or under such a sense and design, as were inconsistent
with, and contrary to those precedent Oaths, upon his and the Nations souls;
which obliged to all things just and honest toward God, the King, and all men;
Nor could in Dr. Gaudens judgment after- Engagements and Covenants either
violently imposed or spont^neously undertaken, any way absolve from the former
lawful bonds, nor bind men to act in the least degree contrary to them.

This, this is the blasphemy, the nonsense, so offensive to the Libeller, The
(...).
to C. B. and all those who first protesting and after covenanting to keep to
the reformed Religion, established in England, to the Laws and Liberties of the
Nation, to their duty to King and Parliaments, the Church and their Country,
were yet (at last) so hurried down the torrents of factions, furies and
rebellio^s, as they not only took away from godly and learned Bishops, and many
other worthy Churchmen their lawful estates; but they tore up even their adored
Parliaments and Representatives by the roots, and pulled out those covenanting
Lords and Commons by the ears; they turned all first to Pre^bytery, next to
Independency, and at last to Anarchy.

Yet did not this gentle Libeller or D.B. all that time accuse any of those
sons of Belial with the least spot of blasphemy, although they were no great
Bigots or observers of the Covenant, in any sense loyal, religious, or lawful,
but as swine trampled all under their feet, only they still corresponded with
this Libeller, and the Chicken under his wings, D.c. Burges, so far as to make
good the bad purchase of Bishops and other Church lands, which he had made. All
this while the most prodigious Violaters, bafflers, and scorners of his Sacred
Covenant, were so far from blasphemers, that they were Saints, and in D. B's
white book he owned them for Parliaments, Reprisentatives, and Supreme Powers,
when he was to acquaint them and the world with his lamentable case, as to his
purchase, which still stuck in the briars, and pulled some wool from the back
of the black sheep.

. Who is not content with Dr. Gaudens Caution and Indulgence, formerly
interpreting, and soberly resoving the Covenant into such a sense, A sober and
just sense o^ the Covenant will ^^t serve D. B's turn.
as only can be just and lawful in it self; also most according to the peace
of the Nation, and composure of all honest men's minds, who are engaged by all
moral and indispensible ties, long before this Covenant was hatched, to keep
their oaths and vows to God and the King, agreeable to Gods Word and the Laws
of the Land; which are the rules of Justice, and gives to every man his due.

. But this sober sense of the Covenant will not keep D. Burges in his Bishops
lands, or Deans house, this will not keep Episcopacy out of the Church, or
Bishops out of their estates; the want, use, and worth of which Government,
many years miserable experience has sufficiently taught all English men, but
only Papists, and Purchasers of Church lands: For this is the Palladium of
their Troy, this their design, who either out of Romish and Jesuitical
principles, or out of Presbyterian envy, spite and pride, or out of covetous
and sacrilegious projects, to make unjust and filthy gain, do so wring the Nose
of the Covenant, that they would make the blood to come again; and so rack its
joints, by a Presbyterian, or a Politic Strappado, that they dissolve the
truest strength, and moral ligaments of it; which it may well have, it ^t be
kept within the due bounds of an honest, just, and legal sense; and not
stretched to the proportions which every Procrustes would have it, to fit his
bed, and serve the turn of his lusts, either covetousness or ambition,
disloyalty or sacrilege, Anarchy or confusion.

O^ (...) L^bellers (...).
The Libellers calumny thou, as to Idolized Nonsense, was only worthy of Dr.
Gaudens smiles, and scorns; but the charge of Blasphemy must be looked upon
with a more rugged and severe brow.

If it were not a mouth and pen wonted to foul Enormities. I might cry out with
him in Homer, (...). If it were a tongue or pen that kept within the circle of
modesty, ingenuity, humanity, or common civility, I would undertake to charm
it, and exorcise that evil spirit which occasionally, and for a fit of passion,
might possess them, by telling him, that next being guilty of blasphemy ones
self, good men should be most cautious of accusing another falsely of blasphemy:
Nor may here every hot fit of passion and revenge, which easily surprizeth
choleric tempers, and adust constitutions, serve for an excuse. Dr. Gaudens
charg^ng D. Burges, (...) charge and B^asphemy (...).
a Presbyter of the Church of England, for his Scandalous and Sacrilegious
purchasing of Church lands, contrary to the Law of God and man, was so easy,
so apparent, so by himself confessed in the fact, and owned by, and all that
kn^w him, for a crying and conclamated case, that it did not deserve such a
black and odious retortion from his Factor this Libeller, as to charge Dr.
Gauden with no less then blasphemy, of which no sober man ever suspected him to
be guilty; nor would Dr. Gauden ever own or avow it in any degree, which Dr.
Burges does, as to his sacrilegious purchase, who has brass enough to bring it
in o dispute, and vent his unhappy Paradox, That what, he confesses, all the
godly and learned World ever esteemed Sacrilege, yet is to him as a new and
great Rabbi, or C^^banist, no sin: He can, like the Psyllae, and other N^groes
in Afryca, feed upon, and thrive with such Vipers and Serpents flesh: Neither
the irreligion, nor oppression, nor the injustice, troubles his Ostrich
stomach, either as taking those Estates from God and the Church, or from
particular worthy Bishops, and other Churchmen, without any Law; yea, against
all Law: For a temporary Order of the two Houses of Parliament (even in their
full and free constitution) cannot lawfully deprive any man of his freehold
lands or goods, and this without any legal Trial. For this is the case, as Dr.
Burges to his great grief and terror well knows, though he vapors much; and so
does his Brave, this Libeller, who is as valiant as an hungry Greek, and will
venture at any thing, that he may but still feed, though upon the Priests
Portion, the Churches Patrimony; robbing Father and Mother, and wiping his
mouth as the Harlot, with, What evil have I done? If I have not done what is
just, yet I did what was profitable, and I am now in prudence to do what is
necessary, scelera sceleribus tueri, to maintain sin with sin, and to turn
godliness into gain, though I lose my soul into the bargain.

Dr. Gauden (...).
But to return more strictly to my Accuser of Blasphemy, my great Diabolus and
Sycophant, this ^anting I ^^eller, and the Demon that possesses him: O evil
and unclean Spirit, who ever thou art, wherever (...)* whence soever thou
come, whitherso^^ (...) to City and Country, to London o (...) what Church,
or Church Lands, or Church m^^ (...) in^^^est devour; whether thou feedest upon
Crown or Church Lands, upon the flesh of (...) W^ether thou devourest the
houses and honors of wid^ows, maids, or Wives: Whether thou be^st b^l^^ bub or
beelphegor, a Spirit of luxury or covet^^^sn^ss, for wantonness or wealth:
Whether thou savourest of a Renegado Presbyterian, or a rambling Independent,
or a sorry Quaker, or a grand Apo^tate from Epi copacy, or an utter Antagonist
to all (...): W^ether thou art nothing, or all things, as the ^^de^cri es, and
wind turns, know, to the increase of thy terror and torment, That there is so
Potent a Defeniative and Firmament against thee in an upright heart, and an
unspotted life, in a just and generous soul, that owns and adores with all
humble reverence, the glorious Majesty, and infinite perfections of the
blessed God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as they are manifested in the holy
Word (besides the power, wisdom, and harmony of their works) that no violent
and malicious imputation of blasphemy can be fastened upon Dr Gaudens actions,
words, or writings; none of which have hitherto (beyond common infirmities)
been any infamy to his person, or reproach to his Profession, as a Christian or
a Minister: For which he may boldly appeal to all that know him, if it were
needful so far to counterpoise the calumny of a vile and obscure Libeller, with
the testimony of persons of honor and honesty.

But possibly the impudence of this Accuser dares not as Lucifer, ascend so
high, as to charge Dr. Gauden with blasphemy in the rank and highest sense,
Whe^^er the Libeller means bla^phem^ in a ^ er sense against Superiors.
which is a presumptuous reproach, or wilful diminution of the glorious
attributes of Gods Name, at the proof of which he no where offers. It may be he
takes blasphemy in a lower sense, as a reproaching those that are Supreme in
power, though not in d^e Authority: And this because, forsooth, Dr. Gauden,
does not, did not flatter every prevalent faction, or comply with every patch
or party, or fag end, or tail, or rump of tumultuated, bafled and overawed
Parliaments: Nor yet suffer his sheaf to bow down to novel, partial and biased
Assemblies; as if they were the grand and sole Dictators, yea, Reformers of our
Church and Religion, beyond all former Synods and Convocations; or as if we had
no Sovereign but the armed Arbitrators of our lives, liberties and estates, who
sought to make the glory of the Nation and Church of England, which was ever
Regal and Episcopal since it was Christian, truckle under a Scotch Canopy, and
to make Bishops to crib in a Presbyterian trundlebed; as much as Kingly
Majesty, to be confounded with Democracy.

. It Is true, the freedom of Dr. Gaudens tongue and pen has been such, that
saving his civility as a man, and his charity as a Christian, which he owns and
studies to pay to all men's persons, friends and enemies (even to this miserable
Libeller, if he knows him;) He hates and dares reprove open sins of Rebellion,
Perjury, Sacrilege, and gross Injustice, in the great, and many, in the most
powerful, popular and prospect^^^, a^ well as the poor, mean and miserable.

(...) Dr. Gaudens (...) against ^^.
D. Gaudens style, wounds and slays the fattest, as well as the lea^^st: he
spared not the Army, the Judges and Destroyers of the King; he has fought with
Beasts at ^yh u^, and encountered the fat Bulls of Basan, such as Dr. Burges,
and other Sacrilegious purchasers of Church Lands, contrary to Gods and man's
Laws: yea, and contrary to the Kings both conscience and commands; highly to
the injury of the dead as well as the oppression and impoverishing o^ the
living many reverend Bishops and other excellent Clergymen in all the Church
of England: Dr. Gauden he fears not to attacque the most specious Hypocrites,
and formal Pretenders to Religion, Reformation, Sanctity and Inspiration, when
their cruel and unjust actions, confute their pretensions: As they do with a
witness, when they are sacrilegious against God and his Church, traiterous and
rebellious against the King; when they are by their covetousness, ambition,
contentiousness, envy and malice, the noonday scandals to the Christian name,
and reformed profe^sion, as men, or Ministers of any degree and order.

^. Dr. Gaudens high esteem of Parliaments and Convocations* in their legal and
honorable constitution, is so sufficiently discovered to the World in his
Writings, late and long since; particularly in that Sermon of his preached at
S. Paul's, called Medicastri, or slight Healers, which so offended C.B. and
those ((...)) Corrosives or canker of Church and State, that none can qu^stion
it, but such a paltry Libeller as this, to whose palate all Dr. Gaudens
Writings seem to be like Rat^bane: he no sooner tastes them, but he surfits and
swells, and is ready to break in sunder with despite and malice.

If to blame those that are blameworthy, whose unrighteous decrees, vile and
abhorred actions, full of cruelty and confusion, expose them to the detestation
of God and man; whose shame no names of Parliaments, or Assemblies, or Saints,
or Supreme Power, can hide and palliate: If to resist such to their face, as S.
Paul did S. Peter, as occasion offers, and either duty to God, or charity to
the Church and his Country do bind and command; if this be blasphemy, Dr.
Gauden is willingly, yea ambitiously guilty of it, not as one that delights to
speak evil of Dignities, lawfully and truly such; but while others flatter the
most indign Usurpations, Dr. Gauden discovers their Indignities; making their
Authors and Abettors the objects of Gods and all good men's just indignation;
while they make tumults and lies their refuge, neither fearing God, nor
reverencing man; insolcncing the honor and fredom of Parliaments, deluding and
oppressing the people, destroying the King, and deforming the Church,
abolishing our ancient Laws, and excellent Constitutions in Church and State,
to set up their novel factions.

. If to assert the clear, moral, just and immutable rules of conscience; the
lavvful and only bonds of men's thoughts, desires, words, oaths, vovvs,
covenants, and actions, namely the Word of God, the rules of right Reason or
common honesty, and the Laws of the Land, which are the measures of Civil
Justice, if this be blasphemy: If to perstringe and sharply rebuke with all
Ministerial authority (yet humble and discreetly) the base Policies, and
injurious practices of an Adulterous generation, of a sacrilegious crew* and
God-robbing faction; who make w^y for the interests of their factions, and for
their private honors or estates; by threatening, imprisoning, and at last
murdering their King; ^y extirpating all his Royal Posterity, by spoiling
learned and holy Bishops, with many other excellent Church men; by forcing
Parliaments, like Plants set in hot beds, to do what they list; by overthrowing
all things Civil and Sacred: If to speak evil of these evil deeds and doers,
whose folly is manifest to all true men: If this be blasphemy, Dr. Gauden does
not depre^ate that imputation, but glories in it, as S. Paul did in serving God
that way which some called Heresy.

. If to state the Covenant in so candid and Christian a sort, as to allow all
that is in any moral and honest sense lawful, just and good in it; as being
within the power of men, as Christians and Subjects, freely to profess or
oblige themselves to in Gods name, as consistent with the Laws of God, and the
Land: It to pare off all that is dangerously interpreted or ath^ed by some men's
superstition: and to give a benign sense of what is dubious: If to absolve men
from what shall appear to be factiously, sacrilegiously, or in^uriously
intended, imposed, practiced or urged by some men's partial and peevish Spirits:
If seeking to draw fairly all English Protestants to true Piety, constant
Loyalty, Ecclesiastical Unity, Holy Order, mutual Charity, and civil Peace, be
any blaspheming of God, or the King, or true Religion; or (indeed) of the
Covenant it self (so much overcryed up by some either more subtle or silly men;
as if like the Sun at noon day, its lights ecclipsed, yea, extinguished all
other lawful and precedent Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, of Civil and
Ecclesiastical obedience; and absolved men from that duty, justice and charity
which they owe to all men:) If this be Blasphemy in the Libellers sense, truly
it is such as cannot justly be blamed by any good Christians, prudent
Ministers, or loyal Subjects: But only by such bold Cavillers, and
calumniators, as have some further fish to fry; and some faction still to
foment, under some affected, rigid, unjust, and invalid sense, which they must
affix to the Covenant, in order to promote the private and partial interests of
some men; whose fear, guilt and shame for past actions, make them fly to this
Asylum of the Covenant, as if it were the only Sanctuary for malefactors.

. If not to purchase Bishops and other Church lands (where no man had
commission or permission from God, the King, the Law, or the Possessors) to
sell them; nor indeed any just cause to alienate them: If to maintain ((...))
an irreconcilable war against all sacrilegious practices, whiles yet he prays
for the persons: If to pity the folly, and contemn the knavery of such
Purchasers, who were so greedy of great pennyworths, as not to regard the bad,
the no little they had for their security: If this be blasphemy, it is more
commendable and useful for the public good, than ever this Libellers frenzy,
or D. B's zeal for such a Reformation as may hedge in his Church Lands to his
private furtunes; or at least help him to some good Composition; that so he may
no^ too much ^^rn (...) sinceri^^, and singe his feathers, or (...) and consume
his nest, by his sacrilegious adventures.

(...).
. If these ways of Dr. Gaudens expressing himself by word and deed; by
preaching and writing, be his Idolized Nonsense and Blasphemy, no doubt, (like
the foolishness of S Paul's preaching, and the weakness of his presence) it will
tend more to Gods glory, the Kings Honor, the Churches Peace, and all good
Christians satisfaction, then all the Factious Conspiracies, and Libellers
Rhapsodies of this Anatomist; who dare not appear or show his face to the
World, lest he should discredit and confute his Libellous Pamphlets by the
scandal of his looks, and infamy of his person; which adds as little to the
repute of any cause he undertakes, as Satan does to the honor of the
Scripture, when he cites it; or the name of Pontius Pilate does to the
authority of the Creed.

Nor is it in the power of any such sacrilegious Apostates, and rebellious
children, as this Libeller appears to be lay his scorning the Church of
England, and disdaining to own her as a Mother, or to pity her in her late
trials and Afflictions upon earth; because Jerusalem from above, whence the
Truth, Light and Savior of the Church descended, is the Mother of us all; It
is not, I say, within the reach of his tongue or pen to fasten any such, as
ridiculous as false, imputation of nonsense and blasphemy upon a person whose
conversation and doctrine have by the grace of God been as free from the spot
or suspicion of such great offenses, as are Idolatry, Sacrilege, Blasphemy,
Simony, Rebellion, putid flattery, and Ec^bolian inconstancy, as some men have
been guilty of all these, and void of all modesty, ingenuity, sense of honor,
loyalty, real sanctity, generous constancy, and common honesty; lurking as
serpents or evil beasts in secret places; and though unseen, yet assaulting
with the sting and poison of blasphemy; whereof nothing is proved either
against the blessed God, Creator, Savio^r and Sanctifier; or against the holy
Scriptures, or against the Church of God, or against any part f his Worship, or
any holy duty, grace and virtue; no not against any counsels, actions or
authority of lawful Superiors; or against any honest man, who keeps within the
bounds of Gods law, and the Laws of this Church and Kingdom.

. Where then O wretched Libellist is Dr. Gaudens D^. Gaudens inn^ce^cy.
blasphemy! Is not this venomous beast, which out of the flames of malice,
burning in a sacrilegious breast seeks to fasten upon his hand, as easily
shaken off without any hurt into the fire whence it come, as that viper which
was seized on S. Paul's; and by his miraculous indemnity manifested his
innocence, to the amazement of his conserious spectators; Alas these impotent
endeavors of enraged wickedness, and sacrilegious despair, are like the
(ultinti conatus morientium ferarum) last bitings of those beasts, whose
revenge consists only in making their teeth meet, though they fasten upon
steel and break their jaws; when the Dragon saw his time was short, he sought
to make it up in the vehemence of his rage against the Church; upon earth no
doubt, described as a woman too, and so may (as F^e) very properly be called
the Mother of all the living in a spiritual new life, which are born of the
Word of God and his Spirit, and brought up in that holy family, and nourished
by the breast of this Spouse of Christ: At which holy allusion this impudent
Libeller makes himself as much profane sport, P^^^ ^^.
as Ishmael did when he mocked Isaac, being justly ashamed to own that Church
as a Mother, which as an ungracious and ungrateful wretch, he has not only
forsaken and scorned, but wasted and rebl^ed as much as in him lay of her
support, ornaments, of her honor^ government and authority: Perhaps this
learned Etymologist fancying, that Jerusalem, which he own as a mother only
above, has its name from his (...), which signifies Sacrilege.

. But ^inding by the gracious revolutions of Divine mercy the Church of England
to be in a fair was to be recovered out of the hands of Sacrilegious H^bbers;
the poor Libellist and his friends are now concerned to cry out amam of
blasphemy against Dr. Gauden, as a constant son, and dutiful assertor of the
Church of England, and a no less severe and smart, then just and implicable
tormentor of impenitent Sacrilegius and Apostates.

. Who are not content to sin and sneak, but they must boast and vapor, and
strut and challenge all the better world, as if they could justify their sin
and folly, against the suffrages of all mankind, Heathens and Christians,
Reformists and Romanists, as the illustrious Dr. Burges Dr. Burges his (...) of
Sacrilege no (...).
has done to his eternal infame, fancying that he has drawn streighter ^ines,
and fairer figures with his black coal, in order to take away the Hell^sh
deformity, or to put on some tincture and fucu^ of beauty, on the ugly face of
sacrilege, then all the great Masters of Learning, Eloquence, and Religion
have in all ages been able to do, by way of describing how unjust, how odious,
how ingrate, how impudent, how abominable to God, how detestable to good men;
how unworthy o any man, much more of any Christian and Reformed, that
facinorous crime of wilful and presumptuous sacrilege is; which openly mocks
God, and affronts Religion; which against all Law, robs the true Church,
inju^es the chief Bishops and Pastors of it, and disc^ura^eth all true
Professors, prostituting all that is sacred ^o Atheism and Profaneness; which
no man can scrup^e, who has learned this Paradox, That to alienate by force,
without any Law or consent of the Patron, and Proprietors, or Possessors,
either the King or the Clergy, those lands, houses and goods which have been
lawfully dedicated, long confirmed, and well used to the glory of God, and the
good of his Church; (that God may be duly worshipped and served; and his
Church, both Pastors and people, duly maintained in good order and government:)
That this is no sin, though against Law and Justice; and no sacrilege, though
manifestly against the peculiar rights of God and the Church, and that double
honor which is due to the Teachers and Governors of it; and lastly, against
the credit of both Christian and Reformed Religion.

. For none of all which great interests, those Gallio's are concerned, who with
this Libeller and his dear D. Burges, having imbarqued in a sacrilegious
bottom: and having had for some years fair gales to flatter them, had rather
make an eternal Shipwreck, like Hymenem and Alexander, of faith and good
conscience, yea, ^f Church and State, of King and Clergy, then make just
restitution to God, the King, and the Church.

. The rendition and loss of which ill-gotten Estates, will teach those
Merchants more wit and honesty hereafter, though they have less money to
venture upon, not crazy or cracked titles, but appar^ntly null and void, as
against all Laws of God and the Land; whose Equity, Sanctity and Antiquity are
not to be battled or abolished by any temporary Ordinance of Parliament, in any
broken Constitution: much less when either leavened with faction and novelty;
or ruffled by tumults, or overawed or abetted by foreign Armies, or sifted
and scattered by any factious artifices and parties; who had no lawful power or
authority in them, either from God or man, to deprive any one honest man, much
less so many learned, reverend and unblameable Churchmen, yea, the whole Order,
Policy and Fraternity of the Clergy, of their Lands and Estates, no way evicted
or forfeited by any Law.

The (...) D ^. and (...) L^^^ller may kno^ thou the members of men (...).
. The numbers of men does not lessen their sin nor their punishment: What may
befall one man, either as to sin or sorrow, may reach Societies, Synods, Houses
of Parliament, and whole Churches; which are subject to Apostasies in Religion,
to Depravedness in Opinion, and to Partiality in Practice; by which if they be
as any time as men, surprised and seized, the only way of happiness is, to
repent and amend; to make personal and public restitution, to return to their
first love, and to strengthen the things that remain; which has been the pious
care and endeavor of this last happy Parliament, rendering to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God, the things that are Gods: That this Church and
Nation hitherto kept, as to its Parliamentary honor and sanctity, from the
great offenses, may be ever free from Regicide, Sacrilege and Apostasy, (for
neither any full and free Parliament, consisting of King, Lords and Commons;
nor yet any National Convocation or Synod, have ever counseled, contrived,
accomplished, or approved any of those horrid abominations, which have so long,
like the Deluge, overflowed and prevailed over the highest mountains:) But now
(blessed be God) they are not only assuaged, but the dry Land appears; yea, our
Noah and his Family, the Father and Conservator of our British world, and of
these Reformed Churches, is come out of the Ark, and has taken just possession
of his Kingdoms and Dominions; for whom even this Libeller dares ( page 13.)
faintly and hypocritically to pray; mentioning His Majesty with a superficial
by-blow of devotion; when (God knows) the Kings restoration was as unwelcome
to such sacrilegious spirits, as Christ's coming was to the Legion Devils in the
Gospel; of whom they had a just jealousy, that he came to torment them before
their time.

. Which fear His Majesty's native, and almost excessive clemency Gods and his
Majesty's clemency should lead to repentance.
has hitherto abated and confuted; yea, is prone always so to do, if he can
but see any such s^^ns of penitence in his and the Churches Enemies, as may
bring forth fruits of justice and righteousness, of restitution and amendment;
which fruits are as hardly t^ be expected from presumptuous Sacrilegists, such
a^ this Libeller and his D. Burges seem ^o be, as figs are from thorns, or
grapes from thi^tler; since they by ^^ar ^etent fancy and fallacy, sev^n to
expect a like improvement of the Covenant by an unlawful and unjust sense; Page
1^.
in which it seems they took it first, and still hold it, for the extirpation
of Bishops, and keeping them and other Clergy men from their estates, as far
better minded men have at last made of it, in part of their Loyalty for
promoting the Kings happy Restoration: Which sense of that branch of the
^^venant, is ^s just, honest and conform to out English Oaths, and Laws of God
and the ^^nd; as the other of sacrilegious exterpating Bishops and Episcopacy,
as to their pri^tine, primitive and due a^th^rity, in order to keep away their
Land, and Estates from them and the Clergy, is most unjust, uncatholick,
unc^ristian; contrary to piety and comm^n ^q^ity, against the Laws and Oaths
of God and man, specially of the English Clergy; a plea and proj^^t (...) only
to be solicited by a Chaplain of Julians the Ap state; and a person publicly
branded as void of common honesty; who forgetting that ^^d^st sinning is some
diminution of guilt, and some pr^tage of repentance, Absalom-like, on the house
top, must spread his tent; and under the ^overt of ^he Covenant (which is too
narrow to hide or protect the sin and shame of either sacrilege, or schesm, or
rebellion) to discover his Fathers, the bishops nakedness, as much as in him
lies, and to prostitute his Mother, the Church of England, to his own and other
men's sacrilegious and unsatiable lusts.

. But I am weary of the kennel and filth of the Title, The Libeller a d
^^oncile and thong.
wherein this Borborites afterward takes so much delight to wallow, and pulls
along with him into the same obscenity D. Burges, a person whom many hands have
often in vain washed, yea, and brayed in morters, if it were possible to part him
from the folly of his versatile, vola i will, and violent temper, being, as he so
proposes, a learned Scholar, a great Divine* an eloquent Orator, and an acute
Disputant (as appeared at Oxford, when keeping his Act to make C.B. D. B. Dr.
Frideaux gave him this Elogie, Profecto mi fili tu praedicare potes disputare
non potes;) besides these, he thinks himself a potent Writer, till he meet with
the gentle lash; and is beyond all his other virtues, a rich and bold purchaser
of Bishops and other Church Lands. Which prodigious practice of a Presbyter,
who stood by Law and Oath engaged to Bishops, he seeks with a like affront to
maintain; and fancying himself to be the Brontes or Boanerges of his age, he
lets fly his brutish thunderbolts and flashes of lightning, against the faces
of any that like not his many faced way of living. In his minority (which he
holds now for his years of indiscretion) he was highly and sharply engaged
against Non-conformists, wrote smartly and truly for Bishops, yea, and for
ceremonies, was Hierarchical, Antisectical, a stout Pluralist; yea, and I have
heard of one of that name, The val^ur and virtue of D.^.
who offered by a Symoniack proposal to the Earl of Cleveland, a 1000 li. for a
Living, then actually void, and in his Lordships gift; as his Lordship has
twice assured me: For which scandal his Honor refused to admit him to be his
Confessor or Comforter; when being Prisoner to the Earl of Essex, and very
sick, this penny-Father was brought and commended to him as (...)
^ather-Confessor, to his Lordships laughter, and just reproach of his
confidence, to obtrude himself to that office, when he had offered to swallow
Simony and the Oath to boot: Nor was one of like letters and manners wanting to
tamper and importune with another (the Earl of Barkeshire) for the grant of
some preferment from the King then at Oxford; when this militant Presbyter,
though ambitious to be a Dean or Bishop, preached and trained men stoutly
against the King. The Earl amazed at the Effronteries of the motion, demanded
upon what score, he that so destinately opposed the Kings interest, should have
confidence to desire any favor of preferment from His Majesty? The wily
Doctor replied, my Lord, I can and will do the King more service by continuing
in the Parliaments Quarters, and seeming to be against Him, then if I were with
him: Which servile hypocrisy the Earl easily believed to be in the man, and
accordingly valued D. B. and his influence.

D. B. (...) ^acriledge and hi^ (...) of ^^.
. After all these noble Essays (the Libellers darling) finding the Kings and
Churches affairs to be very low, and as he thought irrecoverable; he thought to
make up his defeat of undeserved preferment in some advantageous purchase of
Bishops Lands, and Cathedral houses; which finding to be sold at Robinhood:
penny-worths (many times, both sellers and buyers being conscious to the flaws
in the titles, and illegality of such alienations) he doubles his great
loan-money, and fills up the measure of his sins by such a Sacrilege, though
with a wry and reluctant conscience, as he intimates in his case, which he was
not ashamed to tell the world, yea and appeal to some of those spurious
Parliaments, which he hoped would easily be invited to adopt his Cause as their
own; but here he lost his time and oil, for they had other fish to fry.

Yet by an indefatigable improbity of diligence, working wickedness with both
hands greedily, this snail drawing in his horns a little for fear, and
concealing his name, adventured to put out only C. B. D. D. for the authorizing
of his pamphlet, called, No Sacrilege, no sin, because he perceived the
critical distempers of the times, then beginning to work toward purgation and
health were likely to abhor any thing the more to which his name was prefixed;
all honest men being weary and ashamed of the horrid diseases, and worser
remedies of our Church and State, of which this Montebanck and circulator had
been a great and unhappy part: Other Readers as well as Dr. Gauden might have
much mistaken those ill ominating letters of C. B. D. D. and taken them to
stand for Creticus Borborites, or some Caesar Borgia, with the additionals of
Doeg and Demetrius: If the worthy Cornelius Burges Doctor of Divinity had not
with a railing letter sent that book to Dr. Gauden, as the Libeller (one of his
privadoes it seems) truly affirms, page 9.

. That filthy Letter (with Judas the Traitor and theif.) went to its proper
place: But Dr. Gaud^n presently prepared an answer to that wretched Pamphlet,
which he found as full of magisterial impudencies, fallacies, and
impertinencies, as beggars are of vermin, such trash and trumpery indeed, as
is only fit to wrap up that desperate and damnable paradox, of Sacrilege no
sin. But Dr. Gauden finding C. B. to bear himself merely upon event and power,
as if all had been lawful in the alienating of B^s^op Deans and Chapters lands,
because their offi^^ we^e pro tempore during the violent storm of Wa^, and
desolating delusions, of times exautorated (...) listed: and ^oping that ere
long that paltry (...) Pamphlet would be confuted from Heaven and upon earth,
by the Justice and mercy of God and y^^d men, he thought it lost labor to
print and (...) for it, when it had indeed no seeming, (...) grounds of Gods
Word and right Reason, being wholly against the consent of all Nati^^ as well
as against ^he principles of all true Religion and pr^ctises of all just and
holy men particularly against the laws of this Land, and consent or custo^^ of
the or any Christian Church; as also against the suffrages of all learned
Lawyers, as well as godly (...) of whatever persuasion and differences in other
things: Nor did Dr. Gauden think himself bound to consider what such a poor
mushroom as C.B. pretends against such cedars.

(...).
. Nor has Dr. Gaudens hopes (blessed be God) deceived him; those mercies of
the most high God which ^h^re for ever have much visited this robbed and
a^f^^icted Church and Kingdom; and though we have not as we ought repented of
our sins, yet God has repented him of the evils he has inflected, returning
in loving kindness to the King, the Church, the Kingdom, the Nobility, the
Clergy, the Gentry, and all loyal people: who are all disposed now to confute
such pestilent Pamphlets, not in words but in deeds, leaving the Law to its
power, the Church to recover its patrimony, and the Clergy to enjoy their
properties; which 1. the devout wills, the just and pious intentions of the
Donors now dead, 2. The clear word of God commanding, approving and accepting,
3. The consent of all Christian Kings and Parliaments, 4. The fundamental Laws
of the land, do make good to them, beyond what any such skulking Scribler can
disprove, by ought to be pleaded from the pitiful and often repeated crambe of
his Ordinances of the two Houses, or their abolishing of the Offices of
Bishops, Deans, etc. which C. B. presumes of; all which reasons, if valid by
mere force against justice and conscience, against the laws of God and man,
would also hold good against the King and House of Lords, for both were by some
of D. B's Masters abolished, as useless, dangerous, and pernicious: yea, and
the like desolating violence might have taken as much place against the Glebes,
and Tithes, and Employment of all Presbyters, as against the Lands and Offices
of the Bishops, Deans and Prebends, if the Barbonistick Conventicles, and other
abjuring Juncto's of desperate men, had, under the names of Acts and Ordinances
of Parliament, abolished (as they intended, all Ministry and Ministers of the
Church of England of all degrees.

. A Jesuitical project cruel and cunning, carried on by Fanatic hands and
furies; and as near to have taken effect (which C.B. D.D. well knows) as the
Gunpowder Treason once was: For there wanted not barerls of powder, nor Fauxes
with their dark lanthorns and matches, nor traiterous plotters and conjuring,
yea, and covenanting, to perfect (as Feak and others have-told us,) this last
work of thorough Reformation: Which taking away the use and Office of any
ordained ^arochial Ministers, as well as Bi^hops and Cathedral M niste^^, who
are much anci^nter then the other, ^^ght justly in D. Burges judgment and
argument* have taken away, alienated, sold and confiscat^^ all the Gl^be^,
Tithes, and Church Livings in England; of which possibly C. B. might have had
other good bargains, wi hout being put to a new plea: for what woold serve for
one, would also justify the other, so long as the club and the sword was ab^^^
the Law, and Justice, or Common Honesty.

But at last C.B. D.D. is beaten out of the pit. The (...).
And however he have good metal, yea, and hopes for another bush ng Bout: yet
as Cocks of the game are dispir^l^d by the sent of garlic eaten by their
rivals; so he cannot bear the name of King and Parliament happily united. This
sadly presuges Bishops and Episcopacy, this betokens a Church with order and
government, defended by law and justice, that every one may have their own:
This threatens not to make sacrilege a sin, but to own it as a sin of the
first magnitude; at once breaking both Tables of ^od^ Law, and violating both
Gods and man's right, yea, robbing the best, most useful, and most deserving of
mankind; for so godly Bishops and other Minister^ have been, (...).
and ought to be.

And now C.B.D.D. flies (as guilty Joab to the horns of the Altar) to the
Asylum of the Covenant: And putting this Anonymus Libeller in the front, he
following in the rear, makes a foul, dishonorable, and shameful battery (yet
unseen) upon Dr. Gaudens Analysis, his good name, his person, his writings, and
whatever he thinks exposed to the strokes of impotent malice, that he may be
avenged on Dr. Gauden, for his just rebuke of D. B's Sacrilege.

. They cry aloud, O the Covenant, O the sacred Covenant, that did such wonders
of old, that began the spoiling of goodly Churches, the sad ruins of our
famous Cathedrals, that like the smell of brimstone, made all the Bishops,
Deans, Prebends and Cathedral-men to forsake their hives: This stripped those
idle drones, as D. B. calls them, of their Estates and Honors; such as were
the Primate of Armagh, Bishop Morton, Bishop Hall, Bishop Westfield, Bishop
Browning, Bishop Prideaux, Bishop Winniffs, and many others either dead, or
still living, and (by a wonderful mercy) surviving both their own miseries, and
their adversaries malice.

. But D. B. (as he says of himself) has labored more abundantly then them
all; that is, to purchase and preserve to himself these Bishops lands: For
doubtless, if he had had money enough, he would have dealt for all by
wholesale, an^ not by retail, they were such opulent and sweet penyworths.

. Now, If the Covenant help not the poor Libeller and his dear Amico D. B. they
are half undone: If this be soberly interpreted, and justly stated, as in law
and conscience it ought to be, bot^ in taking and keeping it, Actum est,
perimus; fare^el fat Sacrileg^sts, you will become Pharaohs lean kine again: If
Dr. Gauden reconcile the Covenant to Episcopacy, that is, to that Order, and
Authority, and Government in the Church of England, which Catholic antiquity
used, the best Churches and Christians ever approved, which the Laws of this
Church and State ever o^ned and settled in their rights and immunitie^; which
the Christian Kings of England ever swore to maintain; which was so much valued
by the last King of Martyrli^ Honor, and blessed Memory, whose example is most
admirable, for his love and constancy to the Church; for his patience in
infinite affliction^; for his charity to his cruel Enemies, who condemned him,
and cut him in pieces, in order to possess themselves of the Crown and Church
Revenues.

. If Dr. Gauden as a bold Adventurer, makes this g^^d, as all Justice, Honor
and Religion must do, That the Covenant does as much oppose all Injustice,
S^h^sm, S^^riledge and factious Superstition (which calls and counts good evil,
and evil good) as it seemed to do Prela^y and Popery so far as they may be
exorbitant from Christian bounds: If Episcopacy joined with Presbytery, that
is, Bishops attended, advised and assisted by some ch^ice, grave Presbyters,
duly subordinate and inferior to them, as to that precedence of Order, and
eminency of Authority, which are a^ necessary for the Churches Polity and
Ecclesiastical Government, as they are in Cities and Armies, or any civil
Jurisdictions: If these be buoyed up again* and their estates, as the other
part of double honor due to them, restored to Bishops and their chief
Counsellor^, in the Assessors, and Cathedrals, thi^ Libeller and D. B. with all
their projects, purchases* ^lan^^s and Libels, must sink, as if a millstone were
about their necks, and they cast into the sea.

. To prevent this Abusses of poverty, Why (...) Libel^er so ^ad against Dr.
Gau^en an^ h s Ana^^s^.
contempt and confusion, all the arts and engines of unholy Oratory, and
hypocritical Zealotry, are to be set on work by the Libeller and D. B. They
know that Dr. Gaudens pen, tongue, and spirit are not easily damped or resisted
in a good cause (and other he will not undertake: H s free and inaffec^ed style
must be se^^rilously despised, though they cannot imitate it: his Writings not
confutable by such Soph^sters, must be blasted with their stinking breath, with
imputation of Idolized nonsense, and tedious extravag^ncies, and bitter
railings, and lying impertinen^ies, yea, of blasphemy; yet will not all this
dirt infect a jewel, though it foul the hands that cast it: Nor can the
Libeller or D. B. hope hereby either to weaken Dr. Gaudens honor, or to raise
the credit of the Covenant by his sense, and to his vile designs.

. For the Covenant will not swim, but sink under such a burden as they charge
it with; if it be fraighted with high injustice, with presumptuous sacrilege,
abetting of schism; if it be crammed with superstition, and charged with a
sense every way as illegal and irreligious, as it is injurious to honest men,
and to the Church and Kingdom, ^ea, to our God and Savior: Which sense nothing
but either fraud or force can hope to put upon the Covenant; which must cease
to be sacred and holy, if ^t be unjust: So far as it will not admit of any just
meaning, or honest interpretation, or righteous execution, it must be null. In
Gods name, and with the Covenants good favor, let right be done to God, to the
Church, and to the whole Nation; the King, the Bishops, the Clergy, the
Cathedrals, the people, and the poor of the Land, all cry for instice to be
done in so grand and public a case: For they are all highly concerned in
conscience, honor, peace, plenty and prosperity, that this Church have its
ancient Government by godly Bishops, and other Clergymen; that these may have
the estates, lands, and houses which former piety and gratitude endowed them
with, beyond all alienation without their Kings and the Proprietors consent;
for the support of their Ministry, Authority and Honor, for the exercise of
hospitality and Charity, and for the encouragement of Learning and Religion in
this Nation; that the Church of England may not want such Fathers and chief
Sheepherds of Christ's flock, who are worthy to rule; nor the Nation of England
such examples of Ministers, no less imitable for their holy lives and good
works, then for their being Preachers of sound Doctrine, and learned Champions
of the Divine truth; in which no Church heretofore exceeded England, nor any
Divines went beyond our excellent Bishops, and others of the Episcopal
communion.

D. ^. (...) if the Co^enant (...) and (...).
If this just, heroic, kingly, and Christian Reformation and Restitution,
without the Covenants prohibition or unjust stop of it, be once fully brought
to pass, as we hope it will, D. B. and his Amanuensis, the pitiful Libeller,
may take eggs for their money, and retire from his Palace in We^^s to S.
Magnus, or Watford again, if he can get either one or both of them; or possibly
he may ingenuously repent, and fully restore, and to deserve to enjoy that
estate as a Bishop, with a better title and conscience then ever his Libelling
Advocate* or any of his own sweaty pleas, will help him to; which offers were
the probablest temptation to bring the good man to a recantation of his errors,
to a fixation of his judgment, Make D. B. a By hop and he will recant.
to a purgation of his conscience, to some reparation of his credit, and
fortunes too, and to some reconciliation with Dr. Gauden, with whose name the
witty Libeller seeks to make the sad D. B. merry, as if there were gandium as
well as gaudy in the name; when alas manet alta mente repostum, the anxious D.
B. feels at his very heart those ( lethales arundines) arrows and wounds which
Dr. Gauden first gave him between the joints of his armor, when he strutted
his strength, when he thought his sacrilegio^s purchase was safe, and no man
durst have laid at him, no more then at a Whale or Leviathan; while he thought
himself guarded like Goliath, not only with the Covenant, but with Ordinances of
two Houses; in the strength and confidence of which, this dowty champion for
alienating Church lands, brings forth his plea for Sacrilege like the Giants
spear, which seemed a Weavers beans, before all Israe^, that he might defy all
Bishops, and all Episcopal Divines, yea and all Episcopa^y that should pretend
to challenge his lands and purchases, with any claim of right, or any suspicion
of Sacrilege: but he may sooner slip out of his skin, as Worms, Snakes and
other old Serpents are wont to do, than free himself from that foul blot and
contagion, which without repentance and restitution will ever cleave to his
person, pretending to be a Scholar, a Minister and a Doctor; yea and may be a
gangreen to his other estate, as well as a grief to his innocent posterity; To
prevent which Dr. Gaudens charity presented to D. B. his sin and presumption in
point of Sacrilege; in revenge of which this Libeller is to be his
Armor-bearer, and with the shield of the Covenant D. B. hopes not only to cover
his sin, but also to smother and oppress the honor of Dr. Gauden.

(...).
^. But I have done with the filth of this Libellers Title* of Idolized nonsense
and blasphemy, which he imputed to Dr. Gauden and his Analysis; how justly let
the reader judge: yea I appeal to the supreme Judge who sees this Anatomist in
his secret hidings, and malicious hardnings, yea and will reward him openly. If
he had been an ingenuous Adversary, that had wrote a book of just reproof
against me or my opinion, to which he had the courage to put his name (as Mr.
Zach-Crafton, though none of the most fragrant and renowned does) I would have
bound it as a crown to me; but for such a sculking Anatomi^t, to cut and slash
with his butcherly knife, to tear and bite with his foul teeth, and yet to keep
himself unseen, this deserves as different treatment as an open enemy and a
secret traitor, or as those viler vermin, which prove in the night, but dare
not (as more ingenuous beasts) be seen in the day. (...).
But this hiding himself does manifest how inseparable a shadow s^ame i^ from
notorious sins: That men who are most impious can hardly be so impudent as not
sometime to seek to recruit their bankrupt credit, and relieve their soar
consciences, by concealing of their names, (as the theif and Adulterer, who
wait for twilight and darknest) and when they cannot forbear to do villano^^
things, yet they are loath to appear so vile as indeed they are, and must be
esteemed of all honest men if once discovered.

. The next work of Dr. Gauden is to examine the glorious Epithete which he
ascribes to the Covenant, Of the Libeller* stiling the Covenant sacred with an
(...).
calling it by way of emphasis that Sacred Covenant, etc.

My design is not rudely to depreciate or disgrace the Covenant, so far as it
has any thing in it (and many it has) that may justly be counted or called
sacred, by reason of their seeming moral and material conformity to the will
and word of God, and to the laws of the land. God forbid I should call good
evil, or evil good, (or reject all that is good out of a jealousy of evil;)
Nor do I deny that the Covenant considered materially, has many things and
words in it which do pretend to holiness, and much profess the power of
godliness, however some factious Sophisters may pervert them: As all the parts
of Scripture are sacred in themselves, as to the scope and design, or
historical truth, though they may be first spoken, and after alleged or
applied amiss by evil men and devils, with a design rather execrable then
sacred.

Perhaps this Libeller (who may justly bear the title of Sacerrimus)
understands the word sacred here as it is used by the Poet, Auri sacra fames,
the sacred love of money, because covetous Idolaters so highly adore it; and
possibly in this sense the Covenant may be by him styled sacred, as a utensil
now very servient to his execrable design, which is to keep out Bishops from
their just Offices, Dignities and Lands, that he and his dear D. B. may keep
their sacred purchases inviolable; presuming that an Ordinance of the Two
Houses in such distempers of times, ought to be a sempiternal sanctuary, more
sacred and inviolable to such sacrilegious bargains, and their Purchasors more
sacred, then all the wills of the Donors now de^d, or the former Laws of the
land, or the word of God, can be to the ancient and rightful Proprietors of the
^ Church lands. Can any thing deserve to be called (...) holy f^rther then it
i^ just and righteou^, (...) giv^ng to God and man what is their due?

(...) the first ^ontri^ers of the Covenant, or the (...) of it* or the easy
takers had sacred (...) and intentions, I leave to God to judge; but (...)
viol^nt, unjust and cruel methods used (...) in executing of their sacred
Covenant, (...) not reformation of so many learned, godly (...) inno^^nt
persons, Bishops, and other Ministers; (...) to the (...) overthrowing and
extirpating, as (...) lay of sacred, ancient and venerable Ep^^^^ (...) self,
as it had been, and still was by all law^ (...) and civil established in the
Church (...), and in all the Christian world, for the (...) the only Catholic
Government of the (...) And all this in order to bring in* though by head and
shoulders the novelty of an headless Presbyters, and the many headed monster
Independency; doubtless th^se projects and practices promoted upon the account
of the Covenant, do little add to its (...), and make it appear no way meriting
the sing^lar epithet of sacred, in so peculiar, emphatick and superlative a
sense as this Libeller affixeth it, merely to scare his silly, or scrupulous*
or superstitions readers from any thoughts of such sense and keeping of the
Covenant, as is and ought to be reconcilable with a regular Episcopal
Government, also to that duty which they owe to God and the King, to the Church
and its ancient lawful Government.

The restoring of which, according to the good Laws of this Church and Kingdom,
also according to the best pattern of ^hrists Church in all ages, agreeable to
Gods Word, and the rules of all order, polity and justice, as it ought to be
one end of the Covenant if holy and just; so this cunning Libeller foresees it
will be much to the prejudice of himself, and his dear D.B. who it is probable
have but one purse and one heart.

. Hence it is (O ye Ephesians) that this Demetrian A^tist cries so loud, O the
Covenant! O the sacred Covenant, O that, that most sacred Covenant! O what a
goddess? what a Diana is this new found Image, which of late fell from the
Northern climate, and those colder parts of heaven, into the English world, in
a black cloud full of storms and thunder.

. That the world may see this Wolf uncased of such sheeps clothing, as
pretends to any thing sacred in his sense and design, which would seek to
shelter its wickedness under the title of that sacred Covenant; It will not be
a miss to show the Reader, yea and the well-meaning covenanter, the true import
of this sophistry, which as formally ad^s the title Sacred to the Covenant, as
some Bigots do that of Holiness to the Pope of Rome. Not but it must be
confessed that many Bishops of Rome have been very holy men; but some
flatterers have not feared or blushed to give that highest and divin^st honor
to such as have been most flagitious in the confession of many learned and
sober Romanists.

. In like sort, Of the Covenant a^ called sacred by the Libeller.
that many things in the Covenant may have the stamp and signature of Sacred on
them, and that many Covenanters might be sacred things as to their intents,
when they took it, is not in charity to be denied: nor will I envy the
Covenant, this title of Sacred, redu^tive or consequentially, so far a^ every
lawful promise, vow or oath may be holy, and ^ught to be so especially when
Gods holy name is sol^mnly invocated; and when such Promises are lawfully made,
and by lawful means performed, according to that lawful matter contained in
them, and lawful meaning* to which all things sacred are confined by the rules
of Justice and Godliness, the law of God and man.

. But ^ertainly the title of sacred in such a magnificence and latitude as this
Libeller vapors (as if the Covenant, further then it may contain in it words
and things, capable of honest, just and religious sense) were eminently a
sacred thing, in respect of Gods special Institution and appointment of it; as
if the most holy God had by his most holy Spirit inspired it, by his wisdom
composed it, or by his special authority in his word expressly imposed it, so as
he did of old the Law, the two Sacraments, and other holy rites and duties of
his worship and service; in this religious sense (which the Libeller would
insinuate) the covenant wa^ not sacred; no not in a civil sense, as things may
be called sacred (quia legibus sancita) because by Laws established; As the
Church Catholic is holy, which never was without Episcopal Order and
Authority* so the Majesty of the King is eminently sacred, yea and that
authority which is from him derived to inferior Magistrates and Ministers;
whom to despise or repro^ch, or injure is esteemed to curse the Gods; that is
to esteem and use persons sacred by laws of God and man, as if they were
execrable and abominable.

. It is beyond all doubt that the Covenant, as to its method and composure, as
to its authority and imposure, had no such sacredness in it as we call properly
and intrinsecally divine and religious, which consists in those beams of
holiness, which any thing has either derivatively from God, or relatively to
him, by virtue of his own special appointment and command.

. If it were of such previous sacred institution and necessary use, it must
either be expressly contained in Gods word, or by some miraculous operations
confirmed to be his sacred will; neither of which can with any semblance of
truth be affirmed of the Covenant. Alas many of its first contrivers, composers
and imposers, with its most zealous takers, by this time know themselves to be
but men, and some of them not very sacred: If it were sacred by such an
antecedent authority and institution from God; it would be a sin not to have
taken it long ago; which I believe no man ever feared to be guilty of, or made
any conscience to repent of his refusing to take it; nor are any covenanters so
rigid as to fancy that any man sinned against God, because he in conscience or
allegiance scrupled or denied to take it; no, the great fear lay in taking it,
especially as some men list to interpret it; and the next fear of sin is in
keeping it, in that sense which some would now understand it, which is most
unjust and uncharitable, and so cannot be sacred, no nor civil.

. Add to this, even in a civil sense of the word Sacred, the Covenant deserves
not that title, because it was never invented, imposed or confirmed by the
supreme, legal, royal, and legislative Parliamentary power of this Nation,
which doubtless in the only sacred and binding authority in a civil or
politic sense.

How then the Covenant came to be so signally consecrated I know not, as to any
Divine or Humane authority; I am sure it had no Bishops to contrive or
consecrate it in the House of Lord, nor any national, sacred Synod: To say it
is consequentially and interpretative sacred, by way of its matter, end, and
use conform to the word of God, and as the name of God is stamped upon i^
amounts to little more, then that sacredness, which is in every honest man's
word or oath, as he is tied by moral obligations to truth and justice, which
are much ancienter bonds then the Covenant; and for the name of God graven upon
it, it does not make any vow, promise, oath or Covenant sacred, further then it
is materially and morally good, both in its first taking, and after keeping.
But it is a profaning of Gods holy name, when it is added by way of conjuring
or conspiracy, to any purpose or compa^ts, that are unlawful, either for matter
or manner, having no command from God or man, nay contrary to the declared will
of both.

. It Is certain the Covenant has some passages in it, which in some men's sense
never came into the mind of God, nor are in his Word either expressly, or by
just consequence; as that grand and principal one, of extirpating Prela^y, that
is Archbishops, Bishops, etc. If it he meant of the degrees and orders of such
Governors, as have b e^ so long used and useful in the Church of Christ, even
from the primitive times, and from the Apostolic both pattern and succession,
no wise and just man can allow it; because it is novel and factious,
prejudicial to truth and justice, to the order and honor of this, and all
ancient Churches, who were governed by the eminent authority of Bishops: but if
it be meant only to take away the Luxuriancies and Abuses; to prime off t^^
excesses and supply the defects incident to E^^lesi^^^^cal Government; or to be
found in that juncture and ^ons^^stution, or the administration which was in
England no wise and good man will oppose the efficacy of the Covenant, in ways
either sacred or civil, such as become good Christians, and good Subjects: yea
no men are more forward in this then good Bishops, and the best Episcopal
Divines; who have not upon them any such good of the Scotch Covenant, as it is
destructive to regular Episcopacy; but they have far more ancient, evident, and
eminent motives to their duty from the holy Laws of God and man; which are able
to keep men holy, without any super ligation of this or other sacred Covenant;
which some sacrilegious Apostates are prone to reproach by their magnifying it,
in order to their private, covetous, and factious designs; which when more
prevalent in England, did very little advance Gods knows, either the holiness
or happiness of any honest man; no more then they did the piety, peace, or
prosperity of either this Church or State.

. And for such spotted Libellers, who cry out of the sacred Covenant, and count
all blasphemy, that invalidates their Titles to Church lands, or invert and
obstruct their designs, for Anarchy and confusion in Church and State; they are
no more to be regarded, for the specious or odious words they list to use, then
Satan (...) when (...) turns himself into the form of an (...) of ^^got, and
turns Preacher; or then the Elde^^ of that City were, when they cried out of
Naboths bla^pheming (...) the Accusers of Christ, who laid Bla^^hemy (...) to
his charge; or the murderers of (...) of glorious memory, for his constancy,
(...) to this Church and Kingdom, (...) that s^perlative impudenc^ in their
Trea^^^ (...) Mur^her, as to call them elves the Saints and (...).

(...) prodigious Libeller and his Abettors, (...), then what they have gain^
(...) the dry-fats of some such modern (...) ^athe^, Engagements, and
Abjura^ation (...) th^^ght most conduced to their unjust (...) so far
undoubtedly destitute of any (...) Authority s^^e they and their Engagement
(...) such an holiness as will bring them (...) Nor is the design of these
farther, then (...) palitations and pretenses of Sacred^ (...) ^ous bargains,
on which they have (...) and wickedly adventured: for which (...) the Co^^nant
cried up as sacred, and so (...) and keenness against all the right of (...)
and honor, will be a great Abet^ when all other pro^ects fail, and as leaves
after a (...) will ^^ll to the ground.

(...).
. If this high vindicator of the Covenant, for so sacred a business, be himself
so holy a person, as is fit to assert any thing that is holy; it is strange he
conceal^ the honor of his name, and the authority of his person, when he
engages so high as to cry out of Dr. Gaudens blasphemy: Sure he needed not to
have hidden himself in so good and great a cause, wherein his zeal, though mixed
with indiscretion, might have made him appear a very holy man: but it seems he
had not impudence enough to show his evil fac^, nor courage to own his
scandalous name; conscious to the unwelcome horror of it, which is capable to
blast any thing that he cries up as sacred: Therefore he uses these cowardly
Rhodomontado^ of words, to amaze the silly Readers of his silly An^tomy; which
is a work worthy of C. B. Caesar Borgia, son to Al^^ander the sixth; both of
them as Gui^^ardine tells us, Borboritae, monsters of men, wallowing Swine in
the mire of sensuality, Simony, Sa^ril^^g C^^etousness Cruelty, and all manner
of (...) ^ven ^hou when one gloried to b^ his Holi^^ss the (...) (...) head of
the Church, The other to b^ the (...) that is, Son of so ^^^red ^ Father,
neither ^f the^ (...) to advance the repute of (...) they cried ^p f^r holy or
sa^red, any more then the Libeller (...) to promote that ^acred Co^en^nt, and
his execrable, that is, his sacrilegious ends thereby.

. I shall not be sollicitou^ to find out his name who dares not own himself in
the defense of a sa^red thing, and against blasph^m^. I presume he is vir trium
literarum, or nullius nominis as to any thing of true honor and worth; and so
his person is better b^ried in eternal obscurity, then discovered by an
uns^asonaable curiosity; which would utt^rly blast all Sacredness in the
Covenant, no less, then in his profession, especially if he be of the same
sacred gown with his dear C. E. the Letters of whose name are so often graven
upon (...) of the Covenant; which is only dread^^^ (...) head of Nonsense and
Blasphemy, (...) w^i^h swell^ wi^h gre^^ terror and (...) the Read^r, ^o^^iting
out Idolized (...) ^^^sphemy together wi^h that sa^red Co^^^ (...) Juglers do
stones, and knives, (...) yet no ^^n can well discern how they (...). Nay, like
the Devil of Masson, this (...), ^kes foul stir, and hideous noise, yet is not
to (...) only heard sometimes to cry out with a dis^^^ ^mour; other while to
laugh with profuse and ^word ^achinuation^, though no sorrow is sadde^ on the
De^ils and hypocrites mirth; at last he left a (...) sent, and filled the room
with sul^^^ue c^^^lations.

^. (...) does this invisible Libeller, of whom Dr. (...) ^ad no less scruple
in point of making any re^^^^ (...) having any conference with him, then some
had of their speaking to those Ghosts and Spectors which appeared in their
houses: with whom the re^^^en^ Bi^^op of Hall (whose very name (of all Bishops)
the spirit of Asm^^cus, in this Libeller most abhors and (...)) advises not to
have any parley; because be judges those Apparitions to be but the Devils
illusions, a d that there is no hope, either to do them good, or get go^d from
them, by any discourse with them.

^. In like sort for some weeks (having much other and better employment) Dr.
Gauden thought it his wisest was to follow the command of King Hezekiah, by
which he defeated the real blasphemies and railings of Rabs^akeh, by not
answering him a word; it being sufficient reply to such Diaboletto^s, in the
Archangels words, The Lord rebuke them: Many sober persons judged it below the
conspiently and luster of Dr. Gaudens name, to encounter with such an Vmbra,
such a Goblin and Larva; who lurking in m^st deserved obscurity, shoots out hi^
bitter arrows, to the wounding (if it were in the power of his impotent m^lice)
of not only Dr. Gaudens credit, but of all the Church of England, of all the
l^^^ned, godly and reverend Bishops; of the King, that was cruelly and
scornfully put to death, to make way for purchasers of Crown and Chruch lands;
yea, to the reproach even of God himself, and his blessed Name; as if it did by
mere charm consecrate all those projects, confederacies, fashions and
practices, yea, and purchases too, which list to wrap themselves up in the
covert of a sacred Covenant: Which can never be further sacred, then as it
keeps within bounds of Gods and man's Laws; which are just and holy, forbidding
to do any evil, though good should come thereby.

. To be sure, that injurious and sacrilegious sense which his Libeller intends
to put upon the Covenant, The Covenant cann^t be ^oly, (...) or ^ac^ed (...).
will render it rather execrable then sacred; and so must every Covenanter be
to God and all good m^n, who under color of the Covenant, shall persevere in
any way which is unjust; taking or detaining from any honest man, that which by
Gods and man's Laws is his, notwithstanding the Remaining Lords and Commons in
the two Houses, and the Scotch Commissioners, yea, and the Assembly (all sacred
no doubt, though without the authority and consent of his Sacred Majesty) did
take that Covenant, Sept. 11. 1643.

^. Which was consecrated by the swords and pistols of some Soldiers, who
being first pregnant with some prodigious Reformation, fell into such monstrous
longings afterward, as were not to be satisfied, without they de^oure^ not
only the lands and houses of the Cr^wn and the Church; but also the liberties,
lives, (...) ^^nors both of the King^ and Bishops of England, who were
generally persons s^^n m^nt for all excellen^ies befitting Princes and
Prelates, that few men in any age exceeded or equalled them; yet were they
fought to be utterly ruined and extirpated, both their E^tates, persons,
F^nctions and ^uccession^ by some men, who h^d personally taken, and at first
zealously p^^^oted this ^acred Covenant: These were the pious impo^^^^ers of
Bishops first, and then the Kings of England* these were gracious purchasers of
Crown and Chur^^ lands, the holy extirpaters of Monarchy (...) out of this
Kingdom and Church.

^. O th^^ exc^rabl Libeller, who ever thou art^ were not th^se in Pat^^ns for
your c^use, and desired Advo^^tes for the Client D E. had they not gained much
sacred influence, by lying so directly under the Aspect of this sacred
Covenant? Were they no^ blessed ^^^^^rmer^ Are they not still in a very just
ch^ritable and holy temper, when they are impatient, and cry out of non sense,
yea Idolized, yea, and ^l^^phemy too, i^ any man ^^^k in order to public
peace, to reconcile the Covenant by so candid and benign a sense of it, as may
in charity be believed, and ought in piety and equity to be contained in it, if
it be valid and binding of any man's conscience: since no man can be bound by
any contrived form of words, under the name of Vow, or Oath, or League, or
Sacred Covenant, contrary to his duty to God, the King, the Country, the
Church, and the Laws under which he lives, or in prejudice, and to the injury
of any one honest man's rights; much less against so many, as the Bishops and
other Church men were; yea, against the very ^unction, Office, Authority,
Order, and Degree of Bishops, in such a sense and use as (...) was observed in
the Church of Christ.

^. Yet no sense of the Covenant will serve the Libellers turn and D. B's. but
such, which to the reproach and prejudice of God and his Church, and of this
Nation, to the scandal and contempt of our Religion and Reformation, may enable
and encourage them themselves so to act and persist, as obliged by their sacred
Covenant, to make a further execrable havoc of this Church; and to keep those
sacrilegious purchases they have made, contrary to all right and reason; all
civil Justice and Religion, all Laws of God and man.

. Who will hereafter call or account the Covenant Sacred, when he shall read it
so styled by such an execrable Libeller and D. B. who was first a very keen
adversary against the Scots, when they first reemed this Covenant, and brought
it forth as Jupiter did Pallas, completely armed: O how did his Copes-mate D.
B. then bite and tear the poor Scots. After, when he found they had an
influence on the two Houses of Parliament and Assembly; how did he lick them
whole with his tongue? O the glory of the Covenant! how sacred, how venerable
must it needs appear, when such a Libeller and D. B. assert it? when D. B's
well known ambition, never scrupled to have been made a bishop, though he had
no worth or merit fit for it; till by an unhappy fate be plunged himself into a
great purchase of Bishops lands, which to preserve, he is driven in his
greatest agonies and despairs to fly, as Vl^^^ did to Ajax his shield, for
protection to the Covenant; which (if it be indeed sacred, sufficiently tells
all Sacrilegious purchasers of Crown and Church lands, against all law and
justice; that protection is not in it for any such ungodly and unjust
practices: That the Covenant as sacred, could not and did not, ought not to
intend any thing to the prejudice and injury of Venerable Episcopacy; neither
to the lands, liberties, honors, or lives of any Bishops, if legally good men,
nor if morally bad, further then so convicted by Law, and lawful authority. A
deformed or diseased vicious man, must not by a Physician he destroyed, under
pretense to correct or cure him; nor may any Judge condemn him, as to his just
and civil rights, because of his sinful infirmities, which the Law has not yet
condemned.

The (...).
This mitigated and just sense of the Covenant, some that were, and are great
Masters in our Israel, and Assertors of the Covenant, are now content to own;
abating that rigor which sometime possessed some Covenanters against Episcopacy
in that sense, wherein this and most other Churches ever owned and used
Episcopal Government and Authority among, and above Presbyters.

. Yea, many of them begin to cast a favorable eye on Episcopal Dignity, no
less then on Church lands, fearing nothing so much, as not to have a share of
them; much congratulating, as the Kings happy restoration; so the hopes of
recovering the pristine honor and Government, with the revenues and rights of
the Church in point of Episcopacy; not in the fallacy of a Presbyterian p^rity,
but of a presidential constant eminency of Bishops, in authority above
Presbytery, such as St. Jerome affirms to be necessary, to avoid schisms,
factions and confusions in all Churches.

. Which pious, prudent and just resolution, carried on by King, Lords and
Commons happily united, will be best able to declare and state that sense of
the Covenant, which only can be lawful just and honest: And therein to
reconcile all good men, beyond any sense that the partiality and novelty of
others seek to urge and impose, contrary to our Laws and common Justice; which
ought not to cancel, but confirm the Catholic customs of the Church; also the
pious donations of the dead, and the just fruitions of the living.

. There is nothing which Dr. Gauden desires and endeavors more, then the peace
of Church and State; nor can he expect to see either of them sincerely settled,
till justice be done to God, the King, and the Church; nor are these likely to
be effected to a lasting security, until these two things be done and declared
in Parliament, by King, Two things worthy the Kings and Parliaments declaration.
Lords and Commons:

1. First, That all alienating of Church lands, without the consent of King,
Lords, Commons, and the Clergy in possession, is sacriledg, that is, a sin of
an high nature, and justly abominated by this Christian Church and Nation.

2. Secondly, That the Covenant was either not to be taken, as it is not to be
kept in any other sense, then what is agreeable to the Laws of God and men, to
Justice and Charity: That not any National Authority, which the Covenant never
had, but only the matter in it so far as is lawful, does bind any man who
took it, yea, and so all that never did take it: Thus the Skeptical and
superstitious Disputers, and sacrilegious urge^^ of the Covenant may be
silenced; and the just limits of it may be stated, even as to the point of
lawful Episcopacy; wherein all sober minds may agree, not for the validity or
bond of the Covenant, but for the higher obligations which Reason and Religion,
Piety and Prudence, justice to man, and regard to the Church of Christ have
upon their consciences: That the Covenant may not be made the grindstone or
millstone to waste or sink venerable Episcopacy, and undo good Bishops; nor yet
a footstool or ladder to help Presbytery or Independency again into the saddle
of mis-government, first of the Church, then of the State; which has evidently
appeared to be the design of all Factious and Ambitious Novelties.

. As for this Libeller and his Abbettors, (such as D. B. qui iram atque animos
a crimine sumunt) who conscious to the enormity of their actions, are
pertinacious to screw up the Covenant to such rigors, as are destitute of any
justice from Gods or man's Laws, only to abet the sacrilege of their
purchases; or to foment their further factious projects of subduing this Church
of England; that is, debasing and deforming it to other foreign patterns,
which are far below its former beauty, and present constitucion: these are best
left to the enjoyment of such fruits as the Laws will allot to their
Sacrilegious Sin, Folly, and Rashness.

. If the Covenant be Sacred, The Covenant against Presbytery as Schism and
Superstition.
and must bind to that latitude of sense which any list to stretch the letter
of it; I wonder how those that urge it so fiercely against Prelacy and Bishops
as chief, can be free and absolved as to their Presbytery or Independency,
which is Presbytery ravelled, or in rags; against both which they covenanted
under the names of Schism and Superstition; since both Presbytery and
Independency (apart from Episcopal Presidency and Authority) are most signally
to be branded with these characters; both of them being Schisms: both in an
Ecclesiastical sense, because factious varyings or rendings from conformity,
with this and all ancient Churches: Also in a civil sense, as violent
deviatives from the settled laws and constitutions of this Church and State.

. Nor are they less guilty of Superstition: Affirmative, by imposing such
things as necessary in Church Government, and Christian communion, which God
has not made or declared to be so; such as are lay-ruling Elders parity among
Presbyters; a Church Covenant, besides Christian owning of their Baptism and
confession of their Faith in confirmation: And Negative, Superstitious they
are, in denying those things to be lawful or indifferent, which God has so
left in his Word, under the liberty, authority and wisdom of his Church, to
judge of, use and impose as such.

(...)
. If they are guilty of Idolized N^^ sens^ and blasphemy against the sacred
Covenant, who will not suffer themselves, yea, this whole Church and Kingdom to
be hampered or snared by any word in it, or aff^xed to it, contrary to right
reason, settled Laws, and sound religion, to which Dr. Gauden seeks to confine
the Covenant, and reduce all Covenanters that are conscientious; what must b^
the sin and supr^^ folly of those men, who seek to reconcile contradiction^, to
justify immoralities and impose novelties; to abet schisms, and to assert mere
Sola^^^s in Church and State by the Covenant. Swearing allegiance to the King
as supreme; yet making Laws without him, and imposing Covenants upon him and
his Subjects, against his and their consciences? vowing to extirpate Prelacy as
established by Law, yet owning Episcopacy as a primitive, Apostolic and
catholic Government in the Church; engaging against all Schisms and
Superstition, yet strongly abetting Presbytery and Independency, apart from all
authoritative Episcopacy; being both of them highly guilty of those rendings of
both Church and State into factious parties; also of those popular and novel
impositions, upon the consciences of the Kings Subjects and good Christians,
which no Word of God, nor practice of any primitive Churches, nor laws of this
Church or State do require; arising from such arbitrary fancies, as in
licentious times seemed most probable to advance the interests of men's covetous
and ambitious project^, as they could strengthen their several parties and
factions.

. Thus some covenanters The last pro^e^^^^ (...) Covenanters.
who at first professed they aimed at nothing but an ingenuous and orderly
reduction of Episcopal government, to its primitive, legal and just bounds, so
far as it was b^ (...) man permitted by them in their place (...) protesting
that they covenanted only (...) ^ariancies and deficiencies, not the (...)
orderly presidency, or due aut^ority of (...) afterward, as success smiled upon
(...) ^bins of their Covenant was strongly an^ (...) set for Presbytery; by all
means they were to set it up, and to malleate the Church of England (which was
as well constituted and reformed as any in the world) in Doctrine, Discipline
and Government, to the Kirk and Presbyterian mode in Scotland, as a most rare
and unique pattern; when even there the Covenant was indeed but an untimely
birth of yesterday, an abortive brought forth by force, contrary to the former
excellent, legal constitutions of that Church, which were Episcopal.

. Thus while the tide of times ran high for Presbytery, P^^s^^t^ry (...) of
(...) ^^^^nant b^^o^.
there was no hoc, but the pristine order, honor, and liberty of the Church of
England must in all have write after such new copies as were blotted with the
blots of civil bloodshed, and other tumultuary spots, which are not the spots
of God's Church and children: the two Houses, the Assembly, the Clergy, the
King and all must dance after that foraign pipe, which played to the new tune of
Bishopless, or Antiepiscopal Presbytery, without abolishing of which, some men
well knew Church lands could not be gotten, which they so greedily gaped for.
The aba^ement of the Co^enante a heat as to Presbytery.


. When the heat and petulancy of this popular Presbyterian spirit began to
cool, and by overboyling to quench it self, sober people of all ranck^ having
enough of the vapor and flourish, and too much of the pragmaticalness and
impertinency of peity Pre^byters, either in their single or Parochial
usurpations, or in their more politic but illegal associations; then they
began to chew over the Covenant again, to see if it were more digestible in a
softer sense then rigid and imperious Presbytery had dictated; And because
Episcopacy was still under great prejudices, not only by the ambitious envy of
its rivals, the ruling or usurping Presbyters, but also by the injurious
sellers and buyers of Bishops and other Church-mens lands; many covenanters
rather cuning then conscientious, broached new senses of their Covenant, making
it consistent with any degree of Independency, yea with utter Anarchy in Church
and State, in order to set up, as they pretended, the Kingdom of Jesus, upon
the ruins of Episcopacy and Presbytery too.

. Yea there wanted not those whose Vane sophistry found out limits and
solutions for their sworn loyalty, in the words of the covenan^; as binding
them no further to preserve the Kings life and honor, then in his preservation
of true Religion, in their opinion; if he confirm^d not to what they fancied
the true religion, under any sceptick, novel and scraphick form, Adieu
Allegiance, they are absolved by the Covenant; the King is contrary to the
godly party, and the interest of Jesus Christ; he is a persecutor and a Tyrant;
he may be imprisoned, deposed, destroyed, even by some such covenanters,
whether of the Presbyterian or Independent leaven; who made the Covenant, not
the Law of God or the Land, the limiter of their Allegiance, and the
circumscriber, the overthrower of the Kings power, both Ecclesi^stical and
civil, that by the ruin of the Kings and Bishops Palaces, they might build
their cottages to a greater strength and conspicuity.

. Thus was this sacred Covenant made serviceable to the most execrable actions
that everthe sun beheld, both for King-killing, and Church robbing; for
Regicide and Sacrilege, together with all that deluge of hypocrisy and vilany
which must needs flow in upon any Nation where such principles of Anarchy and
practices of Rebellion shall seem consecrated even by a sacred Covenant;
contrary (as I believe in charity) to the intents of most of those that first
invented, imposed it and took it, as a godly farrago full of good words and
specious phrases, which admitted and expressed such limitations by the word of
God, and the Laws of the Land, to men's duties in their places and callings,
also to the measures of true Religion, and bounds of good conscience, that many
in the simplicity of their souls no doubt took it, without any evil thought
against the King; the Church, the Laws, the liberties of this Nation; nor yet
against the just rights of Bishops or any honest man; contrary to which holy
bounds and rules of Justice, to affirm, that no man could with good conscience
otherways covenant or act, is that Idolized nonsense and blasphemy, with which
the infamous and Anonymus Libeller dares to charge Dr. Gauden, as a depraver or
desecrator of that sacred Covenant, with which that Sacrilegious Scribler is so
highly taken, because he fancies it may yet serve his and D. B's. turn at a
dead lift, and save that stake and venture they have in Church lands, which
will signify very little, if Bishops be restored to their just rights, against
which no Covenant could be honestly taken, or may justly bind.

. Dr. Gauden professes, that as no honest man ought by an imposed or
spontaneous covenanting, to engage himself or others to the prejudice of God or
man, contrary to his duty to either, or to the diminution of what is lawful
just and right, either in public or private; which position is as full of good
sense, and as far from blasphemy, as the Libeller and D. B. are from modesty
and common honesty, who would make the C^^enant a snare to sin, and a bond to
iniquity, yet cry it up for sacred; So Dr. Gaudens Analysis, Solution or
Resolution of the Covenant, to such a sense as is suitable to a good
conscience, either in taking or keeping it, is far from bosting or blaspheming
any thing, that may be sacred in it, because consonant to Gods word, and those
moral duties, religious and civil, of piety, Justice and charity, by which all
men, and Christians above all are obliged, and from which no power on earth
can, or in heaven will absolve them.

The pow^^ (...).
. As to the authority, composing, and imposing of the Covenant, Dr. Gauden
affirms it was not legal and complete; nor had it a civilly sacred or
legislative power; consequently the Covenant has not vi^^ legis, nor may be
esteemed as a National Vow or Engagement, not binding all men in their proxios
or persons, much less in their posterities, no more then the public Faith did
which was often and solemnly avowed by these Covenanters, but never performed nor
will be till Doomsday.

. The Church and Nation was happy and free before it, and without it; it being
no command of God or institution of Christ, or necessary ingredient in
Religion, or catholic custom of this or any other Church of Christ, nor any
fundamental law or constitution either sacred or civil, but a mere novelty, and
illegality, as to the polity and piety of this Church and State. Yea taking the
Covenant in its public aspect, and as to those factions and designs to which
it served some men for a while, it was full of the factions, forces, terrors
and jealousies of those most unhappy times, for which the invention and
application of the Covenant, proved no antidote or plaster to remedy or allay
the distempers in Church and State, but was rather a means to fire, inflame,
and exasperate them even so far, till the very first Authors and Abettors of
the Covenant, were more then once smitten, wounded, destroyed, defeated, and at
last wholly subdued, even by their Covenanting brethren, whose Ambition,
quickly made this so sacred Covenant, an Almanac out of date.

. If any man have yet a scruple and jealousy, that what ever defects as to
civil Authority were in the Covenant, Of the religious bond in the Covenant
yet being a Vow or Oath made to God, it is binding, though it were private and
spontaneous; It Is true, it does bind, so far as it is in our power and freedom
to make and keep such a bond, God is not to be mocked; but men's Vows, where
lawful, must be performed. On the other side, God is not to be mocked, either
by making rash and unlawful Vows, or by keeping them when so made; For they
bind the taker to nothing but the breaking of them, and repenting for them; so
soon as they discern the falsity, fraud, impiety, unequality and injustice in
them, they are absolved from them, as much as David was from that resolution be
took, O (...).
as the Lord lived, to de^troy Nabal and his Family, by a military disdain and
passion; yet upon Abigals prudent and humble intercession, he willingly
recan^s, and does not what be rashly Vowed, but blesses God and her, for
^erpe^^ him from being as bad as his word.

^. So Jezabels swearing to destroy Eliah, was bett^^ broke then kept; and the
forty conspirators who (...) ^^mselves to kill Paul under a curse of vo^^^^^
famine; if any men bind themselves by (...) Sacrament to do or conceal things
that (...) ^ce^ful, Treasonable and injust, as the Pow^^ ^tors did, they ought
not to keep those Cove^^^^* but reveal and break them. Yea, this w^^^e Church
and Nation, with it is Parliament and Con^ocation, as in Queen Marys days,
fal^^ng (...) Apostasy from the Reformed Religion and engaging themselves by
solemn penance and absolution, to the Romish superstition, and Papal
subjection, yet did well, upon better information, in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
to break that yoke, and retract that recognition, by a pious levity, and holy
Apostasy, which flies from Idolatrous superstition, to the primitive pure and
reformed Religion.

. As all wise and just men ought well to consider what they do in such eases of
Vowing, Swearing, and Covenanting, Cove^^^^ (...).
either private or public; weighing all words, and publicly declaring their
meaning, as to any words, that may have by their obscurity or ambiguity, any
just grounds of jealousy in them, as servient to men's lusts and passions,
contrary to law and Religion, (which some did even in this Covenant, declaring
they neither could not would own it further then it might consist with their
duty to God, the King, the Church and their Country;) So if well meaning men be
drawn in by the ari^sieo^ or terrors of others, under specious forms of good
words, to such verbal Engagements, as afteward are made use of for real snares
to sin and cords of iniquity, in pursuance of which, they must do, or desire,
or consent to, or endeavor things violent, unjust, disloyal, injurious and
irreligious; doutbless their second and better thoughts ought to retain, yea
absolve them from such Covenants or Engagements, so far urged and interpreted
against the rules of good conscience, and holy conversation, which must in all
things be just and innocent; his first animadvertency or inconsiderateness,
has no validity or bond, muchless the bare charm of words fradulently imposed
upon him; either they must be resolved and stated to a just, righteous sense
and end, or they must be dissolved and broken like Sampsons cords and withes,
when the moral, legal, and religious strength of the understanding recovers it
self, and thereby redeems the conscience from such captivities, either to sin
or superstition: which may in no case prejudice that liberty which a Christian
soul has by Christ, only to do good, and to assert it self from all the
servitudes in which its own lust, simplicity and ignorance, or the Devils
subtilties and devices, or man's power and policies may have ensnared it.

. Contrary to which solid Assertions of Dr. Gauden, D. Gaudens s ^^e of the
C^ve ^nt must be asserte^, (...) C^^en^^t ^^^^^ed.
neither this trivial Libeller, with his childish bullrushes, nor yet Mr.
Crafton with his more grave and solemn weapons, will be able to make any such
impressions, as shall either move Dr. Gauden from his grounds of Truth and
Justice; or drive on the Covenant to any such designs as are so far irreligious
and unlawful as they are violent and unjust, either against the King or the
Church; against his Majesty's supremacy, or the Bishops lawful authority and
Estates under him, neither of which can be managed, as becomes Regal and
Episcopal power, if either the sac^ed authority and patrimony of the Crown, or
of the Church, be alienated, and not restored (as in justice and religion, as
well as prudence and honor they ought to be) upon pretended obstructions and
superstitious scruples, which are insoluble and inseparable (forsooth) from
some men's taking the Covenant, either simply, without due consideration and
caution, or knavishly with design to ruin thereby the King and the Church, in
order to make booty and prey of their Power and Estates.

. Better such Covenants be broken and nulled, yea and all such Covenanters too,
then the malignant influence of it, should as an evil planet or comet ever hang
over this Church and State, King and people, who must not be for ever
miserable, because some men list to color over their folly and knavery, their
Sacrilege and Apostasy, with the veil of that sacred Covenant taken by etc. as
the Libeller relates. Which to reduce to just and honest bounds cannot be
IDOLIZED NONSENSE and blasphemy, save only in the censure of a vile Libeller,
and such as are worthy to march under his banner as a black guard of desperate
and seared consciences, for the defense of Regicide and Sacrilege.

A view of the Cacotomy it self.
BUt I have been too long in examining the beauties of the Frontispiece, and
lineaments of modesty, truth and ingenuity, which this Libeller discovers in
his title: It is now time to make some inspection into his Cacotomy, and to see
how uniform the scribler is to himself, in the whole series of his ridiculous
Libel; which has nothing so considerable it, as the frequent luster which D.
B. and once the venerable name of Dr. Burges, mentioned at length, and not in
figures, do give to it, as lucid stars amidst the black and foul clouds of
malice and impotent passion with which that Pamphlet is laden; and which upon
a just view of its froth and filth, can only fall upon the hairy scalp of its
Author: Whatever he is, he deserves, if he could be found, to have his face
washed in the puddle he has pissed; and to be brought to see those sedities
which he has vomited in his own bosom, to the offense of all modest spectators.

. The first adventure of this douty Defender, or rather Defamer of the
Covenant, is at a fit of wit, The Libel^ers first adventure to stra^^^ of w^t.
in spite ^f Mercury and Minerva too; making himself and his Reader (like a
Buffoon or Jack-pudding) a little sport or mirth, as he thinks, with the title
of Dr. Gaudens Analysis, with a supercritical severity, quarrelling at the
allusion to the loosing of St. Peter's bonds, when he was cast into Prison,
bound with chains, and kept as the English People have been many years by
quaternions of Soldiers (for it was the sword of man, and not the Word of God,
that first sought to bind the Nation and Church of England, with the chain of
this Covenant, and of other postern outhes, e^deavouring to cast this great
people into the Prisons or Pinfold^ of Democracy, Presbytery and Independency,
which had formerly lived in the ample Palaces of Rega^ity and Episcopacy, from
the first plantation of Ch^^^^nity.

. Here by a Sardinian laughter, this Cretian Beast feign^ himself merry, and
affects such frolicks of wit, as he thinks may must divert the Reader from
severe and just disdains of his impudent folly, which is ever attended with
exquisite pains of inward fears and tortures, lest Bishops lands should return
to their just owners, from such sacrilegious Usurpers. Nor can his many
grimasses, mimical gestures and distortions, relieve this j^^^se Libeller from
those torments of iniquity and infamy, which (as Dives) he must needs feel in
such an hellish state as wants both repentance and reputation, peace with God
and good men.

. The sarcastick Libeller would fain make his Reader believe, that nothing is
good sen^e, which is not as flat as a flounder; that allusi^ns are collusions,
that Metaphors ingenuously applied, must be reduced to a literal vigor by such
a pedantique Interpreter, who cannot be ignorant, that nothing is more
frequent, then to borrow such expre^sions from holy Scripture and other books;
as a Coa^ from the Altar. Gedeons Fleece, etc. only so far to serve the mind
of the Writer, as the Emphasis of the phrase or words, may have a meet
resemblance with the main design. The Libellers impertinent trifling in this
first part of his Anatomy, is only fit for the farce of a French Comedy, not
for a preface to a case of conscience, and so sacred a concern as he pretends
to make of the Covenant. Here he shows with what a Goose quill he is fit to
write. Some faces are never more deformed and ridiculous then when they strive
to laugh; and certainly if this Libeller had dared to have showed his face,
when he thus pleased himself with his scurrilous smiles, no grinnings of the
most cacant visage would have yielded the world a more unwelcome aspect: The
grim severity and dreadful blackness even of his D. B. would certainly have
resolved the supercilious horror of his looks into some serenity, though he
affects to be the third great Cato and Caesar of his age; the prime undertaker
to reform the Doctrine, Liturgy, Di^cipline, Government and manners of the
Church of England: If by any of these diversions he may divert King and
Parliament from revoking Church lands, and the making him understand the
meaning of that old Sicilian Oracle, R.A.S.P.P. Reddite aliena, S^vultis
possidere propria. Though the man affects to be Democritus for a fit, yet his
true temper is that of Heraclitus or Magor missabib, full of sadness and
terour, when he sees how the day of restitution, like the day of judgment, is
come upon him, and his sacrilegious comrades; who can never so dissemble his
horrors, but the Reader may easily discern, that in the midst of his feigned
laughter, his heart is as heavy as Nabals was, when he heard of David's coming
to be avenged of his ingratitude. His Mammon, and not the Covenant, is the
sacred thing, which this Achan, this Libeller, the troubler of Israel seeks to
assert and keep.

The L^^^ers (...) on (...) pa^^^.
. After the Libeller has made some childish pursuits of the bubbles and
butterflies of his own fancy; he strives to appear in his more truculent style,
like Polyp^emus, when he stretched himself to grope for Ulysses, that he might
devour him; every where gnasting his foul teeth, as if he were eating up, and
not writing against Dr. Gauden.

Against whose person he is pleased to make two very learned, but most
impertinent digressions, wide enough from his sacred Covenant; which was to be
the umbrella or skreen under which his Sunburned malice, and ardent revenge
against Dr. Gauden was to march.

Here instead of charging Dr. Gauden with Symonie, Sacrilege, covetousness
incontinency, or any such peccadillo's (for which he s^all need great
apologies, and many compurgators) he vapo^ringly and falsely reflects upon Dr.
Gauden, as if without any just ground, he had charged the Assembly with
partiality in its constitution, because himself was shuffled out of it, who had
as much right to sit there, as Dr. Burges, or any other of that Clerick lay
Synod, wherein many sat as servient to Presbytery, whom Dr. Gauden knew to be
firm to Episcopacy, and would now very fain be Bishops. The Libeller urges,
that Dr. Gauden being beneficed at Bocking in Essex, could not be chosen for
that county, where Mr. Marshal, and Mr. Newcomin, and Mr. Sedgwick were the
Clerks elect, and served in that sacred Senate: Hence he concludes it to be a
loud untruth (page 8.) and that he was neither chosen in Essex, nor elsewhere.

. Thus this bold Bayard, whose blindeness makes him so bold, and his malice
makes him so blind; and his revenge against Dr. Gauden so justly perstringing
his dear D. Burges for his foolish and impudent sacrilege, makes him so full
of malice, that he fancies Dr. Gauden disposed to make and publish such
untruths gratis, as may easily be confuted by public Records; that so Dr.
Gauden may come under the same brand with Dr. Burges, who in a Decree of
^hancery, is stigmatized for a person void of common hon^sty.

The error of the audacious Libeller is in this, Dr. Gauden The ^^^^ller^
gr^^^ or as t^ ^r. Gaudens Seeing ^^^n to the Assembly
had then a Benefice in Cambridgeshire, not in Essex; there Sir Dudly North
Knight, and Thomas Chichley Esquire; did in person be speak Dr. Gauden (together
with Dr. Wincop) that they might nominate him for one of the Clerks of that
County; which they did, with approbation of the House of Commons: Yet afterward
(as those Gentlemen, and Sir Thomas Barington, with others who pursued the
business, till they found the loss and error, told Dr. Gauden) by some close
Committee, who were the Scrutineers of the elect, Thomas Goodwin was put in for
John Gauden; alleging this reason, That they perceived by Dr. Gaudens Sermon
before the House of Commons at their first sitting, he was not for their
design, the rooting up of Episcopacy, but only for the regulating of it: They
added, that if Dr. Gauden or any other made enquiry after the business, the
mistake would easily be put upon the Scribe, by reason of the likeness of their
names.

. T^is was one of those Artifices by which the ^^ters of Pre^byter e was
carried on in those times; (...) this Libeller and his D. Burges were (...) at
least would fain seem so, that (...) with the more freedom reproach Dr. Gauden
(...) were prodigal to lie and feign in so (...) as this, the sitting in that
Assembly for the ext^^p^ting of an excellent Liturgy, and ^pi^^op^^^ and the
introducing of an odd Directory, with a Presbyterian Catechism, and new
mis-Govern^^^t (...) which services a sober man would most am^^^^lly ^^^^d, and
no man more then Dr. Gauden) which ^^^le^ in so negligent to retrive the fraud
and pall^^y of those Artists who favored him, in tr^^ing him of that
attendance, which was as tediou^ as servile and odious, to English Divines of
generous and learned freedom; who ought not in hon ur and conscience, if a
National Synod or Conver^ation, to receive dictates from any men, much less be
taught a new Christ-cross row, or A. B. C. of Religion, by the ^es^ne of a
Foreign Sword. Against which Dr. Burges at first so stoutly opposed himself,
till he discerned that Offa, or sop and buccoone of a good Lecture of 4^^^ l.
per annum in Paul's, and other advantageous purchases, likely to fall into his
mouth by the ruin of Bishops and Episcopacy, which could not bear up against
the storms of those times. Notwithstanding D. Burges himself (as yet no^
despairing to be a Bishop by book or by crook) migh^ily interceded so far, as
to be suspended from sitting in the Assembly by the House of Commons (as the
Libeller tells his tale, page 1^.) for protesting against the first draught of
the Covenant, which was absolutely against Episcopacy.

. O the blessed liberty of those times and that godly Assembly, and the then
zealous House of Commons, which could not bear the parrhesie or free speaking
of Dr. Burges his parasitick tongue; suspecting it seems that he was no more
able to speak true English at Westminster then true Latin at Oxford. The (...).


. Having crushed this first mushroom of the Libellers malice and mistake
against Dr. Gauden, as to his choice and right to have sat in that Assembly,
there appears in the belly of a parenthesis (as a toad swallowed by a snake)
another great scandal, charged against Dr. Gauden, for his preaching at the
Temple in Term times this last year; which how far the Gentlemen of those
Societies or Dr. Gauden have cause to be ashamed of (as the Libeller prates)
must be left to the better world. This is sure that neither the Libeller nor D.
B. have any cause to envy the pleasure or profit (which is the main that
troubles them) of that employment, which possibly they mistake as much as they
do the value of Bocking lining; for the Temple employment at twenty five pounds
a Term never defraid the charges of Dr. Gaudens attendance, whose design was
not to make a gain of that service, or to cumulate, as some giants did,
mountains, Watford, and St. Magnus; and Paul's lecture on both, and the Bishops
lands, with Dean and Prebends houses of Wells on all three; But Dr. Gaudens ^im
was, when he saw the waters troubled in that great sea of people which flows in
London and Westminster, to strive to be a good Angel, and to help to the
healing of this Church and Kingdom, which was wounded and sick at heart, by
reason of murderers and Church robbers, who speaking and doing lies in
hypocrisy, drove on nothing but private gain, and public confusions,
dishonest purchases, and cruel oppressions.

To oppose these, Dr. Gauden (being desired by both Temples after Bishop
Brownrigs decease) for a time divided his labors between City and Country, as
s^a^onably, as effectually by Gods blessing; first pleading Gods Cause against
fallacious pretendors; next be detected at St. Paul's in a great Panegyris, the
Medi^ afters of the times, who like this Libeller and his D. B. hoped to make
everlasting advantages by their dilatory Medicines* yea poisonous applications,
wherewith they deluded and tormented their miserable patient, this Church and
State, yea these three British Kingdoms, which now by a general Sympathy grew
impatient to endure any longer, those cruel, and cheating Empericks, fit
Mountebancks for this slavish Libeller to serve, and excellent chapmen, to
furnish D. B. with a good purchase of crown and Church lands; the better to
enable him to exercise as much charity and hospitality, as Dr. Gauden is known
to do; virtues which D. B. was never thought as little guilty of, as he was
most notorious for his covetousness and contentiousness; of whom, I have more
then once heard it reported, that when he was asked by a person of quality how
he could in conscience (being such a Zealot and Reformer) keep his two livings
of St. Magnus and Watford, he professed with great gravity and hypocrisy, That
he could not these many years find a godly and fit man to whom he might with
comfort resign one of them. O the tender conscience of D. B! O how choice and
curious is be of his comforts! who as the dunghill cock, was ever thought to
find more comfort in one grain of gain, then in all the graces and virtues.
Nor is he or his Bembo, this Libeller to be blamed for quarrelling at Dr.
Gaudens service at the Temple in Term time this last fatal and wonderful year;
for in earnest they are in hazard to lose more by Dr. Gaudens and other men's
endeavors to restore King, Church, and Kingdom to their rights, then ever Dr.
Gauden has got either by Bo^king living or the Temple; both which have ever
spent themselves and much more, without any of his grudging or complaining; who
ever thought the poor had a right and due to some portion of Church revenues.

. But I fear to afflict the Reader by retorting these fools bolts upon the
Libeller, The Libellers uncivil re^^rt on Sir Lawrence Brumfield.
who is hidden in the ambuscadoes of his obscurity, infamy and hypocrisy;
these are ((...), and extra Aras) as impertinent to his sacred Covenant, as
that other pass, which with a scurrillity and contempt worthy of such a
Scribler he makes upon Sir L. Brumfield, a person of as great esteem, known
merit, and good use in the City of London, as D. B. the favorite and minion of
this Libeller is of very little, who are not ashamed by a spiteful
correspondency, to despise a person of an ingenuous calling, and honest
industry, blessed by Gods bounty, and favored with the Cities Embassy, so far
as to obtain from his Majesty the deserved honor of Knighthood; for which no
doubt he is more capable and competent then D. B. was thought of the degree of
Doctor, when the University of Oxford at his keeping the Act, entertained the
learned Respondent with the applause of hissing and laughter, being much taken
with the excellent Solecisms, and Antilatinisms, which with great confidence
that dowty Divine entertained those learned Auditors.

O how lippient and bleared eyes are impatient to behold those that have more
pleasing aspects; if S. ^. B. swords had been still sharpened against Bishops,
and would have helped D. B. to defend his purchase from resumption; O then
their edge and point had been for this Libellers turn; Then he had been among
the favorites of D. B. he should not have needed so flashy a defender as the
Libeller esteems Dr. Gauden; whoses flashes, like lightning, may possibly melt
the money which such sacrilegious purchasers have laid out in Bishops and
Church lands, by asserting the ecclesiastical and legal rights of Bishops and
Episcopacy, against all factions and forcible novelties, who seek to shelter
themselves and their evil deeds, under the cover of the Covenant, as Caligula
was wont to do his head under beds, covered with bay leaves to avoid deserved
thunderbolts; Dr. Gauden is a professed and implacable enemy, not against such
covenanters, who either first took it, or now interpret it in such a sense, as
piety, equity and charity will allow, but against all such crafty merchants,
and their Libelling parasites, who make a prey of others simplicity, and seek
to turn the Covenant into a stone of offense, and apple of contention, only to
gratify their covetous, sacrilegious, superstitious and seditious designs;
which are as far from any thing moral, just, legal or religious, as the
Covenant is from deserving to be taken or kept by any man if it be capable of
no other tune or interpretation.

The last impertinency used by this Libeller (wide enough from the point of his
sacred Covenant) is a great glorying in his dear friend D. Burges his rare plea
for Sacrilege, The Libellers ^a^our of D. Bu^ges h^s p^ea (...) sacri^e^ge
un^^^^ered by Dr. Gauden.
wherein by an unparalled impudence, and most transparent sophistry, he
labors to put his false spectacles (fitted for a venal soul, and mercenary
conscience, wilfully blind, and studious not to see or own that to be a sin,
in which their hope of gain does lie:) These false Lunettes must be applied to
the nose first of Richards Parliament, to which D. Burges his case and plea is
preferred against the Corporation of Wells, which defrauded him, as he
pretended, of part of his sacred purchase. When these disdained his impudent
clamors and pamphlet, then he assaults the whole English world, with that piece
( No Sacrilege no sin, to sell Bishops lands,) to which he was ashamed to set
his name, further then the two fatal letters of C. B.

This frontless piece D. Burges D B^^ges his wicked defense fu^ly c^nfuted.
sent to Dr. Gauden about two years past, with a letter (worthy of Senacherib,
or Rabsakah, or Shimei, challenging an answer to that accursed pamphlet, which
is not ashamed to maintain a Paradox, 1. Contrary to the Word of God, which
commands man's honoring of him with their substance, both personal and predial,
unless D. B. thinks his lands to be no part of his substance.

2, Contrary to the holy example and proportion of the divine bounty in
providing for his Ministers, the Priests and Levites by cities and lands,
besides Tenths and other Oblations.

3. Contrary to the principles of common Equity, and native divinity, which
teaches all Nations to abhor the robbing of God and his Ministers, to which
not only Joseph and Pharoahs ancient pattern of not buying the Priests lands,
but the practice of Jews, Pagans, Mahometans, and all Christians (but
consiscatory purchasers of such estates) do consent; agreeable to all laws
Mosaic, civil, Imperial, Canon, and the common Laws of England, which allow no
alienation of Church or Bishops lands, without the Kings or Clergies consent,
the latter as the legal possessors, the former as the sworn Patrons and
Protectors of the Church.

4. Contrary to the judgment of all Fathers, Councils, Historians, Schoolmen,
Greek and Latin, Reformed and Romish Divines, who in no cases but those of
necessity, higher public charity, or further improvement of the Churches
patrimony, do allow any alienation of Church Lands, and never in these unless
the supreme Authority gives leave, and the respective Church men consent: But
to take away Church revenues of pious and ancient donation, devoted to Gods
glory, service and worship, to the support of the ^lergies honor, the Churches
Order and Government, also to the hospitable releif of the poor, and
maintenance of other good works, and to do this by force, against Laws
unrepealed, against the declared dissent of King and Clergy concerned, to strip
and impoverish the present possessors, grave, aged, learned, orthodox, most
reverend and admirable Bishops and other Ecclesiastics, turning them and their
families out of house and home without allowing them any livelihood, out of
those estates which they have merited, and by law enjoyed, and no way
forfeited: yea to deprive for ever all posterity, and the whole Church, of the
blessing of such Bishops as Fathers of the Church, who had legal right to them,
and knew how to make a right use of them; and all this, to save the civil purse
of the Nation a few pounds, and to please a violent Antiepiscopal party, and to
make way for Presbytery, Independency and Anarchy in Church and State, by
extirpating legal, primitive and catholic Episcopacy.

. Certainly so high-handed, unreasonable, unjust and enormious sacrilege,
would not heretofore have gone down with D. Burges without kecking (though he
had ever a good swallow for gain;) yea, as Mr. Fuller tells us in his
Britanick-History of our times, this mutable Master, and great Rabby, sometimes
denied Cathedral lands to be saleable without Sacrilege: True, he after very
graciously recanted that desperate opinion, when he found what hopes there were
of good peny-worths to be had in Bishops and Cathedral lands.

, Yet after all these grand Remonstrances on all hands against Sacrilege,
which innumerable Writers long since and late have set forth, as clear as the
Sun at noon day; the desperate D. B. and his Advocate this Libeller still
flagitate with railing and reproaches a new anwer from D. Gauden to his
flagitious Plea f^r sacrilege. D. Burges his ple^ for ^a ^ile^ge ^u^^ci^^l
c^nd^mned and (...) ^acred.


. If he be really yet scrupulous, and has not wholly scared his soul past
feeling; if in so deep a Consumption of Religion, which he has been sick of
many years, he have not spit out his conscience, as some do their lungs; if as
a Toad poisoned by a Spider, he have a mind to Plantane, there cannot be
better Antidotes or recoveries for him, then those which the Bishop of
Rochester writ, and Dr. Ba^^ere, against this very sin of Sacrilege, so
stated, as hits exactly D. Burges his case of Bishops lands; and possibly he
might get good by them, if he had patience to apply them: But the man is
passionate to a raving, as appears, when Dr. Gauden did but touch him, to the
quick on that sore of his sacrilege, O how did he spit, and bite and kick, and
sting, and tear: Nor has he any more patience to this day, but though he is
ashamed of his putid ulcers, and afraid to be healed (for restitution will cost
him dear) yet his bilions soul seeks some case, by venting it self in Pamphlets
and Libels, so rude, rauting and ridiculous, as would move no less laughter and
pity, then the Asses eating thistles did to Heraclitus.

. In earnest, Dr. Gauden does not know how to add light to the Sun, or water
to the Sea: If Moses and the Prophets, if the consent of all godly and learned
men (which D. B. owns against himself) will not work upon this poor Dives and
his brethren to convert him and them, Dr. Gauden has no miracles to work; nor
can he raise up any potenter truths from the dead, then others have done,
against Sacrilege.

Lo^^ la^^^^ ^o (...) Sa^^il^^^.
Which is such a spot in a Clergie-man, as no nitre can rinse out: If Dr. Gauden
should take pains with Dr. Burges, it would be as the washing of a Black-moor,
lost labor; since he hardens his heart against all the most clear fountains,
and pregnant impressions of Scripture, Reason, Justice, common Honesty, the Law
of the Land, all rules of conscience and charity, all sense of honor and
humanity; most impatient that any should do to him, what he justifies done to
others. Touch but D. Burges his copy or freehold of Bishops or other lands, he
is ready to fly in any man's face, yea, and to curse them to their faces, that
shall take any part and parcel away from him: Nor would he have any reverence
to any two Houses or Ordinances, that should by will and power deprive him of
his Patrimony descended justly to him from many generations, confirmed by many
Acts of Parliaments, and no way forfeited by him: And such were the Bishops
lands and estates.

. To elude all justice and conscience by the froth of that fallacy and
solution, D. Burges h^^ sacril gious s^phistry.
That the Office and use of Bishops, etc. being abolished without law, the
lands as rewards may be lawfully alienated and sold away: is of as much force
in conscience, as to argue, Naboth is killed, therefore arise and possess his
vineyard; or, Christ is condemned, ergo, Cast lots and divide his garments:
Here it is true, Nec fieri debuit, nec factum valet; The Office of Bishops was
not deservedly, nor by due Authority abolished; but partially, factiously,
illegally and violently: Nor was D. Burges himself, when a member of his sacred
Assembly, patient to take away Episcopacy absolutely; ergo, He could not
approve the confiscation of Bishops estates absolutely, but only respective,
when he came to purchase a share of them; which argues a self-condemned
conscience, and a Sophister confuted by his own expressions.

. Of like form, to justify this Sacrilege of alienating Church lands, against
our laws, against the Kings and Clergies consent, is that pitiful Imposture
which D. Burges seeks to put on the Reader, as if no Church lands, given to
Bishops as such, are sacred, because there is no express command of God to give
any such estates to them; consequently they are superstitions, superstious, not
accepted of God, not necessary for his honor, or the Churches well-being;
therefore may be alienated without any sin or offense against God or man.

The Solution and answer is easy, where the general command of God, and the
pristine proportion of his bount^ to his Ministers is extant and in force; as
to honor God with our substance; to own the Pastors of the Church, as worthy
of double honor; to impart things temporal, to those that impart to the Church
things Sp^ritual: Such as are, the Gospel preached, the Ministry constituted,
Ministers ordained, Church Government rightly ordered, and duly administered,
for the p^ace of the Church. These and the like are Gods warrant sufficient to
invest the Bishops and other Minister, with lands given them by Law, in order
to support their Office and Authority; where the donor had power to give or
retribute to God of his own; where the will of the dead is in things lawful
inviolable, in any good work of charity or public endowment: Though the
quantum be left to the liberty of the donor, yet where there is a right to give
and consecrate, ingratitude to God, as the giver of all; to the Church, as the
family and house of God; to the Bishops and others, as the servants of God; and
to the poor as Christ's poor, The donation is accepted, and the consecration
valid, by the laws of God and man; which give leave to every honest man to do
with his own as he pleases, so as it be disposed, agreeable to Gods general
will, for his glory, to no man's injury public or private.

. So that the unjust alienation, rapine and direption of these sacred
Donations, must be every way injust, sinful, sacrilegious and execrable; where
neither Gods, nor the Kings, nor the Churches, nor the Nations, nor the Donees,
nor the Possessors consent is had; which is the case of Bishops and other
Church lands in England: From all which Entanglings of injustice, Dr. Burges
will as hardly extricate his conscience, as Pilate by washing his hands could
free himself of that innocent blood, which he confessed not worthy of death;
yet to gratify popular spite and importunity he condemned to be crucified.

. When Dr. Burges How to cu^e D. Burges of sacrilege.
has pulled these and other forked arrows and habergeons, which not only Dr.
Gaudens pen, but all just, honest and learned men have fixed in this Whales
thick skin, and which pierce him to the heart: When he has eased his
overcharged stomach, and disgorged the indigestible donations he has made of
Church lands and houses, of lead, stones and timber which he has so greedily
swallowed at Wells and elsewhere; when he has (volens nolens) made a just
restitution and compensation such for ill gotten goods as he has usurped; when
he has as for other sins of high scandal, levity and lubricity, done further
Penance for this crying sin of Sacrilege, by exposing himself to public
contempt or pity; when he has better learned those lessons of Eternal Truth
and Justice, much elder then his sacred Covenant, not to do evil, that good may
come thereby; not to rob God and the Church, to enrich the State, or any
private men; not to do to others, what one would not have others do to our
selves; That it is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy, Prove.
23.25. That he that wastes his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son
that causes shame, and brings reproach, Prove. 19.26. That as the Partridge
sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches not by right,
shall leave them in the midst of his days, and in the end shall be a fool, Jer.
17.11. And woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness against his house, that
he may set his nest on high, Hab. 2.9. And woe be to him that increases that
which is not his, verse. 6. And woe be to them, that call evil good, and good
evil, Isa. 5.20. and that, Hear ye this, O ye scornful men, because ye have
said, We have made a Covenant with death, and with hell we are at agreement;
when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for
we have mad^ lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves, Isa.
28.14.15. Your Covenant with death sball be disannulled and your agreement with
hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then
shall ye be trodden down by it, verse. 18.

. When D. B. and his lewd Libeller, have felt the just, inevitable, and heavy
impressions of these sacred thunderbolts, and the like, which witness from
heaven against all ungodly and unjust men; when they have better considered
that covetousness is the root of all evil, that Sacrilege is the sin of
Idolatry; That there is no getting to heaven without repentance, nor any
repentance without restitution of ill gotten goods, so far as we are able: that
Justice Divine and humane, is to give to every one what is by law and right
their own, when these and such other holy indelible and indispensable oracles
are well weighty by that blessed pair, the Libeller, and his D. Burges, and
either not baffled by some sophistical and scurrilous Libel, or not waved and
eluded with pretense of the sacred Covenant, Dr. Gauden will then find so much
leisure and charity, as to give a further answer, to that pitiful repeated
Pamphlet of C. B D. D. which seeks to maintain that Sacrilegious paradox with
such Sophistry and scurrility against truth and his betters, as are only sit
for such a farrago of fraud and fallacy, of ignorance and impudence. Nor does
Dr. Gauden doubt to make him at last cry out, Miserere mei Deus, and although
his obdurate heart is as loath to let his wicked purchase of Bishops and other
Church Lands go (as Pharaoh was the Jews) yet when the Authority of the law and
justice have taught him to refund, and have made such necessary evacuations of
his full purse, and foul soul, as are fitting, possibly he may be more easily
brought to write after Zacheus his copy, being terrified with the sight of
those injuries and indignities he has done to God and man, to this Church and
State, to the King and Bishops, upon whose estates were graven with Aqua fortis
these deep and great Characters, Caveat emptor, and Deus Vindex.

. For there was nothing which the law of Magna Charta, and other Statutes in
all Ages, had fortified with more cautions and curses, as flaming swords to
keep of all regicidious and sacrilegious attempts; nor was D. B. such a Dolt or
Buzzard as not to know well enough that these Merchants who pretended to sell
Bishops and Cathedral Lands, were neither Trustees, nor Proprieters and
possessors of them, nor Lords paramount, nor were they forfeited to them, nor
had they any thing to do with them, further, then to preserve them in those
hands and to those uses to whom by law and all justice they belonged, as much
as their own House and Lands did to themselves.

. D. B. is so much a Barreter and petty Fogger, as to know that estates so
settled and entailed, as Church and Crown lands, are by many acts of Parliament
not to be cut off and alienated by any Ordinances of two houses, especially if
they are scattered by tumults, or scared with their own jealousies, or levened
with faction, or animated by foreign invasions, or overawed with Soldiers, or
transported with any sinister designs and innovations contrary to the laws
established.

. And certainly if D. E. his Masters who gratified his licorish palate with
such sacrilegious morsels, were now to hear his cal^ in which he complains not
as Judas, of the injustice he has done to others far his betters, but of the
Justice he fears is to be done upon him self, by f^rci^g him to make just
restitution, and so to loose his money; They would answer, as the Pharisees
did, lock thou to it, what is that to us* nor will his Libellers reviving the
spur of the sacred Covenant. put any mortal into them, who cannot be very
sensible of that, when in so many other public engagements (as solemn and as
sacred to God and man) they were in the event forced to come short of their
words, both to King, Peers and people, Never being able to make good their
declarations, no more then that public says, which they so often took upon
them; so that now it is presumed they are not so very superstitious, as to fear
the terrors of any such Baal berith, as D. B. or his Libeller, who shall urge
any sacred Covenant in vindication of Sacriledg and the most crying injustice
which can be committed against God and the King, the whole Church and Nation,
besides against those learned and holy men, Bishops and others, who by all laws
of God and man have, and then had, the only legal right to those church Lands
and estates, which are given and devoted to the honor of God, and the meet
entertainment of the guides and Gove^nours of his Church, the Pastors and
Teachers, the Bishops and Presbyters of it, i^ that double honor, which
becomes their holy call ng and authority.

. But it is high time to put a period to this digression from the Cov^nant
about D. Burges Dr. Burges his po^ulant unportunity.
his pitiful vindication of sacrilege, and his sad expostulation, yea
exprobation for an answer to that unlearned piece of his, upon which Dr, Gauden
made long ago such strictures, and animadversions, as that petulant Rapsody of
rusticity and sophistry deserves; but he never yet had time to transcribe them;
nor did he think the world needed any charm against such a (Meridian D^mon)
noond ap devil as that Paradox is, or any Antidote against that impudent and
petulant poison, which spits it self in the faces of so many, nay all learned
Divines, who are diametrally and unanimously against his corrupt judgment, and
impious position: Also in the faces of so many reverend and most excellent
Bishops, with others of the English Clergy, whom this Babsakeh reviles, and
r^yles at, all but Dr. Juxon, sometime Bishop of London, whose Candor and
charity it seems once or twice did D B go^d turns; yea, he flies in the face
of the l^te afflicted and Murd^red King, as if the pertinary of his Episcopal
Counselors, and his own obstinate conscience, were the causers of his death
and undoing, yea he flies in the face of God himself and his holy word,
opposing, eluding, wr^sting, trif^ing and cavelling with the Scr^ptures,
contrary to the analogy of faith, and clear rules of justice, ratitude, equity,
hospitality, and charity, which h^ knows are all expressly against him and his
co^etous cursed principles; commanding, encouraging allowing and accepting,
what is so given to God for his honor, in piety, Ministry, charity,
hospitality, good literature, and due government; and no less forbidding by any
fraud or force to rob God, his Church, his Ministers, his poor, or any others,
who in his name and for his sake have received any alms, or donation, or tithe,
or oblations, or houses, or lands, or any other endowments, either so high a^
great Lordships, or so low as a cup of cold water.

. But if Dr. Gauden should see the popular poison and gangreen of D. B.
scribbling in behalf of Sacril^dge to spread (which has of late by Gods
wonderful providence found so great a confutation and check in the Justice,
Piety and Honor of the King, and the two loyal Houses of Parliament) he will
not fail to apply such a corrosive and cautery as i^ meet; yea possibly at the
end of this work which aims to dissect the Libellers Cacotomy, and to discover
the filth which is both on the forehead and in the bowels of this putid piece;
if he have leisure, he may further add some of those reflections which he made
long ago on those infamous lines written with the black inck, the gall and
coprice of C.B.D.D.

. Mean time having sifted this impertinent bran, The L^bell rs ^ u^
propositi^^^ examined.
and chaff out of the design of that sacred Co^enant, which the Libeller has
stuffed with personal, forc^d and false reflections upon Dr. Gauden, and Sir
L^urence Bromfield; also with great glorying in behalf of D. B. and his
egregious piece of Sacrilege; yet as he clamours unanswered, and indeed never
deserving any reply, being self-convinced, confuted, and condemned. It is now
most proper to examine further, what this Spermologist brings in behalf of his
sacred Covenant; not that he cares for the Covenant, as it has ought in it,
or is in any sense Sacred, no more then Judas did for the poor: but he hopes by
urging this against Episcopacy, to keep Bishops from ever recovering their
lands by a just restitution; which His Majesty with all honor and conscience
has determined to do, as the most acceptable service he can do to God and his
Church, and the greatest honor to the blessed memory and genius of His pious
Father; whom Burges, as Shimei so petulantly p^rstringeth in the midst of His
afflictions, for His constancy to the Church, to ^ishops, and their just
interests.

. When Dr. Burges is a little more humble, and empty of his big bellied
purchases of Church lands and houses; when the Bishop and Dean of Wells have
taken from this ridiculous Crow, the sacrilegious feathers with which he prides
himself, looking and speaking so big as he has done against King and Bishops
for the Covenant and Reformation, then he may possibly have his belly full of
an answer, if that will then do him any good, as thin broth after a strong
purge, to settle his stomach, and rinse his polluted entraile.

. At present it must not seem to the Reader lost time or labor, to look upon
the four Propositions; by which as by so many rotten and worm-eaten pillars,
the l^beller (the dear friend and advocate of D. ^.) ^eek^ to holster up the
Sacred Covenant; so (...) she to hear that Babel of Sacrilege, that hand of
Da^^^, and all the Philistines in it, who have made such scorn and unjust gain
of the Bishops and Clergy, and Church of England, and who now feel their
dislo^al and sacrilegious structure to rotter, and ready to tumble about their
ears; as all wickedness is at last too be my for it self; and standing in a
slippery precipice, must ruin by its own weight, and the vengeance both of
Gods and man's justice.

1 P^^po^^ of (...).
The first Proposition of the Libeller is such a gentle fallacy* and such a
cunning caplating of Dr. Gaudens con^^ssion, as makes him appear rather
combaring as the Frogs in Homer, with a flag or bulr^sh in his hand, then with
a sword or spear, like a man of valor. He thus argues very learnedly, and with
more then a Spanish pride, lifts up his eyebrows, and muschato'^.

. Dr. Gauden agrees (in order to public peace, and to avoid endless contests)
that the Covenant, as to the words and matter of it, may in some benign and
charitable sense, be so for lawful, as it may consist with justice to God and
man, with Laws Divine and Humane, in which center all honest men will agree
(not as it was, or is rigidly urged, and imperiously imposed by any party or
faction in the Nation) but as it might be sp^^^anc^usly taken by well-meaning
men, in order to lawful reforming what was amist in Church and State, and
confirming what was good in both, agreeable to their loyalty and duty, to God,
the King, the Church, and their Country.

. Ergo (concludes the learned Libeller) Dr. Gauden is self-condemned, yea,
contradicts himself, no less then the sacred Covenant, with Idolized nonsense
and blasphemy; because he denies the Covenant to be valid, or binding in any
such sense, as either superstion, or sacrilege, or antiepiscopal folly,
faction and fury list to put upon it, either in the first taking, or after
keeping of it. Yea, and Dr. Gauden further denies the Authority imposing the
Covenant to be legal, national, complete, or valid, to as to bind the Nation
in present age or posterity, to the bondage of the Covenant, because some
members of the two Houses, and the Assembly took it for themselves, but not in
the name of the Church or Nation of which they were not plenary
Representatives, or the Trastees of men's consciences.

. Dr. Gauden did indeed by his Analysts, seek to give Hellebore to such weak
heads, as were troubled with Covenant megroms and vertigoes, that they might at
last fix their eyes and minds on such a sober aspect of the Covenant, as might
present nothing but what is Religious and Loyal, just and honest, agreeable to
the sacred Pattern of the Catholic Church, and the Laws of this Nation. That
they might not be everlastingly tossed to and fro between Piety and Policy,
Faith and Faction, Antiquity and Novelty, according to the various fancies of
their own, or others addle brains. Nor did Dr. Gauden expect to meet with many
such (capita insanabilia) incurable coxcombs, as this Libeller and his fanatic
faction, whom three Antycira's will not restore to either judgment or honesty:
For they are so possessed with the point of Reputation and Profit, much
depending upon the Covenant, as totally destructive of Bishops, and deverative
of their Lands, that they have no regard to conscience, justice, laws, or
common honesty; to which rules to reduce the Covenant, is represented by such
raving wretches, as nonsense, blasphemy, and contradiction, or self-conviction.

Dr. Gauders (...).
. Whereas there is nothing in the Covenant that sounds either grace or virtue,
equity or charity, true Religion or Loyalty, duty to God, Church, King,
Country, but Dr. Gauden willingly allows it, both as to the end and means: He
judges every man in their places and calli^gs oblig^d to those rules and
design; not only because there is such a Covenant of humane composure, to
which some men have so far declared their consent, b^^ f^^m f^r ^igher
authority, and more ancient bonds of morality.

. But to have the Covenant made a snare to this Church and State, and to have
all men hampered by the sophistry o^ supe^st^t^on of s^^ne few sacril^gious
purchasers, and Pre^byterian Projectors, whose design^ either ambitious or
covetous, are by extirpation of Episcopacy, to make a prey of Church lands and
authority: The Dr. Gauden abhors as a brand of infamy, a bond of slavery, and a
bone of everlasting contention; this he protests against as the servitude of
the Church to a faction, and the vassalage of the Nation to novel and foreign
inventions.

. England, and Scotland, and Ireland too, have already paid very dear for this
Covenant, while the nose of it was so wrung by a Parliament, that the whole
body of Church and State had almost bled to death. Nor do we read of any
Covenant ever so imposed or taken by any Subjects, without or against the
consent of their Sovereigns power, Pa^tial Covenants very ina^spi^ous.
but it proved a bloody issue, hardly cured with a miracle, and this after the
effusion of much civil blood; witness that of the Guenses in Flanders, Covenant
of the ^uenses in ^landers.
1560. which began so dreadful a confusion, so sharp a persecution, and so long
a war in all the Lo^ countries: as Etrada, Bentivoglio and Grotius tell us in
their Histories.

. Like fatal effects followed that Guisian Covenant in France, which was called
the Holy League, The Holy League in France.
in Henry the thirds days, then which nothing could be more destructive to
Prince and People of all sides; as Mr. D'avila and others show us in the
terrible and long Tragedies of France.

. After the same rate did the receipt of such a Covenant of a hundred Articles,
taken by a popular precipitancy in Bohemia ^he Bohemia Covenant.
work in the year, 1618. which in a few years, months and days purged out the
Prince Elector Palatine and his Family out of that Kingdom, and all their
ancient Dominions; destroyed some scores of Nobility, many thousands of
Ministers, and a million of poor people, before ever the direful effect of that
Covenant ceased.

. Nor had this Covenant in its first Original in Scotland, The Scotch Covenant.
in the minority of King James and his Mother the Queen Regent, any happier
beginnings or influence on that Church and State. Covenants taken ^y ^ubjects,
apart from their Princes, are like C^^^ers, they may blaze with a great light
and site amongs of Religion, Reformation, Loyalty and Liberty, as if they did
emulate the celestial flames, and borrowed their glory from the Pattern of God
and his ancient People, to whom himself once prescribed an holy Covenant: But
they commonly fill the Church and State where they appear, with dreadful
events; and after much terror, with misery upon poor mortals, they vanish: Nor
is mankind ever more happy, then when they least appear with their formidable
Lights, their new superfluous Streamings.

. The Sun, Moon and Stars, the ^ncient and faithful witnesses in Heaven, are
sufficient to rule both day and night, both matters of Religion and civil
Polity, according to the Word of God, and the laws of the Land, in all duties
Moral and C^ristian, both to God, our sel^es, and others To this Law and Gospel
are all Covenants to be reduced; if they speak not to the sense of that Moral
and Baptismal Covenant by which every man and Christian is obliged, it is
because there is no light in them, or their show of light is but darkness, a
smothering of Religion with faction and superstition, like a smoaky flame, or a
flaming smoke.

. Dr. Gauden justly affirms, That no man, never so much a zealot for the
Covenant, has any cause to glory in the flesh of it, the power and policy, the
novelty and partiality, the illegality and violence, which first formed it, and
obtruded it upon many in this Church and Kingdom, I am sure neither King nor
Parliament, Bishop nor Presbyter, nor any honest man in Church or State, ever
got any great good by it, so far as it was carnal, either fomenting, or
continuing, or increasing, or beginning our sad divisions, and lasting miseries.

. If there be, as he hopes there may be, any thing in it of Spirit and Truth,
or Diviner virtue in it, by reason of its conformity with the Word of God, the
right constitution of the Christian Church, and the laws of this Kingdom (in
which our peace, safety, honor, and comfort temporal and eternal are much
bound up) in Gods name preserve and keep that matter and sense of it; let no
thing be destroyed in which there is a blessing. But the Roses of England have
n^ cause to borrow any beauty or sweetness from the thistles of Scotland: Nor
may the stately Cedar, or the fruitful Vine and Figtree of Episcopacy, so
anci^nt, so universal, so venerable, so useful, so necessary to the well-being
of this, or any National Church, bow down to the brambles and shrubs of
Presbytery or Independency, merely oppressed by the weight and rigor of such a
Covenan^ if formed as a T^lismanick charm, or figure, by the strength of a
Presbyterian fancy, to drive away the primitive Bishops, and all pristine
Episcopacy out of the Church of England, as Apollonius Thyanaeus did Gnats and
Serpents from some Cities in Asia.

. Here, after the Libeller The Libe^lers enforced confe^si^n.
found himself forced to confess (as Dr. Gaudens echo) that the Covenant
either must have such a sense and interpretation as is innocent, just and good,
or it can have no bond on men's consciences: Consequently, that it must not be
urged (with equal impiety and injury, against what is orderly, useful,
honorable and lawful in Episcopacy; as ever owned in the Church of Christ, and
by law and c^stom established in England ever since it was Christian^) which
concession of the Libeller is enough to make good the Office, F^^ction, Honor
and Authority of Bishops and the addit^ment or honorary of their Estates: And
if so, it is ((...)) that which was to be d^monstrated, that for which Dr.
Gaudens Analysis fairly contended: Dr. Gauden may cry I^p^^an (v^cimus) ^ictory.

. But Dr. Burges and his illiberal Libeller must ^ry ( ^hou perimus) in a most
lamentable tone, we are lost and undone: good Bishops, and good Episcopacy must
(...), and enjoy their goods and lands to good use: We can have no more good
title against them for our sacrilegious purchases, then those foolish buyers,
who hearing the father of the family was very sick and oppressed, as they
thought to the death, bargained for his lands with the prodigal heir, and
parted with their moneys before the good old man was quite dead; whose recovery
re^^^s his right to his estate; but his sickness and infirmity, by reason of
inbred distempers, or outward injuries inflicted upon him by his cruel
Physicians or unnatural children, did no way disseise him of his Estate, nor
give either greedy beir and expectant of his last breath, or those preposterous
p^rchasers any right or title to his lands or goods; the Law will restore these
to him, and teach preposterous purchasers more wit or honesty. If D. Burges and
his Libeller can play upon the Covenant to this tune of Restitution, in Gods
name let them go on; we shall all rejoice to see primitive Episcopacy,
primitive Bishops, and their pristi^e Revenues, with their double honor
restored: This will be a fit of mirth not more generous then just in D B. and
his partners; but I doubt the Libeller fears this sense of the Covenant, as
much as a Malefactor does those two Greek Letters G or P, the Gibbet or the
Callows.

. For no sooner has the Libeller pretended a conformity to Dr. Gaudens sense;
but as if he repented him of all good thoughts and motions to repentance, he
falls into a raving impertinency against D. Gaudens Tears of the Church of
England, The Libell^rs a d Dr. Burges his sp^^^ a g^^ st D. Gaud^^ ear^ of t e
Chu ch of England.
upon which this scurrilous Scribler, studies to spit or piss by an unmannerly
and uncompassionate rudeness, only worthy of such a Barberite, such a son of
Belial, whose forehead and bowels of brass, only serve him to scoff at an
afflicted mother, a distressed Church; which ( page 28.) this wretched Libeller
afterward, not only secretly jears at, but lo^dly laughs her to scorn, and
disdaines to own he^ under any such name and relation; so cruel does
covetousness make any man, turning Christians, yea Ministers, yea Doctors of
Divinity, into Jews; whose carbon must serve them to obstruct all charity or
duty to Parents: rather the Church of England must lie in dust and ashes, in
tears and blood, wounded, wasted, trampled under the feet of the beasts of the
people, unpittied and unreleived by any comforter, then some sacrilegious
purchasers should not keep their ^^agitious estates; for this is still the
only design, both of crying up the Covenant, and crying down the Church of
England, and her sons, which some Apostates drive at.

O dreadful Incognite, O cruel Crocodile, O barbarous L^b^^^e^, was it not high
time for some of the (...) the ^^ur^h of England to have pity on her! (...)
Book was (...) capable to have washed the most (...) wh^^^^d the failings and
errors only (...) the sed^ty of a swine, the poison of a (...) of a De^il^^^
wrought great, and a (...) esse ^ every where; it was a cordial to revive the
^^^nting spirits of many excellent Bishop^, and others of all sor^s of
Christians; yea the Church of England from that time it saw its Tears, c^u^^
(...) lifted up her head, and began to ^e comforted. Who was ever so unkind, so
unnatural* so cruel, so vile, as to find fault with that des^gn, that duty,
that piety of Dr. Gauden, but only our Dr. Burges and this Libeller, because
there in his cop^ and freehold was touched, his sacrilege perstringed, his
versatile temper discovered, not with more justice then ingenuity, nor with
more verity then ^ ^rily; for Dr. Burges was never personally injurious to Dr.
Gauden* nor Dr. Gauden par^icularly despited to Dr. Burges; nor would Dr.
Gauden have fouled his fingers by touching that pitch, but that Dr. Burges his
pitiful case and plea came cross Dr. Gaudens way, just as he was finishing his
Tears etc. Et quis tam ferreus, ut teneat se! Who would be patient to see and
hear such a flent^r proclaim his folly to all England, to roar in the ears of
his Parliaments, as he called them, as if he were undone if he had not his full
bargain and penniworth of Church Lands? Who would endure to hear him barking
against King, Bishops and Church and ^l, that was sacred or civil, only to make
good hi^ sacr le^g, which betrayed his Aposta^y? For who in former in^o
pretended greater zeal for Bishops, and conformity both in his Deeds and
Writings to the Church of England?

. Hinc lachryme, hinc irae, hinc odiae; Hence those impotent effusions of the
Libeller and his darling, D.B. against Dr. Gaudens book for the Church of
England, which will live as a monument of honor to all posterity, when such
putid pamphlets, and infamous libels shall rot and perish with the carcasses of
their Authors, only remembered as Hierostratus, for sacrilegious Apostates,
destroyers, despisers and devourers of the Church of England; against whom it
is much more Christian and commendable for Dr. Gauden to express a public
dislike and abhorrence of their impudent and injurious practices to God and
man, then it was tolerable for Dr. Burges, or any of his party to come
strutting out with his pack full of pamphlets, and vile pleas for his viler
sacrilege, to the defiance of all men of learning, honesty, and ingenuity, yea
of this whole Church and Nation, as if all must fly before this uncircumcised
Philistim: No Dr. Gauden, like David, has successfully encountered this
prodigy, and given him ((...)) so seasonable a wound in his bold and brazen
forehead, that ever since he is confounded and fallen; he lies now grovelling and
sprawling with the inordinate motions of his hands and heels, even gasping,
dispairing and cying, while he sees his projects perishing, and his purchase of
Bishops lands, like his soul ready to desert from him; a most just and generous
execution worthy of the courage and freedom of Dr. Gaudens ^^n and spirit,
which neither this Libeller nor D. B. will ever claw off or avoid.

After this the Libeller pleases himself in alleging as beco^^^ him (that is
maliciously, falsely and odiously) some expressions of Dr. Gaudens The
Libellers c^^d (...). Gauden^ (...).
touching those evils which through the vice of men and times (he thinks) are
incident to Bishops and Episcopacy, as accidental to it, not inherent in it, or
emanate from it, much less inseparable, as chronique and hereditary diseases;
not proceeding from the nature of Episcopal Government, which is full of
wisdom, order, honor and goodness in its constitution and due administration,
as well as it is of Primitive, catholic, and apostolic use and authority in
the Church; but from those frailties and infirmities which are incident to
those men, who to Bishops are entrusted with the management of that Government.

The ^^^le^s Log^^^.
. Here the Libeller seeking something to bark at in his ranging springs, as he
imagines, a piece of contradictory ^^nsence, to make good his ridiculous title,
and to justify those (...) ears in which he first appears. Arguing, very
accutely after D. Bs. now Logique, that if misdemeanors be incident to
Bishops, (not as Bishops but as (...), not as invested in that office, but as
tempted by or exposed to their own or other a corrupt passions) Ergo they arise
from the employment of Episcopacy, as effect from their proper cause, and
fruits from their government.

At this rate, what is there good in its nature, and abused by some men, of
which this Libeller may not in set by his Malignant sophistry; Evils are
incident to them, by reason of (...) men; Ergo those evils arise from the
things themselves, or from the office or employment.

Kings may rule Tyrannically; Ergo, Tyranny arises from Monarchy, or Kingly
Government as if a Pollarchy or Anarchy is not fuller of Tyranny, (as at Athens
under the 30. and late in England under 300. Tyrants) then any Monarchy ever
was: So Presbyters may be factious, popular, seditious, ambitious, covetous,
contentious, simoniack, pragmatique, and abjured apostates of Episcopacy; Ergo,
these evils incident to Presbyters, ill ordered, do naturally and necessarily,
arise from the nature of Presbytery.

At the same rate this unlogical Libeller, may argue many vicious distempers
and sicknesses of body and mind are incident to men, therefore they arise from
humanity, or humane nature; so water or wine contract impurity or mustiness,
while they pass through, or are enclosed in such Vessels, or Channel^, which
are foul and tainted, Ergo these being incident to Wine and Water, do arise
from them, as if there were every where a principle productive of evil, where
there is a capacity passive and receptive of it.

Thus Religion is subject to superstition; Ergo, superstition flows from
Religion, thus Heresy as poison, and Schism as an Itch, infects many
Christians, and are incident to Christians subjective; Ergo they arise from
Christianity, formaliter and causaliter; The Holy Scriptures themselves, are
subject to be wrested, corrupted and blasphemed; Ergo, blasphemy and corruption
arise from the Scriptures; so Sacraments and all holy things are subject to be
profaned; Ergo, profaneness rises from the nature of Sacraments.

. Possibly this Libeller may have gone some years to School, and has ventured
to be a Predicant, but he seems not to savor much of the University, Nor can I
advise him to learn of D. B. to be a disputant, because Dr. Prideaux long ago
passed that (...) upon h m at his unlucky act, in Oxford, Profecto ^us sili, tu
praedicare potes, disputare non pot^s.

. But the envy which the Libeller seeks to load Dr. Gauden with, Dr. Gaudens
(...).
is as if he were a bold and severe ce^s^r of Bis ops, in putting some evils to
some of them, and consequently to all of them, yea and to Episcopacy it self,
(for which he professes to be so great a Champion, as either to destroy the
Covenant (as to the extirpating sense of it.) or else to subdue it to the
obedience of legal and regular Episcopacy. Truly no man is less a flatterer of
Bishops or Presbyters in any thing unworthy of their holy calling, then Dr.
Gauden; he is prone to be as severe against any Bish^p, as against Dr. Burges,
(who they say would fain have been a Bishop) if any Bishop had been as guilty
of presumptuous sacrilege as D. Burges, who is but a petty Presbyter, though
he has good store of Bishops Lands, and so per viam concomitantiae, by way of
contagious descent, may contract all the evils incident to Episcopacy, by
reason of some irregular Bishops.

. Not that Sacrilege or Symony, or Heresy arise either from Episcopacy or
Presbytery, though incident to them (in concreto) as they are lodged or fixed
in subjects, at once capable to be Bishops and Presbyters, and yet to be as
weak and unworthy men, as any others in any honest calling and employment.
Lawyers and Physicians, and Judges, and Courtiers, may all be blame worthy, yea
Apostles may be ambitious, as the sons of Zebedee, denyers of Christ, and
dissemblers as Peter, forsakers, as all betrayers of their Master as Judas, yet
must we not he nee conclude that these distempers of the men, arise from the
Apostolical order and dignity.

. In like manner although Dr. Gauden well knows the mischiefs and
inconveniences which from the corrupt principles and passions of some Bishops,
may and sometimes have fallen upon the Ch^^ch of Christ of which as he is no
vindicator, so nor does he desire to be (as this ^ham) d^^^^tor and derider;
yet he has a very high and holy esteem of Eiscopacy, in its eminency,
antiquity, universality, use and authority Ecclesiastical, so as to prefer it
above any Church Government; yea and to own no other, as Primitive. Catholic
and complete, nor yet so convenient or comfortable.

. Nor is this Libeller (who as the Satyr out of the same mouth can blow hot and
cold,) able to avoid the conviction and confession of this truth, so far, that
although he now almost despaires of ever making his D.B. a Bishop, yet he is
constrained to allow of Bishops and Episcopacy, by the conformity of D. B.
heretofore to Episcopacy; yea and his often declaring for it and for Bishops, as
they were by law settled in the Church of England; in which the primitive
eminency, and ancient Authority of Episcopacy, was duly constituted, and
worthily exercised by many learned, goodly and most venerable Bishops, inferior
to none of that order, office and degree in any Age of the Church. So that
however the Libeller who seems possessed with the same spirit as D. B. may in
his fits rave against all Bishops, as drones and belly Gods, and Idle, and
unworthy of their honors or estates, yet in cool^r woods he returns to
something of right senses; and nothing more calmes or charms him, (as all hot
Presbyters) then the name of Dr. Usher, (for Lord Pri^ate and Archbishop of
Armagh must not be mentioned, as if there were no difference in honor and
degree, between Dr. Usher and Dr. Burges, or Hugh Peter's, who laughed at Armae
chanus, whom all the honest and learned world admired,) they hug that model of
his reduction of Episcopacy, which the Libeller and his D. B. fancy will serve
to reduce Bishops to primitive poverty, so as we may yet have such an
Episcopacy, as is consistent with Dr. Burgesse^ interest, and his purchases of
Bishops Lands; whereas that humble learned and most pious Lord Primate,
propounded that his reduction in those difficult, dangerous and distressed
times, not so much in order to bend the hands, or limit the pristine and legal,
and just, and due authority of good Bishops in England or Scotland, but only as
a condescension and expedient at present by which to disarme and bind the hands
of both Presbyters and people, then tumultuarily running to destroy without,
and against all Laws of God and man, not only the Luxuriancies and enormities,
which they thought were incident to Monarchy and Episcopacy, but even the very
function, office and honor of both, to the ruin and extirpation of an
excellent King, and three flourishing Kingdoms, as well as of many excellent
Bishops and three flourishing reformed Churches. The (...) of the (...).


^. In this first proposition then of this Libeller, as there a no more wit,
right reason, or ingenuity, then there is wool on the back of a black dog, so
it has as many pitiful impertinencies, silly fallacies, and childish
captations after shadows, as that creature usually has fleas; with which
companions and his dear D. B. I leave the Libeller and this first insignificant
proposition, which has no logical opposition to Dr. Gaudens Analysis, which is
either to reconcile the Covenant to a just and lawful Episcopacy, such as the
Church of England and all ancient Churches maintained, as venerable, excellent,
and necessary for the Churches good polity* and well being; or else to null and
invalidate if so far, as in any branch of it it was either taken or is by any
interpreted, and urged against Episcopacy and Bishops to the prejudice of the
truth of God, of the honor of the Apostles, of the custom of all Churches,
and to the overthrow of the Laws of this Church and Kingdom, by which our
duties to God and man, to our Princes, our Bishops and all our superiors, under
the Sovereign powers of God and the King are confined; without any power of
dispensation either fron this Covenant, or any other contrivance, destructive
to our ancient and legal constitutions of authority and duty, order and
subordination of Church and State, of which God is the Author, the King the
Supreme dispensor, the Laws the Limiters, and men the Executors, according as
power and authority is legally derived to them.

. To sum up then into a Syllogism the ratiocination of this reverend Libeller
in his first Proposition against Dr. Gaudens Analysis.

What Dr. Gauden does admit in some sense to be lawful and good, may be so
taken and kept*

But Dr. Ga^den admits the Covenant in some sense to be lawful and good
materialiter, nor authoritat^^? (...) reconcilable to, and consistent with the
ancient and legal Government of Episcopacy:

Ergo, It might be so taken and kept.

W^^^^ conclusion is true, as to that conformity of the words and matter of the
Covenant to law and d^t^* which Dr. Gauden requires in a private and
s^^ntaneous making of such a profession to God and man.

^^t what is this to Dionysius? how does this conclusion contradict what the
Libeller had either to prove, namely, the nonsense and blasphemy of the
Analysis, or to oppose and overthrow? namely, That the Covenant either taken or
in^erpreted, or kept in a sense destructive to the ancient and legal
constitution of Bishops and Episcopacy in England, is and was unlawful, null
and invalid, ought not so to be taken or kep^, but recanted and repented of, as
prejudicial to truth, justice and order, to the honor, peace and happiness of
this Church, to the obedience we ow to the Laws, to the duty we owe to the
King, and the equity we owe to Bishops, in having and enjoying their own; also
contrary to the reverence and conformity we owe to the Catholic Church and its
first Bishops the twelve Apostles, with their immediate and constant successors
in all times and ages, which were Bishops in Dr. Gaudens sense, persons
Ecc^esiastick, invested in an eminent power above any Presbyters.

. This, thy Position, O my gentle Libeller, should have been lustily attacqued,
and the contrary proved: But I see the beast is sometime disposed to grin, when
he cannot bite; if his and his Client Dr. Burges his traps have such holes in
them, they will catch no mice; nor will he by such silly engines, long keep
himself as a Rat in his Parmisan Cheese, his purchase and house at Wells. He
must have a better Sophister to plead for his case, then this lack logic
Libeller, or else he will be no long lived possessor, nor avoid an ejectio
firm; which he fears more then Gally slaves do the bastinado of a Bulls
pi^ile. Let the Covenant be reconciled to such Episcopacy; let all Covenanters
be subject to such Bishops, let such Bishops have that authority, honor and
revenue which is theirs by Law; and let us see what this Libeller or his friend
D. B. will get by their first Proposition, or by Dr. Gaudens concession, that
the covenant may in such a lawful sense be kept by the takers of it; but not in
any other, sacrilegious to Bishops, or extirpating of Episcopacy.

. 2. I crave the Readers leave to make him a little more sport, by pursuing
this pregnant Fox, The Libellers second proposition to overthrow Dr. Gaudens
Analysis.
to another of his borrowes, a second more argumentative proposition, which he
hopes will help to save his skin, and furred coat in which Dr. Burges has
wrapped himself by his comfortable purchase of Bishops lands.

He thus therefore rouseth himself, and manageth (as Balaam) the enchantment of
his second Proposition:

All sober Christians who understand themselves concerning Episcopacy, do
herein agree with Dr. Gauden:

Ergo, he concludes in a most magisterially consequence at the last. It is
sufficient that the Doctor in the midst of all his revilings and slanders, has
acknowledged so many to concur in the true sense of the Covenant.

Marvellously well, O learned Libellist: This is indeed to dispute, to prove,
to disprove, to convince, to convert true, to confirm. Dr. Gauden and all
honest men with him agree in such sense of the Covenant as only can be just and
good: but what shall we do with these superstitious Scholars, or those
Sycophants, or those Sectaries, or those Sacrilegists, who do not or will not
as honest men, either understand themselves, or concur with Dr. Gauden in this
sense of the Covenant, as it is reduced to that Episcopacy which Dr. Gauden
according to Scripture, Law, and all antiquity does assert for the only,
ancient, regular and complete Government of the Church, not in a parity of
Presbyters, but in that exors potestat, in that (...), and (...) of Episcopacy,
which Ignatius, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, St. Jerome, and all the ancient
Fathers owned of right, as well as custom, belonging to Episcopacy, and to
Bishops eminently so called.

. Those Innovators Dr. Gauden encounters; these he seeks to redeem from the
fallacy and slavery of any such sense, as is by some affixed to the Covenant,
wholly inconsistent with the stability, restoration and succession of
Episcopacy and Bishops in England. The Libellers interest and D.B's concern is,
to assert these Antiepiscopal Pretenders, these rotten, these rigid Extirpators
of use and abuse: Else the Libeller does but beat the the air, and D. Burgeses
fat will be in the fire; paternal, primitive, reformed Bishops (which the laws
of Church and State ever settled and intended in England) will revive, and will
endure to return to their houses, honors and lands too, and then ad quid
perditio haec? How does this Libeller leaving his dear Dr. Burges in the suds,
operam and oleum perdere: He may be good at rhiming, but stark naught at right
reasoning.

. Sure the Sophister thus not fighting, but flying, yea, circulating about, and
seemingly complying with Dr. Gaudens sense, does but make advantages, and seek
some Ambushcadoes; as appears by his many skulking digressions and divings up
and down, far enough from the question in hand, or the Proposition affixed, or
the conclusion, which should be deduced not for, but against Dr. Gaudens sense.

. But here the poor Libeller is so good natured, The libeller concessions as to
Episcopacy and Bishops.
as to yield that the razor of the Covenant, though in a Scotch hand, ought not
to have cut off the nose, ears, lips, hands or head of Venerable Episcopacy (if
as he impiously and impudently questions, page 7.) there be any such as is
truly Apostolic and primitive, free from the evils of Tyranny, Profaneness,
etc. agreeable to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness; (which this
jealous Libeller is as much in love with, as D. B. is with his purchase of
Bishops lands:) He confesses it is (I am sure it ought to be) far from the
sense and intention of the Covenant (and so of any honest Covenanter) to
ex^irpate it; that contrarily it bind^ by all lawful means to procure it, yea
rather to (...) and estab^^^^r. it, where faction and Schism, had thought to
shake and remove it, a^ in England.

. He seems now so well natured, as to threaten by his p^uning or incision knife
(which the Anatomist own^ as pr^per to a sober Covenanter) only to pare of the
Lu^urtariancies, wens, warts and excrescencys, which corrupt times, customs or
manners of men had procured upon the face or hands of Episcopacy, and such
Bishops, as might (...), be subject to like passions with Dr. Burges for
covetousness, contentiousness, and cholerickness, and the like beautys of his
complexion and constitution.

. In earnest (O gentle Libeller) it is pity you should further spin the thread
of your excellent discourse and polished style, to as little purpose, as
Spiders do wast their bowels in making such cobwebs as will only catch small
flies; Alas, Dr. Gauden is agreed with you, if you mean by these sinful defects
or excelles of Episcopacy, the enormious arrogating of unlawful power and
jurisdiction, or the cruel and uncharitable exercise of lawful power, beyond
those bounds, which the equity and charity of laws Ecclesiastical, are
pre-sumed to allow and expect from every pious and prudent Bishop.

. But if you mean by the superfluities of Episcopacy, the honors, manors,
lands, houses; the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and just authority, either
spiritual or civil, with which Bishops in England are by law endowed, according
to the Catholic custom of all Churches, and the magnificent indulgence of
this Church and State; if this be your reformation, and institution, or your
proving of primitive Episcopacy; I may say to thee, O Leveller, O Libeller, as
Christ to Peter (even then a far honester man) Apage, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou savourest not the things which be of God, but of man, of the world,
and of the flesh: Thy ^wlly wisdom is carthly, sensual, devilish, injurious,
sacrilegious; all this fair apologue, these gentle concessions, and cunning
circumlocutions, are only to preserve Dr. Burges his blessed purchase. O how
his narrow soul cleaves to the dust? Come, be free and ingenuous; let Bishops
and other Episcopal Divines have their lands, houses, and honors, which are due
to them by the laws of God and man, after so long and many injuries done them,
Dr. Gauden willingly agrees to the conforming of their persons, manners, and
authority, to the same strict laws; and being himself not unlikely to be a
Bishop (though unworthy) by the providence of God, and the Kings favor, yea,
and by the general desire of that City and Diocese of Exeter, without any his
own or others ambitious procuring, soliciting or bespeaking in his behalf (as
God is witness) he hopes through the grace of God, to be one of those good
examplers of worthy Bishops, who may answer the Libellers and D. B's best
desires; though he despairs to exceed his two last incomparable Predecessors,
Bishop Hall, and Bishop Brownrig, two, and almost inimitable Prelates, whom the
age was not worthy to enjoy, nor D. B. to mention their names with his foul
mouth; who with others, durst by a super Covenanting rigos, and preposterom
reforming, so worry, guaw, devour, and destroy, even sucking the blood, and
eating the flesh to the bare bones of such, and many like excellent Bishops of
England, whom they reduced to poverty, under pretense of their rigurous
covenanting, and ^^^^p^ting Reformation; not by a power of godliness, but of
darkness, ungodliness, violence, cruelty, sacrilege, (...) and Apostasy; all
which are (without any (...) or scandal upon either of the two Houses and
A^^mb^^, or any blaspheming against the Covenant, if tak n and kept in a just
and pious sense) (...) clear and true, then ever Dr. Burges his title will be
to his purchase of Bishops land, which now begins to be not a ^ettle only to
his hands, but a thorn to ^is feet, and a grivou^ c^rd^lium to his soul, which
makes him and his Copes^^ate this Libeller, so bite a^ every one that comes
near them, as if they meant to (...) them, by persuading the English world to
keep to their wits and consciences, their reason, and the laws; restoring to
every one what is theirs, to God, to the King, to Bishops, and to the Church:
None of all which some Atheists would have this Nation ever to own, rather then
Bishops and other Churchmen should enjoy their own again: Whether this
Licentious Libeller be so far gone, or his D. B. in the consumption of all
piety and common honesty, I leave the Reader to judge.

The (...).
For I am, besides the prosecuting of his argument in this secund Proposition,
to pursue him in his many Vagaries and impertinencies, where he loses the
point he pretended to aim at; and only pleases himself to vent his malice,
ch^ler, and excrementitious stuff, without covering it with any p^ddle. Here
his fo^ls (...), ^^ainst S.L.B. against Dr. Gaudens claiming right to the
Assembly, against his spiteful and pernicious preaching in London, and at the
Temple, in order to recover the rights of King and Kingdoms, of Lords and
Commons, of Parliaments and People; yea, of the Bishops and Clergy of England;
but all these putid petul ^ncies are shovelled away before hand, when Dr.
Gauden did sweep them together, as the scattered impertinencies of an immodest
and immethodical Rapsodist.

. To all which this is also here added by him; a dreadful impatience, that D.
B. having sent to Dr. Gauden (as indeed he did his defense of Sacrilege,
accompanied with the mala cand^ of his vile letter, of which a former account
was given;) yet Dr. Gauden would not vouchsafe to answer his challenge, or to
entertain the world with his rank Colewort, ten times builed, and most ins^pid;
in all which there is not mica sall^* The reason was, because that pamphlet was
a piece worthy of the Author D. B. but of no honest Reader; suitable to his
former Pamphlets, railing at King and Bishops, angry that he had not money
enough to purchase all Crown and Church lands.

. Truly Dr. Gauden knew all the Learned, Loyal and Religious world were so
satisfied and fortified against D. B's Sacrilege, that they abhorred him the
more, because he added that to his other sins; and they abhorred the sin the
more, because defended by so spotted an Author, Leopardick Presbyter, and
Episcopal Apostate. Nor had Dr. Gauden then either leisure or pleasure to
follow D. B. in all the mire and puddles where he lifted to wallow or wade: Dr.
Gauden is (...) to wash the Devils face of (...) D. ^. (...) to paint him (...)
Justice, Necessity and (...) in the ^i^ard of Hypo^^ (...) ^hee to hide either
his horm (...)

(...)
(...) imp^rtin^ncy and vapor is, (...) to the Vrn and Ashes, the (...)
S^otized Assembly, which (...) bl^me in it, then the company (...) D. B's, who
was like a State or (...) in among some Pigeons: that there were (...) and
sober Clergy, as well as laymen in (...) Convention, is not to be doubted; I
wish they had been as valiant, just, wise, constant and resolute to the truth
and right: They had then merited a nobl^r Morument and Pillar, then this
Libeller or D. B. can eiect of their memory, beside the Directory and Catechi^m
which they produced by an Elephantine and very c^stly birth, a charge far
beyond what would have bought the best Library but Bodlies in England; in order
to reject the English Liturgy, and the established Prelacy, making way for the
body or belly of Pre^byterie, without any order and head of ancient Episcopacy,
which deformity was to be supplied with the train or long tail of ruling
Lay Elders.

. The breast or Nurse to which prodigious Novelty, the Covenant was by some
designed to be, but it proved in short time a dry Nurse: These struggling b^bes
and sucklings of Pre^bytery, Indepency, and other productions, soon drew blood
instead of milk: For they being born with sharp tenth, as King Eumenes, they
quickly gnawed and bit off that breast, which they should only have gently
drawn.

. The truth is, there was little hope that that Assembly in which were many
learned and godly men, should ever do much good; when in the midnight dreams
and horrid darkness of those times, the good men in it were oppressed by more
then one Incubus, of Tumults and Armies, besides those Scotists who were as
Masters of the Assembly, to fasten the nail of Presbytery into their heads, as
dead as Jael did hers into Sisera's: To be sure now they are awake, the best of
them do abhor all those Ephialta's or Night-mares of rigid and headless
Presbytery, of rude Independency, and bloody Anabaptism, and utter Anarchy,
which then and afterward cruelly depressed the spirits of those Divines, yea
and l^ng exhausted the spirits of this Church and State.

. Yet that the jejune Libeller, The Libellers plea for the Assembly.
may not seem to say nothing for the honor of that Scotized Assembly (besides
that of D. B. his presence and his protestation for Episcopacy, of which he
does you to wit) he pulls the reader now oscitant, or sleepy, or laughing by the
ear, and makes this venerable mark, That the late King (who by his pertinacy
for Episcopacy, and obstinacy against Sacrilege destroyed himself (as D.
Burges concludes in his Anatomical inspections of the cause of the Kings death)
showed a willingness, October. 11. 1648. to confirm the calling and sitting of
that Assembly, yea and of their hatching of Presbytery it self, to make a trial
or essay of it for three year^, (when indeed three Months wa^ too much for the
great mischief and little good it occasioned in England.)

The (...).
. Alas poor Prince what would not flesh or blood do, or forge in a storm to
save it self? what politic condescent^ons, even to less reasonable demands,
are not venial, if short of blasphemies and immoral^ ies, by which a King may
save his life, Posterity, Kingdom, People, and beyond all, the Churches of
Christ in them from perishing upon the Rocks and quicksands of Schism and
Rebellion? yet even of these concessions at last did the King seriously repent,
as he did those larger which he had granted in Scotland, af^irming to so^e
sacrilegious importuners of him at the Isle of W^ght, that he had granted all
he could to save his life, which might consist with the saving of his soul:
when it was urged that his Majesty had abolished Episcopacy and Bishops in
Scotland, he answered, It is no plea to sin again, but rather to repent and do
no more so, because he had once sinned in that kind, with more regard to
outward and civil peace, then was consistent with inward.

. Thus have I showed thee (O ingenuous and just Reader) the addle eggs which
their Cuckoo has laid in the Hedge Sparrows nest of his second proposition,
which seeming long I thought it had been strong as a Gy^nt; but thou see,
what a man of clouts this Libeller is, and how when he threaten^ to fight, he
only lets three or four scapes, turning his back off the proposition, and
running away to take in hand other weapons, which prove neither Pikes nor
Swords, nor Pistols, but mere bulrushes, flags, and potguns, fitter for to
shoot boys pellets, then to defend D. B. in his sacrilegious purchase of
Bishops Lands, and the extirpating of Episcopacy.

. Which sooty and greasy besmearing of the glory of D. B. and his Covetous
injurious covenanters, no mire of this Libeller will ever wash out.

. As to all Alexanders victories valor and bounty, this is still a take off,
and great blot, At ^^cidit Calisthe^^^; but he killed the wise, the faithful,
the valiant Calisthenes; So, when the triumphant memorial of D. B. shall be
registered by this Libeller or the like Hist^riographer, or Biographer, in which
the (...) and (...) rare exploits and achievements of D. B. shall be
magniloquently epitomized his deserved degree of Dr. which he so adorned with
speaking good Latin, and accute disputing at Oxford, to the posing and non
pluffing of all his auditors, those (...), or variegated writings, for and
against ^onformity, ceremonies, Bishops, Scots and Presbytery, and Episcopacy,
his two good livings, and way-bit of a Lecture at Paul's of 400. per annum, His
preferment and his riches, yea and his honor to be Gossip to the Covenant,
when it came to be rebaptised in a Catholic font, and sprinkled with a
Christian sense, reconciled to Episcopacy; yet after all this gear, and at
every encomiastick clause, this sad and shameful burden of the song will be
added, But he purchased Bishops Lands, when his suspension from sitting in the
Assembly for his generous protesting against the Covenant, as indefinitely and
absolutely for the extirpation of Prelace, (by which it appears how free others
mere, and overawed not to speak their minds) when this shall be recounted; yet
it will be added, but he did indefinitely and absolutely purchase Bishops Lands
and Houses, without leaving them one foot, or allowing them one penny ^ yea and
adding impudence to impiety and oppression, he proclaimed his purchase to some
Pseudo-Parliaments, yea and openly defended his sin beyond Absalom, yea and
complained he had not enough for his money, nor all his sacrilegions bargain;
yea he did thus after long doubt and deliberation, much check and terror of
conscience, to the robbing the Church his Mother, and all his Fathers, many of
his brethren far his betters, without limitation of good or bad Bishops. Nay he
at last reproached and even renounce^ them all, and sought to ruin them all,
against all equity, modesty and conscience, though Christians, nay reformed,
nay the most eminently such in all the World, as to b^ thought worthy to sit in
the Assembly; yet he, he, in great a Divine, so gallant a Doctor, so acute a
disputer, so glorious a Preacher, who modestly speaks of himself that he had
labored more abundantly then they all, (the Bishop, Dean and Prebend of Wells)
his meaning is in rubbidg and dust and mortar, of pulling down and building;
yet after all this to foyl all, to spill all, to curse all, to damn all, this
great D. B. sacrilegiously and presumtuously, did purchase Bishops lands, and
pulled down by a wanton wickedness, better Cathedral Houses, then ever he or
his Forefathers either built or dwelt in.

But the Libeller will cry out next bout, that Dr. Gauden Rhetoricates, that he
tempts the world again with his Idolized nonsense and blasphemy, against the
Covenant, Assembly and the blessed D. B. blessed in the same sense which the
Poet uses the word, when he tells of one whose rise of his bliss (that is of
his riches) was, Vetula vesica heata.

Dr. Gauden must now hasten with the shield of innocence and truth, to receive,
yea and retort, the long dart of the third Proposition, 2. The third Propo^. of
the An ^^^^^al
which this flying Parthian seems to cast at him; as King Saul did his Javelin
at David, when the Morose and melancholy spirit was upon him, much of the same
kind tie probable with that, which possesses this Liboller and D. B. For as he
in a choleric and mad sit commanded Doeg to kill the Priests of the Lord; so
would these if they might have their will, not kill with the sword, (which is
some degree of mercy) but starve to death by a longer lingering poverty and
disgrace the Bishops and other Episcopal Divines in England, far more in number
then Saul's fury commanded to be slain, and all this in order to keep their
Sacrilegious purchases, which he and his can no more do then they can keep fire
in their bosoms, or melted gold and silver in their purses or mouths; The
surest way to thrive is to make restitution.

. But D.B. is loath to hear on that ear, he had rather lend another brace of
thousands, wear another buff-coat, and head another Troop of Horse, and have
the other bout at a Civil War, which shall venture King, Parliament, People, all
things sacred and civil upon a new Alarm of the Covenant, and of reforming the
Doctrine and Church of England; Which stale flourishes are now like the
threadbare tunes, and dull dittles of old ballads, to which no man sober
lists to dance, or to lend (...) especially when sung by such a pair of ^^^th
because ^oy^es, as this Libeller and his D. B. ((...) such ^^^ng and loud
c^m^ors) must needs use, Quo det^^^u^ (...), suo worde^ur gallina marit^. I^e
H^lb^^ (...) ^ingers in a Winters raw evening, (...)
cold^^h (...) do not make more lamentable harmony then these two would do
about keeping the Covenant, and ^lip^ing Episcopacy, or reforming the Doctrine,
W^rship Discipline and Government of the Church of ^^ land.

For such titles of popular pamphlets daub every post and corner in London,
vented by the same hand and heart, as this Libellers Anatomy of the Author:
impudences and solly. Alas is not this great work of Reformation yet done,
after so long Wars and bloodshed? after so many Scotch and English Armies,
either complying or clasting; after so reverend an Assembly and D. B. among
them sitting some years; What, nothing yet reformed? After Liturgy abolished,
Prelacy extirpated, Bishops and Cathedral lands sold; after the Directory had
inducd Ministers with a new spirit and better gifts; after Presbytery advanced,
and Independency preferred? Have not these new brooms swept clean? After Deans,
Bishops and other excellent Episcopal men beggard, after their lands sold, and
houses demolished; after D. Burges has condescended to b^y some of them, and
has got a good purchase; and not yet a through Reformation, according to the
purport of the sacred Covenant?

No, the more is the pity; alas Dr. Gauden and his faction of Episcopal
principles will not suffer the Covenant to be stretched to its full reforming
sense, or to that Anti-episcopal tunc which must be made good against Bishops;
or D. B. and other purchasers are undone. He, he undertakes, now after we are
possessed of Bishops lands and houses, either to reduce the Covenant to reason,
Religion, Loyalty, Law, Justice, and Charity, in regard of Bishops as well as
other men's rights and estates; or else so far to repeal and null it, yea and to
enjoin a penance upon it and its takers, so far as it is irreconcilable to,
or inconsistent with these eternal principles of Morality, Justice and duty to
God and Man, to Church and State, to King and Bishops.

. But Dr. Gauden, thus venting his nonsense and blasphemy against the Covenant,
is by a notorious Libeller undertaken to be severely rebuked; a mere Ignaro and
incognito encounters him, a bundle of ignorance and infamy, of malice and
confusion is cast upon him; inspired as it seems by D. B. a shotten herring of
the same barrel, whose interest is to screw up the Covenant (...) such an
Anti-episcopal rigor, that either we shall have no Bishops in England, or these
no Lands, Honors or Revenues to support their authority, charity and
hospitality.

. The method of this Libellers chastising Dr. Gauden is by a Scorpion of four
cords, one more then the Jewish whips was made of: His two first Propositions
have like squibs spit fire, fluttered and made a crack or two but done no
execution.

This work is reserved for the third Proposition, which is a long spun, dilate,
dull, tedious, sophistical tantalogical rapsody, rather then any just reply to
the weight and force of Dr. Gaudens just and honest reflections upon the
Covenant, in order to reconcile it to the legal interest of Episcopacy and
Bishops, also to remove from it those superstitions, sacrilegious, illeg^l and
in^^ni^^^ interpretations, which so^^ men's ambition* sact^^^s^^, envy and
covetousness seeks to ^ix upon ^^ contrary to the ^ncient constitutions and
laws of ^ngland, and of all pristine Churches, or Christi^n Kingdoms.

(...).
. The first fraud or mist that the Libeller seeks to cast before thee^es of his
Reader is, to vocate the force of Dr. Gaudens argument, grounded on not the
letter only, but the equity, and analogy, or parallel case and proportion of
Gods law, set forth Numb. 30. Where the scope of the discourse of vows is, to
show that as no vow^ made by any do bind, (...).
save only in things lawful (that is neither injurious to Gods glory nor any
moral right) which is confessed by all wise men; so not do those Vows bind
which are made in things lawful, A (...) only l^^ful ^n ch^^ge^ (...) and
p^^^on^ ^^r^.
by such as are no^ sui juris, at their own dispose, but under another
dominion and disposition; nor may any such thus ^lated, subjected, and obliged
to others, make Religion any pretext to their liberty of vowing, what and when
they list to another prejudice, because they are not in their own dispose,
(...).
which reason bolds in all such subjective relations: It Is true the Text
instanceth only in Daughters unmarried, and Wives, because their easiness might
be most prone to rash vowing; but as Mr. Calvin and others upon the place
observe, the reason extends to Sons as well as daughters, and much more to
servants and slaves, of which there is no dispute in Reason or Religion, and so
no mention here (being not libera cap^ta) free per so^^ they cannot lawfully
vow, nor does any such vow stand good (though in things materially pious and
good) which is made by them without, much m^re if against their Masters or
Fa^^er^ consent and to their prejudice: Nor is there any doubt, but the same
rest^aint and nullity ^as to such vowing h^lds good (by the rules and
proportions of divine justice) in any Vow or Covenant which Sub^ects and
^a^^als in any kind to their King, or any meaner Lord and S^gnior shall make to
the injury of their lawful Superiors. N^^ D^^t ^^al ^^od voves r (...) esse
(...).


. The cavelling Libeller finding the strength and edge of this place, to cut
the very sinews of the Covenant, if either taken to the damage of the
Superior, or if countermanded or denied by him: First, he carps at the
instances added of Servants and Sons, calling this a tale of a tub, and says
there is no such thing; after he charge Dr. Gauden as a false man, for
falsifying this Text of Scripture, how justly let the reader judge, when not
only such vows of obliged inferiors are void, though (in relicita) in things
materially lawful, if the Superior or Lord forbid them at the present; but
farther Dr. Gauden affirms such vows though unheard, and so not at present
disallowed by the superior, yet are rash and invalid, if in any thing
prejudicial to Gods glory or the Superiors rights, which vows their superiors
may disanuul as soon as they know of them; yea and the Superior sins, if
hearing them he assent to them, or by silence do not reprove or null them; not
that his silence confirms them unless in things lawful. If a son, or daughter,
or servant under the custody and dominion of Father or Mother (now a widow) or
a Master, Mistress or Dame, shall vow any thing to their detriment, in honor,
liberty, safety, estate or life, I suppose this very Libeller will grant their
Vow unlawful and null, because (in re non licita) in things either materially,
formally and relatively evil.

. Thus if those Relates should vow to pray so many hours, and in such a place,
or at such a time of the day, or to read and hear Sermons every day, or to give
daily so much of their Masters goods in secret charity to the poor, and the
like; or if they vow to sleep at such a time, or do nothing, or to visit such a
friend, or prisoners, or such persons, etc. things not evil, yea in their
seasons very good.

Can this Libeller think (unless he be as void of science as conscience) that a
servant, son or daughter may here plead their godly vow and sacred Covenant, to
the disobedience and detriment of their superiors, and to the neglect of those
civil affairs, which at those time, they require to be done by them? whether
the Master, or Mistress, or Father or Mother, hear or no the ^ow is void; yea in
some cases though they hear and assent, or are silent through imprudence and
superstition, yet the vow is void, both as to their inferior and superior; in
case it cannot be kept but to the impoverishing and not providing for their
families and children, which must want things necessary and convenient, while
this Bigot, Master, or Mistress and servant (on whose honest labor all the
families support depends) spend that time in praying, or preaching, or hearing
of Sermons, or reading the Scriptures, etc. which they ought to bestow in work
for the families support. Here vows are the Urns of Infidels and Rebels, and
the keeping them, as well as making them is denying of the faith, and cannot
bind (but only to break and repent them) either Master or Mistress, or son or
servant.

. But the Libeller with great art urges the silence of the letter (in this one
place as to the instances of sons, servants and subjects) against the Analogy
of the whole Scripture, and the duty of the fourth commandment: which must
always be resolved into things morally and obedientially just and honest. He
says there is not the least hint of any exception, but all men that vow to God,
are held to that vow, whether the chief siavor nor consent or no. Thus the
Devil and Heretics are wont to wrest and abuse Scripture; as Christ said to
the Saduces, ye err not in your citing the place, but in your not
understanding the Sc^iptures; meaning, as if one should limit the duty of the
fifth command only to natural Parents, as father and mother, and exclude all
other superiors in Church and State, because not there expressly named.

. This Sophister should have added, as the latitude of the Analogy, so the just
and necessary limitation ever supposed and intended, and by other Scripture
supplied, which is, that such vows do bind such persons only in things lawful
and free for them to vow and perform, without any injury to God or man; but to
imply an absolute irrespective bond even to vow and do evil, injust and
injurious things, is false and fraudulent; aiming to urge the Covenant
literally and simply, which makes for the Libeller and his D. B's turn, and not
to reduce it to that ^aequum and honum, justum and sanctum, duty of justice,
charity, and equity, without which there can be no sanctity, either in vows or
faith, in word or deed, in making or keeping any such Covenants as are made
(stulta aut impia facilitate) by a childish and foolish facility, as Calvin
speaks. His hope is the bare rigid letter of the Covenant will keep out all
Bishops from the Church, and from their estates, and so he may keep that part
of Bishops lands which he has sacrilegiously purchased.

. From the justice, equity, pregnancy of these cases, which are grounded by the
rule of proportion and right reason upon that Scripture, Dr. Gauden concludes,

1. That inferiors and dependents have no liberty civil o^ religious to bind
their souls by vow, or to perform those vows in any thing that is prejudicial
and detrimental to their Superiors, either as to the duty they owe them, or the
right they justly claim.

2. Such Vows, though unheard by the Superior, yet bind not the takers, much
less if he do hear of them at any time, and openly dissent, yea, peremptorily
deny them; and the King did in this so far as it int^rtered with the just
rights of his Majesty, or any of his ^ubjects; Ergo, since the subjects of
England were by law and oaths inferior to, and dependents on the King* obliged
to duty and allegiance, they ought not, they could not make or take, much less
keep any such vow or covenant, as is any way prejudicial to the rights of the
King or any of his good subjects, and so either against his Majesty's oath, and
his legal Supremacy over things and persons Ecclesiastical, to preserve them
according to law; consequently they could not covenant against the rights of
the Church and Clergy, least of all against the estates and honors of Bishops,
who ought to be in place and merit the most eminent of the Clergy.

. Either then (O gentle Libeller) reduce and limit the sacred covenant (taken
by subjects and inferiors, without the will of the King and Superior) to a
sense lawful, just and honest, no way injurious to God, the King, the Bishops,
or any man's rights (and then restore to them their estates, by no law forfeited
or alienated, (hear this, O D. Burges, etc.) or else repent of the Covenant, so
far as it is irreconcilable either materially or formally to right reason,
honest polity, or Church Government, which is inseparable from Legal subjecti^^
and that justice which binds all men to each other.

. See now (O Reader) how partial, sneaking and delusio^ such wretched Libellers
are; who are ashamed to own their names, and afraid to own that Truth which
makes against their wicked interests; therefore they slily shuffle, and as
(dolosus versatur in generalibus) Sophisters, urge liberally the general case
or thesis, but endure not to apply to the hypothesis, particular or instance:
That thing may seem just by some general maxims or customs of common law,
which is very injust, when brought to the rules of Chancery, as D. B. well
knows in Hippesleys case.

. Yea, Dr. Gauden further adds (ex abundanti) the more to affright and
astonish this Libeller, That it is more pr^faning of Gods holy name, to keep
unlawful vows at all, yea, or to extend or rack lawful vows to unlawful
actions; then it is to break the first, much more to reduce the second to just
bounds, whereto God binds every man, not only in relation to others, but to
himself too, as Gods creature, and so subject to him.

. If a father or mother vow not to give in marriage son or daughter, or not
till such an inconvenient age; or not to give them any portion, or not such as
is proportionable; if they vow them to a single life, or to poverty, or to
banishment, or to base employments, or to give them no decent support; These
vows are sinful, injurious, in superiors, they may not be kept, they ought not
to be made.

. So if masters vow to the injury of their servants; if Kings vow to the injury
of their subjects lay or Clergy, as to subject them to a foreigh power, to put
them out of their protection, to take such taxes from them, or strip them of
their estates, callings or just liberties, such vows must not be kept. Yea, a
man has not so far an absolute dominion over himself (as Gemarrus and others
observe) as to vow to his own prejudice in things not permitted by God to his
free dispose in a religious way, and rational and proportional, for which he is
still accountable to God and others, in the case of his liberty, estate,
health, honor and life.

. A man may not absolutely vow he will never marry, (...) that he will spend or
give away all his estate, single or marr^^d or that he will never drink wine,
or take physic, and the like rash and irrational resolutions, which no way
advance the glory of God, and may in many cases be nec ss^^y for him and his,
for their better service of God and (...), as well as of himself.

(...) King though never so supreme and free, yet may not vow and covenant to
the diminution of his own just Sov^raignty and that authority or power which is
his by law, and necessary for his high calling, to protect the Church and
State, himself and his good subjects. He may not covenant to diminish or
destroy any honest subjects in any of their just rights; much less to extirpate
or expel out of his D^m^^ans any rank, order and degree of men, that are
useful, and in some sense necessary for the being and well being of his people.
As to extirpate all Scholars or Justices ^ as our late illiterate Levellers and
Fanatics designed, after the old rate of Cade and Tyler; nay, neither Piluer
or any party of the people may vow to extirpate the meanest ^^ll^ng, which
serves the body Politic; any more then men may vow to cut off their feet or
toes.

The (...).
. H^w much less may any Christian Prince or people vow and covenant to cal^^ate
so primitive, venerable, apostosl^k, catholic, useful and excellent an order,
authority and polity ^o the Church, as that of Episcopacy* (...) to take away
from godly Bishop, their fa^^ful ^^^oyment^ of which they have as just a
possession and right, as the King has to his Crown, or any man to his house
and ^ani^^.

. Such vows and covenants, so much to the scandal of the Christian Religion, to
the reproach of the Reformation, to the gratifying of dangerous factions, to
the disgrace of this and all former Churches, to the dishonor of Jesus Christ,
of his Apostles and their chief Successors, the Bishops in all ages and places,
besides so injurious to many worthy men, yea, to the whole Church and Nation of
England, either ought not to be taken by Christian King or people; or if by
force, fraud or fear, and facillity, they are so taken, or rather imposed and
mistaken, yet they must never be kept in any such sense; but either repented of
and dissolved, or else the words of them must be resolved and reduced to such a
sense and interpretation as is just and lawful, Id quod erat demonstrandum.

. Which was the thing Dr. Gauden had to prove (as Christ did the Resurrection)
not out of the letter only, but the analogy and equity of that Scripture;
from the force of which Mr Grafton does not, cannot extricate himself, by his
more sober endeavors, much less this paltry Libeller, who does not wash
himself that he may be clean, in the waters of the Sanctuary, but, as the Poet
says, ( Perditus apruus fontibus immisce liquida --) of the Swine, he studies
to be-mud and soil the Scriptures clarity, that his fedity and fallacy may not
appea^* that by the cloud and mist of such superstition cast on the Covenant,
he may conceal his sacrilege, and keep his evil purchase. For he hopes if the
Covenant receive such rigor and vigor from Scripture, that notwithstanding the
Kings declared dissent, as foreseeing the design of some by the Covenant to
overthrow Episcopacy and unto the Bishops and Clergy of England, yet his
subjects so covenanting, are bound indispensably by their once taking it, to
extirpate all authoritative Bishops, and lawful, as well as landed Episcopacy;
then (salvo res est) the Town is his own, the lands of the Bishop of Wells and
others, which he has purchased (per via^ concomitanti^ and reductionis) will
be made good to him by the letter of the sacred Covenant; though against all
law, justice, reason, Scripture and Religion: Such a nose of wax are Heretics,
Hypocrites, Apostates, Schismatics and Sacrilegists prone to make of the holy
scriptures, for their own credit and advan^age as they fancy; but indeed to
their destruction and damnation: No lawful Covenant can be a cloak for such
knavery, nor will the Scripture be any protection for what is contrary to law
and justice.

Mr. Graf^^n (...).
. Here I must by way of Concomitancy, take in Mr. Graftons concurrent replies,
who finds himself very much straightened, and is forced to bring not potent
solutions, but pitiful evasions, which he calls his Wool-sacks. So far his wits
are gone a wool-gathering, at the very first battery which Dr. Gauden makes
against the Covenant, as to the invalidity of its authority, as so imposed, and
as to the nullity of its matter, if not reconciled to what is lawful, just and
honest in the great case of Episcopacy, or the rights of Bishops and other
dignified Clergymen, according to law.

. Here poor Mr. Z. Grafton, as a drowning man, catches at small twigs, yea,
weeds, which sink him, being of no deep reach, nor any skill in swiming.

1. He very gently observes a Legistative power to be at least coordinate in
the two Houses: What, and can they legally exercise this power, without, yea
against the Kings consent, being out of his non age, and not out of his wits?
or are they Legislative in fact, where there is (...) law made? (as none was
for the Covenant:) Was their Legislation here (in actu secund) in exercise or
act? If not, to what end is that mentioned which has no operation? As to
commend a Writer for a Book he never writ, or an Architect for an House was
never built. At best the two Houses alone, no, nor the King alone, or with
them, have any Legislative power to decree or execute what is unrighteous
against God or man.

2 His second nothing observed as his safety is, that a thing may bind in
conscience, which does not in law, or in the judicature of man: True, but
nothing can bind in conscience which is against the laws of man, in cases of
equity, justice and common right, and so the Covenant cannot either materially
or formally, as to its authority or spontaniety bind against Bishops and
Episcopacy, as their just rights were settled, and still are by laws in force;
against which no illegal Oath or Covenant can or ought to bind Subjects or
Princes, who have no freedom to be unjust, sacrilegious, or to sin, much less
to vow and covenant they will do so, and thereupon sin against all Law, Reason,
Justice and conscience.

3. For Mr. Graftons Mr. Graftons rude urging the Kings example.
bold and odious, no less then fallacious urging by a Presbyterian pertness,
the present Kings taking the Covenant in Scotland, in such terms and forms as
were then prescribed and imposed upon him, in his maturity of years, in the
distress of his affairs, in the prevalency of that covenanting power and party:
Truly it had better become Mr. Graftons modesty and good manners, to have been
silent in this sad instance, I believe he thinks his Majesty not much delighted
to hear of it in some men's sense, as never much blessed after it, nor ever like
to be in such a Presbyterian way a^ is destructive of Episcopacy, and the
rights of Bishops, Church and Clergy of England, who have no cause to glory of
what was done in Scotland.

. Besides the Kings taking it cannot make any thing in it lawful, that is by
rules of Religion and civil Justice, unlawful, and what his Majesty did in
Scotland, must not extend to Englands either King or People; against the
immunities, and just interests of which, the King as (...) and Christian could
not bind himself in Scotland; nor the Scots impose any such obligation by any
Vow or Covenant upon his Majesty. Nor will Mr. Graftons smooth title of his
most sacred Majesty, as oil, either close or h^al, or supple the rough usage
offered by some to his Majesty; or the wounds which must be made by the
Covenant upon his and any man's conscience, in case it be not consistent with
justice and honesty: Reduce the Covenant to that sense which Dr. Gauden
contends for as just and religious, neither King nor Bishops, neither the
honest S^^t nor the honest English, neither Dr. Gauden nor Mr. Grafton will
have cause to scruple or complain of the Covenant; it otherwise, the Kings
taking it cannot make it lawful, and so it is as imprudently as impertinently
urged by Mr. Grafton.

4. His next defense against Dr. Gaudens battery, is not with a Woolsack, but
with a brown-paper or cobweb, pleading (fieri non debuit, factum valet) it
ought not to be done, but once done is good; which may not be pleaded in moral
cases, which being materially and formally too, unlawful or unjust, are to be
repented of, and retracted, amends and restitution must be made, as well as
repentance and retraction in such cases.

True, some things, in State policy and civil necessity, or legal formalities,
or Bastards, though they should not have been begotten, yet they must not, if
begotten and born, be murdered; because though the inordinacy of their
original was evil, as the act of a creature; yet their being, and so their
preservation is good, because agreeable to the will and command of the holy
Creator, forbidding to destroy any innocent reasonable creature; but this is
not to be pleaded in events and effects, that draw more evil in their sequel or
maintaining, thou that which was in their beginning, cause or ^^asion. Here we
must with all speed break off iniquity, and its cords of vanity, Breve sit quod
turpiter ander; Not add sin to sin, or portinacy to that wickedness which
calls for immediate repentance. Nor do I believe Mr. Grafton allows that
Baptism which he instanceth in of women, to be valid, any more then their
preaching in Churches or Ordination, if any Bishop or Presbyter should be so
foolish as to ordain them.

5. The last and worst reparty of Mr. Grafton, Mr. Graftons feeble supposal to
g^^e strength to his reply.
which discovers his great weakness and exhausted spirits, is bringing in a
tumultuary rabble that should pretend to be a Pa^liament, and impose a covenant
or vow on us, against the laws and immunities of the Church and State, King and
people, which we like gudgeons (stulta facilitate) swallow simply as their
baits; Afterward we feel the book of fraud, fa^^^on, in justice and rebellion;
the poor man by a terrible ((...)) super superstition, is afraid of being
exposed to a three years famine, in case he with other honest m^n should dare
to resume their reason and liberty; or keep themselves to those rules and
actions of justice, which the laws of God and man prescribe; and from which
these pitiful. ^epanners and imposters sought to seduce them, you and oblige
them to the ^ar^^ry unawares.

Here Mr. Graftons O^^tory, Reason and civility seem again to fail his ^eal,
while he makes such a reflection on his Honorable covenanting Masters, by
comparing them to Colliers when they acted as Kings. Grant them as ^rderly and
magnificent an honor as can be in a Parliament or Council, yet not their civil
glory and authority, but their Reason and Religion is to be weighed, as
obliging themselves and others. Can the man be afraid God will be angry for our
not keeping unlawful vows: and not much more for keeping them, yea and for
taking them too; yea and for keeping lawful vows unlawfully; that is breaking
them by racking them to a superstitious stretch, or in a Presbyterian strapado,
whatever number of men they be that act in such Engagements.

. It was all that Mr. Grafton did or could show of wit and art in this defense,
to withdraw presently, to make only such flourishes, and vanish; for in earnest
the service was too hot for him; and this first Granado flew so terribly about
his ears, that he durst not stay within our gunshot, for fear his brains should
be beaten out, though he be a little mark or Picolhomini which the bolder
Libeller feared not, who has neither Brains nor Bowels, but only guts; if he,
as Dives, may fare deliciously, be ^^reth not perhaps if the Bishops, like
Lazarus starve on his dunghill; he resolves to keep the Lands and Houses he
purchased so sacrilegiously, though he be blind: Dummodo vel caecus teneat, etc.

. Only here I beg Mr. Graftons favor for coupling him with, or subjoyning him
to the wretched Libeller; not as to parallel their morals, civilities or
intellectuals; but finding them in the same trap, decoy or snare, I could not
well part them till I had taken them out one be one.

. But Dr. Gaudens main design is to pursue the crafty Libeller, whose strong
scent like a Fox, taints all he treads on, and he is firmly carthed or burrowed
in the Badgers nest, in a Bishops house and estate; But Badgers skins are used
for the service of the Tabernacle, foxes never.

. When this crafty Animal comes at the second Gulf, D^ (...) the ^^^^^ary and
a^^ed (...) which a^tended the C^venant^ production.
which Dr. Gauden has placed between the Covenant and its either sanctity or
legality, (in case it be urged against Law and Justice, to the ruin of Bishops
and Episcopacy, established by Law and Catholic custom) is the tumultuating
terrors of those times; the armed Legions in the midst of which the Covenant
was contrived, conceived, and brought forth and imposed.

. Here the Libeller cries out very cunningly, and oratoriously of notorious
untruths, of impudence raised to a Meridian height, but answers nothing;
pleads neither guilty nor not guilty, refuses to be tried by King, City, Lords,
or Commons, Bishops, Clergy, or any honest men; who were all witnesses, and
complained of those rude, violent, seditious, intolerable tumults; Of Tumu^^.
only the Libeller as a stranger in our Israel knows nothing of them; they
made well for him, they drove away the Divines, the Bishops, they obtained
Ordinances, they were Midwives to the Covenant, and after-courses, extirpating
root and branch, they prepared for alienating the Church lands, and for D.
Burges blessed purchase.

. In this mud the Libeller and Mr. Grafton too are afraid to stick; therefore
they nimbly skip over it, because they know in truth, honor, and Conscience,
there lay the Original sin of our times; and the great occasion of our misery,
out of this slough and mire of the tumults insuppressed. Du^ cannot be drawn,
though he were tied to the tayls of whole troops of horse, which Dr. Burges
once most valiantly led on to kill frogs, or to catch King^. Hence those verses
grew famous, Principium belli commota plebe tumultus,
^inis commota plebe tumultus erit.
As tumults first begun our wars,
So tumults shall conclude our jars.


Hugh Poters, now hanged, drawn and quartered, (though he never purchased
Bishops lands) was more ingenuous in the point of tumults, of which, when great
complaint was made by Lords and others, at a noble Farls Table, in the year 41.
when they were most rude and outrageous, against King and Bishops, Lords and
Commons, Earl of Strafford and others; Hugh boldly vindicated them in Dr.
Gaudens hearing, for the Parliaments best friends, Quorum pars magna fuit, he
was their great leader and exciter. He protested the chiefest of them, were
godly youngmen, apprentices, and fore-men of shops, or freemen, who every week
fasted and prayed for a blessing on their endeavors, that the earth might thus
help the woman.

. Thus he of their swarmings and insolency at Westminster and Whitehall: Dr.
Gauden and thousands were witnesses; the Covenant he is sure, is not the more
commendable, but more cautiously to be looked upon, for having been either
swadled up, or soyled in such foul clouts; This makes it, by Mr. Graftons good
leave, the more suspicious; for such seconds seldom intend good to honest men;
Not that what is just and honestly done or decreed, is therefore null, because
tumults, as flies, light on it, to taint it; but those are evil means, and
pretend no good ends; the Covenants authority, due meaning and matter, are
indeed more considered than the tumults, and arms; which yet did (to be sure)
Sun-burn its beauty, although they did not wholly blast and burn it.

. Alas what sorry shift men make, rather than they will see, and confess, and
deplore a fault! yea and a great one too, destructive to the honor, freedom,
and very being of Kings and Parliaments, for such those pristine tumults were,
by which and for which God so justly afterward punished even the great
abetters, and movers of them, as justly and severely as King Zedekiah, who
covenanted in the Name of God, upon such considerations of safety, life,
honor, and liberty, as the Conqueror had power to grant him; and he having
power to accept upon swearing articles, his perjury was abominable to God and
man, which is not the case of the Covenanters if unlawfully engaged, and by
unlawful endeavors injurious to the King and the Church.

. The valiant Libeller finding his coat of male to be no better than a
purse-net, or a beggars patcht coat, very wisely voids the dint of Dr. Gaudens
other forked arrows, not directly shot against the Covenant, as to any thing in
it that is loyal, religious, just, and legal, but obliquely against the
vapouring presumption of those who cry it up, beyond all civil Oaths, and
Sacramental vows or Covenants; yea bey^nd the Lords Prayer, Creed, and ten
Comm^n^^m^nt (...) many Presbyterian Spirits cry aloud for the Co^^nant, who
never use, or publicly own an^ of (...) badges and bounds of a Christian,
moral, ^^^o^tal, or Evangelical Covenant to God, to Christ, to the Church, to
the King, and to one another.

(...).
. But in^^^est Mr. Crafton in more sober ze^l is (...), and answers against the
objected no^^lty and partiality of this Covenant, that it is neither near not
partial, as to the point of Episcopacy: If he means as to the Law or the desire
of the Church of England, and as an act of the Nation, by it^ King and
Parliaments; the mistake is so gross, that all times and Histories since the
10. of R. Eliz. (...) confute his Book, and either false or fallacious
a^^ertion.

It be mean not now, as to some inter factions and Schismatical sense, desires,
endeavors, petitions, mo^^^, threats, clamors, and seditions, it is confessed to
be v^lu^^^^ malum, an inveterate ulcer, (or old (...)) yet this answer is as
impertinent, as if the Anabapt sts, and Brownists, or Famil^sts, should make
the like plea, who have had their factors in England as ^o^^ as Presbytery.

(...).
^. So ^^^^a^^ling, all too palpable a Sophistry, that though the Covenant be
new, yet by a legislative authority it is made valid, and antiquates all
precedent Laws, which he must confess did establish the H^erarchy; this is to
play at bo-peep, not to dispute; for it is to beg and suppose that, which must
never by granted, while his nose stands between his eyes, or his eyes are open;
namely, That the 2. Houses in such a temper as they were, when first (...),
viz. (apart in this from the King neither in minority nor lunacy, but driven
away by tu^ults as many of their own members) that these with the Assembly to
boot) were the supr am (...) power, and did by their personal covenanting
engage all the Nation and posterity, as much as Adam and all mankind in
original sin.

. I must here desire Mr. Grafton to b^te me an ace, nor is the repeated stroke
at the Royal a^^nt, by which he again lashes the King (as the Monks of
Canterbury did K. Henry 3. after the death of Br^kes) this is not any grain of
allowance added to the English Covenanters: for it was done in Scotland, post
pactum and factum, when the Covenant in England was antiquated; and how it was
done in S^otland, God knows, and some upon the place, as well as his Maj sty
can best tell; To be sure, we in England are not bound by it, nor to take any
n^tice of it, until King and Parliament put the case to Mr. Grafton and his
Brethren of some new Assembly to resolve it.

. What the Libeller after pretends, A^^^ page 27. (...) Covenant.
with intolerable impudence to take away this aspersion of Novelty from the
Covenant, swelling big with Scripture patterns, with great show of Histories
old and new besides that of the holy league in ^ran^^ and the Scotch Covenant
of old, those leagues in Germany (I suppose he means the ^^^^us Smalcal^^^cum)
and that of the Geneses in Flanders, with that of the Bohemians of later days,
and so the Cantons and Albigenses, in their confederations: he might have added
all federations, leagues, and compacts between Princes and States, so as to
bring in the Turk, or Grand Signior for a Covenanter; This is the Libellers
last sweet bit, to keep the Readers mouth in taste, with the relish of this new
Covenant, as if it were as old as the Gibeonites bottles, or Methusalems beard;
when God and all the wise world knows, this gourd is of ancient, or commendable
note in any place of the Christian world. And in England but of yesternight,
and soon blasted and withered, never flourishing but while it was watered with
civil blood, and driven on to assert the interests of the Scotch, or English
Presbyterians; Here the w^y Antiquary and Historiographer of the Covenant did
well, instead of instances, parallel and pat to his case, to make a long etc.
like the Dragons tail, and so to have the gaping Reader in a wood, where he can
see no such trees of life.

Mr. Grafton defense of the (...) consequences (...) Covenant
. Mr. Grafton goes as boldly to look on the next Gorgon, or Medusa's head,
which Dr. Gauden sets forth to show the horror of those times, which began,
continued, and ended the Covenant, as Presbyterian and Scotized with infinite
prejudice to Church and State, King and People; It was indeed so far like that
from Mount Sinae, with fire and smoke, earthquake and burning, and loud noise
of trumpets, attended with infinite mischief, fury, misery, confusion on King
and Parliament, Priest and People; How far the covenanting Planet, or Spirit,
had influence on these, I will not dispute; This is sure, we were very happy,
to an envy and admiration, before it rose and appeared in the English Horizon:
our Religion and Laws were sufficient to make us happy and holy; The Covenant
never added one dram to either, or yet to relieve our lamps, but rather to
exasperate our public differences, and in^ame our miseries; nor does Dr.
Gauden believe it ever will, in some men's Anti-episcopal sense, since it can
never have any virtue equal to, much less beyond, or more benign than our
former Laws of God and man, our Covenants and Oaths both civil and sacred. I
pray God we keep within these bounds, we shall nee^ ^o charm or spell of such
new found Covenants, or Engagements, or Abjurations, to keep out mischief and
misery; I am sure, without a Spirit of proph^sie, or infallibility, that the
urging of this Covenant to new and exotic senses, contrary to our former Laws,
and good constitution, in Church and Kingdom, against Bishops and regular
Episcopacy, will ever keep our wounds (now well closed) open, raw, and
festered; but I hope the goodness of God and the wisdom of the King and
Parliament, will be better to us than many of the first Covenanters intended,
who certainly aimed wholly to swallow up the authority and revenues of Bishops,
and all Cathedrals; The first as the feathers, or the skin, was to be shared
among the poor preaching Presbyters, the other as the fat carcass among the
rich ruling Elders the better to set off their weary office, and Ecclesiastical
Majesty, which must needs set up blew aprons to govern the Church, instead of
Lawn-sleeves.

. In the next reflection of Dr. Gaudens upon the Covenant, Mr. Grafton Of the
after bafflings of the Covenant, excused by M Grafton.
wishes he had been at the Doctors elbow, when he mentioned the after bafflings
of the Covenant, in the Cromwellian and Idependent reign, or indeed in the
Inter-regnum of (...), and public hon^sty or Justice: (...), by saying Bre^^^^
did not (...) ^^n-co^^nanting to the King; That the hou^^^ (...) ^^^iously
content to accept his Majesty's (...) and submissions without his co^enant^^^.
(...) they were very mannerly, to give the King a little breath after so long
baiting him; that C^^en^nter^ were pulled out of the house by the Ear^; that
the lus^^ of some Soldiers first committ^d the rap^ upon this modest Virgin,
and un^potted Covenant.

^. Yet under Mr. Graftons favor, the vote of non (...) against the King, were
passed by Covenanters as yet unrouted by any military rudeness; This was
pretty nigh the prison, and block, and far from preservation of the person and
dignity of his Majesty. The Covenant was by Sir Henry ^ane and other^,
interpreted both in Print and Practice, with large dispensations of Loyalty, in
case the King did not preserve what any prevalent faction called tr^e Religion,
though far wide or short of that which was establis^ed in England, whose fence
at least the Co^enant pulled up, as to Church Government, in some men's designs
and sense, yes and de facto too; And truly as Mr. Grafton confesses, the
Covenant suffered, by force and policy; so Dr. Gauden says it began and
prevailed by them; He Queries by what Argument of Reason and Religion it was
ever ^l^st^^^: Let him read the Oxford Queries, and others; I believe they will
stick in his teeth, or break them before he chew and swallow them: for he has
but weak ^aws, though he may have good appetite and digestion; Dr. Gauden
queres also by what Arguments of right reason and Religion, by what Law of God
or Man, by what commendable precedent, or to what good ends and uses was the
Covenant sounded or improved, what was King or Parliament, Church and State, or
any honest man benefited by it?

. It Is true, some Presbyterian Covenanters having run themselves out of breath,
and being now hunted to a bay by the insolent Army, by eager Independents, and
Fanatick-factions, fled for Sanctuary to the Covenant, and to the King for a
Treaty, that they might not be taken in the traps and pinfolds of perjurious
engagements and abjurations; So the Scots more adventurously than valiantly or
successfully, with Mr. Love and some other puny projectors in England, sought
to bouy up the baffled and sinking Interests of the Covenant in a Presbyterian
sense; especially when they fancied the Kings necessities would invite him to
embarque in that bottom, or to sink for fear; imagining all the old Ark of
Episcopacy was shipwracked past recovery.

. If his present Majesty do indeed owe so much of his restoration to the
Covenanters, in the Presbyterian sense and strain; It Is well they have had a
mind and an occasion to make some reparation for the former detriment they gave
him; For this combination and interest against Episcopacy, without doubt, first
damnified and destroyed the former King, of which I have greater grounds than
it is fit to tell all the world: I pray God the sober Covenanters persevere in
their now Loyal moderation, who pretend readiness to comply with regular
Episcopacy; But it will be the Kings and Parliaments wisdom, not to trust too
much to any men's good natures; I doubt some will be prone to abate much of
their Loyalty, if the King really set up ancient and legal Episcopacy,
according to the best constitution of our Laws, and the pattern of the best
Churches of old, to which the Church of England was nearest conformed of any
reformed.

. Nor is Dr. Gauden so Illogical, or Atheological, as to infer a nulling of all
things in the Covenant by the Apostasy or perverseness of some men who took it,
nor yet by the rigor of others, who now urge it, (in temporibus mollioribus
and melioribus) to such a rude and unjust Anti-Episcopal sense, from which Dr.
Gauden seeks to restrain it; yea Reason, Law, and all Conscience do restrain it
from such a sense, or else they null and vacate it, so far as it is novel,
factious, ^^^alluable, and irreconcilable to the just interest of Church and
State, of King and Bishop^, to the custom and constitution of this and all
other ancient Churches, who never used not dreamed of Presbyters, as any
headless government of Christ's church, apart from, and insubordinate to, much
less opposed against the Apostolic successional honor, and ordinary eminency
of Episcopal authority. To which if Mr. Grafton and other honest me^ will
cheerfully submit, according to Laws Ecclesiastical and civil, the dispute
about the Covenant is at an end; we shall not need to contend any more, but
only to exceed one another in Piety, Love, and Loyalty, (...), which strife
will better become us all as Men, and Christians, and Ministers.

After this bickering of the fallacious Libeller (in order to make good his
fourth Proposition, That Dr. Gaudens main design is wholly to vilify, make
odious, and destroy the Covenant) He seeks to reconcile the Covenant, Libel
page 12. Grafton p 17 Of reconciling the Covenant to former legal authority.
with the former Oaths taken by the King, or the clergy, or other of the Kings
Subjects, with which he confesses the Covenant, as a late invention and
preter-legall imposition, ought not in Conscience to enterfere, which many were
very jealous of; especially when they heard it urged by some to an extirpation
of the ancient honor, just authority, and legal right, due by our Law to
Bishops and Episcopacy.

. To which (beyond all peradventure) the late pious King was bound by his
solemn Oath at his coronation; with which no Papal, popular, or Presbyterian
power can dispense; especially since it was not a temporary Oath, as occasion
and time did invite; but it was founded on moral, and those eternal principles
of justice, which every King is by Law and Conscience bound to do, as to every
Subject, so specially to the worthy Clergy, because in doing them justice, he
does it to his own soul, and to the souls of all his Subjects, yea to the whole
Church; yea to Christ himself, and to God, who is concerned as in his anointed,
so in his Prophets, that no harm or injury be done to them.

. Nor is his present Majesty (as Mr. Grafton seems to reply) any way absolved
from these ties of conscience, to the loyal Clergy, the reverend Bishops, and
others in England, by any forced or passive taking of the Covenant in Scotland,
For as no after Oath can vacate the just bond of a former, yet in force^ So nor
can any Oath, Vow, or Covenant, be lawfully taken or kept, that shall either
pretend to absolve a Prince, or any man from the moral obligations of Justice
and duty to God or Man; or which shall oblige him to do any thing contrary to
what is morally good, or legally just and due: If the Covenant be thus
interpreted, and executed in an injurious and sacrilegious sense, (as some
would have it) to strip and spoil any one Bishop, or other honest man of his
estate, liberty, or honor, no way forfeited by him, it will become a band of
iniquity, a snare to sin, and a burden for oppression; And must needs be so far
unlawful, by God and man's Laws, utterly null and void as to any obligation upon
the soul of any King or Subject.

Of the (...) to the King and (...) on to Episcopal ^^^^rity established by
(...) Law^.
. But the Libeller very briskly demands, supposing the Covenans to be against
all Episcopacy, what is that to our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? Can no
man be true to Kings, but he that is for Bishops? and those that most eagerly
destroyed Bishops, made no bones to kill the King, and expel his Posterity; It Is
true indeed, those that durst buy Bishops Lauds, did never stick at Kings; and
yet we see many Covenanters were at last zealous for the King! etc. So Mr.
Grafton, in a calmer way, says, non constat; it appears not how there should
be any contradiction found between the Covenant (as against Episcopal
Interests) and the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

Answ. To both these Dr. Gauden replies, That if the Covenant be urged by a
Presbyterian rigor, against the lawful Authority, just rights and pristine
honor of Bishops and Episcopacy (against which injurious and perfidious sense
Doctor Gauden contends) it is not only to be suspected, but so far flatly
condemned, as unlawful; and diametrally thwarting former lawful Oaths of King
and Subjects; besides the rules of moral justice and common hon^sty. 1. The
Oath of Allegiance binds us to pay to the King all that duty, which by the Law
we owe to him, both in active and passive obedience; which no Covenanter can
duly perform, if by that Covenant he fancy himself bound against that part of
the rule of his obedience; namely, the Laws which concern those Governors, and
that government of the Church, which is, and ought in all Conscience and honor
(for the main) to be established in the way of Episcopacy; The rigid
Anti-episcopal Covenanter seemed readier to destroy all Bishops and Episcopacy,
yea and all Kings with Monarchy, rather than obey Bishops, and in them the
King, according to Law;. Which is evidently proved by the rigorous and riotous
practices of those hotheaded Covenanters, who made it their work to plunder
and imprison Bishops, to rout and destroy them all, to exautorate them from all
office in the Church as Bishops, to cut off all succession, to tear from them
their estates, houses and lands, belonging to their persons and dignity; In
fine, to use, or rather abuse grave, learned, godly, aged and most worthy men,
so as was not sit in a land of Righteousness to have used the meanest cobbler;
and all this commanded or done by such as had taken the Oath of Allegiance to
the King, to serve him faithfully and his Ministers in Church and State,
according to Law; He accordingly commands them to let Bishops and the Laws for
them continue as of right they ought; They labor might and main to overthrow
both, in compliance to the Covenant, but in real contradiction to their Oath of
Allegiance, bringing in, setting up, and obeying an Ecclesiastical and civil
power, above yea and against the King, and his laws yet in force.

. And for the Oath of Supremacy, which binds the Subject to the agnition of,
and subjection to that chief authority, which the King by Law has in
Ecclesiastical, as well as civil affairs, so far as concerns that externum
dominium, policy, power, or Empire, which requires, enables, and protects every
one in doing their place and duty, in things Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as
well as secular and civil; How can the Covenant conform to this Oath, if it be
urged in such a sense against Episcopacy, and Bishops doing their duty,
according to Law, that they shall not have any office, power, or estate left
them as Bishops; no nor the King either liberty or power to protect them, and
their either rights or authority in the Church; Such sense and practices
doubtless are diametrally opposite to the Oath of Supremacy, and set up a
superior power above the King's, in things Ecclesiastical, not that of one in
the Pope's of Rome, but that of the many Popeless men, of popular (
Presbyterian or Independent) principles, who resolved either to rule or ruin
both King and People, Bishops and Presbyters, Church and Kingdom; I shall not
need further to instance in the Oath of canonical obedience, by which Ministers
were bound in licitis and honestis to obey their Bishops actively, and in other
things to suffer without sedition or faction against their office and au^hority.

. Either (then) reduce the Covenant to such a sense as is subordinate to these
Oaths and duties in them enjoined, to Bishops, to the rule, and to God, which
will end the controversy; or else confess these superfetations of any novel
leagues, vows, and covenants, repugnant to former lawful oaths, must so far as
such, be necessarily null and void in law and conscience, without any charge of
manifest blasphemy, which the ridiculous Libeller vaunts, but proves not at
all.

. Declare then (O you moderate Presbyterians) and you sober Covenanters, your
loyal quiescency under Episcopacy, in its just authority, of which the Laws are
the most impartial Judges; let the Bishops and other Churchmen have their
rights of estate and honor restored, as is by Laws of God and man due; Dr.
Gauden will no more molest you, or your Covenant; He shall be glad to see that
fulfilled which the lewd Libeller is forced, page 7. to confess, That the
Covenant is so far from any sense or intention to extirpate any Episcopacy They
are forced to bring the Covenant to Episcopacy.
that is truly Apostolic and Primitive, agreeable to sound doctrine, and the
power of godliness, that it plainly includes, rather a binding of all
Covenanters to endeavor by all lawful ways to procure it, (which seems also
the sense of Mr. Grafton in his sober mode.)

. O aurea and bracteata sententia, O well spoken, but most unworthy the mouth
or pen of such a putid Libeller, such an unautoritative Anonymus! It is as a
jewel in a Swines snout; Mr. Grafton; I believe, may mean honestly, but the
Libeller is a droll, and will equivocate, by his if there be any such
Episcopacy etc. He will never esteem any Episcopacy primitive, which is not
pure, and persecuted; For the Anatomist is such a sworn friend, servant and
slave to the Sacril^gious Dr. Burges, that he will never consent, that there
shall ever be such an Episcopacy procured by his covenanting help, which will
deprive Dr. Burges of his pleasant Bishops Lands and Houses.

The (...).
^ Nor dare this false and imp ^dent Libeller, show his (...), and deny, but we
had in the Church of England saving the bonds and distresses of primitive
Bishops, which of late years have also befaln ours) such Bishops as every way
equaled those of the first 300. years, and those of the next ^^. most
flourishing time of the Church; yea, and the Episcopacy settled in the Church of
England, was for the main of the ends, offices, uses, power and authority, such
as all antiquity describes to us: This Anatomist like a varlet, is concerned to
defame all our Bishops, and all our loyal Episcopal Government, because they
might possibly have some decent Customs, civil Privileges, and outward
Ornaments different from those Primitive Bishops; but they had the same
substance: Their nature, gifts, grace, authority, office, use and ends the
same, though in some outward circumstances they might vary.

Which truth, if this scurrilous Libeller can be ignorant of, as he pretends by
his if, let him ask his Dr. Burges, an Episcopal Divine of old, ordained,
possibly confirmed by Bishops, more than once (I suppose) sworn to Bishops, as
owning and submitting to their lawful power; which so grave and learned a
Doctor would not have done sure, merely to gain a brace of good livings, if he
had not in his conscience, as well as in his writings heretofore justified that
ancient Episcopacy which was Established by laws in England; Sure the man
though a Sacrilegist, is not (yet) such a through pa^'d Apostate as to have
renounced his Episcopal Ordination, and in stead of Bishops Palms to have
fallen under Presbyterian fists; nor could this Dr. Burges (an oracle sure to
this Libeller) be so blind a buzzard as to see in all England no other quiet
sober and prudent Bishop but Dr. Juxon of London; A^n^t Page 1^.
did none preach, write, live, do the duty of a Bishop but only He? It Is well if
that blessed Prelate, (whom the Libeller dare own with respect) continue still
in his and Dr. Burges favor, now he is Archbishop of Canterbury; But possibly
his Lordship may do Dr. Burges as good turns (in some other way equivalent to
compurgation) as he did when he was Bishop of London; The truth is, that
venerable Prelate was ever thought of a mild gentle temper, and possibly had
not a whip smart enough for the back of some petulant and wanton Asses who are
prone now unseasonably to fawn upon him, rather to his reproach than his honor.

. Besides all this, which is justly reflected upon the Covenant, as (in some
men's sense inconsistent with the Oath, of Allegiance and Supremacy, The
practice of many Covenanters cause of the oaths of Allegiance and Supremicy.
by which Subjects are bound to obey as well, as own the Kings lawful
Authority in Church and State) there wanted not, as I formerly touched, even
those who found out limitations, yea and pleaded dispensations by the antiquity
of the Covenant, for their sworn Allegiance to preserve the King; for they
pinched up their duty to this point, not in their own, but in his Majesty's
preservation of true Religion, of which if they and their faction judged the
King to fail, in what sense so ever they took true Religion, Actum est de
fidelitate, they had power to give by the Covenant a bill of divorce to their
Allegiance; yea that the King persisted to preserve Bishops and their both
Office and estates in England, they would exclaim, he did not preserve true
Religion, which was only to be kept in the new cask of Presbytery and
Independency; The old vessel of Episcopacy they pretended was so weak and
decayed, that there was no mending it; indeed they had a mind to fill their
Terces and Runlets, out of that Tun, and to draw out all the Sweet of
authority, riches and honor, which they knew had for many ages (as the wine in
the tun of Heidelberg) been preserved, without being ever quite exhausted; But
the misery was, not only these new vessels brake, as unable to hold the
Spirits of the old wine, but the good wine it self of Church Government was at
length so spils and wasted, as to its pristine virtue and spirit, that it came
to nothing, nor can ever recover its vigor, till refunded into its pristine
consistence of Episc^pal authority and eminency, asisted by the presence and
counsel of grave and select Presbyters.

. For the Oath of canonical obedience, Of the oath of Canonical obedience.
it was not the invention or injunction of Bishops, as is pretended, but of the
supreme authority in this Nation, and binding no further then things lawful by
Gods and man's Law. Its force must needs continue upon the takers as obligatory
to such obedience and submission to Bishops; nor can ye after Covenant either
dissolve that oath or absolve the sworn Clergy from the duties of it, to be
performed in due time and place as required of them; The Libeller indeed gapes
as wide, and strains as sore to cast up this Oath and clear himself wholly of
it, as the Whale did when he cased its maw of Jonah; but in vain; for instead
of reasoning against the oath (which could not but be Lawful, since limited to
licita et honesta, and by lawful authority imposed, he falls a railing like an
insolent fellow, not only against our Bishops, the worst of which was much his
better, but of all our late episcopacy which he labors most passionately to be
rid of; because indeed to that legal and Evangelical Episcopacy belonged of
right the Lands and Houses which his Dr. Burges has so good a share in.

. Thus having only spit at, but not disputed any thing against that oath, with
which its probable he was more then once sworn; He very politickly, as a
drunkard does his snuffs, casts away that oath, with a farewell such an oath;
This is the complement of a soul not much concerned in any oath, which he has
once lawfully taken, as that all were to be slighted but this Covenant; But
oaths once lawfully taken, are not so easily shaken of; They stick faster upon
conscience, than the shackels on prisoners legs, or deserved brands on the
hands and foreheads of perjurious Apostates and fellonious sacrilegists.

. To the last Skeptical question which in this paragraph the Libeller makes
(with hopes to encourage the legislative power, Of Power in Parliaments of
England, to abolish Episcopacy.
to change Government by Bishops) which will be much to the advantage of his
Friend Dr. Burges who has sought to change the property of Bishops estates;
Dr. Gau^^n^ answer it, first he should have done plainly and honestly to have
stayed his Sacrilegious purchas^ till the L^gi^lative Power had indeed changed
the Government by Episcopacy, which is not yet done; and so what is done
without it, is not lawful. ^. What the power of Parliaments, the King, Lords,
and Commons, it, Dr. Gauden will not dispute; But this he peremtorily
determines, that they have no prudent moral religions and lawful power to
change an An^ient universal and excellent Government by Bishops to any that is
as new and Schismatical, so far worse and unsuitable to England every way.
Christian Kings and their Parliaments are obliged to the Laws of God, and Rules
of Christian piety and polity too, of which the whole Church in its Primitive
example and constant custom is the best interpreter; as no legislative power
is empowred by Gods Laws to br ng in Heresy and error, and superstition; so
nor Schism, faction or confusion by causelessly wuding, or taking from the
essentials of sound doctrine and Christian communion, ever owned and maintained
in the Church of Christ; Nor is this censure any condemning of the Churches of
Christ, which have laid as he pretends. Episcopacy aside, For they are few, if
any of good esteem, that have done so, by choice, but only pleading the excuse
of necesity, where either popular prejudices, or Princes covetousness and
averseness will not permit the Churches under them to have such Bishops and
Episcopacy as they do approve, desire and prefer before any other Government,
if they could obtain it.

. Which judgment and vote of the best reformed Churches wanting Bishops, frees
them from the guilt of Schism, or factions and voluntary separation from the
Catholic custom, or Episcopal Communion, which they venerate and preserve
toward those Reformed Churches, which as England and many others, preserve the
pristine government of Episcopacy, which the power of Parliaments in England
may reform; but (I humbly conceive) they cannot de jure, of right, with honor,
prudence, and conscience, ruin, or extirpate, since no Religion or Reason can
ever make it either necessary or convenient so to do; Nor can the Covenant
(which has no legislative authority on it) pretend a power so to do; nor ought
its meaning and intent to be so urged, contrary to the duty of Subjects to
their Kings, and of Presbyters to their Bishops, and of people to both; which
was that Dr. Gauden had proved at first, in order to reconcile the Covenant
with Episcopacy.

. And this may suffice for a reply to both these Inquisitions, O^ Episcopa^^
(...) p^imitive and Cath^lick.
as to the weak and Pleocian re-party, they make against Dr. Gaudens seventh
jealousy, that if the Covenant sounds wholly Anti-episcopal, it will savor
strongly as Schismatical, that is, needless separation from Catholic custom
and Communion.

. The jealousies of Romes challenging the name of Catholic, are popular and
impertinent; For that Church may have, and truly has, some things so Catholic
and Christi^n in it, as will make those both unchristian and Antichristian, who
upon no other ground reject them; It is no Magistery but sober Truth becomes a
Minister of Christ, to assert the universal Tradition, both of judgment and
practice, ever eminent in the Church of Christ, as to the use and authority of
Episcopal government, as well as of Infant Baptism, the Lords day, and the
Scripture canon; Nor is the Notion of Episcopal authority obscure, what it
means, as Mr. Grafton pretends; All Histories of the Church clear it, nor was
either Dr. Reynolds, Bishop Usher, Mr. Calvin, Bishop Jewel, Lanchy, Diodate or
Blundel against it, as to ordination, confirmation, and jurisdiction, as
managed principally by Bishops, even from the Apostles days, without any
instance of any settled Church without them; not as Masters and Lords, but as
Pastors, Brethren, and Fathers, over the several degrees of Presbyters and
People; till the loubelling Libeller does prove to the contrary, he must be
esteemed by Dr. Gauden, magnus Apollyon, a mere Abaddon, a cruel Schismatic,
seeking to destroy an excellent part of the Churches policy, honor, order, and
government, which Episcopacy and Bishops ever were, not in an equivocal and
levelling sense, to confound Bishops and Presbyters by a silly Logomachy, or
cavil of names, but by a real, and rational difference of place, honor,
office, authority, and use in the Church of Christ, which no learned man can
doubt of, nor ingenuous man deny.

. The eighth difficulty which Dr. Gauden urged as to some men's dangerous
restriction of the Covenant, Questioning the Covenant to a sense ^^cial and
lawful.
seems to press heavy on both the Anatomist and the Analeptist; neither of
them can deny what is affirmed by Dr. Gauden, that nothing can bind in such
Covenants, but that which is materially lawful in them; this binds by the
private personal and spontaneous susception, although there be not any public
lawful authority imposing, which the Covenant wants, and so it has no public
and national or successional obligation, which just decerning of what is moral
and judicial, in soro externo and interno, valid and obligatory, if the
Libeller had had the wit to disti^guish, and the honesty to own, he would not
have cried out of juggling, an Art in which he is well skilled; If any man have
a mind to take the Covenant even now, he may do it upon his private
satisfaction, as to the matter and sense of it; but sure there is no Magistrate
in England, who by any Law can require it of him, as a public imposition; If
the Libeller be yet blind, sure his nose hangs in his light.

. Little Mr. Grafton Mr. Graftons ^^gor against the whole Hierarchy of the
Church of England.
here after some shuffling and confusion (as is his custom in arguing)
definitively resolves (as if he had been in the bosom of those that first
composed the Covenant) that it expressly binds against the very form and Fabric
of the late Hierarchy, by Laws established in England, and not against its
abuses, excesses, or defects only; as if the integral constitution of the
Church, as Episcopal, were to be quite pulled down, and a new form established,
of his and other good men's modelling; This is to speak out, true-blew high
Presbyterian language, without any lisp or Sibboleth.

. But good Mr. Grafton, if abuses, excesses, and defects of our Episcopal
former constitution or execution be reformed, what can remain but the good,
which you say is fit to be used? Can any man with judgment and Conscience
covenant against the good, and carry on his endeavors against it, which he
must do, who will go beyond the abuses and luxuriances (as some more moderate
consine their sense of the Covenant, in their answer to the Kings late
Declaration) but who shall judge of what is good and in to be retained and
used? sure Mr. Grafton and hi^ fraternity intend to be the censors. What if the
Supreme power do judge the Fabric of Episcopacy for the main to be very good,
(and sure they did so, when they so long retained and established it by many
laws) How dare any conscientious ^ovenanter go about to extirpate it (in case
they dislike the whole frame) further than to pray and petition, if he be
unsatisfied? which petitioning Covenanter would never have hurt Bishops, nor
got away their estates. If Mr. Grafton be cured of his diseases, is it not
enough to justify his Physician? Must his whole body be taken in pieces,
codled and par-boyled, as Mede^ did Jasons, or he will not believe himself
healed* This is so wild and violent a fancy as I am sorry to find in a person
pretending to discretion; for this is to engage the begot Covenanters never to
be quiet in the point of Episcopal government; if any name or thing remains,
they will still cry This is none of the good materials, this is part of the old
Fabric, which we covenanted to destroy;. Sure if the Covenant and Covenanters
be capable of no ^ofter sense, they will hardly be reconciled to that
Episcopacy, which the wise and good Laws of England had established, agreeable
to Primitive and Catholic patterns; Hence they will be ever either
pragmatical, to bring in their own new forms, of repugnant and restive against
that which now is, and for the main ever will I hope be as best, established in
the Church by the Kings and Parliam^nts and Convocations of England, who may as
soon hope to fit the Moon with a coat, as to suit Church g^vernment to such
men's proud and pragmatick fancies, who dare not only to dispute, but to
dictate to their superiors and betters both in Church and State, what they
would have abolished, and what preserved; This is not the modesty of, the sober
Presbyterians, who I am sure are much disposed to, and desirous of Episcopal
government, with its due regulations, and legal administrations; but it is
rather the impatient ambition of levelling, seditious and unquiet spirits, who
never think any thing well done, till they have quite undone all; as the Tailor
that snipt the Welst-mans suit at last into a button;. Nor would Mr. Grafton
have adventured with as little reason as modesty and moderation, Mr Graftons
dictatorian presu^ption in Church government against his Majesty's judgment
and practice.
thus far to have expressed the design of his rigid party, if he and they had
not presumed more of the Kings indulgence, than of his judgment, which surely
prefers Episcopacy before any other way of Church government, as his actions
proclaim, in making and translating and confirming Bishops; The justification
of the Kings judgment and pratice in point of Episcopacy.
For which action worthy of a Christian King, and a nu^sing Father of the
Church, his Majesty has the great examples and good consciences no less than
policy of his excellent Father, his learned Grandfather, the renowned Q.
Elizabeth, the religious and first reforming King Edward, yea all our first
Martyrly reformers, all following Parliaments; yea all the practices of all
Christian Kings and Emperors of elder and later ages, yea of all the Fathers
of the Church, and of all Christian Churches from the beginning, in all ages
and places (as in England) to this day; yea and doubtless he has the
institution of Christ, in the 17. and 70. Also the practice of the great
Apostles who were chief occumenical Bishops, and of their successors, still
principal Bishops, above and besides Presbyters, and this in the very times of
some of the Apostles, and by their appointment, as Bishop Usher and others
prove out of the testimonies of the ancients; yea and his Majesty has the
pattern and proportion of divine policy, in the old Testament and Church of the
Jews, agreeable to the tenor of the word of the God, who is a God of wisdom,
order, and good government, as well as of truth, besides the considerations of
the present want of that Government, the inconsistence of any other, with
Englands laws and tempers.

. After all which great and innumerable advantages, the late rudeness and
ruins, the tragedies and confusions which have followed its absence, all which
are sufficient to establish the Kings Conscience, and hasten his prone care to
restore Episcopacy and its rights) it were further a strange and pitiful
degrading of his Royal Majesty, if instead of maintaining learned, grave, and
worthy Bishops according to Law, to be honorable fathers and Governors of the
Church under him, and if instead of his own Supreme and Sacred Honor, to be
(as his pious predecessors were) a nursing Father of these Fathers, and their
obedient Sons his Clergy, to make himself a ward and minor to some petty
Presbyters, and their juncto's or classes, who neither in preaching nor
praying, many of them do own the Kings Supremacy, because themselves it seems
affect such a supreme Church government and discipline of Jesus Christ, as must
by them be managed above, yea without and against the King, if need be; which
old leaven, and ambitious principle of unruly Spirits long ago discovered, and
of late violently managed even to blood, his Majesty shall do well then to
nourish, when he has a mind to be a Subject to his Subjects, yea and the very
bran of them; men most-what of the coursest Plebeian, and rudest Spirits, who
are not to be won by good words, or convinced by fair disputes, but they must
be ruled with a rod of iron, that just severity of power, which God and the Law
have put into his Majesty's hands; For if he still ask some men's crowing
brains, how he shall rule Church and State, they will never resolve him, till
after many odd and new essays, they have dissolved all into Anarchy and
confusion again, as his late Majesty and all our miserable experiences have
taught all honest and wise men to their cost.

. If Mr. Grafton and his rigid covenanting Presbyters be of these severe
Principles, The vain and proud severity of Mr. Grafton.
and castigating resolutions, if these be his rods for Kings and Bishops, they
should do well to find out another England, for out of old England they have
not yet, nor are like in have to drive out Episcopacy and Bishops, as they
sometimes hoped, either by the Scotch sword, which at last wounded themselves,
or by the rankness and rigor of the Covenant, whose sense it seems they have a
mind to raise to an hangoust, beyond what others of more moderate spirits and
palato^ desire or design.

. This just rebuke I thought fit in charit^ to use, not only to repress the
pertnes and petulancy of this Presbyterian distemper, which dares yet to
threaten, whether the King and Parliament will or no, a demolition and
destruction to the whole frame of our pristine Episcopacy (which for the main
was excellent (as appears in the reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum in Anglia;
prepared in Edward the ^. days. Also in Dr. Cosins his learned Tables
dedicated to King James, besides our long happy experience of Gods blessings to
Church and State by it and under it;) But also in vindication of his Majesty's
Supremacy, and the whole Nations liberty, which must not now after so long a
storm be by obscure and petty Presbyters exposed a new to such dangers and
distractions, as some Fanatic Innovators threatens to Church and State, under
pretense (forsooth) of a Covenant, which has no legal stamp of humane
authority on it, nor yet of any moral or divine precept, unless its sense be
hon^stly, humbly, and obedintially reduced to that which agrees to the Law of
God and of this Kingdom, concluding obed^ence to the King and all Lawful
superiors under him and so to Bishops in all things, not morally contrary to
the Word of God; For Political Ceremonial and Circumstantial variations, do
break no squares, nor make things inconsistent, either with Gods Word, or a
good Conscience; where God has left Liberty and Authority to his Church and
the chief governors of it, Kings or Bishops to order things as they shall
judge most decent and convenient, for the public good and peace of Church and
State.

. Both which (beyond all peradventure) as to your Order, Dignity, Honor and
Happiness, are not to be contrived or maintained in England by any way of
Church government, save that of regular Episcopacy, which will effectually do
the good work desired by all honest men, and all loyal Covenanters; If the
Church be but furnished with such Bishops, and they with such honor and
authority, as well as prudence, industry and moderation as are necessary for
the great ends of Church government, also for the distempers of the times, and
the expectation of all good men, who are as weary of Schisms, as of civil
wars: And are no more concerned in the Scotch Presbytery, than the Scots
Covenanters are in the English Episcopacy.

. Having thus a little strapped the sweetness of Mr. Grafton, and muzled the
mouth of the barking, and as he thinks, biting Libeller. Dr. Gauden comes to
the ninth reflection; D^. Gaudens 9th reflection vindicated a^ to the
Scriptural strength of the Covenant.
which affirms, that the Scripture Authority, recommends to us but one grand
religious moral Covenant; and this never taken by people, but either by Gods
immediate command, or renewed and infused after the Public losses and
Apostasies of times, either by the command of the supreme power, as by some
Prophet immediately sent from God, and working Miracles: None of which either,
(...) to divine mission, or the Kings commission, can be alleged for the
Covenant, so as to make it of ^ublique Religious Authority.

. Here the rabbid Libeller un^^ppily opens with the fo^^ words of Harlot, and
Whore, with whose manners probably he may be long acquainted, their names are
so near his tongue and pen, as if he had compurgated more then once; There he
calls Dr. Gauden a deceiver and proves it, because, Jos. 9.15. There was a
civil or politic covenant made betwixt the Princes of Israel and the
Gibeonites without Joshuas privity at first.. For answer, I must ask where is
the forehead of this sophister? So there might be many hundred secular and
humane covenants or civil Leagues between Nations, Kings and Kingdoms, as in
David's and Solomon's times, which yet were no sacred, new or or renewed
Religious National Covenants, which the body politic, or some parts of it,
took without the head or chief Governor; The thing that the Libeller must
prove, or else he is the deceiver.

. Another Essay he has to prove, there were several other Religious Covenants,
besides that one in which God engaged his people to himself, and himself to
them, is from Jer. 50.5. Where his concordance showing him the word Covenant,
he presently fancies a new one of different kind, when that was but an humble
and penetential renewing of that first and only holy Covenant wherewith the
people of Israel were engaged to God, and God to them, upon their keeping his
Covenant; Nor is the word Covenant in all the old Testament used in the plural
number, there being but one ever given or owned by the one, and only true God.

. After this the Libeller talks of his omitting sundry other covenants, which
he can no where find, but in his ficticious fancy; And ^^th the cavilling
impudence to deny that Moses under God was King in Jesurun, that is supreme in
civil Power and Administration under God,; Libel. Page 15.
At last he turns Cat in pan, and confesses there was but on^ legal Covenant
which included all the moral, potitical and ceremonial appointments of God; as
circumcision, Passover, sacrifices, Temple, festivals, etc. Yet he brings in
these particulars as distinct and often renewed Covenants, which is not to argue
against any thing, but his own folly and impudence, for all these belong to
that one legal Covenant, as much as his fingers and ears belong to his body or
head; But the Libeller was only to vapor and sophisticate, nor has he any
better ware in his budget.

. Mr. Graf. Grafton Page 2^.
here runs in a calmer, but not clearer stream, than the Libeller; And desires
a demonstration to prove that, that one complete and grand Covenant once given
by God to the Jews, was the only rule and dictate of what matter they should
Covenant; He may as well ask a Demonstration to prove, there is but one God,
and one true Religion for the substance and main, and this one God the Author
of this one Religion; All which are confessed by all, but Athists and
Polytheists, if he means as to the lameness of the words formably used in their
renewing this Covenant, either by repentings of their Apostasy, or repeated
celebrations of it, it needs no answer, the question is so frivolous; for all
they did or said as to variety of expressions or circumstances, did not, nor
could not alter that our divinely given Covenant, but were confined to it, and
morally measured by it; For it included all moral duties to God and man.

. Their private Covenants and spontan^ous (...) also had their Rules and
limits, as well as force and vigor, from this being void if repugnant to it,
or firm if consonant with it; So that Mr. Grafton may as well seek for more
Sons th^n one, as more Covenants moral and religious appointed by God, whose
name is one.

^ Nor had there needed such variety of composures, such heaps and cumulations
of 666. words in this new Scotch Covenant, if all men had intended simply Gods
one truly Covenant, there needed as more than to have obliged our selves to
live according to the word of God, and the Laws of the Land; But these generals
would not serve some men's designs who must down with Bishops, and others with
Kings, to get their estates and power; Against neither of which any word of God
commands us no Covenant, but to submit to and obey them, so that neither the
particular matter of the Covenant nor the phrase and form or words, are either
expressed or warranted by the word of God, (as Mr. Grafton affirms) if it be
not reduced to such a moral and just sense, as becomes honest men, good
Christians and loyal subjects; The first may not by Gods word do injury to any
man, and so not to Bishops, who have been and were in England the best of men.
The second cannot Schismatise from the Catholic use and custom of all the
Churches of Christ (and his own particular) in things conform to Christ's word.
The third cannot rudely resolve and Covenant to alter the Laws of the Land,
good or bad, without and against the will of the King; Unless the Covenant be
turned to these three harmonies Dr. Gauden cannot look upon it in its matter,
form or authority, as other than the petty composure of a few pragmatical
^oli^tians compared to the grandeur of this Church and ampleness of this
Kingdom; It Is certain, neither King nor Bishop, neither full and free
Parliament, nor national Synod or Convention, ever either invented or composed
or imposed this Covenant.. Nor can there be any thing in it considerable as to
conscience, further than some men's, and all these but subject, private,
personal, and spontaneous, declaring before God the sense of their duty to God
and man, which they professed as in Gods presence they would endeavor to
perform, as became them, with in the bounds of Gods and man's Laws; How this
could bind or enable any men to do what some have done, and still desire to do
violently, injuriously, sacrilegiously, against the excellent Bishops and the
whole Ecclesiastical state of this Church of England, I cannot see, nor Mr.
Grafton neither, though he put on his Presbyterian Spectacles, made a^
Edinbrough; As for the Libeller and Dr. Burges, they have so many great Beams
and stones of Bishops and Deans-houses in their eyes, so much of their Earth
and Lands in their hearts, that there is no expecting any right reason or
Religion from them, till their fat hearts be made leaner, and their heavy
purses something lighter.

. The next cavil made against Dr. Gaudens just reflection upon the Covenant, Of
the Ap^stacy of the Church of England supp sed by the Libeller and some
Covenanters
as a thing no way necessary to be set up with so much Religious pomp and
solemnity, as that it were a National return (after Apostasy) either to the
true God, or to the true Religion as Christian and reformed, or to the true
worship of him, which affection is most evident false, and none but such
ignorant he^^^, o^ impudent faces, or factious spirits, or fanatic fanci^s, as
this Libeller, can charge the Church of England to have in any such way
Apostatized either in it^ Kings, or its Parliaments, or its Synods, or its
Bishops, or its Clergy, or its people, by any either explicit decree, and
verbal, declaration of such a defection, or by any tacit and general pra^tice
owned by them, and so meriting other the censure of a National Apostasy, or the
antidote of such an unnational and Illegal C^venant; nor can any but an
ungrateful firebrand call it as the bl^^sing of an Idol, Dr. Gaudens ble^sing
of the true God, for his great mercy in keeping this Church and Kingdoms from
any Public Apostasy, against which the last Convocation most eminently
declared against Idolatry, Superstition or Popery. ^. The truth is, it was not
the healing of any suspected or feared Apostasy, from the true Reformed
Religion of the Church of England, whose Doctrine, devotion and Church
Discipline is the same it was at first Reformation, which kindled and blew up
our fires, but rather an Impatient desire of some men to bring in (as Cacus did
H^rcules to his Oxen) their long desired, and long by Law obstructed novilties
in Church and State; This was the ((...)) formative and ex^^cutive ^ower,
prevailing in many men's minds, to bring in and set up that Covenant, after they
had by correspondence with some of the Scots of the Presbyterian party, invited
them into the same ends. Add. (...)
A. A. Dr. Gauden denies not, but some Clergy men in Place and Power were
seemingly very studious (and it may be less discreetly) to advance the outward
decency, reverence and solemnity of (as they thought) Gods house, worship and
service, beyond what was either by Law enjoined or gen^rally observed in former
times; what their hearts and intents were, he leaves to God; Nor did himself
heretofore want his vulgar jealousy, while at a greater distance from their
declared judgments; But for their doctrine and their outward Public Actions
or Injunctions, as to any things of ceremonious use and observance, either ^^ey
had the Articles, Laws, Canons and constant customs of this Church and Nation
to defend what they did hold or preach, renew and require, or else they were
easily to be checked and repressed, yea and punished too, according to Law, for
any thing Hetrodox inverting or variating from the rule; And this might have
been done without any such shaking 3. Kingdoms, and putting all into the
convulsions, Agonies and pains of a traveling Woman, only to bring forth
Presbytery to the secundine of this abortive of Covenant, which if it have all
the due features and parts, matter and form of a sacred and solemn National
Covenant, in judgment, truth and righteousness, yet sure it had neither its
full time nor due Authority, nor can it well tell who was its first Father;
sure enough they were no very great Grandees though it invited some such to be
its godfathers, but indeed the King should have been at the Christning.. Nor
was there any need or have of such an Engine, either to demolish wholly (as Mr.
Grafton tells us the Plot was) the frame of this Church Government, which was
and is Episcopal, or to bring in in past-hast with fire and sword, the rarity
of rank Presbytrie, and its consequents or train, either a popular purity in
Church and State, or a many- headed popery; After these red and pale horses,
followed the black h^rse of poverty and meanness in the Clergy, Sacrilege and
robbery in the people, of Anarchy, confusion and pr^phaneness in all. This
contempt of the ref^r^^^ Bishops, Clergy and Religion in England was indeed the
high way to Popery.

. But the ^^beller, to seem learned and zealous, rather than silly and
malicious, charges, at a venture sundry Bishops, (...) The L^^elle^^ (...) and
(...) upon (...) ^^sh^ps.
for falling off to too much Popery (as if he could tolerate some in them) both
in doctrinal^ and d^voti^nals; It suffices him to calumniate many, to instance
in no one person, or point; only he calls to witness very gravely their
Arminian tenets* against which some Papists he s yes, by hear say do write, and
so do some others, as Fran^is^ans and Jesuits write for them, yea and some,
may most learned Lutherans; But what is Arminius to Popery, Or to the Covenant?
he lived, disputed, and died at a great distance from Rome, in a way of
Presbyterian discipline, and in communion with those Covenanters who were first
called by themsel^e^ the Gu^^ses; All which relations may possibly move this
Libeller to be of Armin u^ his party, whose opin^ons as to the true state of
the controversies (the difficulties pro and con, the d^nger of engaging too far
for or against, either proudly to lessen the necessity and efficacy of Gods
grace, or fatally to confine the liberty of industry of man's will, where the
understanding is by the outward means rationally, yea religiously enlightened
and morally moved. These and other intricacies which have an holy depth, and
high sublimity in them, capable to humble the most learned and acute disputers,
while they see themselves assaulted by so many pregnant Scriptures on either
side) I am confident, neither this Libeller nor his Dr. Burges (as great a
Sophister and as little a Scholar as he appears) do well understand; nor can
such buck-sters of holy things, such purchasers of Bishops Lands and destroyers
of their houses, Such circulaters and crafty Merchants in the Church have
leisure to study or sound the profundity of those controversies, wherein few of
the ancient Fathers were resolute, and St. Austin himself hardly reconcileth
himself;. Dr. Gauden here thinks it modesty and wisdom to be magisterially of
no side, till he can clear the incumberances, or justify the hard consequences
of either; And for this brace of sworn Brethren, the Libeller and Dr. Burges,
you may trust them, they will never much advance or depresse any side, either
by their reputation or their disputation; Arminius is out of the reach of their
darts, though they may shoot at him with their fools bolts.

. But the Libeller boggles terribly at Altars, Tapers, Candles, with etc. that
is, one knows not what, as if our reformed Religion were to be sacrificed on
those Altars, or ^ables of the Lord, which antiquity, as in Tertullians time
long before Popery, so called by either name, and greatly reverenced, not for
their own sakes, but for relation to that sacred mystery of Christ's body and
blood in the Eucharist, for which solemnity they served: He stares at those
Tapers and Candl^^, as if they would presently set all Religion on fire, which
were never lighted that I saw in the Church of England, but in the want of the
Sun ^light and were anciently set unlighted on the ((...)) Lords Table, in
memory of those (Antel^^ans (...)) early morning, or midnight communions, which
poor Christians had in time of persecution, when they were forced to use Lamps
or Candles, and were as falsely accused for a Dogs pulling down the Taper, and
so putting it out, when he skipped at a crust, in order to make a more modest
way in the dark to Christians promiscuous lusts, as this Libeller charges by a
cavine impudence sund^y Bishops, for falling off to too much Popery, because
they retained these things, as they found them of ancient ornamental custom in
the Cathedrals of England, and in the Kings Chapel Royal: The man should do
well at next barking bout, to tell how much Popery he allows as enough, and
what he blames as too much, or whether he thinks all Popery that is held or
done by the Papists.

. But to allay (not gratify) the popularity and petula^^ of this Libeller, Dr.
Gauden denies not, etc. vide A. A.

. Nor can the rigid Covenanters, who rant so against Prelacy, The Co^e^^^^ ^^
or (...) against P^e^b^t^^^ (...) Prelacy.
and that Episcopacy in England by virtue of their Covenant, any way extricate
themselves from that snare, which unawares they run in, as to S^hi^m and
superstition, against which they no less covenanted than against Popery and
Prelacy; since no intr^ can wash Presbytery as a separation from and usurpation
against, or extirpation of Episcopacy, from the stain of Schism, both in an
Ecclesiastical sense, as it rends from the unity and uniformity of the
Catholics Churches, judgments, customs and practice in the government of
Episcopacy; also in a civil sense as receding against Law, from what was in
England settled by Law, and setting it self up in the room of Episcopal power by
mere force.

. Nor will Presbytery wipe off in its rigid and ami^^tious way the sin of
sup^rstition, first negative, as denying that good which is so in the nature,
order and use of right Episcopacy; and secondly affirmative in introducing, yea
imposing that purity as necessary in religious concernments and Ecclesiastical
government, which is not commanded by God, nor ever so esteemed or used by the
Church of Christ; So that Presbytery was in as high a way of running to Romes
superstition, Schism, Tyranny, and usurpation as Prelacy; yea much more, for
this was bounded by Laws, and fortified against Popery by an excellent Liturgy,
which was a daily wholesome form of both doctrine and direction in English,
diametrally contrary to Popish superstitions and errors, which could not
prevail against the Church of England while Liturgy continued, and Episcopacy
was managed, as it was by very godly, and learned, yea modest and humbly wise
bishops for the most part; If any were otherwise, their personal defects, not
their calling, were to be blamed; But Presbytery was generally most cried up,
and imposed by weak and passionate men; for the soberest, ablest, and wisest
Presbyterians do willingly allow, yea and now prefer Episcopacy before any
Church government, in its lawful use and exercise, which may easily be
obtained, and the inconveniences remedied, by that Sovereign power which Mr.
Grafton mentions, but is not willing to be ruled by; for while it was able to
preserve it self, it has preserved the sober and good Refor^ation of England
from Retrogradation to Popers and f^^m the precipitancy or encroachments of
Presbytery, and all other factions novelties, which have no bottom or bounds
but the abyss of popular envies, clamors, ambitions, schisms, and
superstitions.

. If Mr. Grafton and his party did bona fide covenant to restore and reform the
Church of England to its pristine good Law, and practices, in Gods name let
them keep their Covenant; if they intended faction, innovation, ruin and
confusion, by obtruding novel and illegal ways, let them repent, and pray the
thou^ht^ of their hearts, and the words of their mouths, and the injurious
works of their hands may be forgiven them; for they were not wise, nor just,
nor humble, nor charitable, nor religious, nor loyal, as they ought to have
been, and so not fortified in any such sense, either by Reason or Religion, by
Scripture or Laws of the Land, as Mr. Grafton gratis affirms.

. For the poor Libellers The L^^ellers d^s^^nd with Church music.
unharmonious soul, who quarrels most lamentably against music in Churches, it
is pity the Authors or Abetters of so great discords in this Church and
Kingdom as he and his Dr. Burges h^ve been, and still are, should ever be
troubled with good music, but for ever condemned to hear the worst Balleters
when they sing most out of tune; indeed weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth are fitter for them; I do not mean that in utter darkness, I pray God
forbid, but that of bitter lamentation, unfeigned sorrow, and true repentance,
that they may get out of the gall of bitterness, and power of Satan, in which
they seem by their malice, uncharitableness, hypocrisy, apostasy, and
sacrilege to be fallen.

. If this Libeller captate to know by this foolish digression (which imports as
if he had covenanted also against all good music, and so against skilful and
melodious singing, which is the best music) if he aims to know Dr. Gaudens
judgment of Church music, that so he may accuse him to be either an Arminian
or Popishly inclined, (for this calumniating censor and malicious critic
judges of men's opinion by strong Symptoms) let him make what he can of it;
Dr. Gauden does own his approbation and desire of excellent music and melody
in the public Solemn praising of God, which is a part of his worship, yea a
most angelical and heavenly part of it; to this divinest service he does judge
both Nature and Art, in their best improvements, by vocal and organical
harmony, may lawfully yea commendably be applied, not only by vocal singing
after a plain and simple manner to Clement Macots, Sternholds or Wisdoms tunes,
but by the use also of such Instruments and skill in the melody, as may most
raise up the Spirits of Christians to the high praises of God, such as David
and other holy men used in the private and public exaltation of their hearts
and affections to God; nor is there any reason or Religion to be justly urged
to exclude this great help of humane infirmity, and sweet refreshing, besides
elevation of Spirit in the Church of God, since music in its skill and use is
a good gift of God, for which and by which he may be praised, in such a way, as
becomes the sanctity, solemnity, gravity and Majesty of Christian assemblies
and heavenly duties; For as music has an aptitude like an Echo, to answer and
humor every passion and motion of the souls, by a secret symphony with the
Saint^; so the excellent and godly Masters of it will easily so compose their
holy Anthems, and Church melodi^^, as shall aptly correspond not only with the
holy Ditty or matter, but also with the cheerful devotion and affections of
men's souls.

. Nor did any thing more proclaim the after prodigies of our time, than the
zeal, which some in the rude and riotous beginning of their reformation had, to
destroy all Orgins and Church music, as much as Saul had to destroy the
Gibeonites, or the Witch^^; so blind are ^igots in Religion, too bold and too
b^^sterous, dressing the Church as Swine would dress a garden, and while they
fear the horns of superstition, they cut off the head of all decency in
Christian duties; not but that I judge there might be some discreet regulation
in our Church music, as not to sing accurately those Scriptures which most
edify, when best understood by distinct reading, or plain singing, that the
meanest hearer may understand; and least of all to sing any of the Creeds,
which are the ground of Catechism, and the Primmer of Christian beginners; but
rather to confine music to those Psalms and Hymns, those spiritual Songs and
Anthems, which either out of Scripture, or agreeable to its Psalmody, may best
be fitted to Gods glory and the Churches devotion.

. But alas, why do I bring (lyram ad Asinum) a stroke of Music to such deaf
ears, no Orphens is sufficient to move such brutish souls to any thing
harmonious, whose hope is in discords of King and People, Bishops and
Presbyters, knowing no savor or sight, or sound so sweet, as that of gain and
money (quocunque modo rem) though by sacrilege and regiciae, they are far
enough from delighting in Church music, who are greedy to buy Church lands,
but very loath to restore them; and had rather all the houses of God in the
Land should be pulled down and put in their purses, than any Organs set up in
Cathedrals, for those will presage the restitution of Bishops to their estates;
which will make some men hang down their heads, and hang up their harps on the
willows of lamentation, to the great joy of all honest men.

. After the Libellers Libel. p 16: The Libellers jealousy of Popery prevailing.
stroke at music (who wants it more than King Saul ever did, or those that are
struck with the Tarantula) his last flagellation is against the Papists; these
he pretends by a Pannick terror, were presently breaking in upon the Church of
England like a Sea, if the antemurale or bank of the sacred Covenant had not
been set up.

. In good time, as if the Laws of England which happily defended for 80. years
our Religion as reformed against the Roman contention and invasion had not
been sufficient, or as if there had not been more Jesuits and Seminary Priests
in England, acting, fighting, preaching, praying, ranting, canting, and quaking
since the Covenant, than ever were before, and with more severity as well as
efficacy; or as if the Church of England and its Clergy had rather be eaten up
by Presbyterians and Independants, than by Papists; or as if these only had
Teeth and the other nothing but Tongues; No, the craf y Libeller is still on
the wind side, and is to talk for his Dr. Burges advantage; He foresees if
Papists should prevail in England, they would requite the restoring of Church
and Bishops Lands, they are so far good Catholics, as they conform in the main
of Episcopal government to the true Catholic Church; Nor can the Libeller hope
for the like gracious remission, or dispensation of those lands, which his
learned Dr. Burges quotes, as granted for peace sake to R. Mary in the case of
non-restitution of Abbey and Monastery lands, in hope to make it a precedent
and plea for alienating Bishops Lands and Cathedrals.

. The Pope well knew, that Monastic votaries, Nuns and Friars, were the
after-growth of Christians devotion and charity, much younger than Bishops who
were from the beginning, rooted in Christ, and branched in the twelve Apostles,
and spread in all the Christian world, and endowed with honorary supports, as
necessary for the orderly and complete, and regular well-being of any Church,
the others not so.

. To rob the Monks which sprung up in after ages, was to rob the robbers, the
drones for the most part of Christendom; but to rob the Bishops, and with them
the Cathedralls, and in them all the Clergy of their estates and houses and
honor and dignities, was to rob not only learning, religion and the Ministry
Evangelical of its just rewards, comforts and encouragements, in a land of
plenty and peace, but to rob the Church of her principle pillars and Fathers,
of their great ornaments and defenses, of that honor, order, and authority,
which is never to be had or enjoyed so wisely, worthily, and usefully, as from
the hands of excellent Bishops.

. Although Dr. Gauden cannot commend this Libeller for his honesty, no more
than Christ did the unjust Steward, yet he is commendable for his great policy;
Presbytery he, hopes, and the Covenant will let Dr. Burges enjoy his Bishops
Lands; Therefore he joined Popery to Prelacy, by an odious and unjust
Conjunction, it is policy, though no verily or charity so to do; for no
Presbyters (I mean as of that faction Aecrians and Acephalists, were ever so
great vindicators of the reformed Religion against the Papists, as many of our
English Bishops have been ever since the reformation, witness Bishop Jewel,
Bishop Usher, Bishop White, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Davenant, Bishop Hall,
Bishop Bedel, Bishop Prideaux, and many others; These disputed, and wrote, and
fought and conquered the Papists, seconded by many other Episcopal Divines,
when the petty Presbyters did (for the most part) but prate and rail and
contemn, and vapor, and triumph with their tongues by a popular oratory
amidst their credulous auditories; These Presbyters were the warm preachers,
but they were the Bishops and E^scopal Clergy who were the weighty Soldiers,
these were the Light armed, these the Veterani and Triani, who bore the heat
and burden of the day of dispute, whose studious industry, some Presbyterian
factionists and Innovators at last envying for their learning, labors, honors
and estates, they sought to withdraw from them, to undermine to betray, do undo
and utterly destroy them, that is, the strongest Bulwarks, and ablest defenses
of the Christian and reformed Religion of the Church of England; Nay the last
Archbishop of Canterbury, did in this service against the Papists so valiantly
learnedly and honestly acquit himself in his book aagainst ^isher, as he
deserves to be reckoned among the worthies, and of the first three, as to
weighty solid accurate sinnewy disputing for the Doctrine of the Church of
England; And what ever faylings or faults he might have in other things of
imprudence, passion, or policy, Certainly in this he did more and deserved
better, than ever the Libeller, his Dr. Burges, and all that pack of purchasers
of Church Lands are ever likely, or indeed able, if willing to do: I had rather
have Bishops Lands learning, than Dr. Burges his Lands.

. But there is no end of following this error, this ignis fatuus, whose
Libelling Prosody would make an excellent Index or Directory for the next
Presbyterian Synod and Assembly when it applies to a just reformation of these
deformities which have broken in since the Covenant stood in the gap, against
Liturgy, Popery, and Prelacy, yea and against profanes, Schism and
Superstition, that is sacrilege, Presbytery and Independency, whose vanity,
pride and ambition was and still is to lie in the high bed, and make both
Monarchy and Eiscopacy truckle under them, which deformed sight I hope England
shall never see again; In Gods Name let the common Presbyters keep their
ancient station, and there serve God and his Church in humility, peace and
order, and giving leave to their Elders and Fath^rs, their spiritual Colonels
and Commanders in their Ecclesiastical Militia, not only to go before them, but
to far to command them according to Religion and Law, as may be for the good
order, honor, safety, and peace of the whole Church; in which Schism, strife,
and mutiny will bring nothing but disorder, and this confusion, and then
veniunt Romani, their fears may come upon them, Rome will have a throw for all;
For the Romish interest does not press or hope to come in at the great and
strong Gate of Episcopacy and Liturgy, but at the postern and wicket of
Presbytery and Directory, both base and unregarded posts; It is more for the
Popes advantage to have no Bishops and Liturgy in England, than ever it will be
for the poor Presbyters or Ministers; These have been all almost lost in a dark
Wilderness of sin, and bitten with fiery Serpents of contempt and poverty since
they deserted or were deprived of their Bishops; The other has had such an
harvest in 20. years, as was beyond all his gleanings for fourscore before,
which learned Mr. Hooker and others long ago foresaw and foretold of that
disciplinarian faction if prevalent in England, whose prophecy have been too
truly and sadly fulfilled in our days; I pray God we may learn wisdom by
afflictions, and righteousness by his judgments.

. Dr. Gauden having thus disempestred himself of these cavils and calumnies
with which either the simplicity of the Analeptist or the malice of the
Anatomist pleased themselves in their replying upon his Analysis and his
precious refections upon the Covenant, as it is made by some to look with
favor and smiling only upon Presbytery; but with frowns (as cruel and
turbulent as the Duke of Aluis) upon our English Episcopacy, he is yet to
follow them one step more in this rugged way (than which nothing is more
contrary to his genius and design) which was to reconcile Episcopacy and
Presbytery in such an amciable Christian and charitable way, as they either
enjoyed many years in the Church of England, or at this day do in other
reformed Churches, or for 1600. years they did, in the best times and state of
the Church of Christ.

. This Paragraph of both his Antagonists, is so various, or tedious, and so to
no purpose, but to make some show and noise, (as those in London streets cry
loudest, who have the worst ware to sell) That Dr. Gauden might well have
spared his own and his Readers pains; But since they will needs be such
impertinent Scepticks as to seek knots in bulrushes, and to question whether
snow be white or no; Whether there be any precept or pattern of such a
Covenant, formatter, form, author and end in the new Testament, Whether the
Covenant have any foundation or force from the new Testament.
either against Episcopacy in a gubernative and authoritative sense, or for
Presbytery in a Supremacy without any subordination and subjection to Bishops;
The Reader must blame these stickling gladiators and Antagonists, not Dr.
Gauden, who only held out this shield of innocent truth, that there was neither
precedent nor precept for such a Covenant in the New Testament, or moral
antiquity of the Church; That the Baptismal Covenant is the only and sufficient
Religious bond of Christians in the Gospel; that this when violated on our part
by wilful sins, it is to be renewed by repentance, and confirmed by worthy
receiving the Lords Supper.

. That this one great Sacred and Solemn Covenant Of our Covenant in Baptism
once for all.
(in which the blood and body of Christ slain for us, are given to us, and
taken by us, as tokens of our troth and fidelity, no less than of Gods) does
bind us, as men and Christians to all duties we ow to God and man, selves and
others, private and public in Ecclesiastical or civil societies and policies;
By this we stand obliged to fight against the World, the flesh and the Devil,
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live righteously, soberly, and
godlily in this present World, that is, conformably to Gods Laws and Christ
commands; Also to those good Laws and constitutions of justice, order,
Government and peace, which are established in any Kingdom or State, though
not Christian; How much more, if Christian and in a National Church Communion;
This is affirmed and confirmed by Dr. Gauden.

. Also that to renew this Baptismal vow and Evangelical Covenant by daily
repentance and frequent Celebration of the Lords Supper, was very commendable
as to private and public piety.. But to add to this any public Solemn
Covenanting, under a new form of words in a national Notion, where was no
national Apostasy from true Christianity, nor yet any Anabaptistical renouncing
of our Baptism, and to do this without due authority, making a part of the
body to Covenant for the whole, and this without the head, and in opposition to
Laws yet in force, and rules of civil justice, as to many men's Lawful Estates,
deserved honors, and due authority; This kind of Covenanting Dr. Gauden
judges either superfluous (where no public need presses) or fallious, where
not by public consent and sovereign appointment, or partial Schismatical and
superstitious, where it evidently seeks to advance a party and novelty against
what has had constant Legality and universal antiquity, carrying on such
order, authority, prudence, policy and peace in Church and State, as are
agreeable to the word of God, and the custom of the Catholic Church.

. Dr. Gauden judges, that such humane contenuances, under what ever Names they
are put, cannot bind selves or others to any thing more, than God had before
bound us, and we our selves by Baptismal Christian Covenant; much less may they
engage us against any thing that was and is our duty in Religion and civil
justice, or to that which is rebellious to Law or injurious to any man; Least
of all against Kings or any in lawful authority and just enjoyments of Estates
and honors under them, such as Bishops in England were, with other dignified
Clergymen, whom unjustly that is without any Law of God or man, to spoil, rob
and deprive (as some Covenanters did do, and still desire) of what was
honestly, and lawfully theirs, as to Estates, honors and authority, was either
contrary to the letter and intent of the Covenant, and then we are agreed,
expecting restitution, or else the Covenant is so far carried on, contrary to
that Baptismal Covenant which binds against all works of the flesh, World, and
Devil, such as Covetousness, Oppression, Sedition, Schism, Sacriledg, and all
disorderly walking must needs be, if Scripture and Law be our judge.

. This was the demonstration of our Baptismal Covenant, which is just and holy,
which Dr. Gauden used; To which the Libeller The Libellers Sophistry as to the
true Christian Covenant.
after his vulpine and vafricious way, answers; First by confession, Secondly
by collusion, pleading (though there be no pattern or precept for any such
Covenant in the New Testament) yet it is sufficient if there be any such in the
Old; Which he does not instance in, because he cannot, only heaps up Scriptures
like a Quaker to no purpose; Nor will he yield to what he urges as to validity
of old Testament patterns, if not Levitical or Typical; For then the Presidency
and Authority of some Priests above others (besides the High Priest a special
type of Christ) and both Priests and Levites having Lands and Cities annexed to
their Tribe and Office, will plead (and it is one of Saint Jeromes and the
Ancient Fathers arguments) strongly by way of proportion for Bishops and
subordinate Presbyters; Yea and for their Lands and Houses no less than their
authority; The Libellers impudent denial that any such Episcopacy as is in the
Church o^ England is to be found in the New Testament.
and then what becomes of Dr. Burges's purchase, which no doubt he made in
pursuance of his Covenant, for he would not be so execrable as to act against
his sacred Covenant.

. Then he roves like a wanton Spaniel or setting dog, barking against our
Episcopacy in the Church of England, and wagging his tail, as if he had found
a Covy of Presbytery sitting as the sole Elders and Supreme Rulers of the
Church in the New Testament and in Primitive times; He has the impudence and
falsity against the letter and practice of the New Testament, against the
judgment of all antiquity, of which possibly he is ignorant, yea against the
judgment of all later learned reformed Divines in this and other Churches, to
aver no such Episcopacy as we had in England can be found in, or is warranted
by the New Testament.

If he mean such in all things circumstantial, additional and civil, He is but
a frippone and droll, no man affirms it, nor is it more true than to avert that
in the New Testament, no Presbyters can be found in Parochial bounds, living by
Tithes and Cleabe^, for which Dr. Burges is so pertinacious, hoping to get a
good Living or benefice though he despair of a Bishopric.

. If he mean ingeniously of Episcopal presidency and authority, as to spiritual
jurisdiction, in ordination, confirmation, censures, rebukcing, silencing,
excommunication, absolution, and the other exercises of Ecclesiastical power,
(besides Preaching, Baptizing, and Celebrating) above, yea even against
Presbyters and People; He need not go far to find the Precepts, Canons,
Commission, power and Authority given by Christ to the 12. Apostles, above the
seventy, and all other both Christians and Ministers during their life; The
like to St. Paul, and by him derived to Timothy, and Titus in their places or
Diocesses, also to others in other limits; As to the Angels of the 7. Asian
Churches, which all antiquity owns, as Bishops in Saint John days, over those
Churches; Against all this and much more the Satyr answers (^e gry quidem) not
a word, of which he could not be ignorant, since no doubt he has read the
learned fire of the Sanctuary, written long ago by Dr. C. Burges, in which he
owns Bishops with great reverence, and perstringeth the Antiepiscopal non
conformists to some tune.

. Then the Libeller fills his foul pap^rs with some long-winded sentences of
the Covenant Of the power of godliness to which the Covenant must be limited.
(which this asserter will never honor; (and male dum recitat incipit esse
suum) wresting them, if not genuinely applying them to his ends (but not to any
honest sense or design;) only is to destroy and rob Bishops and the Church,
that he may have their Lands.. Let him, if he will needs be meddling, clear his
headless and obtruded Presbytery of the guilt, at least suspicion of Schism
and Superstition, of Sedition, and Injustice, of an Incendiary, dividing King
and People, Laws and Religion, Bishops and sober Presbyters; are not these
practices against the power of godliness, and so against the Covenant? Are not
common honesty, justice, restitution, good order and Lawful Government
agreeable to sound Doctrine? Must not the contrary be extirpa^ed? Such as
fraud, faction injuriousness, sedition, oppression, sacrilege, etc. Now (Oh
Libeller) look to your self, if this bone be to hard for you, give it to Dr.
Burges, he has a bad tongue, but good teeth; He will resolve it upon the
question: whether the late and present Hierarchy (truly so called) or holy
Government of this Church by godly and learned Bishops, according to the Laws
of God and man, was according to the power of godliness to be extirpated by
virtue of the Covenant, when Episcopacy and the Bishops had long and lawful
possession; or whether rather Presbytery is to be denied as a novel faction,
and late intruding usurpation; If so, beware good Libeller of your dear Dr.
Burges his purchase, as well as credit and Conscience, which are far enough
from the power of godliness.

. He complains (en passant) that Dr. Gauden never particularly describes, nor
sets forth what that Epis^opacy The Libellers (...) Ep^^^^pacy D^ (...)
is, which he would have to be introduced; As to this, Dr. Gauden did not think
he should have met with such a hard-head and dullard, as could be ignorant what
the Episcopacy in England was, in its essentials and ornamentals; its spiritual
authority and powers, and Ecclesiastical, which are common to all true Bishops,
primitive and apostolical, and its civil or secular enjoyments, or
juri^diction, which it owes the bounty and munificence of the Kings and
Parliaments of England; This Episcopacy Dr. Gauden would have not retroduced,
(as if once legally expelled, which is false) not more than the King and
Monarchy were) but restored to its just power, dignity, and authority, such as
it had, and has by Law, yea and to its Lands, Houses, and Revenues; This
pincheth the banches of Dr. Burges, and pursues him so closely, that the
Libeller is loath to see the Episcopacy which Dr. Gauden owns; but he hollows,
as if he were in a wood, and at a loss; but he may soon bear of, and see, and
feel what Episcopacy Dr. Gauden means, not one of his own invention, or of any
private man's reduction, and of some Presbyters new modelling; But that which
the Law owns and asserts, and intrusts by the Kings appointment to learned,
wise and godly Bishops, with that ecclesiastical power, which is as necessary
for the Church (as it is due to Bishops) by all right, civil and
ecclesiastical, scriptural and divine.

. If any thing be excessive, or defective, or inconvenient in this Episcopacy
of the Church of England, that is, in the Laws and constitution, or in the
execution and administration; The King and the Parliament by their divine
counsel, or the advice of a National Synod, know in their wisdom and piety what
they have to do, without any such Dictators as this Libeller, or his Dr.
Burges, of whom no man can tell what to make, nor where to find them fixed.

. And now the Libeller in a fit of popular piety, (that is hypocrisy) makes
his appeal, whether this Covenant so formal and solemn, so full of words and so
against Bishops, so much for his turn and Dr. Burges interest, (if Bishops be
not restored to their Lands and just authority) whether it be a piece of policy
more than piety.

. Truly some sober, that is simple-hearted Christians, possibly did not believe
it to be so at first, Whether the Covenant was not made up ^f pol^cy no less
than piety.
when they heard or read the pomp of good words in it; but others that knew the
party first moving, the Artists and Politicians contriving, the partial power
imposing it, the after practices executing it, with such rigor, in justice,
and cruelty against all Bishops, one and another, to their personal undoing,
and to the exposing of their authority, so long sacred and venerable in this
and all Churches, to contempt and scorn, (as others did the Kings, and
afterward those very houses of Parliament, which brewed, or breached, drunk
themselves and urged others so much to drink of the covenanting cup) these did
long ago, and do still, and ever shall suspect the Covenant in some men's sense,
designs, and actions, to have had more of policy than piety; Nor will this
suspicion be removed, till the Covenant be reduced to such a use sense and
purpose, as is conform to justice and law as well as Religion, then it will
appear to differ as little from the baptismal Covenant, as a large gloss or
paraphrase on a short Text, when the will of the Covenant works effectually to
purge the Libeller, Dr. Burges and others of sacrilege, schism and injustice,
conducted against the Bishops and Laws of England, yea against the King and the
whole Church and Nation; Till this is done, he will appear not a Scraphical
Doctor, but a Sophistical caviller, and co^ener of his own and other men's
consciences; no other Covenant is required by God, nor is it either madness or
desperateness to throw off such a Covenant as is unjust to God and man, or to
confute such a sense, but rather to take and keep it, in such a sense as is
injurious to God and man, scandalous to the Christian and Reformed Religion,
besides destructive to many godly and honest men, Bishops and others, against
all Law and justice.

. Then the Libell^r by a ((...)) fallacious and captious way of frequent and
impertinent questions still begs the question, as if he had proved it; He says
it is altogether an Evangelical Covenant, but shows nec v^lam nec vestigium, no
footstep of its disputed passages in the Gospel sense; He sadly heaps up
Scriptures, and loads his Margin with holy figures, and touches on a Jewish
private personal and ceremonial vow upon St. Paul, which was far enough from a
moral, evangelical and national Covenant; But this goats hair serves to stuff
his pillow, which is much fuller of subtilty than sanctity, policy than piety,
and so will the Covenant appear to all honest men, if it be put upon his rack,
who is fitter to torment than interpret Scripture, the byas of his and Dr.
Burges purchase, spoils, warps, wrests all.

. His next Divinity shreds, Libel. p. 18.
and common places of Baptismal and Eucharistical Covenant, his denying by way
of question, that actual repentance, takes off the guilt and horror of wilful
and presumptuous sins, as if he had a fit of Novatianism, only his vile
wresting that place, Heb. 10.26, 27. against the comfort of true repentance,
after actual wilful sins, such as David's murder and adultery were; as if the
mercy under the Gospel were less than under the Law, when the place is meant
of Apostasy from Christ, and adhering to another way of salvation, after
Baptism and profession of the Gospel; This and other such dilute stuff, Dr.
Gauden cares not to tire himself or others with, only he doubts the Libeller
and Dr. Burges are in a desperate state, if no repentance be available after
wilful and presumptuous acts of sin, such as apparent injustice, oppression
and sacrilege.

. The Libeller very authoritatively goes on, which I have insisted on this the
longer, etc. A preaching phrase, but who this J. is must not be known, we hear
and read his voice, but see no shape, or name, or man, or christian; sure we
need not fear the Reader will make an Idiot of him, or take his Libel for on
Oracle; It were worth a while to ask him if he have not forgotten the first
question of the Church Catechism, What is your name? The same which Christ put
to the Devil, who answered Legion, with the same first letter as this Libeller
is called; How ridiculous is it to put the Pronoun, when the Person is afraid,
or ashamed to be known? nor if he were known would it add any authority to his
words.

(...)
. The reason of his being so tedious and impertinent, at hi^ state stuff, and
vulgar cavils, rises from his nose, guilty of a strong smell of Arminianism
and Popery as he pretends, popular words without any rhyme or reason; The Fox is
the finder of this ill savor, Alas, it is not for a man of putrid lungs, foul
breath, rotten principles and corrupt practices, to complain of ill seems, if
Popery savor as bad as Idolatry in his nostrils, yet sure Arminianism is not
so bad as gross sacrilege; Nor does this Gretian Liar so much as suppose
indeed Dr. Gauden to be inclined to either, only all Episcopal, that is,
Catholic and regular Divines must be reproached with something of calumny, the
better to set off Presbytery, and the perverse sense of the Covenant, in order
to extirpate Episcopacy, and to take away or keep Bishops lands in sacrilegious
hands.

. But one blessed word at last drops from the Libeller, namely, the promise of
amends, by brevity in the rest of his profane libel; The two great virtues and
most desirable in so great a sinner, and so idle a babbler, who counts true and
smart expressions which dare search beyond the plausible pretensions of men's
words and formalities, to the reality of their actions, which best interpret
their intentions, these he calls railing and blasphemy, because they strike on
the right vein; the great Presbyterian design, to batter down the whole frame
of Episcopacy, (which Mr. Grafton confesses) violently to seize Bishops and
other Church-mens estates, against all Law and Conscience, thereby to enrich
some sacrilegious purchasers, to the great joy of the Romanists, and to the
infinite scandal of the reformed profession.

. Dr. Gauden owns all this as a true glass, in which too many such Covenanters
Some Covenanters evil manners have brought so great jealousies and reproaches
on the Covenant.
as the Libeller and his friend may see their faces, if the Covenant suffers in
honest men's just jealousies, by these men's evil, and unjust sacrilegious and
cruel dealings, it may thank them; that such things have been done is
undeniable, and by zealous Covenanters too; if it were not the meaning of their
covenanting, as to that clause against Episcopacy, yea if it were not the main
design of their covenanting, let them at last act to another sense, let them
restore the Church lands and estates which they have without Law and against
all justice taken from the Bishops, and the Clergy of the Church of England;
Let them do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with God and man, to their
Kings and Superiors in Church and State; These we know the Lord requires, and
no new Covenants in any thing contrary to these can be sacred, or accepted;
whatever solemnity or sacredness of Terms be put to it, which the Libeller
repeats, page 17. Libel. p. 17.
They are but taking Gods holy and great Name in vain, like putting gilded
frames to ill wrought pictures, will you deal factiously, seditiou^^y,
r^bellious^y, pre^uriously, treacherously, unjustly, tru^lly against God and
man, against Religion, and law, and reason, and humanity, and common benefit?
will you to oppress Men, Christians, Ministers, yea Fathers, and all the
excellent Bishops of such a Church, yea and the King himself as nursing Father
of these ^athers, tearing asunder all bonds of Law and Government civil and
ecclesiastical, and yet pretend the taking of a sacred Covenant, and come into
the house of God, and cry, the Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are
these, and we are delivered to do all these abominations? Hear O. Heavens, and
be astonished O Earth; Ask any Christian Church, ask any Heathen Senate, if the
true God of the first, or the imaginary Gods of the second, will accept of such
bonds, federations, compacts, or Covenants, taken in such a sense, to such a
design, and executed to such uses, that sacrilege may be conse^rated, that
robbery of God, of his Son. Christ Jesus, of his chief Ministers and Servants,
may be set up on an high place, and all Israel go up to worship it; that Dr.
Burges his image may have as many venerators as the name of Cain and Judas
sometimes had, while such a Libeller as this sounds his lowbell instead of a
Trumpet, and cries, Come buy Bishops Lands, bow down and worship this golden
Image of refined Sacrilege:. Is this that (Ju^ facque animi, sanctique
recessus,
Menti^ and incollum generos^ pectus honesto,)
generous justice, and just generosity which the Heathen Poet calls for, as the
most welcome Sacrifices to the Gods? We read in Scripture and elsewhere of some
superstition so cruel, that it persuaded Fathers to Sacrifice their Children to
the Idols or Devils; But we never read any Idol so barbarous that required
Children to sacrifice their Fathers; Dr. Gauden does aver this prodigy to be
the product of this age; For Protestant Professors and Presbyters of the same
profession to persecute, impoverish, oppress and destroy Protest^nt, yea and
excellent Bishops, yea and their sacred authority, and their whole succ^ssion,
That the patrimony or inheritance of the Church might fall to some destroyers
share, either by way of gift or dog peniworths and reward for their good
service, or by getting such as proclaim neither buyers nor sellers to have any
strickt conscience.

. But here the Libeller Lib. ^. pa^. 20.
very gravely asks leave to say a few good and true words, as much as can be
against himself, and so nothing to his design; For the next breath he is at it;
that in this age no Orthodox and reformed Christian, Presbyters or people did
persecute and godly ^^shops; Habemus confitentem reum, very true; for though
they were many Orthodox and godly Bishops, yea one and all of them who were
persecuted (if plundring and stripp ng them of revenews, honors, houses,
authority and office, be persecuting) yet Dr. Gauden believes, as much as the
Libeller, that this was done destinately by none but Christians of Hetorodox
judgment, and most deformed manners.

. But the Bishops must be blackned, therefore the Libeller The Libellers go d
will^ Bis^ops and ^^^r lands,
criminates some of them as charged with Treason (but never persecuted, it
seems) not proved against them, nor punished on them as Traitors; Hence he
concludes (as if the spirit of Korah, Dathan and Abiram were in him) that all
the other Bishops in England were ungodly men, who sped, he says, the worse by
the others means, and he dares to ^ye for the wherstone, by saying he knew not
how godly any Bishops were; Yet afterward by amendacius and treacherous memory,
confesses, No doubt some of these Bishops, whom Dr. Gauden commends, were
learned and pious; (yet all persecuted) resolve your own contradictive riddle
wretched and obscure Libellers. In verity or charity he could not but know what
he denies to know, if he knew no good they had done, yet if he know no evils
they had done, he might have given candid Testimony of them; for sure the
Libeller (whoever he is) can be no stranger to the Bishops of England, besides
Bishop Juxon; does he know they were Heretics, or Schismatics, or Simoniacks,
or, Sacrilegious, or Oppressors of innocent men, or licentious livers? have
they needed any compurgators? have they commuted at any ^^^e? have they sold or
bought Church Lands? Have they sought to overthrow Church and State, Kings and
Bishops Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, all magna charta? have they raised
tumults or stoned any Presbyters from the assembly members from the
Parliaments? yea have they not been many of them, most of them, all of them,
either unblameable or very commendable, or indeed admirable men, for preaching,
writing, ruling, living, suffering, and dying. such as are now at rest in the
Lord, and above the slanders of such a fell^ous tongue and pen (to borrow and
resort one of his words upon him.

. Weary and tired at last as a mad dog, he yet pants and jogs on, he fomes and
s^^aps as he passes, at Land, Bishop Pierce, Dr. Wren. Dr. Goodman and
Williams, with some other Capricious Pragmatick^, as he calls them, for crying
out (it may be less discreetly than became their gravity and constancy) to King
and Parliament, where they were every day ready to be stoned, or pulled in
pieces by tumultuary rabbles; When none but supreme power could preserve their
safeties, honors and lives; I believe if this Libeller or his dear Dr. Burges
had been in their case, he would have roared louder then Mars did when he was
wounded by Diomedes; No other Bishops (he says) but were honored, if learned
and godly indeed (of which qualities this Libeller is a sad judge; nor do the
words become his tongue or pen, if the world mistake not the man and his
communication) They were honored, even they, such as Bishop Hall, Bishop
Winnifs, Bishop Prideaux, Bishop Westfield, Bishop Browning, yea and Bishop
Usher too (for he had Carlisle in Cumberland for his support) these were
honored, that is, all their Church revenews, houses, lands, profits, honor,
Office and authority as Bishops, were taken away; I have known some Bishops (as
good as the best I have named) desire and accept of ten pounds to relieve their
distressed Estates, yet they had neither wife nor Child; If this Libeller and
his Dr. Burges were come to be thus honored, sure the English World and London
and Wells would rejoice to find great merits so justly and amply rewarded; Not
so much for their supposed Treason and Tyranny and ruffling and
ceremoniousness, which the Libeller falsely imputes to the English Bishops as
for their Sacrilegious cruelties and impudent calumnies against worthy Bishops,
and in them against the whole Church of England and Clergy, against the King
who preferred them, yea and against that God who bestowed excellent gifts and
graces on many of them, whose Names shall be as a precious perfume to all ages,
when this Libellers (if it were worth knowing, or he durst own his evil and
abhorred self) will be as his Carcass, best when buried and bidden, being so
putrid that no Egyptian confectioner can make it into mummy.

. Having thus freed my self of this Libeller, and left him either to snarle or
lick his wounds as he pleases; I am not to slight Mr. Grafton, D^ Gaudens
(...) replys to ^^. Grafton.
by leaving him without such an answer, as he may in justice and civility
expect from me, though he has some honey as a Be, yet he has his sting as a
Presbyterian wasp; But he is to be treated different from the hornet of the
Libeller, whose aim is to drive and keep all Bishops, Deans and Prebends out
of their Lands and Houses, as those little, but fell Insects did (armed with
Divine vengeance) the Cananites out of the Land.

. Mr. Grafton instead of proving the Covenant (as to the Presbyterian sense and
design against Bishops, etc.) to be ratified by any precept in the New
Testament, or examples of any Christians in succeeding ages, flies to justify
it by dictates of of Nature, by paralels, discoveries of the Old Testament, by
politic Arts, befitting any people or Church National.. Truly on the same
grounds that so much by his or others decryed with (etc. in it) which excluded
Popery and confirmed the already legal and settled Episcopacy of the Church of
England had been as lawful and sacred as this Covenant, and in some respects
much more allowable, because that it disseized no honest man of his freehold
or Estates; But the Covenant did many in its consequences at last, that was
against Innovation and Presbyterian usurpation, contrary the common Law, and
all Ecclesiastical Canons; This in some men's aim and sense and endeavors
sought to bring in both.

. After this light shuffling, Mr. Grafton Mr. Graftons pitiful evasions.
makes queries, which answer themselves, but prove nothing against Dr. Gaudens
assertion, (which is, that no erigents of Religion ever did put any Church or
Christian subjects upon such a way of public Covenanting, without and against
their Sovereigns assent, yea and to alter Laws Established, and ancient
excellent customs in Church and State;) Prove this good Mr. Grafton, in any
time of the Churches prosp^rity or persecution; what Synod or Counsels, what
Senate, what Parliament, what Christian People and subjects to any King, or
Emperor, Christian or Heathen, ever thought of covenanting against the Laws
established against the Emperors express command, or against the Bishops and
government of the Church, who were of the same faith and profession; I know the
Novatians, Donatists, Arians and others, often conspired against the Orthodox
Bishops and Presbyters, but still even these Schismatics, and Heretics, had
their Bishops and Episcopacy as the Christian and Apostolic method of Church
government, no less universal than constant, and necessary in the Church, as
much as Magistrates are for Cities, or Masters for Colleges, or Cheiftains for
Armies, or Pilots for Ships) as St. Jerome speaks.

(...)
. Next he poorly, not like an Eagle but a ^^^^ner bird, stoops to feed upon
that long a go dead and noisome carcass of the so called; holy league
intrance, as a very exemplary parallel for his holy Covenant, and a kind of
directory in Christian Policy; Sure he might have found other, more specious
paterns, but all of this last century, as that in Spain, when John Padilla who
was a godly Master of mis-rule, engaged the faithful people to rebel with him,
so that that of the Guenses, as they called themselves, in Flanders; So that of
the Bohemians, and possible some others of the like sort, much after the tune
of Massanello and the reformers of Naples.

. All these, as they had much of sower leaven and popular faction in them, so
they were very fatally ruinous to their authors and abettors, no way advancing
either good of Church or State; Having no better effects than as yet we in
England have found and felt to our cost by the Covenant, either taken or kept
in a Presbyterian sense.

. After this Mr. Grafton ^^. G^^^^n ^ad parallel betwixt the S^^^ch Laws ^^d the
Baptismal Ch^^stian Covenant.
stranges at Dr. Gaudens not finding the like lineaments in the Covenant (if
distorted to a Presbyterian sense) as are in the Baptismal Covenant; The
inconsistency is plain, and fully explained in Dr. Gaudens answer to the
Libeller, if as Baptism binds us to imitate the humility, justice, meekness,
patience, submission, cross and charity of Christ, so this shall oblige us to
injustice, oppression, faction, sedition, sacrilege, schism and Iliades of
miserable Innovations, contrary to well established and tried Laws, for
Government in Church and State, At this rate the Covenant will appear with a
witness, as Dr. Gauden truly suspects to be a piece of policy rather than piety
in some men, and to have more of the Jesuit than of Jesus; of Matchiavil then
the Gospel; of Barbarity than Baptism.

. Do not say if so found you will renounce the Covenant in any such sense or
intent or practice; Possibly Mr. Grafton is as confident and as innocent in his
intentions as Joseph's Brethren were of stealing his divining cup; But open some
of his Covenanting Brethrens sacks, and you will find there very much contrary
to the Baptismal vow, against flesh, World and Devil; The Estates of innocent
men, Bishops and others by no Law forfeited, yet taken from them; Which
Church Lands, yea all well nigh sold, this famous reformed and flourishing
Church grievously deformed and shamefully robbed; This whole Nation injured,
and abused, the late glorious King hereby tortured on the racks of Schism,
Sacrilege, between convenency and conscience, between honor and safety,
living and dying, between setting up Presbytrey against his soul, and
destroying Episcopacy, against all justice.

. Good Sir, were we Christians of England baptized into these puddles? Or were
we not rather washed from these filthy abominations as Christians and subjects,
did you Covenant against these? Also against all Schism, profaneness,
Superstition, and whatever is against the power of godliness, why did, and do
you or any men act then or now to bring in Presbytery, which is a potent and
pregnant Schism in the Church and State of England to be sure; Why do you
Covenant confusedly at once, against evil and good, against u^;e and abuse,
against what may be unlawful in fact* and the very good Laws themselves in
force? Whence ^ath all the vastation of Church and State, the profaning of
Churches and Churchmen and all things sacred risen of late years? By what
knees opening have all these innovations flowed in upon us, and so long
prevailed, till of late, by a miraculous revolution of divine mercy to the King
and Kingdom and Church, we have seen some period to the malignant influence of
modern comets.

. If the Covenant be against all these inordinate losts and violent actions, in
which so much of flesh, world and Devil are to be seen; Speak O you godly
Covenanters, let us see your good meanings by your good works, else, quid verba
andiam quum facta videam; First cast out Beelzebub and his Angels out of his
and your usurpations, out of your illegal and sacrilegious possessions, restore
by the same loyalty as you have done the King, the Bishops and others to their
rights, restore the Church of England to its pristine Order, Authority, Honor,
and Government: Submit to these licitis and honestis, that have the rule over
you in Church and State under God and the King; Let us have no more if and
ands, nor Presbyterian policies, and independent projects, which are endless
and every day given to change, as the populer wind blows) cease to do evil,
and learn to do good; Let us see the good tree by its good fruits, this do and
let the Covenant live, in a subordination to Gods word and the Laws of the
Land, yea, and the Catholic judgment and custom of the Church, in point of
venerable Episcopacy, assisted by a subordinate Presbytery; By this you
covenanting Presbyters shall be known to be ingenuous and honest men, and if
credit more than conscience do yet check you from cheerful submitting to your
lawful Governors the Bishops, in active and filial obedience; At least let
them have your silent and passive submission; Truly they are more afraid of
you, whose Presbyterian chastisings have been very cruel, than you need be of
them; Let the Laws be the measure of your subjection (though they were not of
your Empire and Covenant, as they must be of Bishops authority and rule; Thus
you will soon agree, but do not think good Mr. Grafton that you or your party
as good Presbyters must correct Magnificat, or rule Church and State, know your
own last and proportions, it may be you see your selves in a false and
flattering magnifying glass, as if you and your party and interest were more
considerable than indeed you are; There is a way to please the most and best of
all sorts of godly Ministers and sober people with restored and regulated
Episcopacy: with doing Bishops right, and neither Presbyters nor people any
wrong; which way I believe the Kings wisdom will take, and all good Bishops
will follow; Do not think by stickling for the Covenant in the rigid sense of
some men, against justice, reason, law, and religion, and all antiquity, to
engage all in a new war, or eternal broyls, only to gratify a faction; This
hook will catch no more fish, the bait is gone, and the bare hook appears, the
Scotch have had their belly full of the Covenant.

. This (Mr. Grafton M^ G^^ftons (...).
) is no Sophistical evasion (as you list to write) but an honest, plain and
serious persuasion to you, and all your party; We must not, we will not, and by
Gods help we shall not be miserable a second time upon a Presbyterial
adventure, and the novelty of any such Covenant; either bring your Covenant to
good old Christian Principles and legal practice of England, or it must and
shall be nulled so far as it differs from them; nor have you dust or smoke
enough now from armies or tumults to blind the peoples eyes; Nor will it
suffice with a popular oratory, to pretend that the late Episcopacy in England
was a vain pomp or glory of the world, etc.. You may say so of all worldly
glory, compared to higher excellencies, or if vainly used; But if well and
worthily enjoined to know that you never covenanted in Baptism any more against
the lawful estates, honors, authority, and ornaments of Bishops, than you did
against your own Bever hat, or Silk stockings, or your silk Cassock, and fine
Gloves, or your good cheer, and City feasts, or their spruce and decent
clothing, or your power in your family, as a Father, Husband and Master, or
your authority as a Minister in your living; abuse these, and you sin against
your Baptism, but use them all well, yea and a great estate, yea and honor to
boot if you can get them; I believe you will not see any Munkish scruple in
your Conscience against them, nor any godly cause to take a new Covenant
against the very use of them, because they have been and may be abused by some
men.

. It is then a great mistake in Mr. Grafton, Gr^^^on p 24 Ep ^^^pacy (...)
Ca^holi^k cu^t^me a d read to^ but a (...) Ch^^stian indica on.
to say that Dr. Gauden declared Episcopacy in its wonted eminency, to be a
tradition and universal observation; It was so indeed in all ages and places
till of late, but not only so, it has further stamps and impressions of
divine order and wisdom, of Scripture precept and Apostolic pattern, of all
right reason, order, prudence, policy, and due proportions of government; But
the first of universal custom and consent is not to be despised by any sober
Christian, for it gives a great gloss and luster to the canon of the
Scripture, to the Lords day, and to Infant Baptism as well as to Episcopal
eminency.

. All which, and not only this of Episcopacy, are owned with all due respect
to the veracity, fidelity, custom and constancy of the Church of Christ, by
all Episcopal Divines as much as Presbyterians, not excepting the Lords day; if
Mr. Calvin and his followers be counted Presbyterians in your sense, who are
you know not very strait laced, as to the divine right of the Lords day, by way
of any divine Precept confining it to the first day of the week.

. Mr. Graftons many light touches about Bishops and Episcopacy, Page 24. The
many judgments for E^^scopacy and prejudices against Presbytery.
as to the name, office, degree, order and authority in Scripture, is to begin
a new and large dispute, in which no man can well receive satisfaction, that
denies credit to all the testimony of Antiquity, all Fathers, Councils and
Historians of the Church and others; They best interpret any ambiguity and
confusion of names in Scripture, they best show the distinct offices in the
Church, the successions of the officers, the difference between the community
of Christian duties as Professors, or believers of the common verity, and the
specialty of office as preachers, or Ministers in common, and the singular
eminency of Bishops, as Rulers or Governors, in the Churches order and policy,
who have ever been the chief conduits, conservators and derivators of all holy
orders, discipline, and government; Nor can Mr. Grafton instance one age
without them.

. His agnition, if it will hold, is ingenuous, and that which Dr. Gauden waits
for; namely, that the Covenant is not levelled against any real excellency (of
abilities, gifts, graces, authority, estate or honor) in the Bishops, but
against an unwarrantable greatness, power, and authority, either assumed by
them, or attributed to them, without and against the Law of God and man; very
good, we agree, let the word of God and its patterns, let the Law and custom of
the Church universal be the measure of this Episcopal dignity, power, and
authority, see what it was in Ignatius, Iraenius, Tertullian, and Cyprians
times, and the first 600. years, but let not every private Presbytery, or petty
fraternity summon Bishops to their tribunal; if Bishops do arrogate or act
beyond the Law, the Law has its coercion for their extravagancy, as well as
for Presbyters; what the Law gives Bishops, and they have enjoyed these many
hundred years, it is very envious and insolent in Presbyters to call it an
unfitting honor; And it is no less injury, that is high injustice and
sacrilege to exclude them from their right, or to rob them of them by violence
and faction; which I see (for all his good nature by fits) Mr. Grafton will be
ready to do, if he have a party once again strong enough to vail (as he vilely
expresses it) that pompous worldly state and wicked superiority which Church
governors had obtained, one instance of which pomp he gives (more like a
rustic pedant, or mechanic Plebeian, than a civil Gentleman, or a well bred
Scholar) in the Lawn sleeves, A Gr p. 25. Mr. Graftons great scandal against
Episcopacy from lawn sleeves and other Bishops ^rnaments.
I suppose he means the rocket and chymer too, which Bishops in England do use.

. Et pueriliter nimis, and scurriliter satis, is this your gravity and oratory
good Mr. Grafton? Is this a sin, or fault, or shame, or an unlawful pomp to be
found fault with in Bishops? Have you no greater instances of your scandals
from their clothes and ornaments? It is a very hungry fly of malice and envy
that lights on these neither costly or flanting ornaments; I confess I never
saw any such glory in them, but rather have wondered how our ancient and
reformed Bishops in England did not choose to themselves some other men's grand,
masculine, rich, august, and venerable garments and attire, nearer their
Doctors gowns, or the Parliament robes, or the Judges vestments; Truly to me
these white habits ever seemed rather Arguments of modesty, humility, and
simplicity in Bishops, than of pride or pomp, for to express (as some fancied)
by the white linen breast plate and sleeves, candorem pectoris, castitatem
corporis, and charitatem operis; The candor of their mind, the chastity of
their bodies, and the charity of their works.. Alas, is your pique at these
poor things, that are so near a kind to rags and tindar? Truly this petulant
passage argues a more vulgar, trivial, and Plebeian spirit, than I wish in Mr.
Grafton, or any man that means well: The Libeller is not such an Idiot as to
think God pleased with black, and offended with white; Nor has Mr. Grafton
cause to suspect so by the Angels appearing, or the Emblems of Christ's glory
and presence in his transfiguration; Are there not some that will quarrel too
at your girdle, and cas^ock, and gown, if you dare use them? Is not the custom
of any Country made the Law of its fas^^on, and therefore thought comely
because customary, the fancy being reconciled to all things by the lonocinium
oculorum eyes intercession, and wontednesse to behold them?

. Truly it is high time for you to give over pumping up your malice against
Bishops and Episcopacy, for you non draw the very dregs of infantile effusions;
Did your Covenant blanch at these toys, no less than at other innocent
Ceremonies, more than at bloody colors (in comparison) I pray God you may
never find greater faults in Bishops, or spots in the English Episcopacy, than
the p^rspicuity as you call it (it may be you mean conspicuity of their lawn
sleeves) I doubt not, but they may last with honor in this Church, after you
and I are in our winding sheets; Nor shall you want proof either of the
antiquity of these vestes candidae in sacris, the use of white vestures in the
Christians sacred solemnities, or of the constant and un-interrupted succession
of Bishops, as chief Governors of the Church, above Presbyters in all ^ges,
though with their confess assistance and brotherly counsel of the gravest of
them as occasion required, which Dr. Gauden is so far from refusing, that he is
ambitious of it, after St. Cyprians modesty and humility, who yet was a quick
vindicator of his Episcopal eminency and due authority, against any factious
Presbyters, or Deacons, who were not so soon to be found in their Parochial
livings by many hundred years, as Bishops were in their Cities and Diocesses,
from which they sent their Presbyters into the Countries, as occasion required,
which Bishop Usher and many others have proved so clearly to them, if you list
to read, that I need not here add my Candle to their Tapers.

. Mr. Graftons close or farewell to these oblique reflections upon the
Covenant, consists only in repeating some of Dr. Gaudens words, and begging
not proving the question; so concluding Mr. Grafton begs and concludes what he
never proves.
mysterially against Dr. Gauden, who affirms and demonstrates beyond all
rational and conscientious reply, that if this Covenants sense and import be
not reconciled to the established government of the Church of England according
to Law, to the legal and just rights of Bishops, to the Kings Supremacy in
things Ecclesiastical, and to every Subjects duty or allegiance, as to his
obedience according to Laws of God and man; It will follow, that in good
earnest, there can be neither Law of God or man requiring, imposing, or
comprobating any such Covenant to be so taken or kept; So understood as Mr.
Grafton and the Libeller seem still to urge it, against the just rights of
Episcopacy in England.

. This notwithstanding, he as boldly as blindly concludes, by a very weak and
womanish flash, that the Boanergesses of the Presbyterian party will find cause
to cry out against Covenant Breaking, nor are they more willing than Pharaoh
and the Egyptians were to go to the Israelites, to release the credulous
consciences of the vulgar from those superstitious, injurious and disloyal
bonds, by which they have captivated them to the interests of Presbytery, in
order to rob, and spoil, and destroy Bishops, that were most worthy men, and to
extirpate that Episcopal government and authority, which is in England,
conform (as to the main) to the custom of all ancient, primitive, and purest
Churches; and to change our Laws civil and ecclesiastical, which are so long
woven together by a succession of 500. nay a 1000. years; And lastly to impose
by will and force, by vulgar importunity and popular insolency, such Laws,
Rites, and Government Ecclesiastical, upon King and Parliament, Clergy and
Laity, Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, as shall seem most convenient to salve
the credit of some sticklers for the Covenant in their rigid and unlawful
Pre^byterian sense; And all this ne videantur errasse, that these Masters
(forsooth) may be honored before a few people, our Laws must be all unhinged,
our Church government subverted, the King endlesly molested, Heaven and Earth
Church and State must be embroiled and a Covenant, which has neither Gods nor
the Kings authoritative stamp upon it, must tanquam e postliminio be revived
and urged again to such a strain of innovation and alteration in Church and
State, as is neither consistent with equity or charity, reason nor religion,
true piety or Christian policy, no nor with common honesty and humanity; And
all this to make good the retreat of some presumptuous or superstitious
Presbyters, whom it would become much better to see with shame, and own with
sorrow their ametrys and transports, to recant and renounce their popular and
factious both opinions and practices, to deprecate the rigor of the Law, and
the Kings just severity; Not to incroach upon, or abuse his great clemency, But
to acquiesce humbly and thankfully in these gracious remissions, indulgences
and reformations which his Majesty was and is willing to grant, And had
declared so much long ago, to the great satisfaction of all honest and sober
men, if the immodest and unsatiable importunity of some fidling men, had not
by the Kings concessions hightned their factious demands.

. Nor shall Mr. Grafton, or any man of conscience need to go further for a just
and ingenious resolution of the Covenant, The C venant is by its own words
bound to its good behavior.
than it self, whose sense, operation, influence and obligation, is so limited
by its own general words, that no man is permitted, as he cannot justly be
obliged, to act any thing in prosecution of this Covenant, further than is
agreeable to the Word of God, and the duties of his place and calling, of which
the Law of the Land is the bound and limit; if men cannot actively conform to
the Laws of man, the Law of God commands them quietly to submit, with patience
and peace, without murmuring, Sedition, Faction or Rebellion; To begin or
foment, which I suppose no honest man can Covenant, and I am in charity prone
to think this Covenant intended no such thing in many men's sense, I am sure it
cannot bind any man to such desires, endeavors or practices, if it do by any
letter of it, capable of no better sense or interpretation, to be sure it is so
far void and null, nor can it be called a breaking of that Covenant, which did
and could never bind men; For nothing binds the soul or conscience of any man,
but Gods moral ties and commands; Or such spontanious and particular vows of
our own, as are conform, not any way contrary, to those general obligations of
Gods will in his word, and in right reason or principles of common justice
declared in the Laws of the Land; All beyond, besides or against these, is
either impious, injurious or superstitious, and so can be of no validity to the
judicious Christian.

It is now time for me to return to my Libeller, The Libellers (...) and
impenitency (...) s^ith proposition.
and to see how ingenious a confession he makes, having been put, by Dr.
Gauden, upon the rack of right reason, the Laws of the Land, the Catholic
custom of the Church of Christ, and the rules of true Religion, which suffer
no man to bind his own or another soul, beyond that morality, piety, loyalty,
justice and charity which they enjoyne.

. But he sturdy and obstinate to the death, and resolved to make good his own,
and the intrest of Dr. Burges, as to his purchase or hopes of Church Lands, and
is so far from confessing any thing just, honest, p^netent or ingenious, that
although his skin be almost flead off, and it only sticks now (as a rabbets) at
his head and ears, yet he kicks and flings and bounds very desperately; yea he
very pertinaciously bellows out his fourth proposition, as some Popes did their
Bulls and brutish thunderbouts of undeserved excommunication, threatening all
with destruction here (for it seems he hopes to raise an Army and increase Dr.
Burges his quondam troop, to a legion.) Nay and damnation hereafter, as if he
had the keys not only of compurgation, but of Hell it self; And all this
terror must come upon the English World, King and people, Bishops and
Presbyters, if they do not constantly and conscientiously observe the Covenant,
even as to the point of exterpating Episcopal Government as by Law established
in England, although there be nothing in this Hierarchy or Church Government
proved contrary to the word of God, as the power of godliness, or the custom
of Primitive Churches, or to the rule of right reason, or the measure of true
policy; Nothing against faith or good manners, if any little things be amiss,
excessive or defective in the constitution or customary execution of that
Government, they are easily supplied or reformed by godly and wise Bishops, or
good Laws.

. Yet upon point of damnation this Covenant must be observed, even to that
Presbyterian rigor of sense and effect, which is evidently contrary to the duty
of Christians and good subjects, as to your obedience due to the Laws
established, to the King as supreme, to the universal good customs and order of
this and all Churches heretofore; Contrary also to that both charity and equity
which is due from all men to one another, not to deprive any of what Estate,
and honor, and authority they are lawfully possessed of, and which they have
no way forfeited.

. And all this must be driven on after long troubles by virtue of a Covenant,
which neither God nor the King, nor our Laws ever enjoined; nor the example of
any famous Church commended, nor any prosperous or pious events and successes
have endeared to the Nation, nor one half of the Nation ever took; And few that
did, ever took it or intend and desire to keep it in any such an Episcopal
sense; The generality of all people, Nobility, Gentry, Ministers and others,
(no less than the Kings declared practice, testifying, that they desire to be
governed in Ecclesiastical affairs) and by good Bishops according to the good
Laws and customs of this and all ancient Churches.

. But this headstrong and bold bayard (the Libeller) is yet so hard-hearted or
hard-mouthed, as not to check at this sharp bit and bridle, put into his mouth,
and the whole Nations, by his denouncing (as from the Troops) destruction and
damnation to all England that keep not this Covenant to his sense, that is, so
as may save the stake or adventure of Dr. Burges and his associates in their
purchase of Bishops Lands, etc.

. Yet here he stops, and rebounds a little at his own insolency, which crying
out darus sermo, this is a hard saying, and so indeed it is worthy of so hard
an heart, and forehead, and hand, as this stif-necked and impudent Libeller
bears about him.

. The learned and most Scholastical disputant Dr. Burges, has an answer in his
paradox of Sacriledg which very handsomely eludes, as he thinks, all those many
condemnations and curses, those sacred, solemn abjurations of old used and
affixed by many Founders and Donors of Lands and revenews to religious and
charitable uses, by which to deter all covetous spirits from adventuring
injuriously to alienate from, or deprive the donors of those gifts; He there
very briskly avoids those Thunderbolts; what that saying, The curse cause less
shall not come with more Sophistry and fallacy than conscience or justice in
many of these cases, which he arms at, especially as to Bishops and
Church Lands, in which he was deeply engaged.

. And may not Dr. Gauden with the good leave of such a purchaser, make use of
his expression, in a case much more clearly, honest, just and conscientious?
Neither destruction here, nor damnation No damnation to those that keep not the
Covenant in a Presbyterian sense.
hereafter shall (as to the merit of this case) befall those who do not (as
they ought not by the Laws of God or man) observe or keep that Covenant taken,
Sep. 11. 1643. in such a sense as is destructive to that Primitive, Catholic,
Christian, and legal Government by Bishops in the way of Episcopacy which was
then by Law settled in England, and ever was, as to the main of its order,
authority, and policy in this, and all Churches since they were Christian.

. His 1. Argument, Lib. page 21. The Libellers vain terrors and curses.
(which must be the anvil and hamm^r by which this Cyclops or Boanerges must
forge and enforce his Thunderbolts) is; God will require performance, and
severely punish the breach of a Covenant, if made between man and man, ergo, of
this etc. The Libeller was never taken for a good disputant, no more than Dr.
Burges, else he would have limited the major to only Lawful Covenants between
man and man; Such as are of things in our moral power, neither to Gods nor man's
injury; Else that proposition is a rankly false, and fallacious, as its
proposers arms are.

2. He must prove the minor propostition, that this Covenant which he so urges
to be observed, in a sense destructive to the Episcopacy of England,
established by Law, is in that sense, notion and design, lawful; Or
reconcilable with the duty we ow by Gods and man's Laws. 1. To the King as
Supreme. 2. To the Church and our Countries honor and peace. 3. To the glory
of God, in the well Government of this Church. 4. To the reputation of reformed
Religion. 5. To the conscience and care of avoiding Sacriledg. Schism, and
faction. 6. To the justice we ow to all godly, honest, and deserving men,
specially Ministers, yea and chief Governors, or Fathers of the Church, as
Bishops, whom no man can lawfully Covenant to degrade of their dignity, or
deprive of their estates, and destroy, as to their authority, any more than
their persons or life, contrary to Law, No more than he may thus wickedly,
cruelly and injustly act against them; which injuries by some desperate men
have been meditated and promoted, of which the Libeller loves not to hear, nor
dare he patronize them, for fear of poor Peter's his fate.

. But to palliate the looseness, fraud, and fallacy of his 4. damning
propositions, he hastens as if all were Gospel; he writs to prove his hard, but
true saying (as he calls it) of vengeance against Covenant breakers, by
induction of some particular instances out of the Scripture.

. God confirmed, he says, the rash fraudulent and inconsiderate oath made to
the Gibeonites, and punished Saul's perjurious zeal against them; ergo a
Covenant taken, obtruded, urged and in a sense injurious to God and good men,
must be so kept, as this Libeller and others design.

. The fraud of this Sophister lies in confounding all Covenants, as if they
were all of a size, parallel and equal, whether just or unjust, lawful or
unlawful, with due authority or without it, against things, good, or evil, or
indifferent.

1. The League Of the league betwixt the Israelites and Gibeonites urged by the
Libeller and Mr. Grafton.
or Covenant made by Joshua and the Princes of Israel was only civil and
secular, not Religions. 2. It was made by the chief counsel and authority of
the Nation. 3. It was in things within their power as civil and secular. 4. It
was to the injury of no honest men. 5. Though it was rash and unadvised in
point of prudence, and those rules of policy, as to war with those Nations,
which God had given to the Isralites, yet God confirmed it. 1. To punish their
rashness and unadvisedness. 2. To preserve the Law and leagues of mankind,
when possibly begun by an honest fraud and surprise, yet afterward deliberately
confirmed as this was. 3. God had mercy for the poor Gibeonites, as less
sinners, or now more disposed to fear and repent than others of the Nations;
Therefore though God punishes their fraud by servitude, yet he will have the
oath and Covenant made good; Since it was not to the injury of any, but
themselves, who might justly, and without sin, bear any diminution put upon
themselves in secular and civil concernments.

. Tell me now (O Egregious Libeller) is your case and sense and intended
execution of the Covenant like this? Begun without, yea against the will of the
Supreme Magistrate by a part of the Nation, first taking it upon themselves,
and then seeking to impose it on others by terror who were freemen, and over
whom they had no such power by Gods or man's Laws; lo which sense, if it should
still be executed, as the Libeller clamors, it must but consicat and continue
those unjust and violent proceedings, which some men did begin and carry on
against all Law, equity and conscience against Bishops and other honest men,
against King, Church, State, Religion, Reformation; Compare at your leisure (O
Libeller) these cases, Saul and the I^raelites deserved Gods wrath for breaking
their vow and oath to the Gibeonites; And such Covenanters as you, would have
the English world to deserve the like wrath of God, if they either should take
or keep this Covenant in your Unjust, Cruel, Factions, Disloyal, Schismatical,
and Sacrilegious sense: No, all Dr. Burges purchase of Bishops Lands and all he
gapes for, is not worth such a sin, and shame, put by such Sophisters on the
Nation.

(...)
. His second Sophisme is, any sworn Covenant between man and man is the oath of
God and this Covenant; er^o Sacred, Inviolable, and Damnable if broken and
unrepented: This the slatterer means, I suppose, and it is granted as true, if
it be restrained to oaths, vows and Covenants that are lawful, just, honest and
in our power; The God of truth who ^^t in his holy Covenant, exacts from man
also the keeping of all Covenants taken by us in justice, truth and holiness;
But he is far from allowing those Idolaters of Baal-^erith, who under pretense
or a Covenant follow lying vanities, Sacrilegious cruelties, and injurious
usurpations: To which no Covenant of God can bind, nor of men ought to oblige.

. Here the man heaps up Scriptur^s to no pu^pose, he knows that God as much
forbids taking and ke^ping, false, unjust, and sacrilegious Oaths, vows and
Covenants, as he exacts the observance of such as are just: Zedekiahs case is
of all other most improper to the Libellers purpose, for then the late Kings
oath to preserve the rights of the Church and Clergy holds good against the
Covenant, if it was to destroy and strip them, so the pr^vious oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy bind all Subjects to the laws in force, and
accordingly to their obedience to the King, and all others set by him over
Church or State.

Zedekiah as a conquered King had taken law and life, and liberty, and kingdom
from the Conqueror Nebuchadrezar, for these benefits he is bound to the peace
and homage required of him; He had power by the Law of God and nature, to
accept of these conditions, and to ratify things by his oath, which b^nds him,
not only in policy, and by the Law of Nations, but in piety to God; because in
rebus licitis and honestis, though the bargain was something hard, yet it was
in things honest, and in nullius injuriam, and in his own power.

. Let your Covenant be brought to this sense of justice, honesty, and
indemnity, to all good Laws and good men, you shall not need to fear men with
Anathema's, or Presbyterian excommunications; only this I must tell you,
Bishops and Episcopacy will then stand, and your Dr. Burges will loose his
sacrilegious purchase, which none by Gods or man's Laws had power to sell or
b^y, as your Dr. Burges knew well, ergo, majus crimen babel, his guilt with
Judas is greater than his gain can be.

H^^ (...) and (...) of Scriptures
. So that this Libellers cunning cumulation of Scriptures, and his Emphatick
urging them, (with I pray mark, and again thus) These are but as the fine words
that some Jaglers and Hocus Pocus's use to their gaping Spectators, to amaze
them, till they do their tricks, or cut their purses; All these, nor a whole
cart load of Scriptures, will not enable Dr. Burges to take an unlawful Oath
and Covenant, nor to keep it, or any lawful one unlawfully; that is, with
injustice, oppression, and sacrilege.

. This crafts-master and enchanter hopes to darken men's eyes, and eclipse the
Sun of Reason and Religion, by crying it is as clear as the Sun, that God will
never put up the wilful breach of any lawful Covenant, but dreadfully punish
it, even on Kings themselves; very true, but that is not the case, nor the
sense (O noble Libeller) And is it not as clear that God will punish those that
Covenant with sin and death, that bind themselves and others with unrighteous
decrees; that swear with Herod most rashly, and then for shame and sense of
honor must keep their oath by a kind of Heroic cruelty; and least he should
be forsworn, he must murder John Baptist, whereas Herod might have kept his
oath in ways just and generous enough, by restraining it (as this Covenant
ought to be) to a sense, just, lawful, honest, and within his moral power.

. So this sacrilegious Libeller, and his rigid Presbyterian party, they
covetously covenanted, in hope they should extirpate Bishops, possess their
estates, share their authority, abrogate all ancient Laws of Church and State.

. But this sense violent and unjust, was not the sense and design of sober
Covenanters, they declared contrary, and were always really under the salvo's
and restraints, tacit or explicit, of duty to God, the King, and their
Neighbors, according to justice, former oaths, and Laws in force; Yet still
this Harpy and his seconds dream of devouring Bishops and their Land; No man
denies them the severest and rigidest keeping of their Covenant in all honest
and just ways, but to sacrifice the honor, conscience, justice, peace,
prudence, and religion of this Nation and Church only to gratify a few greedy
cormorants, under color of the Covenan^, upon I know not what tenors of
destruction and damnation, that an impudent Libeller (obscure, and ashamed to
own his name) shall dare to threaten King and his people will all this, were to
be afraid of (umbram asini) an asses ears, as if they were horns; or to expect
he will make a learned speech, when he only brayes most lamentably, he is not
to be regarded, though he be the aureus Asinus of Apuleius, and has been able
to purchase a good parcel of Bishops and Church lands.

. O how pleasant a sight will it be to all honest men, (as in the case of Crown
lands) to see these crafty Merchants bite their fingers instead of licking
them, when they are by Law taught to spell their Covenant to a sense, that is
only just, legal, and honest, or else to read it backward, to repent and
recant it, so far as it is inconsistent with truth, right, and peace; there is
no such charm or bond in any passages of it, but they may be easily undone by a
juster and higher power than that which imposed it, or spontaniously took it in
an unjust sense, and to end^ unwarrantable.

(...).
. This scare crow or ox of clouts (the wretched Libeller) still goes on, to
set up this wind-mil of his fancy, as to Scripture severity, against perjury,
(like those which are used in gardens to drive a way birds from Fruit, by their
rattling at every puff of wind) So this man (if he be a man, for he has the
petulancy and malice of the worst of women) fills his mouth with Scripture
breath, which the Devil may do. and will do for his designs, only to scare
away the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters from resuming their Estates, Lands, and
Houses; Secure him but, as to this danger, you shall ride him with what curb or
snaffle you please; He is not tender mouthed, as to any oaths, if he be, let
him look to keep stricktly those he formerly took, according to Law, and which
to be sure bind him to the Laws of God and men.

. It is as true and trite and not disputed by Heathens, that the divine
veracity and constancy abhors, forbids, and will punish severely, both perjury
and sa^riledg, being both sins defying or denying God.

But as Sacrilege is confined to the unjust violation, Alienation or
Dehonestation of things truly sacred, by their Relation, Dedication, or
consecration to God and his service; So Covenant Breaking and vow-violating or
perjury are measured only by the Lawfulness or unlawfulness of what is sworn,
vowed or Covenanted, else unlawful oaths, vows, and Covenants bind not, but
only to breaking of them: The mills of divine vengeance are as heavy, and grind
as much to powder, rash presumptious, false and unjust swearers, who bind
themselves to do wickedly, by taking Gods Name, falsely into their mouths, by
seeking to make God the patron of unjust actions, as they are against those
who violate their faith or Promise made to God or man in things just and
lawful. Nor is there less perjury ( a part ante, and pone, than retro and a
part post) forward than backward; He falls bad enough into the mire of sin,
who falls on his face, by taking unlawful oaths and Covenants to sin, as well
as he that falls backwards, by not keeping such as he has Lawfully taken; But
both the Libeller and Mr. Grafton are shy of this retrospection, how, by whom,
to what, in what sense they are bound by their Covenant, least upon due
examination they find their error, and be forced to recant, to the great
disgrace of their Antiepiscopal party and faction, which having neither law of
God nor man, for their design begun with the sword, and carried on with a
pretended Covenant, or interest of Presbyters, against Episcopacy.

. There is yet one thing more that lies in the Libellers way, Mr. Grafton and
the Libellers shifts make the Covenant National.
at which he stumbles, and crusheth (like Balaam on his Ass) his leg against
the wall, where the way is narrow and presses upon him, between the
unlawfulness of the matter in his injurious and Sacrilegious sense, and the
want of due and supreme Authority to set off his Sacred Covenant, to make it
legal, and so National; The King (he confesses) as Father of the Family did
forbid it) not we presume as to what may materially be in it, Hon st,
Religions, Just, Loyal and Moral; No, the King was too good a Christian to deny
these bonds, which he knew God, the Laws, and his Majesty had on men's
consciences) But all know, that, his Majesty hill had just jealousies of the
Covenant, least under the face of an Angel of Light, of fair and godly words,
Satan an enemy to King and Bishop, might be hal^ And least while men pretended
reformation, they might intend extirpation, deformation and d^struction. The
(...) Covenant.
2. His Majesty justly denied, because it was contrived, offered and obtruded,
without his Counsel taken. 3. He saw which way some Presbyterians at first did
both interpret and intend it, their words and actions Proclaimed their sense of
it, against Root and ^ranch, good and bad, chaff and wheat; Episcopacy no less
then Prelacy (for so those Crit^^ks distinguish where is no difference) The
envy, revenge, ambition, covetousness of some men, was to b^ satisfied only by
worrying to death the godly Bishops and venerable Episcopacy it self, with the
whole Church of England, no Catholic custom, no Laws of the Church and
Kingdom, no pr^^cript^on o^ a Thousand years, no learning, merit, a^e, or
usefulness may be pleaded, to keep but possession of their own during their
life's, no not one foot, or pens or Cottage which belonged to them, as Bishops,
or other dignified and Clergymen belonging to their Couns^l and assistance in
Cathedrals, must be allowed them; Therefore the late wife King finding some men
thus maliciously to take and execute the Covenant, and knowing the petitions
and expectations of so many worthy Bishops and others for their preservation
and his too, and the Churches too; He did resolutely deny it, yea and died
rather than allow it, in that injurious and sacrilegious sense, least under the
belly or over the back of the Covenant, as a stalking-horse, the Enemies of
this Church and State, Papal or Presbyterian, should with their Sacrilegious
murdering piece, at once destroy the Order, Honor, Glory, Renown, Reverence,
Authority and Government of this so Famous, Ancient, Flourishing, and reformed
Christian Church, which has been ever blessed with Excellent Bishops, and by
them, and under them; Nor was any thing ever amiss, but it was either imputable
to the indiscretion of some Bishops, and not to the Governments Constitution,
or might easily be remedied by their wisdom, piety and charity.

. So then the Libeller and Mr. Grafton does but vapor and flourish, and beat
the Air with their Flag-staffs without any swords; For i^ is as false, that
God exacts the performing of any morally or civilly unlawful Covenant, or oath,
or that he allows any to keep or stretch a Lawful oath unlawfully (as if a man
should swear to pare ones nails, or trim his beard, and cut off his fingers
ends or ears) as it is true, that private and personal oaths, morally lawful do
bind, though there be no public, civil or supreme Authority enjoying them;
But no such private oaths may lawfully be taken or kept in contradiction to,
or violation of former public oaths and Laws, yet binding to our duty, which
is the case of the Covenant, if urged to a Presbyterian Anarchical sense,
unlawful and sacrilegious, against Bishops and Episcopacy.

L^^^l page ^^ O^ b^^g^^^g (...).
. After this the Libellers belly gripes him, at one Pill of Dr. Gaudens, which
calls some men bungling Reformers, this he says is either Blasphemy against
his God, or railing nonsense; So it is to call a spade, a spade, to speak the
most pregnant and pungent truths, which many years miseries have told us, The
crafty Merchant will not endure this freedom if it touch his copyhold, or look
squint at Dr. Burges purchase; No sober man may doubt of, or deny a blessed
reformation of Religion, these last 20. years, in which some have risen from
the dung hill to sit above Princes; The monster will not endure Job to complain
on the dung-hil, and to scrape his sores with a pot-sherd, whose miseries and
Tragedies all ingenious spectators behold with tears of astonishment; if he,
and his Dr. Burges, can lick themselves whole, by hedging in their desperate
adventure of money lent on the public faith, and so getting a good penniworth
of Bishops Lands, all is well, though he paid not half the value, as he did
not, for the first money lent was lost as well as other men's; His Gods that
imposed on others a Covenant of salt, why did they not keep their public
faith? Or why should Dr. Burges and some few purchasers of Bishops and
Church Lands speed better by their sacrilege, than many honest men, who durst
not buy Bishops Lands, nor willingly lend any money, but only paid a Ransom
from popular Plunder and Ordinances of sequestration, as they did many years
taxes; The just Prize which our worthy healers, the Libellers Gods, or
A^s^ulapiu^^es, had deserved, for the great cure of this Church and Kingdom;
The first not to be healed by them, till they covenanted and performed the
destruction of Bishops, and all legal Episcopacy; The second not to be cured
till the Kings head was cut off; Are not these your worthies, your Gods, and
worthy to be your Reformers, O devout Libeller?

. After all this swaggering, yet the Libeller, Lib^l. p. 26 The c nf^ssion o
the Libeller ^gai^st his design.
as the Demoniack in the Gospel, after crying and tearing and foaming, comes to
his senses, and confesses oaths, if their matter be sinful, do not bind, but
to break them, or rather not to keep them; Pray Sir keep in this pound, and
keep your Dr. ^urges with you; This will keep him from going with any joy to
Wells again, for the Covenant may neither be kept nor taken in any unjust
sense, nor can it keep him, or any man in his unjust possession of Bishops and
Church Lands; If any men, or the two Houses, or the Assembly, or all Scotland
should covenant to take away all men: estates that have red hair, black beards,
blood-shot eyes, and short legs, and these marks should fall on Dr. Burges or
the Libell r, would they not cry amain, such a Covenant is unjust against
honest men, upon no valid reason, against law, property, liberty of the
Subject, and all good conscience; yet are the allegations against Bishops and
Episcopacy less capable to justify their b^ing destroyed by the Covenant,
than those unlucky characters are of any Zoilus, with Laconick legs and
Draconick eyes.

. The Oxford Reasons reprinted, this Libeller blows away with an easy breath,
as leaf gold, or dry leaves, being an antidote as he thinks, against taking the
Covenant, but no expulsive or dispensation, to the takers of it, for their not
keeping it, he means still in h^s ^ntiep^scopal sense, so as may ensnare Dr.
Burges lands.

. But the man has sure a better nose, if he had a mind to hunt the right hare;
Dr. Gaudens and so the Oxford reasons are urged not against the illegality of
the authority only, but the immorality of the matter, and the Schismatical
Sacrilegious injuriousnesse of the keeping this Covenant in a sense d^structiv^
to Episcopacy, to many Bishops and other honest m^n, to the Laws of the Land
yet unrepealed, to the duty of allegiance and lawful obedience which Subjects
is owe to the King, and Presbyters to Bishops; These are the bones which the
Libeller finds in the Oxford reasons, and therefore spits them out as soon as
he tastes them, for he saw they were not for his turn, and did hold firm as well
after as before any Covenant in an unlawful sense.

(...).
. He very properly tells us this Kingdom, and so the Church, entered into the
Solemn Covenant; What, without the King? Did the body speak without the head?
Sure it is no Kingdom without the King, much less a covenanting Kingdom; And
did the same kingdom aftertake engagements against the King and all Monarchy?
And did the same Church engage against all Bishops and Presbyters, and
Minister^ and Churches? What our Brethren of Scotland did, and how, and how
many, and by what rules, and to what ends, Dr. Gauden is not sollicitous to
enquire* that is another Province, and Dr. Burges when he suffered the gentle
lash, was best able to tell you his sense of their action; For which see also
his learned reply, called, The wh^ppe^ whipped; no Ape with a chain, has more
pr^tty fea^^, winding, turning, and avoiding the lash, than that grave Author
uses.

For the Low ^ountries The Low Cou^^ries C^^^nant.
and Prince of Oranges case, who began that Covenant called the Guenses, which
^rederea and other^ countenanced in a popular way, against the prudent
^o^ernesse, Margaret of Austria, let them plead for ^t that are concerned in
it, and who dearly paid for it, first and last; I believe reason of State first
moved in that business, followed with long wars, and many Tragedies, and so
does Dr. Gauden think it is reason of S^ate which chiefly moves this Libeller
thus to rack the Covenant to his unjust, sacrilegious, impenitent, and
unr^storing sense, that Dr. Burges may keep his Bishops lands, who is no
Bishop, and it is pity he should, till he be of his old mind again, which was
for Bishops tooth and nail, and very bitter against their enemies; but he has
turned over a new leaf, and learned that Divinity in ^is Sheepskins and
Evidences, which he never read in the Scripture, Fathers or Councils, or any
learned writer, no not in Mr. Cartwright, or Mr. Knox, all against sacrilege,
that is ^lienating Church Lands against Law, and without King and Bishops
consen^.

. And thus Mr. Libeller (who may well take the degree of Doctor in that
faculty) you see that Dr. Gauden has discovered your sacrilegious fallacies,
despised your silly and unwitty sarcasmes, not gathering the flowers or fruits
of your sorry Libel, which are none, but weeding away your hemlock and henbane,
by which you seek to poison the Nation anew, and to pervert that only honest
and just sense, which either is in, or ought to be made of the Covenant; How
gaudy the field is of Dr. Gaudens Analysis, your clincking and childish folly
is no competent judge; But to echo to your wit, it will be no very gaudy day
to you, or your Dr. Burges, when the Bishop of Wells comes to his lands, and
the Dean to his house, out of which the Covenant, if honest and just, could not
drive them, being legal and uncondemned men; nor either can or will it keep you
in your usurpations of their rights, not them from their just possessions; And
where then is all your laboring in the fire and furnace, your blowing with the
bellows of faction, to heat the Covenant seven times hotter than any honest man
either designed, or took it in, or can with conscience and justice keep it?
Namely to the utter destruction of all lawful Bishops and ancient Episcopacy in
the Church of England; but to your comfort (or terror rather) there is a young
man now appearing in the fiery furnace, with the conflicting Church of England,
and its afflicted Clergy, Bishops, and others; He appears as an Angel of God,
miraculously come hither to relieve both Church and State; He is, and will be
their Patron and D fender, he only is worthy to be their restorer and
reformer, who is their King, and worthy to be the Son of such a Father.

. And now, O Nebucadonosor, and Holofernes, (for so this cruel and cursed
Libeller may justly be called) you may have leisure ere long to laugh and scorn
more heartily at the Church of England, as a mother, The Libellers scorn to o^^
the Church of England (...) a mother.
and at the Bishops as Fathers, when you shall see them come out of that
furnace, which you hoped had quite consumed them, unless you can make good by
some means your horrid menace of damnation hereafter, and of destruct^on here
both to the King and all his kingdoms; In which all honest men abhor now such
putid Sophistry, and frontlesse Sophisters, who ashamed to own themselves in so
evil a cause, do creep out like vermin in the dark, and appear only in the
vizard of Libels, which show them to be as honest men as those carnati
carnifices were, who durst not but be in disguises, when they did that horrid
act, the execrable murder of the King, even of that King who made such
conscience of sacrilege, and dyed a Martyr for the Church and Kingdom;
certainly if the Covenants words and sense be ambiguous or obscure, no oracle
(next Gods word) can better tell us what ought to be the sense of it than our
Laws, and the Kings great example, whose wisdom we now find, after many
miseries, was as the Prophesies or Oracles of God, so much they have been
fulfilled in our miseries, and now in our hoped felicity, by the happy
restoring of his Son our Sovereign Lord and King.

. Having thus discharged the Libeller with more than one flea in his ear, and
with great flames in his Conscience, (unless he have such a crack in his brain
as may make his excuse from sin, and sacrilege, by his frenzy) The last work
is to pay Mr. Grafton Grafton p 26. Mr. Graftons popular and vain fears.
his due also, after the different account and rate which he may deserve either
of charity or civility.

. His fear (good men) is, least Dr. Gaudens downright blows may quite break in
sunder whatever may be of sacred bond in the Covenant, and instead of leaving
an ulcer of putrid faction, he cut in sunder veins, and sinews, and bones that
are sound and good; But this dread of his is in vain, for Dr. Gauden still aims
to bring it to the rule of justice by Gods and men's Laws, without which it
cannot be sacred; Those are like utterly to break it, who bend it to factious,
partial, sinister, unjust, violent, unlawful designs, which make every thing
execrable that is so abused, though they be the blessed sa^raments of the Lords
Supper it self, which some (as in the powder plot) have taken, as a bond and
seal of secrecy to their treasons and villainies; I still hope better things of
the Covenant, and it shall be the rigid Presbyterian covenanters fault, if they
make it to be wholly broken and baffled by their rigid, sacrilegious, disloyal,
unjust urging and keeping it, in any presumptuous, superstitious, injurious,
seditious, or Schismatical sense, against all which the Covenant does by many
words engage them, more than it can in justice, or reason, or law, against
regular Episcopacy, or the rights of Bishops, or the Churches honor, of the
kingdoms peace.

. Mr. Graftons note, that the paucity of Covenanters Of the many o^ (...)
Covenanters.
does not discharge its obligation, is true, if it bind to just things; and
it is as true, that the multitude of takers does not confirm it, if it bind to
things unlawful, no more than Queen Mary's both houses of Parliament, making a
Covenant with the Pope and Papacy, did bind the Nation for ever to the errors
and superstitious of that profession: Dr. Gaudens argument from the paucity,
was to show how far it is from such a National drag-net as took in all, yet are
none disobliged from their duties, but bound by ancienter, diviner, and more
legal bonds, from which the Covenant can absolve no man, nor enable him to act
contrary to them.

. He is again scratching or clawing the Kings most sacred Majesty, who is never
the more sacred for his passive taking or suffering the cross of the Covenant,
unless the Covenant were taken, and to be kept only in a sacred sense, which
must be just to God and man, to his own rights as King, and his Subjects in
Church and State, against which the King alone cannot take any Covenant which
shall be injurious to God himself and others, because the King is a public
person, and all estates have right in his protection, as he has the right of
dominion above all, and for all his good Subjects benefit.

. For Dr. Gaudens making one of the number of his Covenanters, as Mr. Grafton
reckons without his host, so it adds nothing to the matter; for it is sure,
neither he nor any man can be bound to any thing before, or after such a
Covenant, but what is just and honest; but to satisfy both Mr. Graftons and
the Libellers curiosity, who go by hearsay, Dr. Gauden assures the world, that
he never took any oaths, but those appointed by Law, no protestation, no
engagement, no league, vow, or negative oath, And for this Covenant he offered
freely to some principal authors of it, his many just scruples and objections
against it, both as to its matter and authority; He had some of their answers
under their hands agreeable to that sense, in which his charity w^^ and is
willing to interpret the meaning of the Covenant, to reform, not ruin
Episcopacy; then he declared publicly his judgment, for Bishop^ and
Ep^sc^pacy to be such as now it is, That he neither could, nor ever would
assent to the Covenant in any sense, but such as was in his freedom to refuse,
and consistent with his former oaths, the Laws of the Land, and the
preservation of Episcopal government in its just rights and enjoyments, in
piety, loyalty, and those duties of equity and charity which he owed to God or
man.

. Further than this Dr. Gauden never approved or owned the Covenant, nor ever
shall any part of it, how good soever it may seem in some things and
expressions, yet an evil sense must not be covered under good words, nor may
godly expressions be afterward wrested to abet ungodly actions: the whole mass
of the Covenant seemed to be sweetened by those general salvo^s and restrictions
put into it, of having regard in all things to the word of God, and to the
duties of men's places and callings, and to the power of godliness; Let Mr.
Grafton keep to these, and so keep his Covenant, for surely these can bind no
man to any thing injurious to any honest man, or honest office in Church or
State.

. Of Dr^ Gaudens free and public declaration of his judgment, as to the
Covenant in general and particular, hundreds (besides God and his own
Conscience) are witnesses, and if such a declaration of his sense, what ought
to be the meaning of it in conscience and honesty, will add any strength to
Mr. Graftons sense of it, or to the Libellers design of making it sacred, not
sacrilegious, much good do them, I believe they will sooner be drawn to Dr.
Gaudens sober Eiscopacy, than to their Presbyterian exorbitancy, which he ever
openly abhorred, and never secretly complied with; if he had, it had been as
much against his conscience, as against reason, Law, justice, charity, and
Religion, and he must have had no peace till he had publicly repented and
recanted such dissimulation, which he abhors as Hell; But none that ever
conversed with Dr. Gauden, or his writings, do so much as suspect him to be
either Antiepiscopal, or Presbyterian in such a sens^, as either the Libeller
must intend by his Covenanting, if he be faithful to his friend Dr. ^urges and
his purchase, or Mr. Cra^ton; now openly and most importunately, he freely
tells the world, that the Episcopal Government as by law established in
England, will never be reconciled to his Covenanting conscience, because he
affects either to be over righteous, beyond the sober, just, and honest
meaning, aplicable to the Covenant, or else over wicked, by being more rigid
than the soberest masters of the Cov^nant intended.

. His being apt to think the Covenant in his Presbyterian, injurious, (...)
page ^. (...) Grastons (...) the Covenant (...) a National o^^nd.
illegal and Anti^piscopal sense, looks very like a National obligation,
signifies as little, as any other men's thoughts to the contrary, considering
the state of the times, and of the 2. Houses, when this was first set up in
England; at that distance from the King, and in designs so diverse from our
Laws, and so palpably for a novelty, and a party set up, first by foreign force
and brotherly invasion; The two Houses were not half in each, either of Lords,
or of the first chosen Commons, how they came so thin God knows, it is sure there
was foul play on some side, however collective they had been, they had not
power to make, or take, or impose any oath contrary to the Laws of England,
which they were trusted to observe, not to break, nor yet to abrogate, or
change without the Kings consent; Nay Dr. Gauden has often heard that the House
of Commons have not power to require oath of any, except perhaps of their own
members So that the protestation was precarious and personal, not National, or
Mandatory; And to be tree, he knew so well the intrig^^s of those times, (not
as one of any faction, but as having many in his observation, that were the
Jehu's of the times and drove furiously) that however many, possibly most of
the 2. Houses meant, at first better than things after proved, yet he is
confident he does those men no injury, who were the chief Engines and
Charioters, to say they did all things more out of policy than piety, and by
this Covenant they intended the advance of a party or faction, not of the
public interest, as it was comprehended and fixed in our excellent Laws and
constitutions of Church and State; ( Ad quas evertendas nemo sobrias accessit,
as Cato said of Julius Caesar) to the subversion of which by popular
combinations and Covenantings without the Princes or supreme powers consent no
man comes, but drunk with pride and passion, or ambition, or covetousness, or
superstition.

. For his Sacred Majesty's sense of it, he can best tell what it was and is,
but Dr. Gauden believes in Mr. Graftons sense, it will seem rather sour Grapes
to set his teeth on edg, than sweet ones to refresh his Soul. After all this
said and done, it is sure neither the King nor any subject can be bound by, or to
any sense of it, but what is just; of which, not his will much less others
violence, but the Laws are the measure; Nor shall Mr. Grafton be more wary of
plunging the King and Kingdoms into perjury, than Dr. Gauden is to keep them
and himself too, from both perjury (which is to take a false and unjust oath,
as well as to break a true and just oath) as also from Schism, Superstition,
Sacriledg, and rigid Presbytery. Of oaths extorted by terror.


. What force and terror was used by some Covenanters, Mr. Grafton was not then
such a babe and suckling, as not to know, if he were, let him read the policies
and Histories of these Tragique times; Dr. Gauden judges that an oath extorted
by force and fear, only to a man's Private damage, in things of which he has
moral power, does bind; But not otherwise, nor to another injury; For in these
cases of sin and injury the fear may betray a man's constancy, yet he must
repent speedily and not keep it presumptuously; For as, Nemo obligetur ad
impossibilia, so nor ad impia and injusta, nor can he ( requirere or confer
jus in aliena) get or give any right hereby over another Goods, Estate,
Liberty, Life, or conscience; So that all those shreds and ends signifies
nothing to affix or patch up the Presbyterian sense of the Covenant, against
the rights of Bishops and usefulness of Episcopacy in England.

. He carps at Dr. Gaudens, owning the bonds of God, which are moral, to have in
them sufficient and indispensible Obligations of the soul, to all duty, as if a
man were not bound, or not fast enough in Mr. Graftons judgment, by the
precepts of God, Law, and terror of his curse, even to wrath, Hell and et^rnal
death, until Mr. Grafton hears him swear, or vow, or take some Covenant; all
which are but sederings of those moral chains, or as it were hardnings of them,
as steel or Iron to a greater toughness; As to a man's sense, and caution and
con^^^nce, which sometime need such quicknings, and as to others jealousies who
may need such further a^urances, however it is a most adamantine truth, that a
thousand other vows and Covenants cannot bind the taker absolutely against any
thing naturally guilty, Ecclesiastically or politically good, such as
Episcopacy is without doubt, good orders, just distinguishing, prudent
governing, and meet authority; And so may be useful, yea necessary and so
morally good in the way of duty to God, or good to others, or to a man's self;
Nor can they oblige us to any thing which is morally unlawful and unjust or
injurious to any man, King or subject, which the Covenant must do in Mr.
Graftons Presbyterian sense, and superstition, unless he thinks new Covenants
without, yea against Law can absolve from, or abrogate old Laws and all lawful
oaths; This I hope Mr. Grafton will grant, and this will save Bishops Lands,
lives, honor, office and authority, for all the Covenant, which he may keep in
Gods Name, so far as it stands with a good conscience, and trencheth not on an
others just interest in thought, word or deed, and if he cannot, by reason of
the rigor of his supposed Antiepiscopal sense in the Covenant, help up
venerable Episcopacy, yet I am sure he cannot be bound to pull or hold it down,
since this cannot be done but to the great damage of many honest men, to the
violation of our Laws and Allegiance, to the scandal of our Religion, as
Christian and reformed, also to the Canonization of Schism, consecration of
Sacrilege and encouragement of all Seditious Faction, and disorderly confusion
in Church and State; To prevent which, that Mr. Grafton has yet skill,
courage, or conscience, let him cease to be pragmatick, and give leave to wiser
men to manage affairs.

. For Jeptahs vow, Of Jeptahs vow.
I do not believe Mr. Grafton thinks Jeptah did literally fulfill it, but in a
qualified sense of devoted virginity; and few Authors think other ways, only
Lodovicus Capella, in a Tract added to his Myrothecion, labors to prove it
literally fulfilled by the Fathers killing his daughter, and offering her a
burnt Sacrifice to God; a very horrid fact indeed, and seems so different from
the goodness of God, that however that learned man urge the text in Levit. and
the face of (...) or Anathema, yet I judge no Saint of God, or true Church of
God was ever guilty of such a fact; But God accepted a dedication amounting, as
near as could be, of his daughter, short of life.

. Gods oaths are for our assurance, to confirm our faith, and help our
unbelief, as Tertullian expresses it, Beati nos quorum gratia Deus jurat,
miseri si nec Deo juranti credamus, Gods oaths cannot but be true and just and
faithful, ours ought to be so, in truth, righteousness and jugdment, without
falsity, injury, or silliness; Let the Covenant be so, we are agreed; Let no
honest men have cause to complain that it treads not only on their toes too
hard but on their very heads honors, offices livelihood and life, then I am
sure Bishops and Episcopacy will be safe.

A (...).
. The second suggestion of Mr. Gauden is as true, that Imagination or mear
presumption cannot bind in any Covenant, contrary to what in reason, justice,
law, and religion you ow to another; It may bind you, as the sense, reason and
measure of your erroneous or impendiu^ conscience, to your own injury and
damage, in things of which you have dominion or moral power, but not
otherways; Which truth has as considerable a strength as you confess the next
has, it is well you own any thing so strong, just, ingenious or religious, the
Libeller (as a Dragon) devours all, denis all, as it he had the Devils
Chemistry to turn all he touches, even Scripture it self, into Soph^stry and
falsity; pray keep to this strength, it will keep you safe, and your Covenant
unblameable, let it be in nullius infariam* to no honest man's injury; (Though
you may injure dishonest men too, by exacting more p^nalty of them, than the
Law inflicts) much less to the Kings injury, or the Bishops, or the Church, or
the Nations; keep your Covenant in these (...), and fortifications Salva res
est; vicimus; I will not gave a farthing for the Libeller, nor for Dr. Fur^^es
his tenure and Sacrilegious Purchase.

(...).
. Yet again Mr. Grafton repents and repeals to some his honest concession; And
fearing to confirm Bishops and Episcopacy in their rights, he quarrels at what
are Bishops-rights and the Church-rights, can he tell his own horse and saddle,
or his Wife, or his house, or lands, or his maidservant, or his ox, or his
ass, or any thing that is his? and how can he tell these are his? What if a
Sceptick denis them, he will bring forth first actual possession and quiet, and
for a long time, and many witnesses, and fair deeds and records, will this
serve? All these are undeniable for Bishops, and their intrest, and can a
Covenant rob you or them of all?

. But he and his must have the stating of the object, the regulating,
rectifying, reforming, modelling, mending of Bishops and Episcopacy, even till
they mar all; Good Sir, give leave to the Laws and our Parliaments and Kings
and Clergy in all former ages, and to the Church Catholic to be wiser then you
and your faction; you are but of yesterday, there were with them, and there are
still amongst the Bishops and Episcopal Clergy of England, men much elder and
wiser, without vanity, then you or your Fathers, or your Presbyterian brethren,
besides the Episcopal Clergy, and others of their, and the Laws Persuasion have
almost as much right and wit as your selves, to judge what is best for them and
the Church; Nor are you more zealous in words, to have Government and
Governors of the Church, such as they should be, than they are indeed (I
engage for one if God and the King call me to that work and office.)

. True, if you can model a Parliament to your own genius, much may be done for
Presbytery; But the English World is not taken with it, you should have given a
better cast of your office and skill in Church-work, when you turned up
Presbytery trump, whether the King and the Clergy and the 2. Houses would or
no, for had they continued full and free, no Presbytery had peeped in England.

. The regulating of Episcopacy^s easy, if it come not into Presbyterian hands;
Trust the King, he is wise and just and ^ou have found him very benign and
gracious, you shall do well not to w^redraw his Gentlines, till it break;
rather walk worthy of that indulgence his Majesty intends you and others, who
pleaded weak judgments, and strong passions or prejudices, but take heed of
strong presumptions; the fall of Presbytery (and so it may be you will say of
Episcopacy) had not been so great, if it had not, like young learns flown too
high, and melted its wings before it was half over the Sea.

. The concessions which the late excellent King was ready to have granted, as
to the temperature of Church Government by Bishops, are now lost and forfited
by that party, because they then disdained them, they would have all or none,
it is not just or fit now they should have very much; however not too much.
Government in any latitude is a liquor too strong for most vessels, especially
green, raw, and unseasoned.

. The next Paragraph of Mr. Graftons Grafton page ^^. O^ Eccles. of (...)
is a most factions queri, and not worth any sober man's reply; truly it is pity
Mr. Grafton is not monitor or remembrancer to King, Lords, and Commons, or
interpreter of our Statutes; it is sure that very act or Statute for taking away
the high Commission, is by very many learned Lawyers (and one I could name, a
man without suspicion for any partiality to Episcopacy or Bishops) who yet upon
some Presbyterians desires, of London, (probably Mr. Grafton was one of the
fraternity) to know his judgment, upon that Act touching Episcopal
jurisdiction, how far yet in force, he did very liberally show me his ju^icious
and learned pains in the point, and concluded for Episcopal jurisdiction, still
good and valid by Law, and only abrogated as to the high Commission-Court, I
am prone to think Mr. Grafton knows this story to be true, but it was not for
him to tell it.

. After this Mr. Grafton Mr. Graftons ^ear of a Na^^ nal Covenant Breaking.
has a jealousy least the sin of Covenant Breaking may fall upon the Nation,
but sure there is no fear of National perjury by doing right to Bish ps, and
justice to Episcopacy, injury, oppression, and extortion, and injustice, and
cruelty, sacrilege and schism, are sins also of the first form, and to be
avoided as well as his covenant breach, or national perjury, which is but a
popular and fallacious expression, never to be used, till it be proved that the
Covenant was a national and legal act; here the words are begged by Mr.
Grafton, and applied only ad faci^ndum populum, not ad confirmandum veritatem,
d^ populo ph^leras; these are pretty baits for the vulgar, they do neither
tempt nor scare wise and sober men, of whose souls safety, and consciences
serenity, the Episcop^l Clergy have as tender a regard as Mr. Grafton can
pretend to, or profess; There is as much fear of a rash Covenant illegally
made, violently imposed, and unjustly executed by some men, as there can be of
breaking, nulling, or dissolving it, injurious ligatures.

. But as if Mr. Grafton Page 31. Mr. Graftons unjust and u^b^ s eming
partiality and calumny.
were weary of words savouring of sobriety, he now again falls into rude
Rhetoric, the vulgar and trivial staff of old Martinists and the like, which
lost the credit of the nonconformists for many years, yea he is not ashamed to
aver by a most palpable falsity, that Episcopacy has brought the Reformation
to a palpable retrogradation, he means (by the marks he gives some Bishops, who
observed or urged some ecclesiastical ceremonies more than some men could bear,
or possibly more than were convenient or commanded; Hence till 1^4^. it seems
the Bishops and Episcopal government had run Reformation much backward; well,
but when they were forced out of the box, pray how did the Presbyterian fury
drive? Did they not highly advance the doctrine, religion, worship, ministry,
all holy duties, yea our very material Churches very much; they and those who
got up by their means into the stirrup, (and being in the crupper at last
shoved the others over the horse head) these set forward Mr. Graftons blessed
refomation, by bringing Horses into Churches, when Bishops could scarce be
permitted to dwell in cottages; They advanced reformation by pulling down
Crosses and setting up weather-cocks on steeples; They ordained one another
Ministers after new forms and fashions, which the Law of England knew not, nor
allowed without the formal authoritative and essential words which confer holy
orders; The Presbyterians first got into good sequestered livings, and carried
on the reformation of their estates very well, they exautorated the Lords
Prayer, ten Commandments, the three Creeds, the Church catechism, and all
ancient Liturgical forms of this and other Churches; they set up Episcopello's
or Bishopperto's in every Parish, they unlawfully associated, till they were
ashamed, scattered, and confounded; They cajoled and hugged Independency, till
that creeping ivy starved the yet tender and weak plant of Presbytery; This hot
spur once in the saddle, O what tumults, storms, armies, angers, animosities,
bloodshed, corrupt doctrines, petulant manners, what irreverence,
profaneness, schism, sacrilege, atheism, enthusiasms and endless Egyptian
taxes perfected our reformation:. Who can sufficiently set forth the praises of
the Pre^^yterian s^ort reign, or aspiring rather? It must be left to Mr.
Graftons more florid and affectionate pen, only Dr. Gauden is bold to think it
came as short in proof as in time of the reign of R. Eliz King James and King
Charles the first, in whose last days the stripling of Presbytery, instead of a
Primmer and w^^sour, got a beard and a sword, yea and a foreign vizard, and a
da^g^r; It had indeed long affected a royal Scepter and a Crown, and pleaded a
right at least to Christ's Scepter, but the former Princes and Laws severely
rapped aff its saucy singers; but the last excellent King lost his head in this
Presbyterian fray and quarrel, which Tragedy some honester and better natured
Presbyters did so deplore, that though they had no great hope of his being
theirs, yet they wished rather to have had Bishops continued, yea and
themselves to have been made Bishops, upon condition the Kings life had not
been lost, and Presbytery thereby for ever stained with the aspersions of Royal
blood; for though it were not the Executioner, yet it stood too near the block,
and was the first that taught the King of England what it was to be a prisoner,
as Salmatius observes, who was himself a kind of mongrel, or ambiguous
Presbyterian.

. Mr. Grafton again wipes his nose on the Bishops lawn sleeves, which I before
told him was for want of good manners, but I will forgive him this rudeness if
he do not pick their pockets, by and by he is jealous least Dr. Gauden look
despiciently on inferior Ministers; God forbid he should have any undervaluing
of any honest ability, or subordinate Presbyters, of whom he is one, and one of
the least of them in many respects; Dr. Gauden heartily loves, and tenderly
esteems them, if worthy men; only if he find a rigid Presbyterian, he thinks he
may be better a Cap^n without spurs and comb, than a Cock, so crowing, as some
of them are prove to do in former years over poor Bishops, and they still fancy
England, and London at least, to be their own Dunghill.

Mr. Grafton page 11. Of (...) against what (...) good (...)
. Dr. Gaudens affirming, that an oath cannot bind from what is in its nature
good, was meant so far only as the use of that good may be morally necessary
for himself, or his; as if a man absolutely vow, neither he nor his, will ever
take Physic, or be let blood, or wear a cap, or drink wine; These are rash and
vain vows, and oblige no further than a man can dispense with the use of them,
without drink and eminent danger of his health and life, which are not his own
to squander away, or rashly engage, but to be discreetly preserved for Gods
glory, and other^ good related to us; else no doubt a man may in order to
promote a spiritual good, vow against the temporary use of some things good,
lawful and indifferent; But this must not be rashly nor so, as to oblige beyond
what he morally owns to self preservation, much less may a man make a vow in
an others behalf, and force them to keep it, as some Presbyterians would have
all the Nation and Bishops too, to keep their Covenant, even against Episcopacy
and their own rights; Truly let Presbyters who begot it, keep it, in that rigid
sense, if they can, to be sure they were once better able than most Bishops,
who had much a do to keep themselves being stripped of all by some Sacrilegious
Covenanters.

. For the case which Mr. Grafton puts rather facetiously then conscienciously
in reference to separating the good not materially but morally from the evil of
Episcopacy; Mr Graftons plot of refin n^ Episc^pacy.
My answer is, I know no greater evil in Episcopacy, than to have it too much
leavened, sowred, and paled with Presbytery; The advice and Counsel of grave
and learned Presbyters is good, where required and useful, but to have the
authority so melted and minced, that the Bishops shall have no more of it, than
lately the Presbyters left him of his Estate, is to render the Bishop a cipher,
and to make every Presbyter a kind of Suffragan Bishop, or a Ruling Elder, and
Master of misrule.

But if Mr. Grafton have not so good a sieve or fining-pot for Episcopacy, as
is sit, let him not fear there are some other as wise and honest men in
England, who in this work may save him the labor, and serve the King and
Church and Kingdom, with such just proportions, that Episcopacy like the show-
bread of the Temple, shall be neither too fine nor too course; by either
keeping in all the bran, or bolting out all the flower of Presbytery.

. Mr. Graftons wonderment may cease, Mr. Grafton page 33. Of vows under ^aci^
conditions.
as to a man binding himself from, and after applying to what appears good and
useful to him, when he considers the meaning of Dr. Gauden is not, as to a
sensible or advantageous temporary good, in point of private profit or
pleasure; To which bounds, the oath though inconsiderate and to his detriment
and inconvenience, does bind; But it is as to a moral good, or evil from which
he is thereby excluded, and to the contrary evil of which he is betrayed, by
Sa^ri^^tiously extending his oath to the prejudice Of (...) right and others
just interest in his life, hea^th and liberty and estate, here by being over
(...), a man may destroy himself before his time.

. As if a man vowed he would never go out of his Chamber, either to serve God
or man, no nor in a fire to save himself; Here his vow, as it could not be
extended, so it must not be executed beyond what it could morally be intended
or taken, (salve des contint nento) with reserve and safety of Gods interest,
which is a tacit caution and dispensation; For as we cannot swear to the
prejudice of our neighbors, so less to Gods, and no further to our own, than
in things under our Dominion and command, so as to make a good use of them; If
a man vow in the time of his plenty, and gain to give a Crown or an Angel a day
to the poor, without limitation expressed, and after grow poor, and cannot
spare it from his support and his family, he is absolved and ought not to keep
his vow.

. In his conclusion Mr. Grafton peremptorily resolves, Of the (...) Epis^^pacy
that though Episcopacy were never so good, yet unless it appear necessary, it
must not break through the bond of the Covenant; Episcopacy is not only under
the Notion of a good Notional and entitative or National and political, but
moral and Ecclesiastical, having with it, and in it, something more Christian
and Apostolical perfect and Divine, than any other Government besides the
aequum and justum, right and justice, by Law annexed to it, and not without
injustice and oppression to be taken from it; He that vows to take away my
horse, must not say he will not change his vow, till it appear that my horse is
not only good, but necessary for me; I believe both the Law and the Gate House
will teach him, that all men's goods in nature, art and use, are under the
protection of the Law, as things of right and property, and so by a moral
preceptive and divine necessity (forbidding others to rob, or rapine, yea or to
covet them unjustly) they are the owners; Nor will it serve the thiefs turn, to
say he is a better horseman, and can both keep and ride him better, than the
right owner.

. For the Sacred prophanenes which Mr. Grafton talks of in the Doctors props to
bear up Episcopacy, if they will not serve Episcopacy, possibly they may
Presbytery, which fears not to cover and cluck it self under the wings of the
Covenant, as a strange chicken; When the same Covenant binds against Shcisme
and Superstition, of which scurfe or Leprosy let Mr Grafton (as the Priest of
old) take view and examine if Presbytery be curable, either to the civil
Schism which we call faction, contrary to the Laws, or that Ecclesiastical,
which is contrary to the Catholic Custom and all the Cannons of the Catholic
Church, as well as this of England.

. At last he speaks very softly of mourning for the faylers of not keeping the
vow and Covenant; Pray see if there were no faults in taking it, I am sure
there will be in keeping it to some men's unjust sense, as much as in Absalom,
who had his ambitious vows to be paid in Hebron, when he begun his unnatural
rebellion; Still he deplores and perstringeth Episcopacy, as if Presbytery were
the only spotless bird. Good Mr. Grafton, have you no tears for her, or have
you no eyes to see her faults, her wantonness, her insolences, her excesses,
how like Hagar when she thought she had conceived, not by Abraham the Father of
the faithful, but by a mixture wit^ stangers, she p^rted against Sarah, and
lifted her self up against her superiors King and Law^, as well as Bishops,
has Presbytery given all her bitter doses to King, Bishop^, Church and State
by exa^t weight and measure; Pray look well on the file of our tim^^ story,
examine the simples and the ^omposition^, you will find, as you might by their
violent and destructive operation, they were not well balanced or proportioned
in the Scales of right reason, loyalty, justice, charity, Law or Relig^on, else
we could not have been so overgrown with Anar^hy and confusion in Church and
State, with civil water and Sacrilege, with self-seeking and
uncompassionaten^ss, whom did Pre^bytery ever pity, that was depreiled by her?
Or whom did it ever relieve but it self?

Dr. Gaudens C^^nsel (...) Presbyters.
. There is no better Counsel to be given to our Presbyters Presbytery than that
which the Angel gave to Hagar now wandering in the Wilderness, and rea^y to
p^r^^, return and submit to thy superior in ag^, honor and Authority, to
venerable Episcopacy and Reverend Bishops, in whose family and under whose
inspection Presbyters are much safer and happier, than they can be in their
Schismatic desertions and factious divisions; No men wish and design better
for all Presbyters, that are absolute honest and ingenious than good Bishops
do, who will treat them, not as their Lords over them, but as Fathers to them,
(...).
not as Subjects but brethren, Not is he fit to be a Bishop, who is not as much
concerned for the inferior Cl^rgies good order, support, honor, and
happiness, as his own; for such is the symbolizing fate of good Bishops, and
all other reformed Minist^rs in England, that divided they will be destroyed,
united they will be invincible; Nor can those men be either very wise, or
faithful to the Church and Kingdom of England, who study to separate what God
and the King, and the Laws of this kingdom, and the constant custom of this
Church, as of all others from the beginning of Christianity, have united
together, in one family and holy economy, by which good Bishop^ may be adorned
with the presence, assisted with the counsel, and honored with the love and
respect of lea^ned Presbyters; On the other side, such worthy Presbyters may be
protected and encouraged by the pr^sidential and paternal care of godly
Bishops, whose true honor is not to be preferred above their Brethren, but to
be as Joseph was, profitable to them, and to imitate the great examples of the
Primitive Bishops, of the blessed Apostles, and of Jesus Christ himself, the
great Shepherd, and chief Bishop of our souls, who laid down his life for his
Church and flock, to whom we must all give account of all our times, talents,
and advantages, in any kind, by which we are enabled and called to serve his
great interests, which consists in such an holy ordering of his Church, as may
at once save our selves and others, least while we preach to, or preside over
others, our selves be cast awayes.

. In this humble and holy ambition Dr. Gauden desires to live and dye, nor
should he ever have pleasure in either seeing Bishops restored, or Episcopacy
re-established in the Church of England, if he did not hope to see by this
means the glory of God and the honor of the reformed Religion, with the peace
of this Church and Kingdom happily recovered and firmly settled, upon
foundations of verity and charity, truth and peace, order and uniformity,
sanctity and ^^^ mu^ty, which are the great ornaments and m^n^^^ments of any
Church or Nation.

(...).
. And thus has Dr. Gauden much against his temper and leisure, even tired
himself and his Reader too, with his tedious and entangled animadversions upon
those two Pamphlets, Of the Anatomist D. B. and the Analeptist Z. C. which
sought to weaken the Strength, Religion, Law, Justice, and Honor of his
Ana^ysis, which sought in the most inoff^nsive way so to state and resolve the
sense of that unhappy Covenant, as might make it some way consistent with
Scripture, with our Laws, with the Catholic judgment, order and use of the
Church of Christ, with that loyalty which we owe to the King, with that
justice, charity, and humanity which is due to all honest men, and especially
to Clergy men, who should be the best of all; Lastly, with that peace, order,
stability, and good government, which is necessary for the happiness of this
Church and Kingdom; That Gods mercy and his Majesty's clemency may not be still
turned into wantonness, by the unreasonable and perverse disputes of popular,
peevish, factious, and turbulent Spirits, who are so far from adorning the
reformed Religion, or the glorious Gosp^l of Jesus Christ, or the name of the
blessed God, by urging their Covenant on the King, and on this Church and
Kingdom, in their unjust, ill^g^l, no^el, factious, and confused sense, against
the ancient English Episcopacy, that they cause the name of God, and of Christ,
and of the reformed Religion to be evil spok n of, by following those
injurious, schismatical, and sacrilegious things, that are not true, nor
honest, nor just, nor pure, nor lovely, nor of good report, without any virtue,
or praise-worthinesse, contrary to those things which they have learned and
received, seen and heard, in this and all ancient Churches of Christ, in the
first Apostles and their most eminent successors, whose uniform, piety, order
and charity it is far safer to imitate without any such Covenant, than to
deviate from them under pretense of it, if it cannot be reconciled to pious
antiquity, and to the Laws of God and man, which are the sufficient and only
safe rules and bounds of our duties, nor do they stand in need of any such
novel Covenant to eke them ^ut, nor will they bear any such new patch or add^
ion to their old and fair garment, if it be of another color different and
deformed from those ornaments of justice, loyalty, honesty, and holy antiquity,
which are the glory of true Religion, and the defense of a good Conscience, in
which Dr. Gauden hopes and prays to live and dye, without doing, saying, or
writing any thing which may justly grieve either Gods Spirit, or the good
Spirit of any man truly godly, that is just and holy, righteous to man and
religious to God, contrary to which, no man either may make, or take, or keep
any vow or Covenant.

FINIS.
Reader, through this discourse, for Grafton read Crofton.

Books written by John Lord Bishop of Excester, and sold by Andrew Crook, at
the green Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. HIerasp^st^^. A Defense for the Ministry and M^n^st^rs of the Church of
England. 2. Three Sermons preached on public occasions 3. Funerals made
Cordials, in a Sermon preached at the Interment of the Corpse of Robert Rich,
Heir apparent to the ^^rldom of Wan^^^k. 4. A sermon p^e^^h^d (...) the F^ne^al
of Dr. Ra^ph ^rounrig Bishop of (...) ( Decemb^ 17. 1659.) with an account of
hi^ Life and Death. 5. A Petitionary (...) str^^^^ i^ the behalf of many
thousand Minister^ and Scholars. 6. (...) sive Medicastri, Slight healers of
public hu^ts, set forth in a Sermon Preached in St. Paul's Church, London,
before the Lord Mayor, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council, and Companies of
the honorable City of London. 7. (...). Gods great Demonstrations and Demands
of Justice, Mercy and Humility, set forth in a Sermon preached before the
honorable House of Commons, at their Solemn Fast, before their first sitting,
April 30. 1660. 8. (...). The loosing of St. Peter's Bands; setting forth the
true sense and solution of the Covenant in point of Conscience, so far as it
relates to the Government of the Church by Episcopacy. 9. Anti sacrilegus, or a
defensative against Dr. Cor. Burges.

