THE GENERAL And Particular ACTS and ARTICLES Of the Late NATIONAL SYNOD Of
the Reformed Churches of France, Assembled by the Permission of the King at
Charenton near Paris, beginning the 26th of December, 1644.

Whereby the present estate of those Churches, as also their Doctrine and
Discipline may be known.

With diverse other Remarkable Passages, and Letters from the King and Q. Regent
of France, to the said Synod, and of the Synod to their Majesty's, and other
great Personages.

Never before printed either in French or English, and now faithfully
translated out of a written French Copy.

Whereunto is Added a formulary of Baptism for those who from Paganism,
Judaisme, and Mahumetisme, are converted to the Christian Faith; As also of
those Anabaptists who have not bin Baptized before composed in the National
Synod set forth at Charenton in the year 1645. and now faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for G. Emerson, and are to be sold at the Swan in
little Britain, and at the black Bear in Paternoster Row. 1646.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THe Church has been under a threefold oppression; first violent, under
persecuting Emperors. 2. Fraudulent, under insinuating Heretics: 3. Violent
and fraudulent both, under the Romish Antichrist; every one worse then other.
This last the most pernicious and perilous as in whom the force and fraud of
both the former were combined in one. The first was grievous to the body, but
could not touch the soul; the second destroyed the soul, though it spared the
body; the third spared neither: but by Impostures, lies and a thousand
falsehoods entangled the soul in damnable errors; and upon the bodies of
Christians, what savage cruelties they have exercised is as incredible to be
believed, as impossible to be expressed; They have persecuted poor Christians
with fire and water with fire to consume their bodies and bones to ashes; With
water, to consume their very ashes if it were possible to nothing.

Of this the Church of France has had most sad and long experience. For the
persecutions of the Protestants in France; How many Edicts, Proscriptions,
Proclamations for their utter destruction are still witnesses thereof? What
combination of Princes? what Armies raised? Towns burnt? whole Countries
depopulated? Witness that of Merindol, and Chabriers: private murders, public
Massacres as that of Paris, wherein were most bloudily cut off very many
thousands? what cruelties have been exercised, for number incredible, for fury
unsufferable, had they not been inspired, and supported by the divine power;
What lingering torments were invented, to make them dye piecemeale; ut sentiant
se mori; among many other, one is most memorable, of a Friar that took a poor
Protestant, filled his boots full of grease, set him upon a form, with his
legs hanging over a soft fire, and so broyled him to death, with many more, too
tedious to mention here. And yet for all these cruel sufferings they have kept
the faith and obtained a good report; they have been bettered by it; like gold
that comes the purer out of the fire, they have been the cleaner for winnowing,
the clearer for scowring. Tortores nisi habeat Ecclesia, non haberet fidos
Doctores; And certainly this Church, though it has been under many clouds,
yet such lights have still broke out in it, that the world has not seen the
like. And as God has still moved the hearts of their Princes, to give them
some intermission of suffering, so now a permission of doing, even to assemble
at Charenton for settling of that Religion, whereof their chief Princes are
enemies: If God will restore his Temple, Cyrus a heathen King, shall grant a
Commission for building of it. In this Synod there are many things remarkable;
first the goodness of God in moving the hearts of the King and Queen Regent
toward them. 2. Their loyalty again in their humble submission to their
Sovereign Princes, their obedience to them and prayers for them, though of a
contrary Religion. In the Acts of this Synod; observe first their wisdom, and
moderation in Discipline. 2. Their piety and purity in Doctrine; but our
approbation can add nothing to their worth. If any shall question what need of
such frequent Assemblies (as many there be that move such questions) let him
hear what Saint Paul says; It is necessary that heresies be amongst us.
Therefore as necessary are often Assemblies of Pastors of the Church.
Necessitatem hanc furor haereticus imponit; and this made the Apostles
themselves call a Synod Acts 15..

It seems two dangerous Sects were now like to trouble that Church, against
whom care is taken in this Synod viz. the Anabaptist and the Independent; The
first the most pestilent sect, that sprang up of late times, and could never
catch many Disciples in a clear water, did not the latter trouble these
streams. But the reverend Pastors have put in sufficient caution against them
both, and God grant their neighbors may follow their worthy president.
Concerning differencies about matters of indifferency, the most ancient and
true bond of unity is, not one discipline one ceremony one policy; but one God,
one Faith, one Baptism, and so one Church. Una erit consortio aeternitatis and
ad colendum unum Deum tota est instituta; God grant one thing more sit una
vinculo charitatis; And that we may all keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace.

In the name of God, Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of
France, assembled by the Permission of the King, at Charenton near Paris the
26th of December, and days following; 1644.
AFter the opening of the Assembly performed, by a Prayer pronounced by Sieur
Drelincourt Pastor of the Church of Paris Monsieur the Marquess of Cleremont
deputed General exhibited, the Breuets dispatched by the Commandment of the
King, for the calling togethe^ of them, the tenor whereof follows; This day
being the twelfth of the Month of February, 1644. the King being at Paris,
upon the most humble Petition made unto him by his Subjects of the Pretended
reformed Religion, to permit them the Convocation, and Assembly of a National
Synod, for that there has bin none since that of Alenzou in the year 1637: His
Majesty with the advice of the Queen Regent his most honored Lady and Mother,
desiring to gratify and favorably to treat his said Subjects, has permitted
them, and does permit them the calling together of a National Synod in the
month of December next at Charenton, with charge that therein they treat
only of such affairs as are permitted them by their Edicts, and that the
Commissary appointed by his Majesty shall assist in the said Synod, as has
been accustomed. In witness whereof his Majesty has commanded me to
expedite this present Declaration, which he has signed with his own hand.

LOUIS.




There appeared in the said Assembly with their Letters of trust which were
read by Sieur le Cog, Ancient of the Church of Paris assisting at the Table,
with Sieur Calliart, Ancient, chosen to assist for to number the Voices, for
every Province two Ministers, and two Ancients of the principal Churches. To
manage the business (as President) Sieur Drelincourt Pastor, and Cog Ancient
of the Church of Paris, after whom Caliart Ancient of the Church of Alenzon,
joined with Monsieur the general Deputy, gathered the suffrages of them, which
were deputed in this Assembly, which was carried by a Ticket in writing by
every one of them, for the nomination, first of a Moderator* secondly of an
Assistant, and afterward of Secretaries, one after the other. By a plurality of
Voices, they made choice to conduct the Action of Sieur Garrisoles for Adjunct
and Seigneur Besuag^; and for Secretaries Sieur Blondel, and Cog all which
took their places one after the other as they were c^osen. Immediately after
the nomination of Moderator, Adjunct and Secretaries; Monsieur de Cumon the
Kings Counselor in his Council of estate in his Court of Parliament of
Paris, Commissary, deputed of his Majesty for to assist on his part in this
Assembly presented the Patents of his Majesty containing his Commission, which
being read, there were Acts made of them, and Registered according to their
form and tenor.

A Copy of his Majesty's Patents.
LOuis by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to Our beloved and
trusty Counselor in our Council of State in our Court of the Parliament of
Paris Sieur de Cumon health. We have permitted our Subjects of the pretended
Reformed Religion, to hold in the Bourg of Charenton near Paris the twenty
sixth of the month of December next, a National Synod, composed of all the
Deputies of the Provinces of our Kingdom, to Treat of affairs concerning
their said Religion, and being to make choice of a sufficient personage, whose
fidelity is well known unto us, to assist on our part in quality of a
Commissary in the said Assembly, knowing the Services you have rendered unto us
in diverse honorable employments, We have committed to your trust, of the
which you have worthily acquitted your self, w^ have thought that We could not
make a better choice then of your Person, upon the assurances We take, that
you will continue unto us the testimony of your affection unto our said
service. For this cause, with the advice of the Queen Regent, our most honored
Lady and Mother, we have committed unto you, and deputed you, We do commit
and depute you by these Presents signed with One hand, for to transport your
self to assist on our part in the Synod assembled in the Town of Charenton,
there to propose, and resolve what We shall command according to the charge and
Instructions given unto you taking care they speak then of no other businesses
and affairs then such as are under the quality and condition of such matters
or things, which ought to be handled in such Assemblies, and a^^ permitted by
the Edicts, and if they undertake to do any thing to the contrary, you shall
hinder them, and shall interpose our Authority, or shall speedily give advise,
that remedy may be taken to prevent such inconveniences as may arise, or as We
shall think most fitting to do, for this We give you Power, Commission, and
especial commandment by these presents.

Given at Paris the 28th of November in the year of Grace 1644. and of our
Reign the second signed in the original LOUIS.
And underneath Philippeaux.

After the Reading of his Majesty's Patents, Monsieur the Commissary spoke.
SIRS, As I hold it a great honor to be commanded by the King for to assist
in your Synod, and to let you know his will and pleasure; in like manner it as
great joy and contentment to me to behold this Illustrious Assembly chosen out
of a^l the Provinces of this Kingdom that I may be able to tell you I have
express charge and commandment from the King and the Queen his Mother to
assure you of their good will and protection for you and for all your Churches
and the entire execution of the Edicts of Pacification so long as you shall
continue within the terms of Respects, subjection, and fidelity, which you
owe to their Majesty's, which are the higher powers which God has established
over you having given unto them that sovereign Authority, and left you as
sharers of the glory of obedience unto which you are obliged by your birth the
sense of your own consciences, the favor you continually receive from their
Majesty's, and by all sorts of considerations both general and particular.

After the lamentable accident which deprived us of our King Louis the Just of
most glorious memory there was no man which believed not that the end of his
life would have been the end of our happiness. But God which loves France,
and has so often raised it from falling, suffered not this loss to beget
mournful consequences. The Sun sets not, but to rise again, and to make us to
observe the first day of the Kingdom of Grace. We have seen, for the
beginning of our good and welfare, his Majesty holding his Bed or chamber of
Justice accompanied with the Princes of the Blood* and of all the great ones,
and the Queen declared Regent of this Kingdom by the suffrages, and solemn
Arrests of Parliaments. Soon after their Majesty's opened their treasures of
Mercy and Clemency, they did write to all sorts of persons any way Interessed,
reconciled many particu^ars to the State; gave liberty to prisoners permission
to them that were absent to return to their own houses to them which were
accused to pursue their Justification, Replaced all the Innocent in their
places of charge and Government, and Confirmed the conduct and leading of the
armies, unto Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, who has made all men to wonder at
his orderly proceedings in the siege of Gravelin who in the sight of his Enemy
took that important place, which shall serve as a monument unto posterity of
his valor and generosity. We may add to this his valorous success the
victory of Rocroy the taking of Theonvile, Spire, Worms Mayence,
Phillipsbourg; the defeat of the Bavarians army after they were forced into
their Trenches: These great and signal advantages followed with sundry others
have rendered the name of our King August and venerable unto all Nations, and
his power formidable to his enemies, which have been constrained to confess it
is not to be paralel'd; and that the Heaven apparently blesses and favors
his Armies and Designs. We see likewise that at the same time the fire of a
strange war spreads it self on all sides about us, France enjoys within it
self an assured peace reposing it self upon the continual cares and travels
of the Queen Regent, whom we may call by just title the Mother of the Country,
and the Mother of Armies; and upon the wise and prudent Counsels, of Monsieur
the Duke of Orleans, and Monsieur the Prince, and Monsieur the Cardinal
Mazarin, upon the perfect union and Intelligence which is between them, and
upon the fidelity and experience of Messieurs the Ministers of Estate, which
makes us hope to see in our days, the general Peace which shall be the
perfection of our happiness; Besides, the considerations which are common to
all Frenchmen, there are other particulars which concern men of your
profession.

Remember you that upon the entrance of this Kings reign, their Majesty's have
been pleased to make, a Declaration, which confirms all former Edicts,
permits you the exercise of your Religion, the liberty of your consciences,
the safety of your Persons, Goods, and of your Churches, which subsist happily
under the shadow of their Royal powers and bounty. Observe, that by their
singular favor, you have in the midst of you Dukes, Pairs, Marshalls of
France, Generals of Armies, Magistrates, Governors of sovereign Courts, and
that as yet to this day their Majesty's for a witness of the confidence they
have of your fidelity have granted you this Assembly at the very gates of the
Capitol, or principal City of this Kingdom in the sight of all France, and
of the great people of Paris so different in manners, and humors, which will
be Witnesses and Judges of your actions.

After all this, Sirs, I persuade my self you will all with a general
consent, aim at this principal end the glory of God, the service of the King,
the good and welfare of your Churches, and that in all your words and actions,
you will bring that prudent moderation and humility, which can be desired of
good and faithful subjects, which will be a powerful means to draw upon you,
and upon the Provinces which have deputed you the gracious favor of their
Majesty's, especially when all the world shall observe that ye breath nothing
more then that respect and obedience ye owe unto them.

And to the end all things may be done according to the order prescribed me,
Their Majesty's have commanded me to tell you, that all Ministers which are
strangers are to be excluded your Synod, and that none may assist there which
is not deputed by a Provincial Synod, and that during the time it is holden,
you may not have communication with strangers, or other suspected persons, but
to abide in that place, attending the affairs for which ye are called, and
because your Assemblies do not constitute a body Politic, their Majesty's
have forbidden you to treat in your Synod of any secular affairs of State or
Justice, nor to speak any thing in the Re-establishing of Ministers which are
strangers, and have been Dispossessed by virtue of the Arrests of Parliaments,
and Letters signed by his Majesty, nor to propose there any complaints of
pretended infractions of the Edicts, seeing you have Chembre iniparties (so
called in the French) and other Courts of Justice, established by Edicts to do
you Justice, and to repair the Contraventions unto the Edicts if any shall
happen, for the which you may procure Remedy, before the Counsel of the King,
and there present your requests, according to the accustomed manner, your Synod
having no power to judge in such matters, so that you are to treat only of
your doctrine and Ecclesiastical Discipline. They have forbidden you likewise
to nominate any Pastors, or other extraordinary Deputies to receive Letters,
or to make Answer to them, which shall be addressed unto them from their
several Provinces, to provide for their affairs, during the time that there
is a Synod, for that by the Edict of the month of December 1622. and other
subsequent Declarations, such Counsels and Counselors of the Provinces are
expressly forbidden.

Their Majesty's also forbid you to print any books in any place whatsoever,
making mention of your Religion without Attestation of two Ministers of this
Kingdom, under pain of Confiscation of them, and not to send forth any
Excommunication against Ministers and others which shall change their Religion,
nor to use any reproachful words against them by writing or otherwise* nor to
receive for the time to come, any Minister which is a stranger, appointing you
for this end to put in the attestations of the Proposants and Ministers, to
understand or to be informed of the place of their birth; They forbid also the
Provincial Synods to summon general Fasts. And for the better assurance of
public tranquillity his Majesty enjoynes the Ministers to preach unto his
Subjects (following the commandment of God) the obedience which they owe unto
him, and that upon no occasion whatsoever it is lawful for them to take Arms
against their Sovereign; And he forbids them in their Sermons and Writings,
to give the terms of scourgings, Martyrdom, and persecution of their
Religion, under the name of the Church of God or otherwise, as likewise to use
the word of Antichrist, and of Idolatry and other offensive words in speaking
of the Pope, of them which are of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Church of the
Sacraments, and Ceremonies therein, upon pain of Interdiction; It is forbidden
them likewise to make Collections from house to house* to gather money of the
poor, in regard of men's last Wills and Testaments, or to sue any in any Court
of Justice for Salary, or payment of wages, in regard of the charges of their
Colloques, Synods, Reparations, and garnishing of their Temples. In this his
Majesty is pleased that the Article 44 in the Edict of Nants be particularly
observed and executed and for that their Majesty; are adverti^ed, you send
your children to study, and to be brought up in learning at Genevas, in
Switzerland, Holland, etc. which are Nations and Commonwealths a verse to
Monarchy which may stretch their Precepts to politic, and secular affairs, a
matter of great consequence, and may produce dangerous effects for the
prevention hereof, their Majesty's desire that amongst the Articles of
Proposants, you make one express to be practiced for time to come within all
your Provinces, that no Proposant or Theologue shall be received into the
Ministry, if they have studied in these Countries and Estates. And they have
commanded me to assure you, that upon your conforming to their Intentions in an
affair so important, you shall do a thing very acceptable unto them and
advantageous for them of your Religion. I have charge also to let you
understand that their Majesty's are d^spleased that against the Amnestye so
much recommended by the Edicts In the Calenders of the Psalms imprinted at
Geneva 1635 these terms are inserted that on the f^fteenth of March 1545 was
Assembled the detestable Counsel of Trent, and many other like things that in
the twenty fourth Article of the Confession of your Faith, the Catholic
Apostolic Roman Religion is represented with the name of Abuse and deceit of
Satan, Purgatory, with the title of Illusion, and the Shop from whence
monastical vows, Pilgrimages and other things do arise and in the 28 Article
you use these wo^ds We condemn the Assemblies of Popery where all
Superstitious and Idolatry have their Vogue; Their Majesty's not being able to
suffer that such words should be affirmed upon Oath in a National Synod of
their Kingdom, holding them scandalous and injurious unto that Religion and
Church of which his Majesty held it an honor to be styled the eldest son,
and against him whom he acknowledges to be the chief, calling him holy
Father and with whom he has Alliance and amity, for these reasons their
Majesty's desire, that in a thing they take so much to heart, you will
manifest, and make known the respect and obedience which you will render unto
that which by them is propounded unto you; Moreover, I will add this, that
their Majesty's have commanded me to tell you, that they have just cause to
complain against you, for that since his Reign they of your Religion have
undertaken to re-establish Preaching in Languedoc, and elsewhere by an open
violent way, contrary to the public Assurance, and the general Laws of the
Kingdom, which forbid equally unto the Subjects, both of the one and the other
Religion to do right unto themselves, as in other things, so more especially,
as likewise in the enterprise of Vsez, where they placed Bells in their Temple
without permission and leave and against the terms of their Capitulation of
the City of Monpellier. Their Majesty's are displeased that they of your
Religion in Languedoc have enterprised to renew the deputation in the Court of
Monpellier, Nismes, and Vsez, suppressed long since, in the year 1632. out of
the Capitulation of the foresaid City, and that Seiurs Reyzobs, and Faraier
deputed themselves without the consent of a Provincial Synod; and that they
parted against the leave of his Majesty, and that they have established
Preaching by private Authority in sundry places, besides the places designed
by the Commissioners of his Majesty, in execution of the Edicts of Names, and
contrary to the same Edicts, have continued preaching in those places, where
the Lords are Ecclesiastics as their Majesty's have been informed.

And besides all this certain Ministers have taken unto themselves that height
of liberty, as to preach in their Pulpits seditious words, and have cut off
from their Communion such Parents as have sent their children to the Colleges
of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion. Lastly, they have given me in
charge to ell you, that all these are manifest Infractions unto the Edicts
contrary to their duty, to the prejudice of the King and the public
tranquillity, the which his Majesty has been so careful to observe on his
part, as that he neither can nor ought as a common Father of his people to
suffer the like attempts, hoping that for the time to come you will use greater
circumspection in removing all just discontentments, which may upon any
occasion be offered.

These things heard the Deputies made answer by the mouth of Seigneur
Garrisoles Moderator, who acknowledging that by the merciful bounty of
Almighty God, the prayers of the Churches were so blessed as that after the
public loss of France, in the death of the late King of glorious and
immortal memory, and this sad Eclipse of our Sun which seemed to be for
ever buried in the black darkness of uncomfortable grief, and irremediable
confusion* every man has seen with incredible joy and admiration the
happiness and peace of the estate of France, to appear as a new bright star
out of the East, which has raised the hope of all his faithful Subjects, and
of all Christendom possessed with wonder, when they consider that the good
hand of God has not only elevated his Majesty as it were from the Cradle to
his Fathers Throne; whose birth was so long desired and at length by Gods
wonderful providence obtained by the joint prayers and supplications of his
people and particularly of the Churches but also put the Reins of this Empire
into the hands of the Queen Regent a Princess, whose glorious birth seems to
serve for no other end, but to place her virtues on the highest Theater o^
Glory.

Secondly, under the Auspitious happiness of the continual prosperity and
succesfull victories thereof have so added to the reputation of this Crown as
that in despite of envy they have joined hand in hand to second the just Arms
of his Majesty employed in the defense of the Estate the protection of his
Al^ies the designs of his Royal Highness and other Chieftaines, having every
where encountered a success as well happy as glorious insomuch as the first
works of employments from Royal Authority since his Majesty's coming to the
Crown, has been the Declaration of the Edicts of Pacification the assurance
of their sacred Majesty's protection unto all the Churches, in favor of which
the Edicts have been first published the glorious approving of the services of
two great men nourished in the bosom of their Communion and so raised above
the pitch of envy, as that the Staff of Marshall of France, with the conduct
of Royal Armies, have been put into their hands without coffeehouse of any
person in the State, and that their Majesty's have been graciously pleased, to
receive their Supplications presented by Monsieur the General Deputy, as that
he has thought good to grant them the holding of this Assembly, and to commit
the care and inspection thereof, to a person no less Illustrious by his
virtues, worthy of the highest esteem, then by his place of dignity in the
first of Parliaments.

Being thus carried with the sweet and pleasing violences of resentments of so
many good deeds to open their hearts and mouths in giving thanks unto their
Majesty's for their singular favors with their most Ardent prayers to God for
the preservation of their Sacred persons, benediction of the Kingdom the glory
of the Crown, under the comfortable shadow whereof the Churches enjoying a
sweet rest, shall never desire or think any thing, but to practice faithfully
and conscientiously the express commandment of our Savior by St. Peter,
Fear God and honor the King, with an entire and sincere obedience, without
any design, nor to admit in the body of their National Synod contrary to
ancient custom persons not deputed by the Provinces, nor to foment any
communication with strangers, nor to take and receive any Letters coming from
them, nor to give an answer unto them, unless such as the Commissary
representing his Majesty's person shall find expedient nor to make any politic
deliberations and Rules nor to introduce into particular Churches for their
Pastor any Ministers being strangers, nor to establish any Counsels of the
Province against the will of the King, nor to suffer the violation of the rules
taken in National Synods, according to the intention of his Majesty for the
approbation of books which shall be published in print touching matters of
Religion. Nor to Excommunicate any of them which forsake their Churches, and
acknowledge not their Jurisdiction over them at the time they shall quit their
Communion; nor to vent any Sermons fraught with railing and reproachful terms
injurious to the members of the Roman Church, as well in general as
particular, which may in any sort stir up, or animate the people to a
tumultuous rising and taking of Arms, against the Sovereign Authority of
their Majesty's.

Nor to put absolutely in the power of a particular Province the Indiction of
general Fasts.

Nor to practice any thing in Collection of money for their poor, and the
like, which may be a contravention of the Article 44. or of the particu^ar of
the Edict of Nants, their only and constant Resolution being to remain and
continue under the precise observation of the Edicts, and to lead under the
benefit of them a quiet and peaceable life, with all godliness and honesty,
They do in most humble manner likewise beseech their Majesty's;

1. First to stop, by the Interposition of their Sovereign Authority the
violences attempted by them, which under the pretense of false zeal, or of
their employment, undertake to trouble the public tranquillity by Infraction
of the Edicts in a violent way and enterprises against them of the Religion in
general, and in particular, to the end that none of them (as being contrary to
the principal end and formal intention and express of the said Edicts) be
br^ught to suffer for his Religion, or in consequence be forced to make
complaints of their sufferings, which cannot be qualified (according to their
understanding) with any other title then such as would be displeasing to their
Majesty's.

2. Secondly, to take into their consideration, that the Confession of Faith
framed about an hundred years since, before the grant of any Edicts unto them
of the Religion, has been presented by them to King Francis the second, to
render reason unto his Majesty of their opinion concerning things which they
esteemed (as being corrupted in the Confession of Faith received in the Church
of Rome) for to need Reformation, insomuch as diverse French Protestants could
not from the beginning, neither can at this day, without prevarication change
the form of the expression which has been inserted to declare in truth and
verity their common Faith authorized in the year 1561, by the Edict of
January, and since by that of Nants; accorded unto by King Henry the great and
confirmed so often by the last King as ^ikewise by his Majesty himself.

3. Thirdly that all the Catholic Roman belief neither has bin ever nor is
not neither can be truly qua^if^ed absolutely abuse and deceit of Satan,
seeing that the Church of Rome, and the Protestants differ not in the Doctrine
of the Trinity and Incarnation of our Lord Jesus which are the first
principles of Christianity, though with these fundamental verities confessed
by all the Christians of France, etc. There are some other^ in which they vary,
so that diverse humane opinions touching the Intercession of Saints, Purgatory,
the Pope etc. have been Introduced into the Church in the compass of ^ate
Ages, and constantly contradicted and gain-sayd by all the Protestants in
France, and elsewhere so that they cannot at this day continue their former
Protestation confirmed by Edicts, and depart from the Declaration which they
had made by their Confession in sincerity and truth, as before God, which
knows the hearts of a^l men and cannot suffer the hypocrisy and evi^l
consciences of those, which by an inexcusable imposture traverse their
conceptions, and ruin the h^pe of their salvation by a sacrilegious profession
of Doctrines which they believe not.

And this is that the Churches hope that his Majesty which vouchsafes to
accord liberty of conscience unto his faithful Subjects, according to the
example of his Predecessors, will find them more worthy of supportation which
declare openly that which they believe then them that dissemble or impugn the
faith they profess by mental reservations, or in any equivocall way introduce
a kind of fraud of Religion, and betray by a deceiptfull compliance in a full
Imposture the sound and good faith of their fellow Citizens, and their own
consciences.

4. Fourthly, that the Printer of Geneva depends not on the Synods of this
Kingdom, nor has taken order, nor received any express charge of his
Superiors to use those terms he mentions, from which it were to be wished
he had abstained though for sense they express the general meaning of all
Protestants in Europe which from the beginning with a common consent have
impugned the form of the Convocation the proceedings the Decrees the
Anathemaes, the Counsel of Trent it self; Besides the Roman Catho ike Princes
have judged it necessary to make provision by their protestation^ against it by
their Ambassadors, as the Emperor Charles the f fth his Majesty's great
Grandfather by his mothers side by Seigneur de Mendoza; King Henry the second
by Abbot Belozane since Bishop of Auxerres; and King Charles the ninth by
Monsieur de Ferrier who observing that famous Assembly says of it, that it was
a Scorpion pricking the Gallican Church, using an expression which contains
little less then that of the Printer of Geneva, whose liberty hat^ been so
displeas^ng to his Majesty.

5. Fifthly, that the Churches were never so forgetful of their duty of
subjection, as to take the liberty to do right unto themselves, but having
been favored by the Declaration of their Majesty's confirming the Edict at
Nants, as likewise the secret Artic^es and Concessions which formerly have been
accorded unto by f rmer Kings many particular Churches resetled entirely in
their estate and re-established in their ancient rights, have be^eeved that
they committed no fault to use it according to the intention of his Majesty.

6. Sixthly that upon this innocent Proposition which tends not unto any
disobedience against public order, the exercise of the Religion which has
been continued for the space of seventy years without interruption at Ribaute*
having been violently hindered by the Lady of the place and Sieur Arnand the
Pastor of Anduze, being called thither by the Inhabitants, and accordingly
having presented himself to serve in that place unto their edification, as it
has been practiced before, was driven away by the force and violence of men of
Arms, by the Commandment of the said Lady, and afterward was put in prison
by the commandment of Monsieur his Majesty's Lieutenant General in Languedoc
notwithstanding his being sent back by the Chamber for which wrong he
presented himse^fe now at the feet of his Majesty, imploring his clemency and
Justice according to the Edict.

7 Seventhly that the Deputies of the Province of lower Languedoc in the name
and behalf of those Churches that sent them, do profess that the three
Cities of Nismes, Vsez, and Monpellier, having by deputation with all possible
speed tendered their first act of submission, and acknowledgement of duty unto
his Majesty, rendered most humble thanks unto him for the grant of his
Declaration and for the protection of his Justice, and demanded in all
submission and respect the repa^ation of the Infractions of the Edict, as it
has been always practiced. They cannot persuade themselves that the said
Cities have committed any fault in presenting their duty as good subjects
according to the obligation of their consciences, neither that they have
deserved blame in having recourse to his Majesty against the prohibition, made
by Monsieur the Intendant, in the name of his Majesty directly against his
intention, which he has vouchsafed to publish by his Declaration.

8. Eighthly, that the town of Vsez is not culpable of any Contravention be it
to the Edict, or to any particular Capitulation, neither needed any permission
to use that which was never taken from it by any former Prohibition. The Bell
of which there is complaint made to his Majesty having bin placed in the
steeple of the Temple ever since the foundation, and continued there till that
a little before the Capitulation the steeple menaced ruin and was likely to
fall whereupon the be^l was carried into one of the corners of the building,
whence after the Capitulation and the steeple repaired, it has been put again
into his former place.

9. Ninthly, that in all the Provinces, there neither is, nor has been any
Preaching, but in places permitted by the Edicts, which confirm the Churches
in their possession, and entire enjoying of them for fourscore years and
more, from which they hold it hard^r for them to depart, then to suffer death.

10. Tenthly, that in none of the Churches of the same Provinces, the fathers
and mothers which send their children unto the Colleges of Jesuits, have bin
suspended from the Sacraments, but according to the Discipline permitted by the
Edicts, in which they of the Religion may observe in this particular, which
regards the peace of their consciences, and the education of their children,
being bound to take an especial care of their Instruction in the obedience of
God and of their King and to detest all evil impressions, which have so often
obliged France, to grief, sorrow, and tears, so that they cannot be culpable
of the Infraction of the Edict, seeing the Sorbone* the most ancient University
of Europe, and the first of this Kingdom have at this day by public
accusations and in the face of the Parliaments complained by process in
public Judicature of the society of the Jesuits, as corrupters of the manners
of youth committed to their trust, by their doctrine, as contrary to good
policy as true Theology.

As for the Prohibition to send their Scholars hereafter destinated to the
study of Theology to Geneva, Switzerland, Holland etc. Seeing that Geneva has
these fifty years and more been in special protection of the Crown of
France, and that it has always followed her Interests; And that those other
Estates are in a^lyance with the same Crown* and maintain t emselves in it as
much or more inviolably then any other Estates of Christendom, that by sending
their youth into France, to fashion their manners, and to instruct them in good
learning, they thereby give good testimony that they are no enemies to the
Estate, nor of the form or order by which it is governed that some of them
which at this present serve in the Churches of this Kingdom, and have studied
in all, or in part with strangers in foreign Countries, have withdrawn
themselves from the obedience due unto his Majesty neither have showed any
dislike or aversion against Monarchy, unto which the French Nation have
subjected themselves these 2200 years from the Father to the Son. and seeing
his Majesty thinks it no^ fitting to prohibit them which are students in
Philosophy, Law or Physic to travel into other strange Countries, yea
Commonwealths, as that of Venice where many on all parts of France render
themselves by a great confluence to study in all Faculties; His Majesty is most
humbly entreated to leave the Churches in their liberty, Accorded by the Kings
his Predecessors, to all his Subjects without distinction of Religion.

The Assembly have named Sieurs, Vincent and Chebrole Pastors, and the Sieurs
de Pamieur and of Clesse Ancients to present without delay at the feet of their
Majesty's, their most humble submissions, and thanks, and have charged them
with Letters to the King the Queen Regent the Duke of Orleans the Prince,
Cardinal Mazarin the Chancellor the surintendents the Comptrollers general
and Monsieur de le Villiers, Secretary of Estate.

A Copy of the Letter written to the King.
SIR,
NO sooner was our Assembly convened, and that we turned our selves toward
God to obtain his benediction on the same our first thoughts have been to
acquit our selves of our duty toward your Majesty, who is his lively Image
having sent for this purpose Sieur Vincent and Chebrole etc. to lay down at
your feet our submissions and homages as likewise to render unto you most
humble thanks for the singular favor we have received from your Majesty in
that you were pleased to give unto us the liberty to Assemble our selves in
this place, where we labor with zeal to confirm our selves in the service of
God, and in the obedience we owe to your Majesty and in this glorious
proximity of your sacred Person, and of so many Jntelligences which inviron it;
The knowledge we have that your Majesty observes us and that we are as well
under your inspection as under your power, is unto us a strong encouragement to
do well, and to persevere in the fidelity which is hereditary unto us and
which we are most willing to transmit to our Posterity. But since the
principal aim of this deputation is for this end, that they w^tnesse unto
your Majesty the triumphant joy of all the Church s and the unspeakable
satisfaction we have in our souls, to see him justly raised upon the Throne
whom we have demanded of God with so much instance, and importunity, with the
multiplication of so many prayers in our Ecclesiastical Assemblies; We doubt
not Sir but God has drawn you out of his treasures, and that out of his
abundant Grace has given you to France to bring about the golden Age and to be
the most glorious Instrument of his most exquisite favor such as we never had
before, for that it has pleased him to accompany your first entrance into the
Kingdom with mavelous success and unexpected Victories, which have rendered
your Majesty formidable to your enemies but made your own people to consider
you as a precious bud of infinite prosperity which the providence of God has
reserved unto France under your Government. We promise, Sir that as with other
of your people, we have reaped the fruit which God has dispensed unto us by
your hands, in like manner as well as they, we will endeavor to make our
selves worthy by the most signal examples of our fidelity and that we have
neither lives, goods, nor honors which we will not Consecrate with
cheerfulness to the service of your Majesty, so often as the honor of your
Commandments shall call us thereunto, this is the Posture Sir, in the which
we desire to live and dye being not only by birth and obligation, but by
sincere and Ardent affections of your Majesty, Sir, the most humble, most
obedient, most faithful, subjects and servants, the Pastors, and ^ncients
assembled by permission of your Majesty, in the National Synod at Charenton,
and for all.

A Copy of the Letter written to the Queen Regent.
MAdam, we account this day on the which we prostrate ourselves at the feet of
your Majesty, in the person of our Deputies, for one of the most happy days of
our life. So soon as God had committed to your trust the Reins of this
Estate, your Majesty may be pleased to remember, that our Churches were very
diligent to be admitted to this honor, which we now partake of, to give place
in the presence of your Majesty to the using of that Joy, wherewith we are
marvellously transported, to see that God watches particularly for the good of
France, so that in the same time he gave it occasion to shed tears, even as
then did he stay the course thereof, in repayring the mournful loss that we
had of the deceased King, of most glorious memory, by the happy substitution of
the Regency of your Majesty, which has occasioned that we scarsly perceive
our loss, the Sun shining as clearly unto us as ever only certain
thwartings (God so providing it) have deprived us of this honor; This is that,
Madam, which God will, that before we appear in the presence of your Majesty,
our Associating together be prejudged of other men, and our hopes fail of
being as they have formerly been; however the experience which we have of the
Benedictions of your government, which are such as we cannot more fully
express them, nor in better terms, then in joining together, in rendering the
Action of Graces to our most humble submissions. It is for this end, Madam,
that we have deputed toward your Majesty, Sieurs Chebrole and Vincent Pastors,
and Clesses and de Panieur Ancients, that they may assure you, in the behalf
of all the Churches, the deep Resentments we have of all your favors which
your Majesty has been pleased to impart unto us.

You have continued unto us the favors of the King and his Predecessors, you
have confirmed our Edict^, by his Declaration, and which is more, Madam, out of
your gracious bounty, we now have the liberty of this Assembly, which we
beseech you in all humility to consider, as an Uniform meeting and concurrence
of the hearts of all your Subjects of the Religion, in the service of your
Majesty whom we do affect, Madam, eternally, and without partage, and do
transmit this disposition unto our posterity as an essential mark of that
Religion which we profess, and do beseech the great God by whom you Reign,
and who till now has made the Buds of your Crowns to sparkle with so much
splendor, that he would be pleased, Madam, to preserve you for the King our
common Master, and the King for your Majesty, and both for France, and for our
Churches, to the end that in the uniting and perpetual conjunction of these
two great Lights, the Estate may receive the favorable influences thereof, and
that your government, Madam, may beget the envy and Emulation of other the most
accomplished Kingdoms, and be one day a Domestic Patron unto our King, by
which he may confirm all his glorious Actions. These are the most ardent
vows and wishings, Madam, of

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Subjects and servants, the
Pastors and Ancients Assembled by the permission of your Majesty in the
National Synod of Charenton, and For all

A Copy of the Letter of the King unto the Synod. BY THE KING.
Dear and welbeloved, we have received your Letters the twenty eighth of the
last month, and understand by them with great contentment, and by your
Deputies, the good and sincere intentions of your Assembly held by our
permission at Charenton to continue in the inviolable fidelity and obedience,
unto which you are obliged unto us and whereof you have given unto us, and the
Queen Regent, our most honored Lady and Mother full satisfaction; This we
would have you to take notice of, by this our Letter, which exhorts you to
persevere in in this Resolution, rendering unto us upon all occasions the proof
which we expect of your good proceedings, be it by observing the good orders,
which are prescribed unto you, upon the holding of your National Synod, or be
it in regard of other occurrences which may offer themselves to maintain the
public Tranquillity in our Kingdom; In performance of which duty if you
acquit your selves, as we persuade our selves you will, you may be assured to
receive of our bounty, and of that of our Lady and Mother the Queen Regent all
protection, and favorable entertainment and to be maintained and kept under
the benefit of our Edicts, of which we shall take great delight, to make you
partakers with all safety and liberty, in such manner as they were justly and
duly granted unto you, during the Reign of the deceased King our most honored
Lord and Father, these your Deputies which return unto you, will assure you
more particularly on our behalf.

Given at Paris the 4th of January 1645. Signed in the original LOUIS, and
below PHILIPPEAVX.
And in the superscription. To our dear and welbeloved, the Pastors and
Deputies of the Reformed pretended Religion Assembled in a National Synod,
held by our permission at Charenton.



CHAPTER I. The Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France.
Article 1.
TO proceed unto the Election of them whom they will employ in the holy
ministry of the word of God, they are to govern themselves according to the
Rule of the Apostle, that is, that an Examination and Inquisition be made of
their Doctrine, and that they be apt to teach, as likewise of their manners,
with as much diligence as they may.

Article the 2.
When any new Ministers are to be brought into the Church, but more especially
Monks and Priests, they may not be chosen into the Ministry, without diligent
and long Inquisition and trial, as well of their life, as of their Doctrine,
and they may not impose hands on them, no more then on persons unknown, only
by the advice of Synod National or Provincial; to wit, for the space of two
years at the least, since their profession and Conformity, by good witnesses
of the places where they lived and coversed.

Article 3.
If it happen that any Bishop or Curate aspire to the Ministry of the Gospel,
he may not be chosen till he be first a true member of the Church, and renounce
all his Benefices, and other Rights depending on the Roman Church, with
acknowledgement of his forepassed offenses formerly committed, as he shall be
advised by the Consistory, after long experience and trial of his Repentance,
and good Conversation.

A Question or Demand.
Whether the Beneficed Curates which have ranged themselves in the Church, may
receive the Revenue of their Benefices when they serve in the Ministry.

Answ. No.
A Curate having sold his Cures, and not touched any of the money, may not be
received to partake of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unless he protest
not to take or receive the said moneys, and for the offense he has committed
in selling his Cure, shall do Penance in the Consistory; It being asked if a
Minister having been once a Curate, and has no other means or revenue to live
by, then that appertains to his Cure, which is about 65 pounds or thereabouts
per annum, the which Revenue he cannot obtain, but by constrayning them which
owe it, by the power of the Magistrate, and the Magistrate will not condemn
the debtors, if he implead them not in the name of the Curate, whether it be
lawful for him to do so or no. Answ. No.

Article 4.
A Minister of the Gospel, (unless it be in time of persecution) as when they
may be chosen by their Pastors and the Consistory of the place, in case of
greatest necessity) may not be admitted to that holy charge, but by the
Provincial Synod, or the Colloque provided it be composed of the number of
seven Pastors at the least, which number, if it be not found in the Colloque,
they may call unto their neighbors for their concurrence, and he who ought to
be chosen, shall be presented with good Witnesses, not only of the
Universities and particular Churches, but also of the Colloques, and of the
Church in which he had most conversed.

The Examination of him, who shall be presented shall be in this manner.
FIrst by propositions out of the word of God, upon texts which shall be given
unto him, the one necessarily in French, and the other in Latin, if the
Colloque or Synod judge it expedient, for every one of which there shall be
granted unto him twenty four hours of time, for to prepare himself. If by
them he content the company, they shall inform themselves, by a Chapter out of
the New Testament, which shall be presented unto him, to know if he have
profited in the Greek tongue, so that he be able to interpet it; And for the
Hebrew tongue, they shall see at the least that he know to read it, that they
be able to use good books for the understanding of the Scripture, unto which
shall be added, an Essay of their industry upon the most necessary points of
Philosophy, and all in Charity, and without affectation of Questions intricate
and unprofitable, finally he shall make a brief confession of his faith in
Latin, upon which he shall be examined by way of dispute, and after this
examination he be judged capable, The company shall acquaint him with the duty
of his charge unto which he is called, and shall declare unto him, the power
which is given unto him in the name of Jesus Christ, as well to preach the
Word, as administer the Sacraments, after his entire ordination in the Church
unto which he is sent, the which shall be advertised of his election by Acts
and Letters of the Synod and Colloque delivered and made by a Pastor and
Ancient.

Upon the Proposition made by the Province of Anion, that it were necessary not
to limit so short a time unto the Proposons to prepare themselves, the company
without changing any thing in the Article, has left it to the wisdom, and
discretion of the Colloques and Synod to prolong the time according to the
knowledge they have of the quickness or slownesse of the said Proposons.

Article 5.
He of whom the Election shall be notified unto the Church, shall expound
publicly the word of God fourteen days without power to administer the
Sacraments, o^ solemnize marriages, all the people hearing him, to the end they
may know his manner of teaching, the people being expressly advertised, that if
there be any one which knows any impediment, for the which his election who
shall be so named, may not proceed, and brought to effect, or that the people
agree not, they shall come to the Consistory to make their Complaints, which
shall hear patiently every ones reasons the better to judge of them, the
silence of the people shall be held for an express consent, but if there be
difference, and that he which is named be liked of the Consistory, and not the
people, or the greater part of them, his Reception shall be deferred, and he
shall be transmitted to the Colloque or Provincial Synod, to know his
justification as well as his Reception, and although he be there justified, yet
shall he not be given as a Pastor unto the people, against their good liking
nor to the coffeehouse of the greater party of them, as the Pastor likewise
shall not be given without his liking unto the Church, and the difference shall
be ended according to order before mentioned, at the charges and expenses of
the Church which demanded him.

Article 6.
As for them that are not found upon the place, but shall be demanded from
another Church, to be employed in the Ministry of the Gospel, they shall be
sent with good and sufficient Testimonies of their life and doctrine, unto the
Colloque or Synod of the place where they shall be demanded, and the said
Colloque or Synod shall hear them in propounding the word of God, yea, they
shall examine them if they have ever before exercised the ministry of the Word,
There shall be deputed one or more Ministers, to present them to the Church
which shall demand them, and the Church shall proceed to hear them and finally
to receive them; if there be any refusing, or contradicting of the greater
part, all shall be voyded by the order before mentioned, at the charges and
expenses of the Church which shall have demanded them.

Article 7.
He whom they have accorded to be elected into the Ministry shall receive the
charge, which shall be given unto him, and upon his refusing shall be solicited
by fitting exhortations, but by no means shall be constrained.

Article 8.
All which has been before mentioned being observed two Pastors which shall
be deputed by the Synods or Colloques to impose the hands on him which shall be
chosen, coming on the place, he of them which shall make the Exhortation
shall handle briefly, the Institution and excellency of the Ministry,
alleging the Testimonies of fitting Scriptures to that purpose, as Ex. 4.11.
Luke 10.16. John 20.22. St. Paul 1 Cor. 4. and 2 Cor. 5.18. and other the like
places, exhorting every one to take care in his calling, to the end that both
Minister and people do their duty, the Minister so much the more faithfully
acquitting himself of his charge, for that he knows it precious and
excellent before God and the people receiving with all reverence, the word of
God, which shall be preached by him who shall be sent unto them, then shall be
read before all, that which is written 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. where the Apostle
teaches, what a Minister ought to be, and to the end that God may give grace
unto him which shall be chosen, to acquit himself well of the charge committed
to him, a brief prayer shall be made to that purpose, at the end whereof the
Ministers shall impose their hands upon the head of him which is chosen,
praying God that as he is Consecrated to his service, so he may be filled with
the Graces of his holy Spirit, and bless his holy Ministry* and his labors
to his Glory, the edification of his Church, the salvation of him who is
chosen, and shall kneel when they impose their hands on him.

Article 9.
They which shall be chosen, shall sign the Confession of Faith established
among us, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline, as well in the Churches where they
shall be chosen, as unto which they shall be sent.

Article 10.
The Ministers shall not be chosen, without Assigning a certain flock unto
them, and they shall have a particular care of that flock which shall he
assigned them. And a Church cannot pretend right unto a Minister in regard of
particular promises made by him without the knowledge of the Colloque or
Provincial Synod.

Article 11.
They which are chosen in to the Ministry, ought to understand and know, that
they are placed in that charge for all their life, if they be not lawfully
discharged for certain good considerations, and that by the Provincial Synod.

Article 12.
The charge of the Ministers is principally to Evangelize and preach the word
of God unto them unto whom they are sent, they are exhorted to abstain from
all manner of teaching strange and unfitting doctrine not tending to
edification, they are to conform themselves to the simplicity and ordinary
style of the Spirit of God; They are to take care that they have nothing in
their Sermons which may bring prejudice to the honor and authority of the
holy Scripture they shall not preach without having for the subject of all
their discourse some text of holy Scripture, which they shall ordinarily
follow, and from thence draw their observations; so far-forth as they may, they
shall abstain from all unnecessrry amplifications, from long digressions
without occasion, from heaping up a number of passages of Scripture nothing to
the purpose, from a vain reciting of diverse expositions, they shall not
allege but very soberly, the writings of the Ancient Doctors, much less
profane histories and authors, they shall not handle their doctrine in a
Scholasticall form, nor with the mixture of tongues; Briefly they shall shun,
whatsoever may serve unto ostentation, or shall give suspicion thereof in any
manner, of this the Consistories, Colloques, and Provincial Synods shall take
an especial care.

Upon the twelfth Article the Provinces are exhorted to make enquiry after them
in their Synods, which transgress this Article, that they may be censured
according to the Ordinance of National Synods; It is expressly recommended unto
the Provinces under the pain of being censured, to watch diligently over those
Pastors which preach not sound Doctrine, and use the fashion of Expressing
themselves in speech far from the simplicity of the Scripture, or mingle
Latin, Greek or Hebrew sentences, or intermixe too much of profane
Histories; The Deputies of the Provinces, in the next National Synod held,
shall bring their Instructions given in writing of that which the Provinces
have done in this particular.

Upon this charge of the Pastors, it was demanded by the Province of Poictou,
whether it be expedient or no, that the Ministers go to visit the sick of the
Plague; The Assembly has referred this to the wisdom of the Consistory,
conceiving notwithstanding, that this ought not to be done, without exceeding
urgent cause, they may not expose to danger one whole Church for a particular
person, unless some comfortable exhortation may be made without danger,
speaking afar off to the sick, howbeit they advise, the Minister seeing the
danger to approach, to prepare his Church in his ordinary Sermons to patience,
by comfortable exhortations, taking some proper text to that purpose.

Upon the same Article 12, in the second National Synod at Vitre in Britany in
the year 1617. it was enacted thus. It is forbidden all Past^urs to preach
their own sense in politic affairs, contrary to the general resolutions of
the Assemblies, and it is enjoined unto the Consistories, Colloques, and
Provincial Synods, to watch over such persons, and to prosecute them by all
Ecclesiastical censures even to the suspension of their Ministry. The like is
to be done unto the Pastors which clash one against another in their Sermons
upon such matters; The Synod of Alez in the year 1620. upon the second Synod
of Vitre. The Article which forbids Pastors to preach their own particular
sense in politic affairs, having been read and it being represented, that
diverse Pastors have swerved from it in the late Assembly at London.

Assembly desirous to stifle all ^eed of division, would not enter into an
examination of what had passed, but for the time to come, it is forbidden,
Pastors, (who ought to handle that only which is the word of God) to mix in
their Sermons any discourse of Politic affaire^* upon pain on them which do
otherwise to incur all sorts of censures even to the suspension of their
Ministry, as exposing to contumely and reproach the Gospel of Christ; For
this the Provinces shall take an especial care to demand an Account of their
Deputies in the general Assemblies, as well as of them which take on them to
handle them in their writings. The observation of the Synod at Charenton, in
the year 1623. upon the Synod at Alez.

The Article which forbids Pastors to speak in their Sermons of Politic
affairs, directed to the second Synod at Vitre, and reiterated in the Synod of
Alez, shall be read in the Consistory, and the Provincial Synods, are charged
to give their helping hand to the execution thereof and to make known their
care and diligence at their next National Synod.

Article 13.
The Churches are Admonished to use more frequently the catechism and the
Ministers are to handle and expound it by succinct, plain, and familiar
Interrogations and Answers, applying themselves to the rudeness of the people*
without entering into large discourses of common places; It is the duty
likewise of the Ministers to Catechize every one of their flock once or twice
and to exhort every one to range themselves diligently into the number of them
which are to be Catechized.

Article 14.
The Ministers shall keep Actual Residence in their Churches, upon pain of
being deposed their charges with all their family, Synod of Castrees. It is
added to the body of the Discipline by the National Synod of Charenton, in
December and January 1644. and 1645. The practice of the Article of the first
Chapter concerning Residencie of Pastors, is recommended to all the Provinces,
which shall have mutual Inspection, the one over the other, and shall answer
respectively for the duty by them performed at the next National Synod.

Article 15.
They unto whom God has given Graces and Gifts to write, are advertised to
write in modest fashion and becoming the Majesty of the word of God
consequently not to write in a Ridiculous and injurious fashion, which modesty
and majesty they shall observe, in their ordinary Sermons. They shall be chosen
by the Provinces which shall have received the Graces and Gifts of writing* and
if it happen that any books be published against the true Religion, they shall
be sent unto them, to the end that they may answer them, a Colloque being
deputed in every Province which may have the care to take heed of spreading
Copies of that which shall be written and published.

Article 16.
Ministers may not pretend primacy or domination one over the other.

Article 17.
The Ministers and their Consistories are to preside and govern by order, to
the end that none may pretend superiority over his companion* and none of them
may give testimony in any matters of importance, without having first
communicated it to the Ministers their brethren, and companions.

Article 18.
They shall take heed of the custom which is found among them in many places,
which is the Deputing certain Ministers by their Provincial Synods to visit
the Church, the order which they have formerly used until now, being
sufficient, to have knowledge of Scandalls. And this new manner of Charges and
Estate is condemned to be of dangerous consequence* all names likewise of
superiority are to be rejected, as Ancient of the Synod, or superintendent, and
the like.

If it be requisite to Assemble the Colloques or Synods, of any matters that
may depend thereon, then Advertisements shall be Addressed unto the Church, and
not unto one Minister, or any particular person of the same.

If by chance or accident Letters be addressed to one of the Ministers or
Ancients upon any consideration, they which shall have received them, shall
bring them to the Consistories to take advise and deliberation of them.

Article 19.
A Minister may not practice Physic or Law, with his holy Ministry, howbeit
he may in charity give counsel and assistance unto the sick of his flock, and
the p^aces near unto him, provided he be not diverted from his charge, and
that he make no gain or profit by so doing, except only the time of
persecution and of trouble, when he cannot exercise his charge in his Church
and that he shall not be entertained by it.

They which apply themselves to Physic, or are otherwise withdrawn shall be
exhorted, so to behave themselves as that above all they intend their charge,
and study of holy Letters.

The Colloques are advertised to proceed by the order of the discipline against
them that will not obey.

Having regard to the small means, M. received of his Church, and the long
time he served there.

The Assembly permits him to instruct youth; As also condemns them which so
employ themselves in the Instruction of youth as that it hinder them in
intending their principal charge, which the Colloques shall take notice of,
even to the suspension of such Ministers.

Article 20.
The Ministers shall exhort their Flock, to keep modesty in their Apparel and
they themselves in this kind shall show themselves as good examples in
abstaining from all kind of bravery in their habits, and in the habits of their
wives and children.

The Synod and Colloques shall observe this Article and rule, as before, and
practice suspension on them which conform not themselves unto it.

Upon the reading of the 20 Artic^e which enjoynes Pastors to exhort their
flocks, to observe modesty in their Apparel, and to show therein themselves
the first examples both in their persons and families.

Many complaints have been brought of the breach of this Article, by Pastors
themselves, their wives and children in secular habits, too far from the
modesty required in them.

The Assembly desiring to remedy so notable a scandal have given express
charge to all moderatours of Colloques and Provincial Synods to correct such
excess, by censures and reprehensions, and the Refra^^ory shall be by the
Authority of this Assembly, suspended of their charges until they have taken
away the said Scandal. And to the end that this may be the nearer looked unto,
it is permitted unto every particular man following the form of the Discipline
to advertise the Consistory of the foresaid excess, and to bring them to
punishment for it the which being denied, they may address themselves unto the
Colloques to draw a Censure from them against the Pastors, and against them
which shall be found faulty in that kind.

Article 21.
The Princes and great Lords which follow the Court, which have or will set up
a Church in their houses, shall be entreated to take their ministers of the
Churches duly reformed and where they have more then one, with sufficient
assurance of their lawful calling, and with the leave of the Colloques and
Synods, they shall first sign the Confession of Faith of the Churches of this
Kingdom, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline and to the end that the preaching
of the Gospel may have the more fruit it is desired they would be pleased
every one in his own family to set up a Consistory composed of Ministers, and
the people of their family, most approved for their Integrity, which shall be
chosen Ancients and Deacons till they have a sufficient number by which
Consistory, the Scandalls and Vices of the same family shall be repressed
according to the order of the Discipline.

And the same Ministers shall make their appearance at the Provincial Synods
as often as they can possibly.

Article 22.
That it shall not be lawful unto the Pastor to leave his flock without the
leave of the Colloque or Provincial Synod of the Church unto which he shall be
given.

Article 23.
They which forsake the Calling of the Ministry shall be finally excommunicated
by the Provincial Synod if they repent not, and reassume the charge, which God
had committed to their trust.

Article 24.
The Ministers shall not be wanderers, and they shall not have liberty to
intrude themselves into any Charge of their own authority, as they shall
think fit.

Article 25. 26.
The Minister of one Church may not Preach in another without the consent of
the Minister of the same, unless he be absent, in which case the Consistory
shall have Authority to grant it; And if the Flock be scattered by persecution
or other trouble, the foreign Minister shall endeavor to assembles the
Deacons and Ancients* and this if they cannot do, he shall be permitted
notwithstanding to preach, for the reuniting of the Flock.

Article 27.
Ministers shall not be sent unto other Churches without authentical Letters,
or their sufficient testimonies* etc.

Article 28.
The Minister which shall say he is forsaken of his Church or persecuted, may
not upon that be received by another Church, unless by good testimony he make
it appear unto the Colloque, or Synod, how he has behaved and governed
himself* and shall be remitted to the wisdom and discretion of a Colloque or
Provincial Synod

Article 29.
When a Minister shall be destitute of a Church having fa^^^y ^^tained leave,
and discharge of that which he served; It shall belong to the Colloque or Synod
of the Province, to provide for him within a month, and if within the same
time he be not provided by the Colloque or Synod of the Province in the which
he served, he shall have his liberty to provid for himself with another Church
out of the same Province, even there where God shall give him means according
to the order of the Discipline.

Article 30.
Provincial Synods have authority to change the Ministers for ^ertaine
considerations, their Churches being heard, and their reasons being well and
duly examined* but in case of difference nothing shall be innouated unless by
a National Synod.

Article 31.
When the Minister shall be persecuted, or for other cause, cannot exercise his
charge in the Church unto which he was assigned, he may be sent elsewhere by
the said Church, etc.

Article 32.
Ministers may be lent for Salarie with their own good liking by the
Consistory.

Article 33.
Ministers lent for a time, when the time of their being lent shall be expired,
they shall return into the power of the Churches, whence they departed.

Article 34.
If within a year after the time be expired, the Church redemand not their
Pastor being lent, he shall appertain to that Church which borrowed him, etc.

Article 35.
He which being destitute of a Church, cannot be employed by the Province, he
may be hired out of the Province.

Article 36.
To the end that the Flocks may acquit themselves of their duties toward their
Pastors as the word of God obliges them, and that occasion be not given unto
the Pastors to complain, and to depart from their Flocks, they are admonished
to administer unto them necessary things.

Article 37.
Yea, to meet with the ingratitude of many which have been found to deal
unworthily with their Pastors the order following shall be observed, one
quarter of their Pension is to be advanced, which has been promised them by
every man.

Upon the Article 36. and the other following it is remitted to the wisdom of
the Consistory to proceed against the particular persons, which are unthankful
to their Churches either by compelling them, permitted by his Majesty, or by
particular Obligations, or by Eccleas it is siastica^l Censures, yea by
Suspensions from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper after great and solemn
remonstrances, and warnings, and other means as the Consistory shall advise.

And in the Synod of St. Foy, Article 4. The Colloques and Synods shall proceed
by all Censures against them, which are unthankful to their Pastors* seeing
the unthankfulness of particular men has sh^wne it self greater then ever
toward their Pastors, touching their entertainment which menaceth the
Churches with an entire dissipation. It has been advised that the unthankful
men, which show themselves refractory to the many advertisements made unto them
by the Consistory, the foresaid Consistory shall proceed against them, to the
depriving them of the Sacraments.

The Synod of Alez. Considering that many Churches seeing themselves every day
in danger to fail through default of means, to entertain amongst them the
holy Ministry; All the Churches are exhorted so far forth as they desire
the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, to gather a stock be it by devotion
amongst the living, be it by Testamentary Legacies of particular men, or by any
other convenient means, so that the holy Ministry of the word of God may be
ever preserved, and that posterity may be instructed and confirmed from age to
age in the true Religion.

The Synod of Charenton Observe. 9. upon the Synod of Alez. the Article which
concerns the means to entertain the holy Ministry shall be read in the
Consistories, which shall be exhorted to procure the execution thereof so far
forth as possibly they may. In pursuit whereof the Article following has been
agreed on in the Provincial Synod of Handen.

Seeing the Churches, which have formerly resented notable effects of the Kings
liberality, have within these few years been so destitute of that succor,
that the Flocks which are founded on the hopes, to partake of the moneys
granted by his Majesty, are for the want of these moneys threatened with an
evident and approaching ruin, and that through default of zeal and affection,
rather then for want of means, to particular men; the necessities as well of
the Churches, as of the Pastors increase every day, insomuch as if it be not
speedily prevented, it is impossible to hinder their dissipation.

The Synod of this Province touched with a just apprehension of so great a
Calamity to prevent it have ordained that all Churches be advertised, that
they ought to search out among themselves the means for their proper
subsistence, to raise the Contribution of particular men to repress the
Ingratitude of them* which testify and show a notable defect of zeal, and
charity, and to take order for time to come, that though the money granted by
his Majesty entirely fail, yet the Ministers of the Gospel, may be conserved
in those places, where it has pleased God, to establish them, and the Kingdom
of Christ advanced.

In pursuit of this Article, and to come unto the execution thereof, It has
been decreed that the chief of every Family shall assemble and meet together
in every Church presently, before the dissolving of this Assembly, to the end
that upon the place they advise to make new stocks, and to provide for the
subsistence of the Flock, of which they are members, and that they dispose
themselves unto the observation of the Article of the General Acts of the
National Synod of Alez, and of the National Synod of Charenton, which shall
be read unto them,

Article 38.
To prevent for time to come the dissipation of the Churches; They which shall
be elected to conduct the Action of the Colloques, shall make inquiry in every
Church of the enter tainment which they owe unto their Ministers, etc.

Article 39.
When necessary assistance shall be denied unto the Pastor, and that he shall
remonstrate, and make his complaint thereof, when three months are passed, it
shall be lawful unto the said Pastor to go unto another Church, with the advice of a Provincial Synod.

Upon the complaint of a Minister of the ingratitude of his flock, all
circumstances shall be prudently considered and upon the information which
shall be made, they shall principally have regard unto the poverty of the
Churches, and to the substance and means of him which makes the complaint,
putting a difference betwixt ingratitude and inability, to the end they may
follow that which may most concern the glory of God the edification of his
Church, the honor of the Pastor and of the Ministry.

Article 40.
The Church which shall be found to be ungrateful, shall not be provided of a
Pastor till it has fully satisfied that which was due unto him, of whom it
has been deprived.

Article 41.
The Ministers which have any state or fortunes, may notwithstanding take
Salary of their Flocks, yea, it is expedient that they take it in regard of the
consequence, and for the prejudices they may do to other Pastors and
Churches, but they shall be exhorted to use it as the necessity of the
Churches, and charity requires them.

Article 42, 43.
It is not permitted to any Pastor to possess any heritage under the title of
Pastor, but if a Pension, or any part thereof be assigned upon any possession,
Rent, or revenue, it shall be all administered by the Deacons, or other
personages, to whose trust it shall be committed, and deputed by the Church, of
whom the Minister shall receive his Pension to take away all suspision of
avarice or covetousness, and to the end by such distractions they may not be
withdrawn from their charge.

The Church shall take care of the Widow and Children of that Minister which
shall dye in their service and if the Church have not means, the Province
shall take ^are of them.

Article 44.
The Minister shall be subject to Censures.

Article 45.
The Office of Ministers is to regulate themselves and their flock great and
small, of what quality and condition soever they be, by the word of God, and
Ecclesiastical discipline.

But it appertains also unto the Magis^rates to watch over all Estates, yea,
the Ministers themselves, and to take care they walk in their vocations, and
in case they fail in the performance of their duty, the Magistrate may cause
them to be admonished thereof, by the Ecclesiastical Discipline in the
Consistories, Colloques or Synods, unless the faults be punishable by the
Laws, the cognizance of which appertaineht to the Magistrate.

Article 46.
Ministers shall be deposed which ^each corrupt doctrine, if after they be
sufficiently admonished they desist not. They likewise which obey not the holy
admonitions made them by the Consistory taken out of the word of God. They also
which shall be of scandalous life, they which shall be convinced of Heresies
Schisms, and Rebellion against the Ecclesiastical order, manifest blasphemy
worthy of civil punishment, simony, and all corruptions of litigious
wranglings, to occupy the place of another; desertion of their flocks without
lawful leave and just occasion, falsity, perjury, adultery, theft,
drunkenness, buggery, worthy to be punished by the Laws, Usury, sports
forbidden by the laws and scandalous dancings, and such dissolutions, a crime
importing civil infamy, a crime which deserves in another separation from the
Church, and all them which shall be totally insufficient to discharge their
duty.

Article 47.
They shall not be deposed, which by reason of old age, sickness, or other
inconvenience shall be rendered unable, to Minister in their charges, in which
their honor shall continue, and they shall be recommended to their Churches to
be entertained by them, and they shall provide others to discharge their Cure.

Article 48.
Scandalous vices punishable by the Magistrate as murder, treason, and others
which shall redound to the great dishonor and scandal of the Churches,
deserve that the Minister be deposed, though the offenses were committed
before his Election yea, in the time of his Ignorance, for that in this case he
continuing in the Ministry brings more scandal then edification unto the
Church; of this the Synod shall take especial notice.

Article 49.
If a Minister be convinced of notorious, and enormous crimes, he shall be
presently deposed by the Consistory, having called the Colloque, or for want
thereof, two or three Pastors not suspected, etc.

Article 50.
The causes of the Ministers deposition shall not be declared unto the people
if necessity require it not, of the which, they which shall be judges thereof,
shall take notice.

Article 51.
The National Synod shall be advertised by the Provincial, of them which
shall be deposed, to the end that they receive them not.

Article 52.
Ministers deposed for crimes deserving capital punishment, or bearing note of
infamy, may not be remitted in their charges, whatsoever acknowledgement they
make; As for the lightest faults after acknowledgement they may be remitted by
a National Synod.

Article 53.
Gadders and wanderers, (that is to say) they which have no vocation and
intrude themselves into the Ministry, they are to be suppressed by the
Consistory, etc.

Article 54.
They which shall be declared Wanderers, Apostates, Heretic* Schismatiques,
shall be denounced by all the Churches, to the end that they take heed of them,
and a list of them shall be carried to the Provincial and National Synods,
to the end that they may take care of them.

Article 55.
They which shall be put into the rank of Wanderers by the advice of a
National Synod, may not be received, unless by the advice of a National
Synod.

Article 56.
They which intrude themselves into the Ministry in the Provinces, and places
where the pure Ministry is already established shall be sufficiently
advertised to desist, and in case they persevere they shall be declared
Schismatics, and all which follow them, if after the like advertisement made
unto them, they forsake them not.

CHAPTER II. Of Schools.
Article 1.
THe Churches shall erect Schools for the instruction of youth.

Article 2.
The Governors and Masters of the Schools shall sign the confession of
Faith, and Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Article 3.
The Doctors and Professors in Theology shall be chosen by a Synod or Colloque,
after good and sufficient proof of their life and doctrine.

Article 4.
To the end there may be a sufficient number of Pastors, and that the Churches
may be always provided of capable persons to govern them, and to preach unto
them the word of God, the Churches shall be advertised to choose Scholars
already advanced in learning, and of good hope to entertain them in the
Universities, to the end that they be prepared, and f^shioned to be employed in
the Ministry, preferring before others the children of poor Ministers, which
they are part for learning; Kings, Princes, and Lords, are to be entreated and
exhorted to take care and to employ some part of their Revenues, as also
Churches well peopled, that they give the ^e^^ part of their A^^^es to be
employed for entertainment of Scholars in the Universities.

Article. 5.
The question having been propounded by the Province of Aniou, what time they
are to give to them, which forsaking the Papacy, do range themselves within
the Church to be called unto the charge of Ancients, and Deacons.

The Assembly Decrees the term of two years, to be given unto them, which is
the same that is for reception into the Ministry.

The custom which has been found in some Churches, in the which the Ancients
which left their places, named others to succeed them, has been reproved, and
it is decreed that the nomination shall be by the common voice of all the
Consistory following the discipline.

Again, whether to set up a Church, men may aid themselves, with Ancients
which have been Idolaters, then, when they cannot have others.

Resp. They may take them, provided they promise not to commit Idolatry for the
time to come.

Whether it be lawful for the Reformed Church to choose him for an Ancient,
who by infirmity has fallen into Idolatry.

Resp. If the fault be fresh in memory, and very late, he may not be chosen,
otherwise there is no doubt.

CHAP. III. Of Ancients and Deacons.
Article 1.
IN places where the Order is not yet established, the Elections as well of the
Ancients, as of the Deacons, shall be made by the common suffrages of the
people, and of the Pastors, but where the order of the Discipline has been
already established, it shall be in the power of the Consistory, with the
Pastors to choose the fittest and ablest men, with earnest prayers, and the
nomination of them shall be made unto the Consistory, with loud voice, and the
charge of them which shall be chosen, shall be made to the Consistory, to the
end they may know in what they are to be employed, and if they consent, they
shall presently after be named to the people, two several Lords days, to the
end that the consent of the people may also be taken, and if there be no
opposition, on the third Lords day they shall be received publicly, they
standing up before the Chair with solemn prayers, and so they shall be settled
in their charges, signing the Confession of Faith, and the Ecclesiastical
Discipline; but if there be opposition, the cause shall be known, and
determined in the Consistory, and if they cannot accord there, all shall be
remitted to a Colloque or Provincial Synod.

Article 2.
They shall not choose hereafter so far forth as they may, them for Ancients
and Deacons in the Church, which have Wives contrary to the true Religion,
following the saying of the Apostle.

Howbeit to the end the Church be not deprived of the labor of many good
personages, the which by reason of their forepassed ignorance, have Wives of a
contrary Religion, they shall be tolerated only for the necessity of time,
provided that they make their duty to appear by indevouring to instruct their
foresaid Wives, and to solicit them to a conformity in the Church.

Article 3.
The Office of Ancients, is to wa^ch over the flock with the Pastors, to
cause the people for to assemble themselves, and that every man be found in the
holy Congregation, to make a report of scandalls, and of faults, to know and
judge of matters with the Pastors, and in general to have care with them of
all things which concern the order, entertainment and government of the
Church, so that in every Church they shall have a form of their charge in
writing, according to the circumstance of place and time.

Article 4.
The Office of the Deacons, is to gather and distribute, by the advice of the
Consistory, the moneys of the poor, of the prisoners, and the sick, to visit
them, and to take an especial care of them.

Article 5.
The Office of Deacons is not to preach the word of God, and to administer the
Sacraments, notwithstanding, in case of necessity the Consistory may choose
certain Ancients and Deacons to Catechize throughout Families, also it is
permitted unto the Ancient in the absence of the Pastor, to say public
prayers, on ordinary days, when they shall be chosen thereunto by the
Consistory, so that they follow the form which is prescribed in the Psalms.

As for Deacons which have been accustomed to Catechize publicly in certain
Provinces.

The inconvenience heard and weighed which has happened, and may happen
hereafter, the Churches are exhorted where that custom has not been received,
to abstain from it, and others which have used it to leave it and to cause the
said Deacons, if they be found capable to range themselves into the Ministry
of the Gospel so soon as possible they may.

Article 6.
The Ancients and Deacons may very well assist the Propositions of the word of
God, but the decision of the Doctrine is principally referred unto the
Ministers, Pastors, and Doctors in Divinity, which are duly called to their
charge.

Article 7.
The Deacons, nor the Ancients likewise may not pretend primacy or domination
the one over the other, be it in nomination to the people, or in place, or in
order to give their advise, and other things depending on their charges.

Article 8.
The office of Ancients and Deacons, as it is used among us at this day, is not
perpetual, howbeit for that the change of them may bring detriment to the
Church, they are exhorted to continue their charge so long as they may, and if
they depart from it, they shall not do it without leave of their Church.

Article 9.
The Ancients and Deacons shall be deposed of their charges for the same
causes, that the Ministers of the word of God may be, according to their
quality.

Article 10.
The restitution of Ancients and Deacons deposed, shall be after the same
manner as the Restitution of Pastors.

CHAP. IIII. Of Deacons.
Article 1.
THe Moneys of the poor shall not be disposed of but by the Deacons, with the advice and consent of the Consistory.

Article 2.
In ordinary distributions it is required, that one or two Ministers be
present, above all in the rendering of Accounts.

Article 3.
The people shall have notice given, and be advertised of the making up the
Accounts, to the end that they may if they please be present, as well for the
discharge of them which manage the Accounts, as to let every man know the
neces^ity of the Churches, and of the poor.

Article 4.
To hinder disorder, the Assembly advises, that every Church nourish their
own poor, etc.

CHAP. V. Of Consistories.
Article 1.
EVery Church shall have a Consistory composed of persons which shall have the
government thereof, to wit, of Pastors and Ancients, and the Pastors ought to
praesede in this company, as likewise in all Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

Article 2.
As for Deacons, seeing the Church by the necessity of the time have employed
them hitherunto prosperously in the Government of the Church, as also
exercising the Charge of Ancients, the which hereafter shall be so chosen and
continued, they shall have the government of the Church with the Pastors and
Ancients, and for that cause they shall accompany them ordinarily in the
Consistory, yea, in the Colloques and Synods, if they be sent thither by the
Consistories.

Article 3.
In places where the exercise of the Religion, is not already established, the
faithful shall be exhorted by the Colloques, to have Ancients and Deacons, and
to follow the Discipline of the Church, and shall be advised in the said
Colloques into what Church they ought to range themselves for their
convenience, from whence they may not depart without communicating it unto the
said Colloques.

Article 4.
Every Church shall have one only consistory, and it shall not be permitted to
establish any other Counsel, for any affairs of the Church, and if there be
found any other Counsel separated from that of the Consistory, it shall be
speedily removed; Howbeit the Consistory may call unto them sometimes such of
the Church as they shall think good, when any affair shall require it.

Article 5.
It rests in the liberty of the Consistory to admit the father and son, or
two brothers in one and the same Consistory, unless they be otherwise
hindered, of this the Colloque or Provincial Synod shall take notice.

Article 6.
A Magistrate may be called to the charge of an Ancient in the Consistory
provided that the exercise of the one of the charges, hinder not the other, and
that it be not prejudicial to the Church.

Article 7.
It is likewise left to the wisdom of the Consistory to call unto them
Proposants, although they have no charge in the Church, but not without great
causes and considerations.

It is decreed that the Proposants may not preach publicly.

The Synod of Charenton 1644. and 1645. confirm the Rule taken by the Synod of
Gergeau, and Rochel upon the undertaking of Proposants, which intrude
themselves into the Pul^its to make Propositions which are in stead of Sermons
before the people in the ordinary days and hours of their assembling.

The Assembly of the Requisition of the Province of Xantaigne interdicts all
Pastors and Consistories, to suffer that course to be practiced in their
particular Churches, or to be brought in among them.

Article 8.
The government of the Church shall be squared, according to the Discipline, as
it has been agreed on by the National Synods, and no Church nor Province, may
make an Ordinance, which conformes not in substance unto the general Articles
of the Discipline, to this end the Artic^es of the Discip^ine shall be read, in
the Consistories, at the least in the time they Celebrate the Lords Supper, and
the Ancients and Deacons are exhorted to have every man a Copy of them to read
and study them in their particular, and at their leisure.

Article 9.
The knowledge of Scandalls, and the judgment of them appertain to the
Assembly of Pastors and Ancients.

The custom which is in diverse places to make enquiry and to have a general
Censure of facts in the assembling of the people in the presence as well of men
as women, being condemned by the word of God, the Churches are advertised to
abstain from it, and to content themselves in effect with the ordinary censure
agreed on by the Discipline.

Article 10.
The Ancients shall be advertised not to report the faults of offenders unto
the Consistory, without great reason.

Upon the 10 Article.
It shall be declared, that although by disposition of right a Crime may be
called public, which meriteth exemplary punishment howbeit we call that
public which begets scandal, or an evil example* which comes to the
notice of all or of many, N^twithstanding that shall not hinder, but that in
pub^ike faults the circumstances, be considered to proceed unto censures and
corrections.

It shall likewise be declared that for light faults, as private, domestic,
and small injuries it shall suffice to admonish particularly the offender by
any of the Consistory, but as for public faults, which shall be scandalous by
reason of the circumstances, they may call the Delinquents into the Consistory,
to proceed there according to the circumstance of the fact.

Article 11 and 12.
As also, no man shall be called into the Consistory, without sufficient
cause; In the exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline they shall abstain
hereafter so far as they may, as well from the formalities, as the terms which
are ordinarily used in civil Jurisdictions.

Article 13.
The faithful may be exhorted by the Consistories, yea, summoned in the name
of God to speak the truth, so long as it derogates in nothing from the
Authority of the Magistrate, as also they may use accustomed Formalities, in
the protestation of an Oath, charged by the Magistrate.

Article 14.
When differences happen, the parties shall be exhorted, to make an accord by
all amiable and friendly ways, but the body of the consistories shall not
delegate Arbitrators, neither shall they carry themselves as arbitrators, only
they shall advise as particular men, and in their private name.

Upon the 14. Article.
They of the Religion, which have process and differences as well civil as
criminal, shall be seriously exhorted by the Pastors to endeavor an accord
between themselves by the arbitrament of them which are of the Religion without
going to law.

When Gentlemen shall be engaged in any quarrel, they shall be exhorted to
subject themselves, to the advice and friendly composition of their friends.

A certain complaint being made, that the Consistories too much trench upon
the Magistrate, taking Cognizance of Processes, to determine them.

The Assembly Decrees, that the Consistories shall be advertised not to call
Pleaders into their Consistory, unless it be them which by reason of their
Process commit scandalous offenses, yet notwithstanding they may exhort the
Pleaders, by all means to compromit their differences, or otherwise to accord
between themselves.

Article 15.
Besides, the admonitions which are made by the Consistories unto them which
have offended, if it happen that they use greater punishment and censure, be it
of suspension or privation for a time, from the Supper of the Lord, or of their
Excommunication, and cutting off from the Church.

The Consistory shall be warned to use wisdom in distinguishing the one from
the other, as also to weigh and examine diligently the faults and scandalls
which shall be brought before them, with all their circumstances, that they may
judge of the Censure, which is most requisite.

Because the faults ought to be corrected in the Church by the word of God,
and according to the rule of charity, and that all are not grievous and
scandalous, some being enormous, others less offensive, some secret, others
public.

They ought to accommodate the Censure and Reprehension according to the
quality and greatness of the offenses. That in secret faults of which the
offender shall repent, they shall not be reported unto the Consistory, but
only those which they cannot correct by the first means, or which being
public, the Consistory may take Cognizance of, and proceed to the correction
of them, by fitting censures, weighing well the Acts with their circumstances,
to the end they may apply thereunto, according to the exigent of the case,
fitting censures, in such manner as it shall be expedient to draw the sinner
to repentance, who to this end may by the authority of the Consistory, be for a
time deprived or kept back, from the Supper of the Lord.

And if there be need the more to humble him, he may be finally Excommunicated,
and cut off from the body of the Church, according to the order before
expressed, and declared, especially if he show himself rebellious unto the
holy admonitions and censures which shall be made unto him, and continue
obstinate and altogether impenitent.

But for that this remedy is the last, and of all the most rigorous, it ought
not to be practiced, unless in an extremity after all other more gentle means
have been tried, and because hitherunto it has not been used as it ought,
neither yet has been made that distinction which is requisite between this
last Excommunication and suspension for a time, and simple privation of the
Lords Supper.

That there may be a right use of the one, and of the other, the Ministers and
Elders, in interpreting the words of excommunication and Suspension from the
Lords Supper, do advise that no man ought to be deprived, nor suspended, from
the Lords Supper, by the private authority of the Pastor, or of any other, but
only of the Consistory, to whose wisdom it shall be left, to take
cognizance, after that the offender has first bin admonished for any fact
which meriteth Suspension.

In this case he which shall have committed any offense, shall for a time be
deprived of the Supper of the Lord, for to humble him, and try his Repentance.

Howbeit the offense not being known, but to a few men, such a Suspension, or
the cause of it shall not be declared to the people, for fear of further
defaming the oftendor, by rendering his offense more notorious and scandalous
then it is, and it shall suffice in this ease to acknowledge his offense, unto
the Consistory, that he may be admitted to the supper of the Lord.

But as for them which have been admonished diverse times of their offenses, and
yet show themselves disobedient unto the Consistory, as also they which shall
have committed any great and enormous crimes, which are punishable by the
Magistrate, and which may bring public scandal unto the Church, they shall be
punished withal sort of Censures.

And if it happen that after long expectance and patience, and many admonitions
made by the Consistory, and the forementioned proceedings kept and practiced,
and all other endeavors of charity observed in the behalf of the offender, if
after all this he yet continue obstinate and impenitent, then shall they
proceed against him by public admonitions, and by the mouth of the Pastor in
the name of the Church, declaring his offense, and protesting their endeavor
of reclaiming him, without any profiting therein, exhorting the whole Church to
pray unto God for him, and essay by all means to lead him to the knowledge of
his offense, for to prevent his cutting off and Excommunication, whereunto they
may not proceed but with dolor and grief of heart, and of which the Pastor
shall set forth the true and lawful use from the word of God, to the end that
every man may be admonished to keep himself within the compass of his duty
toward God and his Neighbor, and to make known also that this last remedy is
practiced in the behalf of such an offender, for the glory of God, the honor
and repose of his Church, and his own salvation the which public admonitions
and denuntiations they shall prosecute and continue three times on three
several Lords days.

In the first to spare in some sort the offender, he shall not be named,
because he is already known to the people, but in the other he shall be named.

And if for all that he return not, but persevere in his hardness, in the
fourth Lords day he shall be signified, and the Excommunication of such a
personage shall be pronounced as a Rotten member cut off from the body of the
Church, by the Pastor, in the authority of the word of God in the name and
consent of the whole Church, of the which Excommunication the tenor follows.
Following the requisition made by the Province of Poictou, the which was framed
by the necessity of its practice in this corrupt age as also has been more
fully declared then it has been in the book of Discipline. MY Brethren, behold
here the fourth time that A. B. having committed of C. and having scandalized
the Church of God, and showed himself impenitent, and a contemner of all
admonitions, which have been diverse times made unto him from the word of God,
has been suspended from the Supper of the Lord, the which suspension and the
causes thereof have bin fully made known unto you to the end that you join your
prayers with ours that it would please God to soften the hardness of his heart
and to touch him with repentance, withdrawing him from the way of perdition;
But seeing after he has been so long borne withal, entreated, and in a sort
menaced, and adjured to turn himself unto God, he persevers in his
impenitency, and with a hardened obstinacy rebels against God* and tramples
under his feet the Word, and the order which has been established in his
Church, glorifying himself in his sins and in a course that the Church has a
long time been troubled, and the name of the Lord blasphemed, We the ministers
of the Gospel of the word of Jesus Christ, whom God has armed with spiritual
weapons mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
every thing that exalts it self against him unto whom the eternal Son of
God has given power to bind and to loose on earth, declaring that what they
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, willing to purge the house of God and
deliver the Church from Scandalls and in pronouncing Anathemaes against the
wicked to glorify the name of God.

In the name and in the Authority of Jesus Christ, with the advice of the
Pastors and Elders (in the Colloque or Synod) Assembled, and of the
Consistory, of this Church of N. we have cut off, and cutting off the said A.B.
from the Communion of the Church we excommunicate him, and expel him the
society of the faithful, to the end that he be unto you as an Heathen, and
Publican, and that he be unto all the true faithful believers an Anathema, and
execration that his conversation be esteemed contageous, and that his; example
strike our spirits with horror, and cause us to tremble under the mighty hand
of the living God; Which sentence of Excommunication, the Son of God will
ratify, and will make efficacious until the offendour confused and dejected
before God, give glory unto him, by his conversion, and being delivered from
the chains of Satan which inthralls him, he bewail his sin touched with
repentance pray God (well beloved) that he have pity on this poor sinner* and
that this horrible judgment the which with grief and great sorrow of heart we
pronounce against him, in the authority of the Son of God, serve to humble
him and to reduce his soul in the way of salvation, from which he strayed and
erred. Amen, Amen.

Cursed be every man that does the work of the Lord negligently, Amen.

If there be any one that love^^ not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maranatha, Amen, yea Amen.

Moreover, they shall use the suspension from the Sacraments of the Lords
Supper, to humble offenders, and to touch them with a more lively sense of
their offenses.

This suspension, nor the cause thereof, nor the restitution of the offender,
shall be published unto the people, unless in case they be heretics, despised
of God, rebels to the Consistories, and traitors against the Church. Besides,
they which shall be attainted and convinced of crimes, worthy of corporal
punishment, and which may bring great scandal to all the Church.

Item, they which against the Remonstrances made unto them, marry themselves to
them of the Romish Religion, the Fathers and Mothers which so marry their
children, the Tutors and Curators, and others which hold the place of Parents,
which in such manner likewise marry their Pupills. They also which carry their
children to be Baptized among them or present others to Baptism among them, it
is necessary that such persons though they perceive in them some beginning of
Repentance, be speedily suspended and deprived for a time of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, and that the Suspension be declared to the people, to the end
they may be further humbled, and brought to repentance, as well to discharge
the Church of God of all blame and reproach, as also to beget fear in others,
and to make them learn by such examples not to commit the like offenses.

The annotation upon this Article follows.
They which shall be excommunicated for Heresies, contemners of God, Schism,
Treason against the Church, rebellion unto the same and other vices greatly
scandalous to all the Church, shall be declared Excommunicate unto the people
with the cause of their Excommunication. As for them which have been
excommunicated for any light cause, it shall be the wisdom of the Church to
determine, whether it be fitting or no to manifest it to the people, until
that otherwise it be agreed in the next general^ Counsel.

They which have been so excommunicated and cut off, shall be deprived of the
Communion of the Church, and of the benefit thereof, yea, the faithful shall
be admonished not to converse any longer with them, nor to haunt familiarly
their company, to the end that they may be ashamed and humbled and brought
again to repentance, the which shall be approved by good and sufficient
witnesses, well known to the Consistory, which shall judge whether or no they
shall be remitted to the Church, and to that purpose shall call them before
them, and having seen and heard them, (if they find their repentance true and
unfeigned) it shall be publicly denounced unto the people by the Pastors, to
the end that they may be moved to praise God, which has t^uched their hearts
to make acknowledgement of their offenses, and brought them to repentance, and
then they shall be presented to the Assembly, to acknowledge, confess, and
attest their forepassed offense and rebellion, and beg for pardon of God, and
of his Church, and so shall be reconciled with joy unto it, and that with
public prayer. The Assembly enacteth, that when the Magistrate shall first
take notice of any crime and have cognizance thereof, the Consistory shall
wait until the fact be verified by the Magistrate, before it require such
satisfaction of the offender as appertains unto conscience, unless the
circumstances be such as that they cannot wait or attend.

Upon the 16. Article the Deputies of Poictou having demanded whether they
which marry themselves according to the Romish Religion, or in such manner
marry their children, come afterward to testify repentance of their faults,
may be exempted from public suspension or no; The Synod judging such a
punishment to be entirely necessary to retain them, which have but to great an
inclination to commit such and the like offenses, have decreed, that the
Article shall be exactly observed, seeing that without such a suspension, the
scandal given to the Church cannot be sufficiently repaired,

They which shall be married by a Romish Priest, cannot be dispensed withal
without public acknowledgement of their offense to the Consistory of what
quality or condition soever they be.

They which have committed enormous crimes and offenses, as Paricides and
Incests, ought to be speedily suspended of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and their suspension declared to the people.

The Consistories are advised to use prudently, and very rarely, so far forth
as possibly they may Public acknowledgements, and they only in the public
offenses.

Article 17.
If by suspension the offenders ^mend not themselves, but continue Impenitent
after long expectance, and that they have been diverse times admonished and
solicited they shall proceed against them by public admonitions made unto
the people by the Pastor three several Lords days naming them, if there be
need, to beget in them the more shame, and every one shall be desired to pray
unto God for them and to essay by all means to bring them to repentance, and
an acknowledgement of their sins, that they may prevent a Cutting off and
excommunication, unto which they may not proceed but with a kind of reluctance.

And if for all that they repent not, but persevere in their obstinacy and
hardness, the fourth Lords day, the Pastor shall say publicly, that they are
declared hardened and scandalous, and naming them, shall denounce that they are
not to be acknowledged for members of the Church cutting them off from it in
the name, and in the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Church, the
form of which excommunication is fully set down before.

Upon the 17. Article.
An observation of the Synod of Saumur upon the Discipline. It has been
enacted by the Synod, that in public acknowledgements, the crimes shall not
be specifyed, which may draw after it danger of death or note of Infamy.

Article 18.
For time to come, all sentences of excommunication confirmed by the
Provincial Synod shall stand firm, as also all sentences of suspension from
the Lords Supper, without the Consistories giving their names, although the
suspended persons appeal unto the Colloque or provincial Synod.

The Deputies of the Isle of France having demanded in the 18, Article touching
the Appeals of public suspensions, that they may know if the Consistory
having decerned a public suspension against one, and the person condemned
appeal, whether they may proceed unto the suspension notwithstanding the
Appeal.

The Assembly has judged that the Consistory may not pass any further, but
ought to admit of the Appeal, unles in public offenses known to all the
Church, and this Appeal shall be definitively determined by the next Colloque
or Provincial Synod.

Article 19.
They which have abandoned the profession of the Religion to adhere to Idolatry
if they persist in this Apostasy, after they have endeavored to bring them
again into the flock, they shall be publickely denounced Apostataes to wit,
they which lately have revolted, unles by naming of them the Consistory judge,
that thereby there may happen, some great and notable danger, unto the Church
in which case nothing shall be done, but by the advice of the Synod of the
province, so that for them which shall have been a long time revolted, the
execution of this denuntiation is remitted to the wisdom of the Consistories.

Upon the 19. Article.
Touching them which have forsaken the Church, they are no more to be accounted
of our body no^ of us.

The Assembly advises that where the Church is in danger all is to be remitted
to the wisdom of the Consistory which shall have a regard to the edification
and good of the Church.

It being demanded by the Church of Poictou, how they ought to proceed against
them, which have wholly forsaken the Church denying the truth which cannot by
any censures be brought again into the Church, some of which in such sort
render themselves enemies, and persecutors, as that if they name them
publickely in proceeding against them, by excommunications they render
themselves worse, and are the more exasperated against the flock, to endamage
it, more then before as the effect shows.

It is agreed that excommunication is properly instituted, for them which are
of the body of the Church, and not against them which are without, and that the
effect of it ought to tend to edification and not to destruction* to the end
that the flock be not vitiated by the scabbed sheep, and that he which is
separated being humbled through shame be in the end reclaimed that others may
fear by his example; so that when they are named which have forsaken the
Church it is not properly to excommunicate them, because they are already out
of the Communion, but to declare there Rebellion and revolting to the end that
every one take heed of them, as being incorrigi^le and that they endeavor
notwithstanding to correct, and reduce them, if it be possible by any means,
and that they pray unto God for them, so long as they have any hope of their
amendment. When they are found to be such as instead of mollifying their
hearts, and repenting, they harden them, and grew worse, becoming as madd men,
even to the machinating and conspiring against the flock, and Governors
thereof above all when they understand that they are named or shall be named
publickely, It is far better to abstain from that course of naming them
because it is no other then a formality and that by other means they may
attain to the same end which is to give notice unto the people of the said
revolters, and backesliders, to the end that they may take heed of them and
their conversation. This may be done easily and sweetly by the means of the
Ancients and Deacons which shall let the people understand thereof that no man
may pretend cause of ignorance, and that they which converse with the said
backesliders, may be censured according to the order of the Discipline; all
which may be confirmed by the general Doctrine of the Ministers which shall
cause them sufficiently to understand it, without naming them to the end that
the advertisement made in particular be not contemned. For which cause the
Ministers and Consistories, shall be advertised to proceed there in with all
moderation, and prudence, as it is fitting, that all censures and orders of the
Discipline be to edify, and not to destroy, remembering the saying of St.
Augustine, That there, where remedies hurt more then they profit, it is better
to abstain from them; and because that in many particular facts there are
sundry circumstances, in regard of which a law cannot be made* it is fitting to
use therein great discretion and mature deliberation the which is remitted to
the prudence and wisdom of the Consistory.

Articl^ 20.
After the committing of public offenses, known to a great party of the
people, the restitution of the offender shall be made by the public
acknowledgement of hi^ offense, when the same has been condemned by the
Magistrate.

Upon the 20. Article.
Upon the Proposition* etc. How they are to govern themselves in the behalf
of them which are fallen into unpardonable crimes according to the civil
Laws, and notwithstanding desire with a testimony of their repentance to be
comforted by the participation of the Sacraments.

The Assembly judges that the offender, satifsying the Church, ought to be
received at the Table of the Lord though he cannot hope, in regard of his
Prince, for r^mission of his Crime, one jurisdiction not Clashing against the
other.

Article. 21.
Seeing that whoredom brings note of Infamy, and chiefly to women, the
acknowledgement of such scandalls is remitted to the wisdom of the Consistory.

Article 22.
All acknowledgements shall be personal, and the offender shall render
himself openly assistant in person to testify his repentance.

Article 23.
The offender which shall have been suspended from the Supper of the Lord, by
the Consistory, unless the Suspension be signified, unto the people, he shall
come into the Consistory for to desire that he may be restored and upon the
making his repentance to appear, shall be restored without public
acknowledgement.

Article 24.
He whose suspension shall have been declared unto the people after that his
repentance shall have been known unto the Consistory, by good fruits and
sufficient witnesses, he shall be publicly reconciled unto the Church,
confessing his offense.

Article 25.
They which through obstinacy and hardness of heart, shall have been cut off
from the Church, for their offenses; They shall not be lightly restored, and
reconciled to the Church, but after a good and long proof of their repentance,
they shall be heard in the Consistory; and if they entreat to be received in
the peace of the Church, acknowledging their offense, the denunciation shall
be made unto the people, for to move them to praise God, and to pray unto him,
and soon after they shall be presented unto all the Church, to confess with
detestation theit forepassed offenses, and rebellions craving pardon of God and
of his church, and so they shall be reconciled with joy and public prayers.

Article 26.
They which being in the church, are fallen into Idolatry, and for that cause
shall go to continue in another Church, when their offense is not known, they
shall make an acknowledgement of their lapsing, only in the Consistory, upon
condition, that returning unto the said Church where they were, and which they
had offended* they acknowledge therein likewise their fault publicly,
remmitting notwithstanding, to the discretion of the Consistory, to use them
otherwise, if they judge it expedient for the edification of Churches. The same
shall be done in all other faults, which deserve public acknowledgement.

Article 27.
All offenses acknowledged and amended, shall be taken out of the books of the
Consistories, excepting them which being joined with rebellion, shall have been
censured, with suspension from the Lords Supper, or with the Excommunication.

Article 28.
The Consistory shall not give testimony unto the Magistrate by Act or
otherwise, neither shall any particular person of the Consistory, reveal unto
any the confessions of Repentants, which voluntarily, and of their own accord,
and by admonition made unto them, shall have confessed and acknowledged their
faults before them, so it be not by the advice of the Consistories.

Article 29.
They shall proceed by Ecclesiastical censures, unto Excommunication, against
them, which saying they are of the Religion, and yet shall call the Pastors,
or Ancients, or the whole Consistory in body before the Magistrate, for to make
them to give witness against Delinquents, which shall have confessed their
faults before them.

Article 30.
As for the crimes which shall have been declared unto Ministers by them which
beg for counsel, and comfort, it is remitted to the conscience of the
Ministers to judge, if they ought to declare them unto the Magistrates, and in
this the Ministers shall with great wisdom have regard unto all circumstances.

It is demanded if a Minister ought to reveal to the Magistrate the Crimes,
which shall have been revealed unto him in secrecy, by him which shall beg for
counsel and comfort?

It is agreed that this be remitted to the conscience of the Minister, who
shall have a prudent regard of all circumstances.

It is demanded if it be lawful to the faithful to appeach them, which being
in the Church, have committed any crime punishable by the Laws?

As for scandalous vices* and dammageable to the Commonwealth, the faithful
ought to further and assist the Magistrate against them which are impenitent,
and persevere in their evil; But in the behalf of them which shall have
failed for once, and prosecute not their failings, one Ecclesiastical censure
shall suffice.

Article. 31.
If one or more stir up debate to break the union of the Church upon any
point of Doctrine, or of the Discipline, or concerning the forming of the
Catechism, of the administration of Marriage, and of the Sacraments, and
public prayers; And because for this particular, admonitions cannot give
sufficient remedy, the Consistory of the place shall readily endeavor to
dissolve and appease, all without noise in all meekness, by the word of God;
And if the gainsayers will not acquiesce, the Consistory shall entreat the
Colloque to assemble themselves on a time and place most convenient, having
first caused the said gainsayers to make an express promise, which is to be
enregistred, not to scatter their opinions in any sort or manner, but to attend
the said Convocation of the Colloque, upon pain to be censured as
Schismatics, with exception notwithstanding, that they confer with the
Pastors, and Ancients if they have not been taught, and otherwise in case that
the said gainsayers refuse to make the said promises, they shall be censured as
Rebels, according to the Discipline; The Colloque likewise shall jointly
proceed as above. And if the gainsayers, having been patiently heard, and
fai^ly refuted continue satisfied all shall be enregistred; if not, a
Provincial Synod shall be held, to assemble themselves extraordinarily if need
require, in a time and place that the Colloque shall judge most proper, after
the promise, such as is before reiterated, made by the gainsayers. The Synod
Assembled shall advise, as before, with good and mature consideration of
circumstances of the matter place, time, and persons, if it shall be expedient
that the conferences with the said gainsayers, be made in the presence of the
people, in open Court and that they give audience unto him of the Assistance,
which shall speak, yet so notwithstanding, as that the decision of all
appertain to others rather then unto them which are Assembled in the Province,
and all following the order set down by the Discipline. And then if the
gainsayers will not range themselves, they shall make the same promises as
before whereupon they shall be transmitted to an ordinary National Synod, or
if necessity require, to a National Synod extraordinarily Assembled, the which
shall hear them with all holy liberty and freedom, and there shall be made an
entire and final resolution, by the word of God; unto which Resolution, if
they refuse to acquiesce from point to point, and with express renouncing of
their errors enregistred, they shall be cut off from the Church.

Article 32.
A Pastor or Ancient breaking the union of the Church, or stirring up
contention upon any point of Doctrine or Discipline which be shall have signed
or of the form of Cathechisme the Administration of Marriage, Sacraments, or
public Prayers, not willing to range themselves unto that which the Colloque
shall have determined, shall be suspended of his charge and be further
proceeded against in a Provincial or National Synod.

Article 33.
In every Church they shall prepare Instructions of all notable things, which
concern Religion, and in every Colloque one Minister shall be deputed, to
receive them, and to bring them to a Provincial Synod.

CHAP. VI. Of the union of Churches.
Article 1.
NO Church may pretend Primacy or domination over an other, nor one Province
over another.

Article 2.
No Church may do any thing of great consequence, which may comprehend the
Interest or damage of other Churches, without the advice of a Provincial
Synod, if it be possible to assemble themselves; and if the business be
pressing and urgent, she shall communicate, and have the advice and consent of
other Churches, and of the Province by Letters at the least.

Article 3.
The Churches and particular persons shall be warned not to depart for any
persecution which may arise, nor to procure for themselves, any peace or
liberty apart, which breaks the holy Union of the body of the Church. They
which do otherwise shall be censured according as the Colloques or Synods
shall judge expedient.

Article 4.
The disputes of Religion with the Adversaries shall be regulated, in such
sort, as that the Ministers shall not begin the onset and if they be engaged in
verbal Disputations, they shall not do it but according to the rule of the
holy Scripture not giving place to the Ancient Doctors, for the judgment and
decision of Doctrine; they shall not enter into dispute unless it be regulated
by writing respectively given and signed. And as for public dispute, they
shall not enter into it, but by advise of the Consistory; and of a certain
number of Pastors which for that effect, shall be chosen by the Colloques, or
Provincial Synods; They shall not enter into any dispute or general
conference, without advise of all the Churches Assembled in a National Synod,
upon pain to the Ministers which shall do to the contrary, to be declared
Apostates, and forsakers of the Union of the Churches.

Article 5.
The Churches ought to take notice, that the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, of
Colloques, and of Provincial Synods* as well as National, are the chains and
butteresses of their Union, and concord, against Schisms, Heresies, and all
other inconveniences, to the end that they do their duty, and employ
themselves by all means unto what the said Assemblies shall order and Decree.
The Pastors shall come every one of them, accompanied with one Ancient in the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and if they be sent alone, they shall not have more
regard unto their Instructions, then unto them of the Ancients when they shall
come alone.

That which cannot be finally concluded or determined in the Consistory shall
be brought unto the Colloque, and thence to the Synod.

CHAP. VII. Of Ecclesiastical Assemblies.
Article 1.
IN a Colloque the neighboring Churches shall assemble themselves twice every
year, if it may be, or four times according to the Ancient custom.

This is reserved unto the wisdom of the Province, thither the Ministers shall
come, with one Ancient of every Church.

Article 2.
Such Assemblies and Colloques shall be made to advise concerning differences
and difficulties, which may be propounded, and which may happen in the said
Churches.

Article 3.
Thence also the Ministers shall propound the word of God every one in his
turn, to the end that men may know how every one has done his duty, by
exercising himself in the study of the Scriptures, as likewise of the method
and form he uses in the handling of them.

Article 4.
The Authority of the Colloques is subject to that of the Provincial Synod, as
the Consistory is to the Colloques.

Article 5.
The Colloques and Synods shall advise to limit the bounds of the places,
within which every Minister may exercise his Ministry.

Article 6.
The Censures of the Pastors and Ancients, shall be upon the issue of every
Colloque.

CHAP. VIII. Of Provincial Synods.
IN every Province the Ministers of every Church shall assemble themselves,
once or twice in the year, as they may according to the wisdom and discretion
of the Synod.

CHAPTER IX. Of National Synods.
Article 1.
National Synods shall be Assembled from year to year, so far forth as
possibly they may.

The Synod of Montpellier and another of Gorgeau have ordered the Convocation
of National Synods to be from three year to three year.

Article 2, 3.
And because it is at this day difficult and dangerous to assemble a National
Synod, in great number of Ministers and Ancients; It is decreed for this time
only and during such difficulties, that the Brethren assembled in every
Provinci^ll Synod, (so far-forth as possibly they may) choose two Ministers,
and two Ancients* the most expert in the affairs of the Church for to send
them thither in the name of all the Province, and that the Deputies come
thither with sufficient Testimonies, and charged with good Instructions, signed
by the Moderator and Scribe of the National Synod. And to the end there be no
failing, the Provincial Synod shall name three or four Pastors, and as many
Ancients, because if they which were first named be hindered by sickness, or
other lawful impediments to undertake the journey, there be others which may
serve in their place.

In the National Synod at Charenton 1644. and 1645. expounding the third
Artic^e of the fourth chapter of the Discipline; The Assembly declares, that
the Instructions wherewith every Province charge the Deputies, which she
sends unto the National Synod ought to be resolved in the Provincial Synods
by plurality of voices, and signed in the said Assemblies by the Moderators,
and for default thereof they shall no more regard, what they propound, then
they do the Propositions which particular men shall advance of their own
heads, and without Commission.

In the same Synod, it is inserted, that because of diverse defects met withal,
in sending Letters from the Provinces, it is enjoined unto all to insert in
them the proper names, and sur-names of the Deputies,

To wit, of good Letters, in the bottom of which the submission shall be set
down in these words for substance;

We promise before God to submit our selves, to all which shall be concluded,
and resolved on in your holy Assembly, to give obedience and to execute them
with all our power, and that we are persuaded that God will govern there, and
will conduct you by his holy Spirit in all truth and equity by the rule of his
Word, for the good and edification of his Church, and to his great glory, and
this is that we demand of God in our prayers.

This is that which was framed in the general Synod at Vitrey held in the
year 1617. conformable whereunto shall be the submission required in the
Letters, of them which are deputed in Provincial Synods.

Article 4.
In the beginning of National Synods, shall be read the Confession of Faith of
the Church of France, with the Articles of the Discipline.

Article 5. 6. 7.
All Ecclesiastical things may be definitively decided and resolved in a
National Synod.

CHAP. X. Of holy Exercise.
Article 1.
THey shall correct the irreverence which they shall perceive in many, when
they are present at public prayers, or domestic, in not uncovering their
heads, nor bowing the knees, a thing which is repugnant to common piety,
causes suspicion of pride* and may scandalize the good, and therefore the
Pastors and Ancients, yea, and the chief of every family, are war^ed to watch
carefully for this, that during the said prayers, every man without exception,
or acception, give by exterior signs, testimony of the humility of his
heart, and of the homage which he owes, and is to make unto God; except any one
be hindered for so doing by sickness or otherwise, whe^eof the determination
shall be lef^ unto the testimony of his own conscience.

Article 2.
The Congregations of the faithful, being likewise ordained to sing to the
praise of God, and to comfort and fortify themselves, by the use of Psalms,
all shall be admonished to be present in the Congregations, and they which
shall thence absent themselves through contempt, shall be censured, as also
they which uncover not their heads so long as they sing, as well as in the time
of the Celebration of the Sacraments, so farforth as they may, as at other
times.

Article 3.
In the time of sharp persecution, be it of Pestilence of War, of Famine, or
other great affliction, when they will choose the Ministers of the word of God,
and when there shall be question of Assembling Synods, they may if necessity
require it, denounce on a certain day one or more public and extraordinary
prayers with fasting, howbeit without scruple or superstition, and all upon
great causes, and considerations, and the Churches are admonished to conform
themselves one unto the other in celebration of the Fast, so far-forth as
possibly they may, according to the convenience of time and place.

Article 4.
The Churches which have been accustomed to make public prayers upon certain
days may keep the order, which they have a long time happily observed, and
other Churches are to conform themselves therein according to the means it
shall please God to give unto them hereafter.

The Pastors ought to reprove them which contemn the frequenting of Sermons,
and neglect the use of prayers, which ought to be performed in private houses,
by the chief of the Families, and their domestics.

Article 5.
They shall not make Prayers nor Sermons, at the enterrment of the dead, to
prevent all superstitions, and they shall not give public Alms, at the said
enterrments, to prevent the inconveniences, which may happen; and they shall be
exhorted, which accompany the body to the grave, to behave themselves modestly
during the Convoy, meditating according to the object, which presents it self,
as well of the miseries and shortness of this life, as of the hope, of the happy
life to come.

Article 6.
Because mourning consists not in the habits, but in the heart, the faithful
are admonished to behave themselves there with all modesty, rejecting all
ambition, hypocrisy, vanity and superstition.

CHAP. XI. Of Baptism.
Article 1.
Baptism administered by him which has no vocation, nor any Commission, is
altogether null and invalid.

Article 2.
A Doctor may not Preach, nor administer the Sacraments in the Church unles he
be chosen Doctor and Minister.

Article. 3.
A Pagan or Jew, of what age soever he be ought not to be Baptized before he be
instructed in Christian Religion, and that it appear so by his Confession.

Article. 4.
The Children of Fathers and Mothers of the Romish Church, and of excommunicat
persons, may not be received, into the Baptism of the Reformed Churches,
although they be presented unto them by faithful suretyes, if they have Father
and Mother, when they have no Father, or if they consent not when consent is
required, nor transmit their authority, yet yield their rights unto the surety,
in regard of instruction, with promise that they will suffer their Children to
be instructed, in the true Religion, they may be Baptized.

Article 5.
The Children also of them which are called Bohemians, Saracens, or Egyptians,
may be received into the Baptism of the reformed Churches, upon condition,
that the suretyes oblige themselves, for the education and instruction of them
which are so Baptized.

Article. 6.
They shall not administer Baptism, unles it be in Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
where there has been a Church publicly erected; and where it is not public,
and the Fathers through infirmity fear to bring them to be Baptized in the
Assembly, the Ministers shall advise prudently how far they ought to yield,
though there be allwaies the form of a Church, together with exhortations and
public prayers. But if there be any Church whereunto the people cannot
Assemble, the Minister shall not make difficult to Baptize the Child of a
faithful man presented unto him, with prayers and exhortations.

Article. 7.
For that we have no Commandment from the Lord, to take God Fathers and God
Mothers to present our Children at Baptism, there may be no express law
imposed on persons to use it, howbeit for that the custom is ancient, and
brought into the Church for a good end, to wit to witness the faith of his
Parents and at the Baptism of the Child to charge themselves with the
instruction of him, in case that death take away his Parents, also to
entertain the society of the faithful, by amiable conjunction. They which
will not follow this, but themselves alone will present their Children, they
shall instantly be exhorted, not to be contentious, but to range themselves to
the ancient order, and accustomed which is good and profitable.

Articles 8. 9. 10.
It is fitting that they which will present children at baptism, be of age
sufficient, as of 14. years of age at the least, and that they have received
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Article 11.
They which are suspended of the Supper of the Lord may not in the quality of
Godfathers and Godmothers present children at baptism, so long as the
suspension shall last.

It is decreed that for whatsoever fault it be, the faithful may not be
refused to present children at baptism unless that they have been suspended
of the Sacraments by the judgment of the Consistory.

Articles 12. 13..
They of the Religion which present children by Proxy at baptism, in the
Roman Church, shall be sharply censured as consentting to Idolatry.

It is demanded; If it be lawful to accompany the Papists to the doors of
their Temples; at the convoy of Baptismes and Marriages.

It is answered, they may not, and in such case they are liable to censure.

Article. 14.
Touching the names given unto Children in Baptism. In the imposition of names
unto Children, Men ought to shun on the one side over much precisenes, and on
the other superstition and scandal, and for that this act as all other ought
to serve unto the edification of the Church in such fashion that there, where
the Fathers are suretyes, require that their, or other men's names be given to
their Children, or being presented by them may be received; provided, that they
be not names prohibited in this 14. Article, as names of office, of Angel or
other notoriously ridiculous.

The Ministers shall be exhorted for the difficulty they make unto names,
henceforth to behave themselves with all modesty, without being so difficult.

Besides the Ministers are exhorted not to make any more difficulty in
receiving names from Fathers and sureties at Baptism, though they be not
contained in holy Scripture, provided that they contain nothing which is
indecent.

Article 15.
The Ministers shall admonish their flocks, to behave themselves with all
reverence, when that Baptism is administered, and to abate the contempt, that
the greater part have of Baptism, which they show by departing out of the
Assembly, when it is administered, ^ It is decreed that none depart the
Congregation, unless great cause require it, upon pain to be censured by the
Consistory.

Article 16.
The Consistory shall have an eye on them, which without great consideration,
keep their children too long without being baptized.

The Consistory are charged to exhort the faithful to present their children
at Baptism so soon as they may after their birth, and to censure them that
are rebellious, even to the suspending them from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

The faithful are to be exhorted as well in Sermons, as particularly, not to
suffer their children to be unbaptized, if it be not upon very great
consideration.

Article 17.
Though a faithful Husband have a Wise of a contrary religion, yet is he not
excusable, if the child be presented unto Baptism in the Roman Church,
therefore he shall not be received to partake of the Lords Supper, unless it
be in case that he has endeavored to hinder it with all his power.

Article 18.
Baptism shall be enregistred, and carefully kept in the Church with the names
of the Fathers and Mothers, Godfathers and Godmothers, and Children baptized.

Article 19.
They shall enregister in he Book of Baptism the names of Fathers and Mothers
of Children borne of unlawful copulation, so far-forth as they may possibly
know it unless them that are borne of incest, to the end that the memory of so
enormous a wickedness may be extinguished, in which case it shall suffice to
name the mother, with him and her which present the child, and of all
illegitimate, there shall be mention made that thy are borne out of Marriage.

CHAP. 12. Of the Lords Supper.
Article 1.
WHere there is no form of a Church, it is not permitted to administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Article 2.
Children under the age of twelve years shall not be received to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Article 3.
Priests, Monks, and other Ecclesiastics of the Church of Rome shall not be
admitted to partake of the Lords Supper, until they have made public
acknowledgement of their forepassed life and profession.

Article 4.
Beneficed men which bear the name and title of their Benefices, and they
which mix themselves with Idolatry, directly or indirectly, be it by enjoying
their Benefices themselves, or by the hands of another, shall not be received
at the Supper of the Lord.

Article 5.
Ministers shall not receive them which are of other Churches unto the Supper
of the Lord.

Article. 6.
A deaf and dumb man, which by signs, and evident tokens, and gestures,
shows, so far-forth as he may his Piety and Religion, may be received to the
Supper of the Lord, when by long experience, and holiness of life, the Church
may perceive that he has faith, and shall truly have learned the knowledge of
God.

Article 7.
The Bread of the Lords Supper ought to be administered unto them, which cannot
drink wine they making protestation they do it not out of contempt, and
essaying so farforth as possibly they may, to put the Cup unto their mouths.

It remains in the liberty of the Pastors distributing the Bread and Wine, to
use the accustomed words, the thing being indifferent, provided they do that
which tends to edification.

Article 9.
The Churches are admonished, that it belongs to the Minister for to administer
the Cup.

Article 10.
For as much as in the distribution of the Lords Supper* many sick persons
present themselves to the receiving of the Cup, which causes many to be
unwilling to take the Cup, and drink after them.

The Pastors and Ancients are admonished hereafter to take order for it.

Article 11. 12.
It shall not be permitted to any for time to come, to present themselves to
another Church, for to receive the Supper of the Lord, without the leave of a
Colloque or Provincial Synod.

Article 13.
The faithful which go about to hear the word of God in one Church and to
receive the Sacraments in another, shall be censured.

Article 14.
Though it has been a custom in diverse Churches of many places not to
celebrate the holy Supper oftener then four times in the year, howbeit, it is
to be desired, that they celebrate it more often, the reverence required
thereunto, being kept, as being a thing most profitable to the Church.

The Ancients of the Churches shall communicate at the Lords Supper, with the
Pastors in the beginning of the Action, and the rest of the people in such
order as the Consistory shall judge to be expedient by the order of the
Church; Synod of Montaubeau.

CHAP. XIII. Of Marriages.
Article 1. 2. 3.
ACT. 6. of the National Synod at Charenton in December 1644. and January 1645.

The Province of Brittany, having by their Deputies asked if it ought to be
permitted unto Pastors to solemnize the Marriages of Cousin germans, before
they have obtained the dispensation of his Majesty.

The Synod forbids all, to undertake any thing in that kind, for that the
contrary is expressly set down in the particular expositive Acts of the Edicts.

Articles 4. 5. 6.
Touching cousin germans, be it by affinity or consanguinity the faithful may
not contract Marriages with them, unless it be permitted by the Edict of the
King.

Article 7. 8.
It is not lawful to espouse the Sister of a man's Wife that is dead, for such
Marriages are forbidden, not only by the Laws, but also by the word of God;
and although that the laws of Moses ordain that when the Brother is dead
without children, the brother shall raise seed to his brother; Howbeit that law
given to the people of Israel, was temporal regarding only the conservation of
the lignage of the people, there is another reason in the sister of the
betrothed being dead, because that the Alliance is not contracted by commixtion
of blood.

Articles. 9. 10. 11.
No man may marry the Aunt of his Wife, such a marriage being incestuous, and
when the Magistrate shall permit it, it shall not be solemnized in the Church;
wherefore the Pastors shall take care thereof, and for the same reason it is
forbidden to marry the Niece of a man's wife.

Article 12.
Honesty and comeliness permits not any man to marry the Widow of his wives
brother.

Article 13.
No man after the decease of his Wife, may marry her with whom he had committed
Adultery in the lifetime of his wife.

Articles 14. 15. 16.
The banes of Matrimony shall be asked in the places where the parties live,
and shall be well known.

Article. 17.
The Banes shall be asked three several Lord days.

Article 18.
They which abide in places where the exercise of the Religion is not
established may cause their Banes to be published in the Temples of the Roman
Church, because that it is a thing merely politic.

Articles 19. 20. 21. 22.
The Banes of Widows which shall Marry again, shall be published seven
months and a half at the least, after the decease of her Husband, to prevent
inconveniences and scandalls which may arise thereby.

Article 23.
Marriages shall be publickely solemnised in the Assemblies of the faithful,
and by the Ministry of Pastors and not of others.

Article 24.
The Church shall not solem^^e Marriage in the days on the which the Supper of
the Lord is administered, nor on the Days of a public Fast.

CHAP. XIIII. Of particular rules and advertisements.
Articles 1. 2.
IT is not lawful for the faithful to intermeddle with any thing which has
had Idolatry joined therewith. But to hold Priories, Castles. Farms and Rents
to pay the Revenue unto Ecclesiastics, seeing they are temporal Lords, it is
a thing indifferent. Notwithstanding the faithful shall be admonished not to
intermeddle much with such things, if they find any abuse in them.

Articles 3. 4. 5
Advocats and Proctours shall not give counsel in causes which are properly
concerning benefices.

Article 6.
Bishops, Archdeacons, Officialls such as they are at this present have no
right of Jurisdiction Civil or Ecclesiastic, how be it for that the faithful
are constrained to go sometimes before them to obtain their right, which
otherwise cannot be obtained, they may have recourse unto them, being sent unto
them by the Magistrate unto whom they shall first address themselves.

Articles. 7. 8.
It is a thing unlawful in it self to exercise civil jurisdiction and
procurations under Ecclesiastics.

Articles 9. 10.
Because it is not lawful nor expedient to go to hear the Preachers of the
Roman Church, and others which intrude into that office, without any lawful
vocation, the flock shall be hindered to go to hear them by their Pastors,
and they which shall go shall be called to the Consistory and censured
according to the exigent of the case.

Articles 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
Although the Priests falsely usurp the tenths because of their administration,
yet ought they to be paid in regard of the Commandments of the King to avoid
sedition and scandal.

Articles 19.20.21.
All usury shall be straightly forbidden, and men shall regulate themselves
according to the Ordinanance of the King, and the rule of charity.

Article 22.
Swearers which rent the name of God by Oaths shall be severely censured.

Articles. 23. 24.
Men may not be deprived of the Supper of the Lord for any ordinary and
accustomed fashion of habits in this Kingdom, but in this rank they may not
be comprehended, which are branded, with the notorious mark of impudicity,
dissolution, and over curious novelty, as painting, naked breasts, and the like
things, of which there is great abuse, as well in Men as Women.

For these things the Consistory shall proceed with a simple suspension of the
Sacraments, to the end that they may range themselves, to that which is most
agreeable to Christian modesty.

Articles 25. 26. 27. 28. 29.
Dancings shall be repressed, and they which make a practice of dancing, after
they have been oftentimes admonished shall be excommunicated, when they shall
continue pertinacious and rebellious therein. The Consistories are to be
exhorted thoroughly to practice the Article and to cause it to be read in the
name of God, and authority of the Synods, and the Colloques; and Synods are to
be exhorted to take care in their Consistories that they do their duty in
conserving of them.

Mummery, Juggling, Gaming, Puppet playing shall not be tolerated neither yet a
French game, called Fair le Roybait, nor Shrove Tuesday be observed of the
faithful, they are all forbidden, etc.

Article 30.
They which call others to duells, or being called thereunto do accept thereof
which shall have ^ulled their parties; Notwithstanding they shall have obtained
their Princes favor or shall be otherwise justified they shall be censured even
to the suspension of the Lords, Supper which suspension shall be speedily
pub^ished and in case that they desire to be received unto the peace of the
Church, they shall make public acknowledgement of their offense.

Article 31.
The Articles here contained touching the Discipline are not so resolved on
among us, but that if the benefit of the Church require it, they may be
changed; howbeit it shall not be in the power of the Ministers, Consistories,
Colloques, or Provincial Synods to add thereunto, nor to diminish from them,
nor to change them without the advice and consent of a National Synod.
According to that which has been agreed upon, in the last National Synod held
at Gorgean the first day of May 1601.

An Extract from the Acts of the National Synod held at Rochell the 2. of
April. 1571.
THis present direction being read and dilligently examined according to the
word of God, by all the Ministers and Ancients deputed by the Churches of
France; They have in the name of the said Churches promised and protested to
keep and observe them for the edification of the Church the conservation of
the order and union of them to the honor and glory of God.

Another Extract touching the Confession.
BEcause there is found among men diverse sorts of Confessions, The Synod has
declared that to be the confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches in France,
which begins thus; We believe that there is one only God, etc. The which
was presented in the first National Synod held at Paris the second of May
1559. As when were present, Ja^e by the grace of God, Queen of Navarre the high
and puissant Princess; Henry, Prince of Navarre, and Henry Burbon Prince of
Conde and the most Illustrious Prince Lewis, Count of Nassaw; and Messieur
Gaspard Count of Caligne Admiral of France and many other Lords and Nobles of
great quality.

General Acts of the National Synod Assembled at Charenton etc.
THe Assemhly prohibits all Provinces to take an Oath of Scholars, to the
prejudice of the right of al^ National Synods, and the common edification of
the Churches that they shall never depart from the service of the Churches of
those Provinces in the Which they were first received in the Ministry of the
Gospel.

At the requisition of the Province of Ceuenes, the Assembly for to explain
the first Article of the general Acts, of the National Synod held at Saint
Maixant, have declared that no particular Church may make inquiry after any
Pastor without the permission of a Colloque or Provincial Synod nor establish
him by Act in pursuit of such an enquiry without advise be it of the Synod in
body, or be it of the neighboring Pastors attending the liking and agreement
of the Synod.

The Province of lower Guyenne having desired that an injunction were made unto
all the Churches to keep conformity with them which have received the custom,
that particular persons entering into the Church, humble themselves before God
and every man apart make his prayers, for the imploration of his assistance in
the hearing of the Word.

The Assembly has not judged it fitting to make a Rule of such a thing, which
of it self is free; but has left the Churches in their Ancient usages,
exhorting them all respectively to seek that which tends to edification, and
to avoid all ostentation, affectation, and superstition.

The Assembly enjoynes a Collection to be made throughout all the Provinces
for the relief of the Captives detained in Argier, Tunis, and other places.

Upon the Remonstrance of the Provinces of Anjon, and the Isle of France, all
the Churches which have places for Printing houses, are particularly charged,
not to suffer any alteration or change to be made in the Translation of the
Scripture, or in the Rithmes of the Psalms, or in the text of the Confession
of faith, Liturgy and Catechism, without express order of the Consistory,
authorized by the Provincial Synod.

Upon that which has been reported by certain Deputies of Maritime Provinces,
that many coming from foreign Countries, which call themselves Independants,
because they teach that every particular Church ought to govern it self, by
its own proper laws, without dependancy of any person in Ecclesiastical
matters, and without obligation to acknowledge the Authority of Colloques and
Synods for their government and conduct, and establish their habitations in
this Kingdom, which may hereafter cause great inconvenience, if it be not in
good time carefully prevented.

The Assembly fearing that the contagion of this poison gaining insensibly, may
bring confusion and disorder among us, and judgeing the said sect of
Independants not only prejuditiall to the Church of God insomuch as that it
endeavors to introduce confusion unto the place where it has its being,
opening wide a gate unto all sorts of singularities and extravagances and
taking away all means of bringing a Remedy thereunto, but also it is very
dangerous to the State, so that if it have place, it will form as many
Religions, as there be particular Parishes, or Assemblies.

It is therefore enjoined all the Provinces, and especially the Maritime to
take care that this evil take not footing in the Churches of this Kingdom to
the end that Peace and uniformity, as well in Religion, as in Discipline, be
inv^olably maintained among us, and that nothing be here brought in, which may
alter in any manner the service which is due to God and the King.

A Report being made of certain Writings printed, and Manuscripts, by the
which the whole nature of original sin is placed in the only hereditary
corruption incident originally in all men, and the imputation of the first sin
of Adam is denied.

The Assembly condemns the said Doctrine, insomuch a^ that it restraines the
nature of sin in the only hereditary corruption of the posterity of Adam,
excluding the imputation of the first sin, by which he is fallen. And forbids
upon pain of all Censures unto all Pastors, Professors, and others which
shall handle the said question, not to depart from the common received sense of
the Protestant Churches, which besides the corruption, have all acknowledged
the said imputation unto a^l the posterity of Adam, and ordain that all Synods
and Colloques which shall hereafter proceed to the receiving of Scholars to
serve in the holy Ministry to oblige them to the signing of this Act.

Because that the Adoration which is rendered by the Roman Church unto the Host,
which she pretends to consecrate, has as well in their public service, as
when it is carried in Procession, and to the sick, this false presupposition,
for a maine foundation that by the Consecration it is made properly the very
same body, which was taken out of the womb of the blessed Virgin, by the
eternal Son of God, unto whose divine Person it appertains, as well before
as after his Incarnation; And because the Roman Church renders and requires no
other Adoration then that of Latria (...), for the Consecrated Host, and they
of the Religion, in regard of the same follow another belief, touching the
substance of the Host, which they hold to be after the Consecration of the same
insensible and inanimat matter which it was before, cannot according to the
sense of their consciences, and the fundamental principle of Christianity,
attribute sovereign Adoration unto a thing which by nature is not God, nor
transfer the glory of the eternal God to any of the creatures of lower degree.

The Synod adjureth all by the profession which they make to serve the Lord
purely, and by this irreparable prejudice which they cause on the one part to
come by their inconsiderateness, and on the other in regard of their own
consciences, which they shamefully betray, and for them of their fellow
Citizens, which are of the Roman Religion, whom they confirm in their
superstition, as well as for the weak among themselves, whom they lead into
error, by the example of a prevarication, most unworthy of the name which they
bear, to return unto themselves, and to bewail their estate, before the
great God and Savior Jesus Christ, whose Glory they have profaned, so far
as in them lies.

It ordaines therefore that then, when the Host shall be carried by them of the
Roman Church, that every one of them retire himself, so soon as possibly he
may, not to give any scandal to his neighbor, and as for them which will not
retire, feeding themselves with this frivolous imagination, that they set n t
their thoughts, as the Members of the Roman Church do, which adore it with the
same worship as they do the Divinity persuading themselves that they may
conform unto that custom, by a servile complaysance in putting off the ha^
then when the Host passes if not for the cause of it (as their complaysancie
requires) at least in honor of the Curate, or Vicar, which bears it, or of
them which accompany it, seeing they answer no^ the intention of them which
they think to gratify, because they undertake to substitute a civil
salutation, not a Religious worship* which the Church of Rome ordaines, and
that they attribute it unto another object, then she propounds, resting
themselves (against the Maxims of civility, received among all men) to honor,
not as the Roman Church pretends) the Lord of Glory, but in his presence, and
as it were in contempt of him, the Minister which says he is cal^ed to serve
him, and that in the proper act of service, which he pretends to render unto
him, nor yet to the duty of Christian sincerity, which requires that our deeds
be veritable expressions of our desires, and not deceitful shows of that
which is not only with our intention, but formally contrary, to blind
malignantly the eyes of them which see and observe us; and lastly, not
answering the example of the Ancient Christians, which could never suffer such
disguisements, but holding them impious* and sacrilegious* loved rather to
expose themselves to death, then to depart never so little from the fidelity,
which they had sworn unto God in their Baptism.

The Synod ordaines, that it be carefully declared unto them, that they may not
continue in this hypocrisy with what pretext soever they color it, without
irreligion, and open mockery of God and of men, without scandal of their
brethren, and mortal wounding of their own consciences; and in case they
continue in this ungodly resolution, Enjoyne all the Consistory, to pursue them
with all Ecclesiastical censures, as unworthy of the Communion of the
faithful, after they have caused in all places where there is need, a public
reading of this present Act, to the end that no man may pretend cause of
ignorance.

Seeing that for a long time the patience and long-suffering of the Lord, which
invites men to repentance, has made way to his just anger against impiety, so
that the fire of his indignation, which passes from Region to Region, has
covered the face of Christendom with an universal conflagration, so that for
the present his Almighty hand is armed and lifted up to smite; the wars, (the
cause of the obduration of the people) continuing and menacing offenders with a
total ruin.

The National Synod Assembled by the permission of the King at Charenton
considering that the only remedy of so many miseries, consists in the
conversion of men, and in the humiliation of their hearts before the glorious
Tribunal of that great God, whom they have provoked to jealousy; and that the
perpetual exercise of Christians ought to be the renewing of themselves, and
the cutting off of dead works, to serve Gods holy name in Righteousness; and
that true piety exhorts the faithful as well in general, as in particular, to
offer unto the Lord of glory justly provoked, the reasonable sacrifice of a
broken and contrite heart, unto the very feet of his most holy and divine
Majesty; and the Provincial Synods have summoned in their Divisions, Fasts,
according as the particular necessity requires; And now to implore the grace
and mercy of the Almighty and infinite good God, to obtain his favor for the
establishment of a general Peace, the settlement of the Estate, the
conservation of the Sacred person of the King, the benediction of his youth,
the glory of his Crown, and happy success of his Arms, under the lawful
government of the Queen Regent, and the prosperity of all the Royal Stem;
Enacts, that a Fast of all the Churches of this Kingdom shall be Celebrated,
the fourth day of May next, and that all the faithful shall be Advertised, to
prepare themselves by the reading of this present Act.

Particular Acts.
REport being made by the Deputies of Normandy, of a Process commenced by the
chief of a Family, of the Church of Rouen, as well against her, which has
been (without permission) espoused by his Son, as against her Parents.

The Assembly orders that the Son, who has been deprived of the
Communion, inconsequence of this difference, seek the grace of his Father by
all duties of submission and respect, according to the word of God and that the
Father be entreated, and earnestly sought unto by the Consistory to limit time,
in which he will be pleased to void the suite, which time being passed, the
Son may be admitted to the participation of the Lords Supper.

The Church and Academy of Sedan, having represented by Letters, the favorable
and gracious entertainment, which they do receive, and have received from
their Majesty's, since they have thought good to incorporate the Principali^ies
of Sedan and Rancourt unto France, and that they need that by order of this
Assembly Scholars be sent unto them, as unto other Academies of this Kingdom.

It has been Decreed that Answer shall be made unto them, to testify the joy
that all the Churches take in their prosperity, and to assure them that their
Academy shall be always upon an equal consideration with others in this
Kingdom.

The Academies for them of the Religion of the Kingdom of France.
1. MOntauban, 2 Nisme^, 3 Die, 4 Saumu^, 5 and last Sedan lately added.

A College erected at Chatillon for Scholars, founded by Marshall Chatillon
and others, with Contribution of the Churches. Contributions unto those
Academies, by particular Churches in all the Provinces. The whole sum which
is levied, amounts to fifteen thousand eight hundred Livers.

A Division of the sum of fifteen thousand eight hundred livers, (every liver
being two shillings of English money) remaining of the sum of sixteen
thousand livers accorded by his Majesty, paid to defray the charges of the
Assembly.

There being 54 Deputies every one of them received 292 livers, 11 sous, by the
hands of Monsieur de la Veilliere.

Anjou for four Deputies, 1170 livers 7 sous.

The Isle of France, for 3 Deputies, to wit, Sieur Blundell, Drelincourt, and
Le Cog, 877 livers, 15 sous.

Normandy, for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous, 4 deniers.

Dauphancy, for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Ceuenes 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Bearne for two Deputies, 585 livers, 3 sous.

Lower Guienne for two Deputies, 585 livers, 3 sous, 6 Deniers.

Xantaigne for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Vivarets, for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Berry for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Poicton for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Britany for two Deputies, 585 livers, 3 sous.

High Guyenne for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Lower Languedock for four Deputies, 1170 livers, 7 sous.

Burgundy for three Deputies, 877 livers, 15 sous.

Province for two Deputies, 585 livers, 3 sous.

The two hundred livers remaining, are to be employed to defray the charges of
the two Deputies (if they have need) as has been observed before.

By reason of the dearnesse of Provision, the journeys of the Deputies have
been taxed, according to the requisition of sundry Provinces at 6 livers the
day.

The Province of Anjou have required, that the right of the Convocation of the
next National Synod, be continued unto them of the said Province.

The Synod has accorded unto them their Demands, and Agrees, that after the
expedition of the breuet of his Majesty, the said Province shall have the said
Convocation, and the Synod shall Assemble at Loudun.

It is agreed that unto the Acts Signed by the Secretaries of this Assembly,
shall be given the like faith, as if they had been signed by the Moderators,
and the whole body of the Synod.

Six Ministers were deposed this Synod for changing their Religion.

One of them named Esaias Laurent, aged fourscore years, was deposed for Simony,
and Rebellion to the Discipline.

Particular Act.
SIeur Blundell, who was employed in the service of the Church of Houden when
he was deputed by the Province of the I Will of France, and has since been drawn
thence by the last Provincial Synod, which has permitted him his Residence at
Paris, for to intend his studies, as it may appear by reading of the Act, of
the said Synod.

The Assembly being entreated first to judge of the quality which ought to be
given him by the Acts of this National Synod, and to take into consideration
if it may approve his Residence in Paris; Secondly, they are to advise, in case
they are to prepare themselves to answer unto his said Treatise of Primacy, if
it be fitting that he keep himself near to defend it, or if they think it
fitting, that that charge ought to be given unto some other, he leaves it to
their consideration, as also all which concerns the disposition of the
Churches, as likewise the ordaining, that all they which can make any
observations upon the said Treatise, may communicate their Instructions, to the
end that profit may be reaped thereby. Thirdly, if the Treatises of which he
has produced a List by him composed on diverse matters concerning Theology, and
History, may be of any profit.

Fourthly, if that in case that the Aids which he had hitherunto at Paris,
fail him, or that he find himself too much diverted, if it may be permitted
him to retire himself elsewhere, or without any charge of the Churches, he had
the means to intend the defense of the truth, according to the Arrests of the
National Synods, of Castres Charenton and Alenson, and to end the rest of his
days in serving God and his Church.

The Synod acknowledging the profit that the Public receives of his learned
labors, and that to finish them he cannot be in a more proper place then
Paris, as well because of the communication which he may have there, with
diverse learned men, as for the reason of the use of many rich Libraries of
France, he continue there his Residence. As for that which concerns the
quality which is justly due unto him, of the Minister of the Gospel, it is
enjoined him to keep himself near, for to answer to his book of Primacy, as
being a person which may acquit himself therein very worthily; he is exhorted
also to put in light so soon as he may, the Treatises of Theology and
History, the List of which have been read in this Assembly, and of which we
hope that the Church of God shall receive very much edification; It is enjoined
him particularly to hasten the Edition of his Treatise of Bishops and Priests,
by the which he shows that there is small appearance that Saint Peter was ever
at Rome. And because that the Assembly knows his excellent gifts, amongst
other things the great knowledge that he has in the Antiquity of the Christian
Church, which causes all the Churches to esteem of him greatly; They cann^t
in any sort consent to his departure out of the Realm, and exhort him to
continue his dwelling at Paris, for to enjoy the helps there before mentioned,
which the providence of God has presented to him, to accomplish his designs.

But because it is not just, that he travel incessantly for the public, and
that he employ himself in undertaking the task, which the National Synods
have given him, without reciving some profit thereby.

This present Synod considering him as an honorable professor, have granted
unto him by the uniforme advise of all the Deputies of the Provinces, (besides
that which the said Province of the Isle of France and the Church of Paris
furnish unto him) an Annual Pension of 1000 livers, which shall be carefully
paid by the Provinces, according to the direction hereafter mentioned, and
proportionably to that which they furnish for the Academies, and by the same
ways shall they be obliged to send every year to the Consistory of the Church
at Paris.

The Assembly being much grieved, that they cannot give unto him an
acknowledgement more proportionable to his graceful qualities, and his
incomparable travells.

A Division of the sum of a thousand livers accorded by the National Synod
unto Sieur Blundell, Minister of the Gospel, to be gathered of the thirteen
Provinces following.
FIrst of the Province of Normandy the sum of 157 livers, 3 sous.

Of the Province of Dauphine, 157 livers, 3 sous,

Of the Province of Bourgogne, 13 livers, 4 sous.

Of the Province of lower Languedock, 112 livers, 3 sous.

Of the Province of Anjou, 89 livers, 10 sous.

Of the Province of Xantaigne, 100 livers, 12 sous.

Of the Province of high Languedock, 104 livers, 4 sous.

Of the Province of Britany, 13 livers, 12 sous.

Of the Province of Berry, 35 livers, 13 sous.

Of the Province of Poictou, 102 livers, 3 sous.

Of the Province of lower Guienne, 94 livers, 4 sous.

Of the Province of Ceuenes, 26 livers, 2 sous.

Of the Province of Bearn, 6 livers, 11 sous.

Observations upon the Reading of the Discipline.
THe tenth Article of the thirteenth Chapter shall be made clear in these
terms.

The Person Betrothed may not marry, the Mother of her which was betrothed unto
him deceased unless it be in case, that the Magist^ate has Authorized it by
his ordinance, which shall be expected, as well by the Pastor, as by the
parties Contracted.

The twelfth Article shall be set down in form following;

As for Espousing the Widow of the Brother of the Wife deceased, though honesty
and decency seem not to permit it, the Church shall make no difficulty to
solemnize such Marriages of they find that the Contract has been before
authorized by the Magistrate.

The Province of Britany having by their Deputies demanded if it ought to be
permitted to Pastors to Solemnize the Marriages of Cousin germans, before they
have obtained the Dispensation of his Majesty. The Synod forbids all men to
undertake any thing in that kind for that the contrary is expressly prescribed,
by the particular Articles Expositists of the Edict.

Complaint having been made by one of the Provinces against Sieur Amarant,
Pastor and professor in Theology at Saumur, as having swarved from the rules
of the Synod of Alenzon, by the Edition of the book of Reprobation, and
Remonstrance being Respectively made by the Province of Anjou, and by the said
Sieur Amarant, for the Church and Academy of Saumur.

The Assembly judging that the reciprocal complaints, and threatenings, ought
to be buried, by a Religious Amnestye, and desiring to settle for time to come,
a good and permanent Peace within the Churches, as well in general as in
particular.

And to satisfy the Requisition of all the Province, which have universally
required the punctual confirmation and observation of the Arrests of the
National Synod of Alenzon; The Synod forbids upon pain of all Censures, all
Pastors and Professors, even to the Deposition of their Charges, to Write,
Preach, or Dispute one against the other, about the matters declared and
explained in the Synod of Alenzon, or to publish any Books concerning them.

Decrees likewise that all Professors shall answer for their Lessons, Theses
and Disputes unto their Provincial Synod, which shall render an account
thereof unto the National Synods.

It enjoynes also most expressly, all Students in Divinity upon pain to be
declared unworthy for ever to serve in the holy Ministry, to abstain
hereafter from all contestations and debates upon unnecessary questions, as of
the orders of the Decrees of God, of universal Grace by the preaching of
nature, which may lead unto salvation, and other heads, which may be set forth
to exercise the curiosity of men; For them which they shall examine to be
received into the Ministry, they are to proceed with them in all charity,
requiring of them (according to the Discipline) besides requisite sufficiency a
Confession conformable to that of our Churches, to their Liturgy and the
Decrees of Alez, Charenton, and Alenzon, the which they shall sign with this
present Act.

After the reading of this rule whereunto Sieur Amarant promised to submit
himself, he desired that it would please the Assembly not to suffer, that by
public writing coming from without the Kingdom his doctrine should be
rendered suspect, and his Reputation tainted that they would leave unto him the
liberty to employ himself in the defense of his innocence, and to use his
natural right in repelling the injury, and clearing the blames.

It has been decreed, that if any such thing happen, he shall entreat for
permission to write for his defense in the Provincial Synod of Anjou, which
shall advise of that which shall be most expedient, as well for the
consolation, as the common edification of the Church.

The Synod being upon the point to frame a writing containing the complaint of
the Churches, and particularly against the Infractions of the Edict, made
within all the Provinces, as well before the Convocation, as since, Monsieur
the Commissary has Remonstrated, that the intention of his Majesty, was not
that they should take in their Assembly any deliberation concerning politic
affairs, but withal, he will not hinder the compilation of a writing, to take
pains in particular about the Instructions wherewith the Deputies were
charged, as well to bring from their Provinces, by their Synods, as since their
arrival in this place, by the Churches and particular Interests, with which
they have made their Addresses by Letters.

The Synod submit themselves fully, to the order prescribed by Monsieur the
Commissary.

A Copy of a Letter written to the King.
SIR, We have deputed the Sieurs de Langley, and Cattiby Pastors, and de
Maraude and Pelena Ancients, to lay down at the feet of your Majesty, the most
humble action of Graces which we owe unto your bounty, having happily begun,
and finished our Synod under your royal Authority, and to entreat your Majesty
with all the powers of our souls, to hear favorably the most humble requests
of your most faithful and most obedient Subjects of our Religion which mourn
in many places of this Kingdom, seeing themselves deprived of the means to
serve God, according to the sense of their consciences, in the Liberty which
has been granted them by the Edicts of the Kings your Predecessors of most
glorious memory, and confirmed by your Majesty upon your coming to the Crown;
and deploring, that by the rigor of some of your Officers, they be excluded of
their Charge and government of all sort of Trades and Occupations, a dealing
which has taken from them contrary to the intention of your Edicts, the means
by which they may be able to gain their livelihood, as well as other of your
subjects; These things, Sir, shall be more particularly represented to your
Majesty, by the writing of Complaints, which we have taken the hardines to
present unto you, and unto which we hope to receive favorable Answers, to the
end that the throne of your Majesty, being grounded upon piety, and Justice,
during your happy Reign, that Equity and Clemency meet together, and all sort
of virtue flourish, and the heaven pour down his most precious Benedictions,
as well upon your Sacred person, as upon your people in such sort, as that
after they have seen the glorious Victories, and magnificall triumphs of
David, they may behold to succeed, the peace, happiness, and abundance of
Solomon. We may end our days praising God, blessing your Majesty, and leaving
to them which shall come after us, the condition in the which we principally
take glory in, To be for ever, of your Majesty, Sir,

The most humble, most faithful, and most obedient subjects and servants, the
Pastors and Ancients Assembled in the National Synod, and for all.
At Charenton 27th January 1645.
A Copy of the Letter written to the Queen Regent
MADAM,
AS we have opened this Assembly with the most sincere protestation of our
fidelity, so now we finish it with most humble thanks, which are due to the
bounty and clemency of your Majesty, we shall Madam, be altogether ingrate, of
we all find not in our selves a most deep resentment of yours, and the Kings
favors; Because that it is by the favorable permission if your Majesty that
we have obtained the liberty to have our meeting in this place, where the
incomparable wisdom, which holds the helm of your Regency governs the French
Empire, with so much good success, as that it possesses an happy tranquillity,
so that whilst other neighboring Kingdoms mourn, being beaten with fearful
tempests, we have had the good hap to busy our selves in our affairs, under
the shadow of your royal protection with all safety.

And seeing that your Majesty has dained not only to accord unto us, a
general Deputy by whose mouth our humble supplications may enter into your
most Sacred thoughts, but also to pour out of the source of your liberality
upon all this Assembly so many singular testimonies of the bounty and grace of
your Majesty, which touch most sensibly our spirits.

We dare as yet, send prostrate to your feet Sieurs Langley and Cattiby
Pastors, with Sieurs de Maraude and Pelena Ancients, newly to present unto
you, our most humble thanks, and to implore the protection of the Kings
Sovereign Justice, in the name of all them, which living with us under the
benefit of the Edicts confirmed by the King at his coming to the Crown suffer
contrary to the intention of your royal Clemency diverse troubles in all the
Provinces of the Kingdom.

If the assurance we have of hearts enflamed, with zeal for the service of
our lawful Prince, and grounded upon the inviolable fidelity of generous
thoughts, not to yield to any of your people in most entire obedience, but to
live and die therein, with constant Resolution, be capable to excite our just
hopes, we shall live, Madam, in this to obtain of your grace, the general
remedy of our evils. And after natural obligations of faithful subjects, and
religious among Christian people, to enter into that of servants, filled with
good deeds which desire not to possess their lives no longer then employing
them in most ardent vows, for the preservation of the person of the King, the
dear Son of your Majesty obtained of heaven by the common supplications of all
France for the benediction of his youth, for the establishment of his Scepter,
sustained now by your Royal hands, and for the perpetual glory of your
Majesty, continuing ever, Madam,

Of your Majesty, the most humble, most faithful and most obedient subjects
and servants, The Pastors, Ancients, etc.
At Charenton, January 27. 1645.
The Confession being read, it was Signed, by all the Deputies, which have
unanimously in the name of all the Provinces made solemn Protestation of their
continuance in the Inviolable profession thereof, even to the last gasp of
their lives.

An Act that is to be published against Sieur Militier. Sunday, January 29.
1645.
Most dear Brethren,
IT is a long time that you have beheld with grief the Sieur Theophilus,
Brocheur Sieur de Militier employed to withstand by writings published, the
belief of our Churches, and that you have been wounded with just grief caused
by the scandal of his proceeding, totally differing from the duty of a Person
raised from his infancy in the profession of the true Religion, the which he
has in such sort contemned, as that he loves rather, to abound in his own
sense, and to leave himself seduced by his own proper prejudgings, then to
hearken never so little to the Remonstrances, which have been made unto him in
all charity.

First by the Consistory of this Church, and in the pursuance thereof by the
National Synod assembled at Alenson, in the year 1637. by express order
whereof the Consistory denounced against him, that for default of returning
unto himself within six months, and giving glory unto God, he shall not be
acknowledged for a member of this Reformed Church.

This just and necessary advertisement having no way touched him, and not
having hitherto produced any other effect, then to render him the more
inexcusably obstinate; The National Synod of the Reformed Churches of this
Kingdom, desirous to remedy a scandal so long continued among them, and to
procure, so much as in them lies, your edification, came to this Conclusion in
this place, confirming the proceeding Arrest assembled at Alenson declare unto
you by our mouth, that the said Sieur de Militier long since, more then ten
years being deprived of the Communion of the Lords Table, and cut off from the
Church in the year 1638. and from the number of the faithful of our
Confession, may no more be accounted by you among the members of the Reformed
Churches. Pray the Lord that touching his heart with all the puissant virtue of
his Spirit, he may return himself from the gall of bitterness and that he
would be pleased to give him the grace to turn himself from darkness unto
light, and from error unto truth, to the end that as the fall of this personage
has for many years afflicted your spirits with just sorrow and grief, so you
may be edified and comforted by his Repentance, Amen.

A Formulary of Baptism, OR, The manner of Baptizing those, who from
Paganism, Iudaisme, and Mahumetisme are converted to the Christian faith: as
also of those Anabaptists, who have not been Baptized before; Drawn and
Composed in the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, Assembled
at Charenton, in the year of our Lord 1644. Being the 26 of December. Printed
first in French, by Samuel Petit etc. in the year of our Lord 1645. and now
faithfully Translated into English.
AFter that the Catechumen, or party that is to be Baptized, has been
sufficiently Instructed and Catechized, so that he is able to give an account
of his faith, and that the Church by irreproveable witnesses is satisfied
concerning both the integrity of his life, and his Instruction, he shall by the
said Witnesses be presented to the whole Congregation to be Baptized in their
presence, And the Minister shall say unto him;

1 Quest. Do you not ack^owledge that by nature you are a child of wrath,
worthy of death and eternal malediction?

Answ. I do.

2 Quest. Are you not sorry and grieved for all the sins you have committed
since you were borne and do you not promise that you will forbear henceforth
for ever?

Answ. Yes.

3 Quest. Do you not from your heart renounce to the seducements and wiles of
the Devil and his Angels, to all the Pomps and vanities of this world, and to
all the Affections and concupisence of the flesh?

Answ. I do.

If he be a Pagan, or Heathen, the Minister shall say;

4 Quest. Do you not perceive that there is but one God, who has created
Heaven and Earth, who upholdeth all things by his powerful Word, and in whom
we have our being, live, and move?

Answ. I do.

5 Quest. Do you not believe that this great God, who has created heaven and
earth, is one Essence distinct in three Persons of the same power and eternity,
the Father, the Son begot of the Father from all eternity, and the Holy Ghost
eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son?

Answ. I do.

6 Quest. Do you not believe, that this great God who never left him self
without witness, did manifest himself unto men not only by his Works, which
from their first Creation do incessantly declare his praise and glory, but
also by Revelation of his Counsel, for the salvation of mankind contained in
the holy Scripture, commonly called the Old and New Testament.

Answer. I do.

7 Quest. Do you not believe that all these holy Scriptures are by Inspiration
of God, and contain in them a perfect rule, both of our belief and of our
lives?

Answ. I do.

8 Quest. Do you not ptotest that to the last breath of your life, you will
resist the Devil whom hitherto you have adored, serving either Idols made
with hands, or the Host of heaven, or briefly those which by nature are not
Gods?

Answ. I do.

9 Quest. Rehearse the summary of your faith.

Answ. I believe in God the Father Almighty; etc.

10 Quest. Do you not believe that this good God, who by the preaching of his
Word, does call us all to life and salvation, has Instituted some Signs and
Sacraments in his Church, which seal and confirm the truth of the Covenant of
grace, which is proposed to us by the preaching of the Gospel?

Answ. J do.

11 Quest. How many Sacraments do you believe there be in the Christian Church?

Answ. Two, to wit, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

12 Quest. Do you desire to be instructed concerning the nature and use of
Baptism, for which you are a suitor unto the Church?

Answ. I do.

13 Quest. Our Savior saying to us, that we must be borne again, show;
unto us what wretchedness and misery we are all borne in: for if our nature
must be renewed, to have entrance into the Kingdom of heaven, it is a sign
that it is altogether perverse and cursed. In that therefore he does admonish
us to humble our selves, and to be displeased in our selves, and by that means
he does prepare us, to desire and crave his grace, by which all the
perverseness, and cursednesse of our first nature may be abolished: for we
are not capable to receive it, except we be first emptied of all confidence of
our own virtue, wisdom and justice, unto a perfect condemnation of all that
is in us.

Now when he does put us in mind of our misery, he does likewise comfort us
by his mercy, promising to regenerate us by his holy Spirit unto newness of
life, which may be to us an entrance into his Kingdom.

This regeneration does consist in two parts: first, we must renounce to our
selves, not following our own reason, pleasure, and will; but captivating our
understanding and heart, to the wisdom and justice of God, mortifying all that
is ours, and of our flesh: Then we must follow the light of God to obey and
submit to his good pleasure, which he does show unto us in his Word, and to
which he does lead us by his Spirit.

The accomplishment both of the one and of the other, is in our Savior JESUS,
whose death and passion has such virtue, that partaking of it, we are as it
were buried to sin, to the end that our carnal concupiscence may be
mortified in us.

In like manner by the virtue of his Resurrection, we rise unto newness of
life, which is from God, in that his Spirit does lead and govern us, to
produce in us such works as may be acceptable unto him.

Nevertheless, the first and principal point of our salvation is, that by his
mercy he does forgive us all our sins, not imputing them to us but blotting
the memory of them, that they may not be reckoned unto us, when we shall
appear before him to be judged.

All these graces are conferred upon us, when he is pleased to incorporate us
into his Church by Baptism, for by this Sacrament he does testify unto us
the remission of our sins, and for this cause he has instituted the Sign of
Water, to figure unto us, that as by this Element all corporal filthiness is
cleansed, so he will wash and purify our souls, that no further spot or
stain may appear; Besides, it does represent unto us our renewing, which as
we said before, does consist in the mortification of our flesh, and that
spiritual life which he does produce in us.

So we receive a double grace and benefit from G^d in Baptism, provided that
we do not void the virtue of this Sacrament by our ingratitude, first we have
a certain assurance that God will be a propitious Father unto us, not
imputing to us our sins and offenses; Secondly, that he will assist us by his
holy Spirit that we may be able to fight against the devil, sin, and the
concupiscence of our flesh unto victory, that we may live in the liberty of his
kingdom, which is a kingdom of Justice.

Since then these two things are in us accomplished by the Grace of JESUS
Christ; It will follow that the virtue and substance of Baptism is comprised
in him: and in very deed we have no other washing; but by his blood nor no
other renewing then in his Death and Resurrection: but as he does communicate
unto us his riches, and his blessings by his Word; so he does distribute the
same by his Sacraments. Now in this does appear the mavelous love of God
toward us, in that these Graces which are conferred upon us in Baptism
(having before the coming of the Redeemer been confined to the nation of the
Jews, the middle wall of partition, which did separate the Jews from the
Gentiles, being by the death of the Lord JESUS taken away* he has poured upon
mankind these saving waters of his grace in such abundance that in him now
there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither Male, nor Female, neither
Circumcision, nor uncircumcision, nor any other difference of outward estate or
condition, which can exclude us from this great Salvation* which JESUS Christ
will have preached to all Nations, and from the Covenant of peace ratified by
Baptism, according to the charge given by him to his Apostles, saying, Go ye
and teach all Nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost: And of this grace it is, that you my brother
desire to be made partaker by Baptism: Is it not? Answer. It is.

14 Quest. But because entering into the house of GOD, every one is bound to
look unto his ways, lest he profane the Sanctuary in presuming to offer
there (according to the saying of the wise) the sacrifice of fools and impious
men, and that he ought to be purged from all leven of error and malice; Do
you not detest all errors contrary to the holy doctrine taught in our Churches?

Answ. I do.

If the Catecumen, or party to be Baptized, be a Jew or Mahumetane, after
those words in the sift Question, Do you not renounce, etc. the Minister shall
add.

4 Quest. Do you not believe that this great God, Creator of Heaven and earth
is one Essence, etc. as before in the fifth Question?

Answ. I do.

Then he shall as he unto the Jew:

5 Quest. Do you not detest the Rebellion and hardness of heart of the Jews,
and do you not ask God forgiveness, that you have continued in it so long.

Answ. I do.

6 Quest. Do not you believe, that whatsoever God has been pleased to
reveal unto us of his will, is contained not only in the Books of the Old
Testament, but also in those of the New?

Answ. J do.

7 Quest. Do you not believe that JESUS the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary,
conceived in her by the ineffable power of the holy Ghost, and since by the
unjust sentence of Ponce Pilat, upon the flanderous accusation of the Jews
condemned to the death of the Cross* risen from the dead on the third day, and
now raised to glory, is God manifested in the flesh, the eternal Word of the
Father, by which he has Created, and upholdeth this Universe, the blessed
Seed which was promised unto Adam, presently after his fall, by virtue of which
the head of the Serpent has been bruised, the coming of whom all the
Patriarks in Faith and Hope have expected, that great Prophet and true Messiah,
both by Moses, and other Prophets, which have been since him, foretold?

Answ. I do.

8 Quest. Do not you believe that the Lord Jesus, is the fulfilling of the Law
in righteousness to every one that believes; the truth of the Types and
figures of it; the true Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world,
and that in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily?

Answ. I do.

9 Quest. Do not you believe that now the observation of the Ceremonies of the
Law is not only superfluous, but also altogether prejudicial to the
conscience?

Answ. I do.

After this the Minister shall propose the Questions that are set down before;
Rehearse the summary of your faith, etc. and those which follow; If the
Catecumen, or party to be Baptized be a Mahumitane, after those words before
mentioned, Do not you believe that this great God, Creator of heaven and earth
is one Essence, etc. the Minister shall add.

5 Quest. Do not you believe that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
were inspired by him, and c^ntaine all his Counsel for the salvation of men,
and are the only and perfect Rule of faith and manners?

Answ. I do.

6 Quest. Do not you believe that JESUS, the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary,
conceived in her by the power of the holy Ghost, and according to the flesh
formed of her proper substance is God and Man blessed for ever, perfect God,
and perfect man; Man made of a Woman in the fullness of times, and God,
begotten of God the Father from all Eternity.

Answ. I do.

7 Quest. Do not you believe that the Lord JESUS from his first Conception
according to the flesh has been Holy, Innocent, without spot, and separated
from sinners, and that he has not suffered death for any business of his
own, but for ours only.

Answ. I do.

8 Quest. Do not you believe that his death is the propitiation of our s^nnes
yea, of the sins of the whole world, and that this propitiation i^ of
infinite merit, by which salvation and eternal glory, is acquired unto us?

Answ. I do.

9 Quest. Do not you believe that Mahomet was a notorious Impostor, and that
his Alcaron is a sacrilegious rapsody of dreams full of absurdities, and of
purpose devised to establish a false, and an abominable Religion?

Answ. I do.

10 Quest. Do not you believe that the Gospel of the Lord JESUS, is the power
of God to salvation to every one that believes, that the Christian Religion,
is the only Religion by which God the Father, has manifested his good
pleasure for the salvation of men unto the end of the world; that since the
manifestation of it there is no other to be expected: That the Lord JESUS
CHRIST only is that great Prophet promised to the faithful of the old
Testament; and that God having formerly spoken in diverse manners unto men,
before the Law, and under the Law, has spoken to the Church of the New
Testament by the mouth of his only begotten Son JESUS.

Answ. I do.

After that the Minister shall add; Rehearse the Summary of your faith, etc.
and the other questions which follow.

If the Catecumen or party to be Baptized be an Anabaptist, after that the 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and ninth Questions set down before, shall have been
proposed, the Minister shall go on thus.

10 Quest. Do not you believe that the Lord JESUS is, and shall be true God,
and true man, in both his natures eternally; that according to his humanity, he
was like in all things unto other men, sin only excepted, so that he was the
true Son of Abraham, of David, and of the holy Virgin, of their blood and seed
issued, and that the substance of his body was formed, not in the Virgin only,
but of the proper substance of the Virgin also, agreeable to what the Apostle
says, that he was of the seed of David according to the Scriptures, that he
was made of a woman, and that he was partaker of flesh and blood as other
Children are.

Answ. I do.

11 Quest. Do not you believe that the Baptism of Infants is founded upon the
Scriptures, and in the perpetual practice of the Church?

Answ. I do.

12 Quest. Do not you renounce with a sincere heart the error of those who
reject it, and do not you repent that you have despised it hitherto?

Answ. I do.

13 Quest. Do not you believe that the establishment of Magistrates is an
ordinance of God, to which those that will not submit themselves bring
condemnation upon themselves; and that all manner of obedience according to
God, is due unto them?

Answ. I do.

After this shall be proposed the 10 and 11 Questions. Do you not believe that
this good God, etc.

The Minister having spoken to his Catecumen, or party to be Baptized, whether
Pagan, Jew, Mahumitane, or Anabaptist, respectively shall add.

Since we are now about to confer this holy Baptism upon you; Do you not
protest that you will live and dye in the faith of the Lord Jesus, whereof you
have made confession before, accompanying it with a good life and holy
conversation; and to employ all your thoughts, speeches and actions, to
glorify God, and to edify your neighbor, submitting your selves to the order
of the Church, and to the Discipline of it, according to which this holy order
inviolably ought to be maintained?

Answ. J do.

After this the Minister shall add; Let us pray God that he will be pleased
to bless this holy action.
O Lord our God, wisdom and mercy it self, we bless and praise thy holy
Name, for that grace which thy good hand has been pleased to shed upon this
thy servant, who lay in the deepest darkness of the shadow of death, whom thou
have enlightened, making the saving and quickening brightness of thy dayspring
from above to arise upon him, drawing him from desperate hardness of heart, to
soften his heart, and delivering him from the bonds of death, to restore life
unto him: Lord as thou have taken away the veil that was upon his heart,
calling him to acknowledge thee the only true God, and him whom thou have
sent, JESUS CHRIST, and have infused courage into him, to make public
Confession this day of thy most holy faith, and of the hope which thou have
dred in his soul, granting to him, to present himself before thee, to receive
this holy Baptism the seal of our Covenant, the pledge of the Remission of
our sins, and the badge of our entrance into thy house, by a spiritual
Regeneration, Cast upon him, good God, more and more, the beams of thy
gracious aspect, forgiving him all his sins, and sprinkling his conscience
with the precious blood of the Lamb without spot, which takes away the sins
of the world, making him to feel the virtue of thy omnipotent propitiation,
that thy Spirit may sanctify him, and make him a new creature, that dying to
sin, he may live to Righteousness, and putting off the old man with his
deeds, he may put on the new man which is renewed in righteousness and true
holiness, and as we are now ready to pour upon his head the water of thy
Sacrament, pour thou upon him the gifts and graces of that sovereign Spirit,
receiving him into the number of thy domestics, and honoring him with the
adoption of thy children: giving him grace to consecrate unto thee, during the
course of his life, that obedience and that religious service that is due unto
thee, and to persevere for ever in thy holy Covenant, that as now, we do
receive him in thy Name to the Communion of the Church Militant, thou may
be pleased to lift him one day to the bosom of thy triumphant Church, and
join him for ever to the Assembly of the first borne, whose names are written
in Heaven. Hear us, O Father of mercy, that the Baptism which we do
administer according to thy ordinance may produce its fruit, and its virtue,
such as it is declared unto us in thy holy Gospel, in thy Son our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, who has commanded us to pray and say; Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

Then speaking to those who present the Catecumen or party to be Baptized, the
Minister shall say unto them;

As you have been charitably employed about Instruction and edification of this
our Brother, and are Witnesses of the Baptism which by and by he is to receive
by our Ministry; Do you not promise here before God and this holy Assembly,
that you will continue more and more to strengthen him in the faith, and to
exhort him to all manner of good works?

Answ. We do.

This done, speaking to the Catecumen or party to be baptized, who waits on
his knees to be baptized, and pouring water upon his head the Minister shall
say, N. upon these testimonies of your faith, which have appeared: J. Baptize
you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

IA. CRANFORD,
Entered according to Order.

Wardens.
Richard Whittaker, Henry Seal,




A Looking-glass FOR ALL Proud, ambitious, covetous and corrupt LAWYERS.
Wherein they may see Their Forefathers Love and Humility.
Dion. Halicarn. l. 2. Livius l. 1. Plutarch. in Romulo. The like was used
amongst the Thessalians, who called these kind of Clients, Penestae. And
amongst the Athenians, who called them Thetae. Lazius. Comment. Reipub. Romans
lib. 12. c. 3. De^^pster. Antiquitatum. Romans lib. 1. c. 16.17. Car. Sigon. de
Antiquo. Jure Civium Romans
WHen Rome was in her integrity, the great men studied the Laws, and pleaded
the cause of the poor without fee, Jure Clientela: Every eminent man having
many ^undreds, nay, some thousands of poor men under their protection, for whom
they did, respondere de jure, make defen^e in Law. This was a mutual
Obligation of common charity; and these ^nfeed Patrons were justly styled,
Sacerdotes Justitia, Priests of Themis the Godd^^e of justice. But afterward,
Cum abundantes divitiae desiderium im exere per luxum atque libidinem pereundi
perdendique omnia: When abundant wealth brought in luxury to afflict the
manners of the Commonwealth, they grew into corruption with the times, took
fees, and became viles rubulae, Hackney Petty-fogg^rs, and Hucksters of the Law.

Now, though our Lawyers were never in that state of innocence to practice
without Fee, yet were they never in that height of corruption, and unlimited
way of gain, they are now in. I have heard old men say, they remembered when
Lawyers at the beginning of a Term, would stand at a pillar in Paul's,
Temple Bar, the corner of Chancery Lane, and other Avenues, attending the
coming in of their Contrymen, with cap in hand courteously saluting them,
and enquiring what business brought them to Town: not much unlike Watermen,
plying for a Fare. But now they are grown to that height of pride, that a man
can hardly (after long attendance) come so near a great Lawyers study-doore,
as to bid (God save him) without a fee or bribe. Nor are their fees of mean
value three pounds, five pounds, six pounds being usual, even for making a
motion of five or six lines: and if he be a Lawyer interioris admissionis, a
Privado or Favorite, so much is well given to buy his silence, that he appears
not against you: Oh misery! poor men cannot go to the price of justice, and
rich men are often undone by buying it. Prevarication was so detestable to the
Roman Patrons, when they took no fees, that hy the Decent virall Laws, it was
enacted; Patronus si Clienti fraudem fecerit, sacer isto. But when they
practiced for fees, all-corrupting money taught them to sell their faith, and
betray their Clients. Claudian. in Ruffin. Profers arcana. Clientes fallit.
Walter Norborne.
Nor is it an unusual thing for a Lawyer to be of Council with one party, and
to prevaricate, and be of confederacy under hand with the adverse party. By
these means, though there are so many Lawyers (besides Attourneyes, Clerks, and
Sollicitours, to spring game for them) that they can hardly live one by
another, that the multitude of Professors scandalizeth the profession, and
oppresses the Commonwealth: yet many of them rise from nothing to great
estates, five thousand pounds, six thousand pounds, nay ten thousand pounds,
twelve thousand pounds land by the year, (to the admiration and detestation of
Forrainers) and purchase Baronies and Earledomes. But this bought Honor, is
Honor the Whore, not Honor the Virgin. And this is an evident demonstration
of a decrepit Commonwealth, when these necessary Evils do so increase and
multiply upon us. Nor do our Lawyers practice any thing more, than to please
their more litigious Clients, by evading Laws and Statutes, with intricate
Pleadings, Mis-constructions, and Delays, and where they fail, by enervating
the Laws under a pretense of Equity in Chancery. This Court was Griginally
Officina Juris, the workhouse where Original Write were made, it received
Inquisitions and Offices post mortem, and dealt in some other businesses
assigned to it by Acts of Parliament, and the Lord Keeper, or Chancellor, had
the keeping not only of the Kings Great Seal, but of his conscience also; and
did right to many men upon supplication to him of wrong and torts done them by
the King his immediate Officers, or Tenants, overruling that Law Maxim, The
King can do no wrong, where Equity (sharper sighted then the Law) saw a wrong.
Spalman. trifariam facit Cancellariam.

1 Ministralem, que originis antiquae.

2 Judicialem, seu forensem, quae mediae antiquitatis.

3 Praetoriam, quae recentioris originis est, and hoc sensu Recordi Curia non
habetur: huic subjiciuntur casus Anomali and exorbitantes.


But very few ages since, the Lord Keeper (under pretense of keeing the Kings
conscience) takes upon him to have an-oare in every man's boat, a conscience in
every man's case but his own; and exercises a Pretorian power, Secundum Aequum
and Bonum, according to equity and good conscience. Under which notion, the
Jurisdiction of this Court has very lately over-flowne the Land like a
Del^ge; so that all sorts of civil causes, first or last, are ventilated
there; and all other Courts are but Courts of Pie-pouldier, in comparison. And
yet it ought to meddle but with three sorts of businesses.

1. Breach of Trust. Take away the the Statute of Uses (whereof we have little
use) and this clause in almost gone.

2. Combinasions. Which are now made the impudent suggestions of every Bill,
though never so apparently false: only to hold in the cause, which is a clear
confe^sion that frauds and deceits are the greatest things that this Court
ought to deal in. Yet it is now become the common Sanctuary for all brabbling,
and deceitful persons, which ought to be a shelter for the simple and
oppressed.

3. Accidents. Casus fortuiti. As when a man traveling with money to pay his
debts, falls into the hands of Thieves, whereby he is enforced to fotfeit his
security. Yet in this case the Common Law-Courts may give a remedy, and do.
Nor does it appear upon what grounds in Law the Lord Keeper has Conusans of
these three recited points.

But now if a man have but communication of a Bargain with a litigious crafty
person, he will by the help of that thing called Equity, cry it up for an
absolute Bargain, and enforce the performance of it. Nay, contrary to the
Statute, 4. H. 4. c. 23. this Court is grown to that boldness, as to examine
Judgments given in the Kings Courts (though anciently the Kings Bench did
reverse Errors of the Chancery) whereby suits are revived, and have more then
one life, and become almost immortal: What suit of Buffe lasts half so
long? Nay, the suits which the children of Israel wore in their forty years
peregrination through the wilderness, were of no durablenesse in comparison.

This Examination of businesses after judgment at the Common Law was
countenanced by K. James in the year 1614. who affecting to weaken the power
of the Laws, and to have all Laws in scrinio pectoris, within his own and
his Lord-Keepers breast (whom he can displace at pleasure) knew that the
frequent use of equity in Chancery was a more hidden and powerful way to
undermine our Laws, and bring all our Rights and Properties under an arbitrary
power, then his boisterous Prerogative Royal; freer from envy, and fitter to
exstinguish common concord, and to divide Families by multiplicity of Suits,
which all immoderate Princes desire, their rule being, Divide and impera. And
this is Hist. H. 7.
Bacons meaning, where he says, Such were our Judgments for Ship Money.

1. Fore-judged at Court.

2. Seemingly argued in the Checquio Chamber.

3. Adjudged there according to the said fore-judgement.


H. 7. would govern his People by his Laws, yet would govern his Laws by
his Lawyers. That is, They should first consult with him or his Favorites what
interpretation to put upon the Laws. As the Mufti at Constantinople privately
does the Grand Seignior before he gives out his definitive Sentences and
Oracles to the People, whereby they may be more serviceable to the State; both
the Law and the Gospel under subtle Princes, being Organa politica,
Instruments of Government, politic Scarro-Crowes. The premises considered, I
wonder not that De Regno Britan. He was Ambassador here for the King of Spain.
Phil. Honorius says, Cum a Gulielmo Conquestore (quod perinde est ac
Tyrannus) institutae sit Leges Angliae, admirandum non est quod solam Principis
utilitatem respiciant, Subditorum vero bonum desertum esse videatur: plenaeque
sunt tricarum, ambiguitatum, sibique contrariae: fuerunt siquidem excogitatae
atque sancitae a Normannis, quibus nulla Gens magis litigiosa atque in
controversiis machinandis ac proferendis fallacior reperiri potest. Since the
Laws of England were instituted by William the Conqueror (which is as much as
to say, the Tyrant) it is not to be wondered at that they respect only the
profit of the King, and have no regard to the good of the Subject; and are full
of pleadings, ambiguities, and contrarieties in themselves: for, they were
invented and established by the Norr^ans, then whom no Nation is more
litigious, nor more deceitful to invent and wyre-draw Suits and controversies.
But (I believe) he looked more upon the practice, then the sense and nature of
our Laws.

There happens rarely in the Civil Law a doubtful case, called, Casus pro
amico, A case to pleasure a friend withal; when (upon arguing the case) the
arguments upon both sides are of such equal weight, that neither by anything
spoken in pleading, nor by any arguments, or reasons from his own knowledge,
the Judge can possibly discern to which side the Balance of Justice inclines:
in this ambiguity the Judge (without wronging his conscience, not being able to
judge upon the merits of the Cause) may judge according to the merits of the
Person, he may give it to the poorer by way of charity: or to the worthier by
way of reward^; But our Judges and Lawyers endeavor to make all causes such,
Casus pro Amico. If it be in Chancery, though never so plain, after a
Reference or two, and a Generation or Pedigree of Orders, the controversy will
become so intricate, that the merits of the cause being lost, all the labor
lies in the mannaging of Reports and Orders and sometimes (even in cases of the
like nature) equity bears the sway, sometimes the Common Law: according as the
party, Plaintiff and Defendant play their game: for that is the only
personal merit here respected. I have insisted the more upon the abuse of
equity as being the fowlest ulcer in all our legal grievances, and but an
upstart of no Antiquity.

For our Law, it cannot be over thrown but by it self, nor without the
injurious wit of a Lawyer, to misconstrue and betray it. These Sons of the
Law have turned justice into wormwood: the honorable profession of the Law in
artem litigandi, into the trade of brabbling and pettifogging. It were a work
of infinite labor to trace half their misdeameanours. They are Turba gravis
paci, placidaque inimica quieti,
Quae semper miseras sollicitabit opes.
Foes to sweet peace, and unto pleasing rest,
Which miserable wealth do still molest.


They are Crumeni-mulga natio, loquuteleia turba; A purse-milking generation,
and a prating Rabble. I speak not these things against the Profession, nor
against all the Professors, amongst whom I know are many worthy of respect for
their abilities and integrities, I speak only against the common Traders of
the Law, vulgus Iurisperitorums. Of these I may say, that the house of a crafty
Lawyer or Attorney keeps the Country in awe, and draws in contribution as
far as an ordinary Garrison. And (custom being grown into a second nature)
it is as natural for a poor countryman to fear one of these as for a Lark
to fear a Hobby. Having thus prepared your mind, to receive good council, I
will now give it you without Fee or Bribe.

Take heed how you fill up Elections with these kind of men: the Recorder of
every Borough will of course look to be chosen, as being the mouth of his
Corporation. But it is a Custom not fit for the necessity of these times, our
affairs require rather Statesmen then Lawyers: My reason against such
Elections follow.

1. The knowledge of the Common Law, does no way conduce to the making of a
Statesman: It is a confined and topicall kind of Learning, calculated only
for the Meridian of Westminster Hall, and reaches no further then Dover.
Transplant a Common Lawyer to Calice, and his head is no more useful there
than a Sun-Dyall in a grave: who ever heard of the Politikes written in
Law-French?

2. If the making and penning of good Laws were the work of these times (as
they are not) it were not wisdom to choose mercenary Lawyers to make Laws:
because they are the first men to invent subtilities to evade them, and make
them useless; and will pen them obscurely on purpose, to make themselves work
in the interpretation.

3. Lawyers, being a bold and talkative kind of men, will intrude themselves
into the Chaires in all Committees, where (being accustomed to take Fees) they
will underhand protect Delinquents, and their concealed Estates with tricks
and devices.

4. The Reformation of Courts of Justice is a work of absolute necessity,
without it (though the sword of the Lord return again into its scabbard, so
that you have no war) you shall have no peace. But if you have many Lawyers,
they will never suffer any effectual Law to pass, for this purpose: Because
they get more by the corruption and delays of the Law, than by the Law it
self.

5. It it necessary to make a Law for imitation of exorbitant Fees, extortion
and prevarication amongst Lawyers, as is used in other Countries.

6. It is necessary to limit the certain number of practisers in each Court,
that they swarm not (like Loc^sts) over the Land, devouring and impove ishing
it.

These blessings you will never attain unto, unless God give you the wisdom
to avoid such Elections. Lay the sin, as well as the shame and smart of legal
oppressions to you^ hearts, and you will find that the cries of the oppressed
have been a principal motive to draw down Gods vengeance upon this mournful
Land. Was ever so desperate a wound given to your Laws, Liberties, and
Properties, as the predetermined judgment of Ship Money? Who gave that blow?
Judges. What were they? thieves, Cum Prewilegio Regiae Majestatis; who bought
Justice by whole sale, and sold it by retaile: who assisted them? Lawyers, who
undertaking to plead for their Clients against it, prevaricated (for the most
part) and betrayed the cause; to get favor and preferment. And yet such
proceedings were against both the Judges, and the Coronation Oath: And the
Judges as well as the King have the Coronation Oath in keeping; Tresilian and
his fellow Judges were condemned and executed in Richard the seconds time, for
making the King break his Coronation Oath, upon an extrajudiciall opinion
collusorily given: for (says the Record) Sacramentum Domini Regis erga populum
suum habent ad custodiendum. But our Judges (though more wicked) have the
happiness to live in a more wicked age (cujus pars magna sunt) and outlive
their Crimes, paying only a small part by way of Fine, enjoying the rest of
their stolen Treasure: Occulta spolia and pluros de pace triumphos. After they
had made Peace as devouring as War, and the Law as cruel as the sword, who
(that is not a better Christian than these Brothers of the Coyfe, Brothers in
evil) will not cry out with Epicurus, Deos prorsus contemnere res humanas.
That God takes no more care what men do on this Earthly Ball, that man does
what Ants do in an Emmet-hill. When Cicero in Verrem.
Verres (being Pro-Consull of Sicily) had pilled that Province (and other
Pro-Consulls, and Pro-Pretors, were punished for lesser extortions) he laughing
at their foolish moderation, vaunted to his Broker Timarchides, that he had
gotten enough to buy the friend-ship of the Senate, and come off a rich and
honorable man: So our Judges enjoy their crimes, and the price and reward of
them. Nay, Fruuntur diis iratis, cum tu victrix provincia ploras, grow fat and
prosper upon the anger of God, and man, whilst this Land groans under the sad
weight of sword, pestilence, and famine, the effects of their injustice. But
through whose favor is it, they have not expiated their crimes with their
blood, and washed away the guilt of the Land, but the Lawyers? who wisely
consider, it may be their own case another day.

I have showed you how unsafe it is to trust mercenary men with making or
keeping of your Laws, I will epitomize what I have said in Panigyr. ad
Trajanum.
Plinies words, Olim Criminibus, jam legibus laboratur, and metuendum est ne
legibus fundata res publica, sit legibus eversa. Heretofore we were laden with
our crimes, now we are oppressed with our Laws: And it is to be feared least
the Commonwealth (though founded by the Laws) be confounded by the Laws, (or
rather by the Lawyers.)

I have given you good Counsel, God make it wholesome to you, and safe to me:
which (if the times be not too wicked to hear truth) I shall not doubt; In the
mean time the feeling experience I have in the public calamities, has raised
my resolution rather to scorn then fear any injury. Justum and tenacem
propositi virum, non civium ardor prava jubentium, non vultus instantis Tyranni
mente quatit solida. Fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae. A just
and constant man will not be shaken in his resolution, neither by the threats
of tyrants, nor by the clamours of the many-headed multitude: though the world
fall upon him, he will fall accompanied with justice, honesty, religion,
(mistake me not, I do not mean hypocrisy.) Leve est quod far possum,
breve est quod far non possum. Mors ultima linearerum est. So I conclude my
advice, and God conclude our miseries.

Printed in the Year, 1646.


