ANALYSIS.

THE Loosing of St. Peter's Bands; Setting forth The true Sense and Solution OF
THE COVENANT In point of CONSCIENCE SO FAR As it relates to the Government of
the Church by EPISCOPACY.

By JOHN GAVDEN, D. D.

Acts 16.26. The foundations of the Prison were shaken, the doors opened, and
every ones bands were loosed.

1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart,
and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

Non est conscientia sine scientia; nec pura esse potest, si sit caeca. Bern.

LONDON, Printed by J. Best, for Andrew Crook, at the Green-Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

TO His honored Friend Sir Lawrence Brumfeild Knight. And Colonel in London.
SIR,
WEll knowing (as St. Bernard speaks) The tenderness of conscience.
how tender and delicate a thing Conscience is; how it is not to be baffled or
deluded with any Sophistry; nor ravished or captivated by any violence and
tyranny; not cajoled or trepanned by any Policy and hypocrisy; but (apart from
all fraud or force) it is then most at its ease, freedom and tranquillity, when
it has most light and serenity to see its duty, also most liberty to act
according to those rules of right Reason and Religion, which are not partial,
flexible and mutable, but universal, fixed and eternal.

. The rules of Conscience.
I have here endeavored to give you and others (upon your motion) that sober
sense of the Covenant, whereof I believe it is only capable before God, before
all good Christians, and in a man's own wel-informed conscience.

. Which must, and at last will judge of things in point of scruple or
obligation, not by the occasion beginning them, or the power imposing them, or
the passion clamoring, or the multitude applauding, or the success abetting, or
the pertinacy maintaining them; Nor yet by the superstition of some men
devoutly doting for a while upon that as a goddess or an Image fallen from
heaven, when it may be (indeed) but the late invention of some cunning
workmen, whose golden rings and earrings being melted in the furnace of Civil
wars, may sometimes bring forth such a thing as the Authors and Abettors will
needs vote to be their God.

. But the true light and medium of Conscience as to its judgment, practice,
peace and perseverance, must be by those clear, pregnant and constant beams of
right Reason, add true Religion, which shine in the brightness and stability of
Divine and Humane laws, which are the solid pillars of Truth, the firm supports
of duty, the sure bounds of obedience, and the safe repose of conscience.

. All other superstructures of fancy, policy and Interest, as hay, straw and
stubble will perish; but those others will out last the last conflagrations
which shall make a fiery trial of all men's thoughts, designs and actions both
public and private, whether they be made up of popular and peevish dross, or
of such piety, more precious than gold, which is both pure and permanent.

. In this great concern therefore of conscience, I must study to be void of all
fear and flattery of men, Freedom from passion and prejudice in cases of
conscience.
separate from all crowds of passions and prejudices, free from popular
petitions, and the two Houses resolutions; from Scottish importunities and
English compliances; not obnoxious to the Court or the Country, to the Assembly
or the High Commission, to Episcopal infirmities, or Presbyterian insolences;
but as in the presence of God, and before his Tribunal, so serious, intent,
upright and unbyassed shall I declare my judgment to you, to your City, to my
Country, and to our most welcome King; to my reverend Fathers, and brethren of
the Clergy, and to my dear Mother the Church of England, for whose sake
nothing must seem hard, or too much to be done or suffered by me, or any of her
Sons, since we have the great paterns, both of our late Sovereign, who suffered
as a Martyr in her defense, and of our blessed Savior, who was crucified for
her redemption.

. As for my Brethren of the Church of Scotland, I confess I understand not
their motions or mutations, because I think they once enjoyed the best
constitutions of Episcopacy in the world; I have a Christian pity and charity
for them; I leave them to that liberty which is the fruit not of the swords and
passions of man, but of the Word and Spirit of God; which clearly unites
Loyalty and Religion, Duty and Devotion, Reformation and Moderation, Order and
counsel, eminency and harmony in one paternal, fraternal and filial unity of
Bishops, Presbyters and People.

. As to the scruple or case of conscience then, with which you tell me, The
shiness of some men's consciences as to Episcopacy.
many sober and honest men, are by their once taking the Covenant so scared
from all complyings with any Church Government under any name of Bishops, or
notion of Episcopacy, never so reformed and regulated, that they fear by
looking back to the primitive, Catholic and universal Government of this and
all other ancient Churches, to be turned into pillars of Apostasy as Lots wife,
Answers oblique.
was into a pillar of salt. And to prevent which sad Metamorphosis in City and
Country, my Answer or Resolution in point of Conscience as to the Covenant, so
far as it relates to Episcopacy is this.

1. The Covenants defectiveness as to authority and law.

First, I might shrewdly batter the Covenant, by urging the defectiveness of,
and so the invalidity of any lawful, constant or complete authority in it,
capable to bind the Subjects or People of England, either in the Court of
conscience, or any other ( Ecclesiastical or civil) Judicature; in which
nothing can have any permanent bond or tie of Law (except Gods Word) without
the Kings consent, no more than the vow of a servant, or son, a daughter or
wife (in Moses Law) could bind them without, Numb. 30.2.
yea, against the declared consent of their Master, father or Husband, under
whose protection they were.

2 The violence of the times.

Secondly, I might echo and retort upon the Covenant, the violence and noise
of those times in which it was first hatched in England, and brought forth by
the Midwifery of tumults and Armies, of engaged, yea enraged parties and
factions, whose wrath and policies were not probbale to work the righteousness
of God; nor did they seem good Angels, which troubled our waters to an healing,
but evil ones sent in Gods just anger amongst us to turn our waters into blood.

3. The novelty of it as to our laws.

Thirdly, I might further urge the novelty and partiality of the Covenant, as
the English Laws and genius; that it was from a foraign influence and design
first invented, then obtruded on this Church and State, contrary to our ancient
Laws and constitutions both ecclesiastical and civil, to which King and People
were bound, till by mutual consent they were altered; which was never yet done
in the point of Episcopacy.

4. The sad and tragique consequences of it

Fourthly, It might seem odious to reflect upon this Covenant, as to the sad
effects, and unblest consequents, which like black shadows have attended its
appearing and prevailing in England, and in Scotland too. What havocks followed
in Church and State? what improsperities, disorders, contempts, confusions,
wars, spoils, and bloodshed upon all estates and degrees; besides the contempt
of Religion, the neglect of Sacraments, the expulsion of the Liturgy, and the
aviling, no less than dividing of Ministers, who (instead of Oaks and cedars of
God, formerly frequent in this Church, I mean Divines of great gravity and
excellent learning, worthy of double honor) everywhere shrunk and dwindled to
Plebeian shrubs, and popular parasities, the pity of the more pious, and scorn
of the more petulant sort of men.

5. The baflings and annullings of it by counter engagements.

Fifthly, Nor will I insist upon the bafflings of the Covenant, before it was
adult or many years old; how it was soon made Nehustan, and reduced to nothing,
by counter and cross engagements, after it had served as one of the great rocks
for the Kings shipwreck, no less than the Churches and States; nor did the
Covenant ever thrive after it was watered with the Kings blood, wherein many
men had an hand who had been zealous Covenanters, If it was so easily vacated
in point of its express loyalty for the Kings Preservation, I do not see how it
should be so binding in the case of abjuring or extirpating of all Episcopacy,
though reformed and regulated as it ought to be.

6. ^ts variating from, if not crossing former lawful Oaths of King and
people.

Sixthly, Wherein it is very considerable how the Covenant (if so interpreted)
must needs grate sore upon, and pierce to the very quick those former lawful
oaths, which had prepossessed the souls and consciences of most of us in
England; not only of Subjects, as those of Allegiance and Supremacy, besides
that of Ministerial, canonical obedience to our lawful superiors in Church and
State; but even the conscience of the late King, as he was bound by his Oath at
his Coronation to preserve the rights and franchises of the Church; which the
King rather than break, as some men urged him, chose to die and lose all in
this world; as he declared to many at the Isle of Wight; and to Mr. Marshal
with others, at Newcastle; from which Oaths, as we know no absolution, so, nor
can there be any superfetation of such a contradictory Vow and covenant without
apparent perjury, which we presume the Covenant never intended, nor included;
or if it did, it is therein of no bond or validity, as to any good man's
conscience against previous lawful oaths, which must be kept.

7, It threatens dangerous Schism.

Seventhly, Besides, if the Covenant were designed, as wilfully exclusive and
totally abjuring of all Episcopal order and Government in this Church of
England, it must needs run us upon a great rock not only of Novelty but of
Schism, and dash us both in opinion and practice against the judgment and
custom of the Catholic Church, in all places and ages (till of later years)
from the Apostles days, with whom we ought to keep communion in all things of
so ancient tradition, and universal observation; nor may we so comply with a
few reformed Churches of later days (whose want but not contempt of Bishops
also the necessity of times, and distress of affairs put upon them, either by
the policies of Princes, or the impatience and prejudice of people, or the
covetousness and sacrilege of both may excuse, while they approve and venerate
Episcopacy in others) yet with these we must not so comply, as to put a
reproach, scandal, scruple or affront upon all other Christian Churches at this
day in all the world; among whom, not one ever was of old, or is to this day in
any Kingdom to be found without their Bishops, as derived by the succession of
all times from the Apostles; nor is the abolishing of Episcopacy a small wall
of partition newly set up to keep all Papists from due Reformation.

8. The ^est sense and use of the Covenant.

Eighthly, I might further add, how much more equal and ingenuous, loyal, and
religious were it for all sober-meaning Covenanters to reduce and confine their
consciences, as well as their Covenant, from such an extravagant, disloyal,
unlawful, enormious, and Schismatical sense, to which some do wrest and
torture it (in which it could neither be lawfully taken, nor can be kept with
honesty, as against all Episcopacy) and rather to retire to that sober sense
wherein alone it might lawfully be taken, if it had been imposed by due
authority, or were spontaneously assumed, which sense can reach no further than
those abusive excesses or defects of Church Government under Bishops, so far as
they were really such, either by the inconvenience of the constitutions and
customs in England, or at least as they appeared such to these Covenanters, as
to the execution of that authority, through the faults or infirmities of some
Bishops and their instruments, who possibly were not so worthy and good, or not
so wise and discreet, as became Christian Bishops, or Ecclesiastical Governors
of Christ's Church. But it is a most irreligious, as well as unreasonable
(Ametry) transport, for men to covenant against all the right use of things
that are good, because of the abuse incident to them, by men or times that may
be evil.

9. Its pretended authority-from examples in the O. Test.

Ninethly, It were easy to level to the ground all those fair but fallacious
pretenses drawn to fortify the Covenant, from Scripture examples, wherein the
Jews sometimes solemnly renewed their Covenant with God; But it was that
express Covenant which God himself had first made with them in Horeb and Mount
Sina, punctually prescribed by God to Moses, and by Moses (as their supreme
Governor or King) imposed upon them; this they sometime renewed after they had
broken it by their apostasy to false and strange gods: But blessed be God, this
was not the case of the Church or people of England, nor was there any need of
such covenanting, any more then there was any Moses, or Hezekiah, or Josiah, or
any chief Governor commanding it: Nor (alas) was this Covenant any divine
dictate or Sovereign prescription, but the petty composition of a few politic
men, Subjects not Princes, and very mean Subjects too some of them, either as
Lawyers or Ministers, a great part of whom I and others well knew to be no very
great Clerks or Statesmen; and fitter for a country Cure, than to contrive and
compose Solemn Leagues and Covenants, to be imposed upon Churches and Kingdoms,
(yea, and upon their Kings too) in whose Dominions were many thousands equals
and Superiors to those Masters, whose heads rather than their hearts, and their
State correspondencies more than their consciences brought forth this Covenant.

10. No evangelical example of any such Covenant in any Christian Church of
old.

Lastly, I might truly allege against the novelty of the Covenant in the
Church of England, that there is no precept or pattern for any such in all the
New Testament, nor in all succeeding ages of the Christian Church; we never
read nor heard of any covenanting Christians (until the Ligue saint in France)
except those who in one baptism were sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and so
entered into that covenant which God makes with us and we with him, in that holy
laver of regeneration; this is the new and Evangelical covenant of all true
Christians; this we break by wilful and presumptuous sins; this we renew by
true repentance, and by worthy participation of the body and blood of Christ in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

. How vastly different from this sacred covenant, this late piece of policy
more than piety is; and how little the true covenant of a Christian binds him
by his Baptism or Repentance, or the Eucharist against all Episcopal
Government, I leave to all sober-minded Christians to judge; since both the
power of ordaining Ministers, and by them to consecrate and celebrate both
Sacraments, was ever derived from and by Bishops of the Church, as the chief
conservators, cisterns, and conduits of all Ecclesiastical Authority and
Ministerial power from the very Apostles, the first Bishops of the Church, Acts
1. who had the same immediately from Christ, who was, and ever is the great
Bishop and Pastor of our souls, to feed and rule his Church, not only by his
Word and Spirit, but by such Shepherds and Rulers as he has in all ages set
over his flock; of which Bishops were ever esteemed the Angels, Presidents, or
chief Fathers; whom utterly to destroy, and violently to extirpate out of this
or any Christian Church, is not only to offer signal and intolerable injuries
to the persons of such excellent Bishops as England lately had, and still may
have, but further mightily to abate the honor of this whole Church, and its
Ministry, by taking away all the rewards and encouragements of Learning and
Religion; yea and to scandalize all Churches by abolishing such a venerable
order and universal custom in the Church, as has no origin but that of the
Apostles, and looks very like an immediate institution of Christ, either
preceptive and explicit, or tacit and exemplary. The just abatements of
Covenanters heats and rigors.


. So that if this were the sense and intent of the Covenant-makers, and takers,
to extirpate and abolish, not the abuses, but the very uses of all Episcopal
Order and Government, the great Boanergesses who thunder out so much terror
against Covenant Breaking, may do much more justice and execution if they turn
the mouths of their canons against such Covenant-taking, which is better broken
than kept in any unlawful sense, and best of all, when not at all taken, with
any such intention, which is as presumptuous, as it was preposterous.

. These things being thus premised, are sufficient (as I conceive) to abate the
edge and rigor of the Covenant, as to its antipathy against all Episcopacy, and
to ravel that cable or bond of religious obligation, which some men do seem to
twist and urge upon poor peoples consciences in that point; when in good
earnest, there is neither Law of God or man requiring, imposing or comprobating
any such Covenant, by any National or Ecclesiastical authority; so that it
appears (at best) to be but a matter of will worship, of humane and private
invention, void of public and plenary injunction, esteemed by many but as a
stratagem of State, a flag of faction, an engine framed on purpose to batter
down Episcopacy, and the whole Church of England, in order to obtain the spoils
of them; not to punish and amend the evil that might be in Episcopal
Government, or in some Bishops and other Ministers, but to seize all their
estates, and all the patrimony of the Church, to the great enriching of some
sacrilegious Protestants, to the gratifying of some Presbyters envy and
revenge, but most of all to the great joy and triumph of the Romish party and
Jesuitick designs, which were thought by many wise men to have been, if not the
Sires, yet the Sibs to that Covenant; that they might help to spread it as a
snare in Mizpeh, thereby to catch and destroy the famousest Bishops, the most
renowned Clergy, the best reformed and most flourishing Church in all the
world.

. The best aspect of the Covenant considered in conscience.
But I will look upon this Covenant in the softest sense that can be made of
it, as a voluntary Vow, or religious Bond which private men, and some part only
of the Nation, spontaneously took upon themselves, in order to declare their
sense of duty to God, the King, the Church, their Country, and the Reformed
Religion, to make themselves more strictly sensible of the sacred and civil
obligations respectively due to them, that so they might be more ready to
discharge them in their places and callings by taking such a Covenant freely,
not for fear of prison, plunder, sequestration, and the like wracks of men's
souls; the terrors of which made many, if not most of the takers of the
Covenant, to take it; and yet I believe not one fourth part of the people of
England now living ever did take it in any sort; and very few but rigid Bigots
and virulent spirits in any sense, against primitive, reformed, and regular
Episcopacy, so reduced to an efficacious conjuction with Presbytery, as the
most Reverend Primate of Armagh proposed in his Reduction of late, and so did
the Lord Virulam long before in his considerations touching the Church of
England, offered to King James in the beginning of his reign.

. In this aspect of the Covenant, Answers direct.
as a religious obligation, either newly made or renewed upon the foul of any
that willingly and freely took it, and who thereby think themselves eternally
obliged to fulfill the letter of it, or that sense they had of it as to the
matter of Church Government by Episcopacy or Prelacy, which they fancied to
have abjured and renounced, no less than Popery; my Answers and Solutions are
these:

1. What only can bind in it,

First, They are not the bare words of the Covenant which as charms can bind
any man's conscience, to or against any thing; but it is that force of Truth,
Reason, Justice, Religion and Duty to God, or man, our selves or others which
morally and really obliges men, either by Gods general or particular precepts;
which are as iron or admantine bands on every man's soul, to choose good and do
it, to hate evil and eschew it, long before any of these withes or cords of
man's combining and tying are put upon them, by themselves or others.

2. Not the takers fancy or imposers.

Secondly, Nor can any such Covenant bind any man in any conscientious bond,
merely by the power of a man's own imagination, or by such a prejudice and
presumption as he lists to form and take up against any thing, short of, or
beyond the merit of it, either as good or evil.

3. It cannot bind to the in^ury of others.

Thirdly, No such Covenant can bind us to the injury of another liberty,
right, power, or lawful authority, private or public; and so not against that
which is in the King and the Bishops, or in the major part of the Church or of
the Country, or of any Parliament, which may look upon Bishops and Episcopacy
with a far more propitious eye than those that beheld it only through the
Presbyterian spectacles.

4. It cannot bind either to evil, or from good.

Fourthly, Such a Covenant can bind no man in conscience against any thing that
is in its nature good, or that is not morally evil; for this were for man to
bind himself and others beyond Gods eternal bonds of righteousness: They are
Covenants with Hell and Death which bind men either to what is evil and sinful
in its nature, or from what is allowed of God as good and lawful, yea and may
be necessary in its time and place; now there is no doubt, but there is much
good in Episcopal order and government; much good was done by it to the
Churches of Christ in the primitive and all times; much to this Church of
England since the Reformation and before; the principles and proportions of
order, subordination and government (which hold good in all other polities, and
fraternities) cannot be evil in this of Episcopacy; It has much of God in it,
from Scriptural precepts and patterns in the Jewish Church, which the
Christians followed in many things; It has so much of Christ's example, and the
Apostolic constitution, of the primitive use, of Ecclesiastical custom, of
holy men's general approbation, and universal imitation, both here in England
and elsewhere, that it were extreme folly, madness, profaneness and blasphemy to
cry it down for evil, or to engage and covenant against it as such, when it
has in it so much good, and so attested by experience, to be beneficial for
the well-being, yea almost for the complete and regular being of any Church,
and none more than this of England, where people are not to be governed by
their equals and inferiors, because they are in black cotes.

5. It cannot oblige to extirpate the use of what is good, because of any
abuse.

Fifthly, No man may vow or covenant, much less keep any such Covenant as he
has taken intentionally against the evil or corruption and abuse of any thing,
so as to involve the good and usefulness of it, and to condem that to
destruction or extirpation with the other, as Abraham said to the Lord, God
forbid that the Judge of all the earth should destroy the righteous with the
wicked; or cast the wheat with the chaff into inquenchable fire: No, a good
conscience abhors confusion; it does not take or do things by wholesale but by
retail, weighs all in the balance of the Sanctuary, separates the precious
from the vile; the superstructures of men, from the foundations of Christ and
his Apostles, which stood firm for so many ages; it becomes the children of
wisdom to justify her, by trying all things, and holding fast what is good.

6. It obliges not to abolish all that is good or christian mixed with Popery.

Sixthly, As they that covenanted against Popery, cannot think they did abjure,
or must abhor all those saving truths and duties of Christianity which are
mixed with Popery; no more can they justly think because they covenanted
against Prelacy, that is, against its pride, presumption, idleness,
covetousness and tyranny, that therefore they are for ever engaged against the
order, presidency and paternal authority of Episcopacy; men's malice and hatred
may not go beyond the grave; if the abuses and disorders in Prelatick
Government be dead and buried, true Episcopacy may yet have a blessed
resurrection from corruption to incorruption, from dishonor to honor, which I
hope and pray God will by the wisdom of the King and his Parliament effect.

It cannot bind to any thing out of a man's lawful power.

Seventhly, No man may lawfully vow and covenant, or accordingly act in any
thing, which is not in his power and dispose, in his sphere and calling, beyond
which bounds this Covenant permits no man to go; yea, it does limit by these
all his engagement and activity. Now certainly, the government of the Church of
England, especially as established by Law, neither was nor is in any private
men's power, be they never so many, either to alter, or innovate, or abolish and
extirpate; This is only in the power of the King as Supreme, by the Law of God
and the Land, to protect and preserve: Nor can it be changed but by his royal
assent to the counsel and desire of the Two Houses of Parliament: Nor may any
man never so much for Presbytery, or Independency, or Anarchy, as to his
private opinion, either vow or covenant, or act overtly and violently, further
than by humble petition or counsel against established and legal Episcopacy, no
more than he may against Monarchy, because he prefers either Aristocracy or
Democracy.

It cannot bind against what may after appear good.

Eighthly, As no man could lawfully covenant against what he thinks to be good,
or against what is less good then he desires and opines, but out of his calling
and lawful power to effect; so, nor can any man in conscience be bound by any
such Covenant (taken in a gross sense, or in general terms) against that which
may upon second thoughts, or after-view, and better information appear to be
good and useful to him; he is here bound not to keep his Covenant, in the
latitude of his mistakes and presumptions, nor to act according to his
prejudices and former supposals, but rather to retract his rashness and
unadvisedness in taking it at first, and to act according to the present
evidence of what is true, just, good, lawful and useful, even in Episcopacy,
whereof he cannot but stand convinced, both by the principles of right reason,
and the proportions of all Government, and by the experience of the defects,
deformities and inconsistencies of all other models.

. It is now high time, after so many afflictions to learn righteousness and
wisdom; and to discern between the faults of men or times; and the true nature
of things; between good and bad Bishops; between pontifical Prelacy, and
Paternal Episcopacy, which is that wherewith all sober men would be satisfied,
and against which no Covenanter could in Reason or Religion, in piety or
policy, in prudence or conscience be engaged.

The duty of a cautious and consci^ntious Covenanter.

Ninethly, The cautious and conscientious Covenanter therefore is now to take a
calmer view and exacter measure of the Covenant than (perhaps) he did at the
first offer and taking of it, which was in haste, and heat, in fear and fury;
what then he greedily swallowed without chewing, he should now leisurely and
soberly ruminate; for in lumps it will not easily digest or pass; he may better
learn what there is of God or good in it by the still voice, wherein now the
Lords mercy appears and speaks to this Church and Kingdom, than in those fires
and earthquakes, which at first represented this Covenant to him with shining
swords.

. He must now distinguish what may be in it of God, what of good and
well-meaning-men, and what of evil or sinister designs, at least as to the
event; in what is good he may lawfully persevere; what may by some be urged to
evil, he is to avoid; what he did weakly or inconsiderately in the taking or
pursuing of it, he is to repent of and retract, by keeping in the bounds of
duty, allegiance and subjection to God and his Superiors in Church and State.

10. The easy satisfaction of any conscientious Covenanter.

Tenthly, and lastly, the most strict and severe Covenanter cannot but be
satisfied and absolved in point of conscience, if first he has and still does
in his place and calling seasonably advise, humbly petition, and lawfully
endeavor to reform what is truly amiss in the Church Government by Bishops.
Secondly, If he use the like means to restore and preserve, what he finds good
and useful in Episcopacy. Thirdly, If he humbly submit to what the King in this
point as Supreme shall see fit to establish in his Church; which is very
probable to be such, as will much differ from the former way of Government,
Reformed Episcopacy consistent with the Covenant.
as to any thing evil or inconvenient in it: Certainly, a little change realy
to the better, much more an honest and ingenuous Reformation of Episcopacy,
beyond the former excessive or defective either constitution or execution of
it, will abundantly absolve the honest, yea and the very litteral and
complexive meaning of that Covenant; which may not be a bond of iniquity, or a
snare and gin for schism and sedition to act by, to the dishonor of God, to the
reproach of the Reformed Religion, to the scandal of foraign Churches, and to
the ruin of these sometimes so famous and flourishing; which the King and
every good Subject are bound in conscience to repair and restore, not only to,
but (if it may be) beyond its pristine condition; wherein some things possibly
were so amiss that it will be happy to have them either supplied as to the
defects, or repressed as to the excesses, without any extirpation of what is
holy and catholic, primitive and paternal, orderly, politic and prudent in
Episcopacy; which Government duly fitted and fixed, comprehends beyond any, all
the just interests of People and Presbyters, no less than of the Bishops and of
the King.

. This Right, The duty and just dealing of an honest Conanter.
Justice and Duty then every conscientious Covenanter ows,

1. To God, in approving, desiring, loving, and using what is good.

2. To the King, as the chief Governor of the Church and State, enjoining
things lawful and honest, though not the very best.

3. To the Bishops and Fathers of the Church, who have been many of them most
injuriously used many years, and ought in Justice to be recompensed.

4. To all learned and sober Ministers, who have a long time been exposed to
all manner of discouraging and dividing factions among themselves, and
insolences from the people, for want of King and Bishop to govern, guide and
protect them.

5. He ows this love, moderation and charity to this Church, hereby to advance
and settle the unity, peace and prosperity of it, which cannot be but in the
way of Episcopacy duly constituted, and carefully executed.

Lastly, he ows this care to his own soul, whose inward and eternal peace is
not to be made up by passion, superstition or presumption, but by meekness of
wisdom, justice, charity and discretion; as in all other things, so very much
in this point of Episcopacy; so studiously then put into the Covenant toserve a
prevalent interest, but no way in conscience to be now stretched against a
right and regular Episcopacy, no more than Physic given to cure a disease,
should like unmortified Quicksilver, be applied to kill the man.

. The sense which the prime authors of the Covenant gave of it.
This I know was the sense of the most learned men in the Assembly, and of
those, who with my self had as much right to sit among them, as any others, but
were not permitted, either by popular faction and tumult, or by other
shufflings and reasons of State which took care to exclude or deter all the
excellent Bishops of the Church, and the most able of Episcopal Divines, for
fear there should have been any just plea for moderate Episcopacy, against the
then Magistery of Presbytery. This I have often heard Mr. Marshal and others
affirm (who had a great hand in penning and promoting the Covenant) and they
owned it to some foraign Divines, That the Covenant was levelled only at the
(Despoticum, Tyrannicum, regimen) misgovernment not the Government of
Episcopacy. This is at present the sense and hopes of the most learned and
godly Presbyterians, whom I have lately spoken with in London and elsewhere;
That if the ancient lapsed and decayed frame of Episcopal government were a
little altered, it would satisfy the end and letter of the Covenant, which was
not to destroy, but to build, and repair, not to consume all, but to use those
materials which were good in that ancient, noble, and venerable fabric of
Episcopacy.

. The speedy settling this Church in a Episcopacy.
Which I beseech God may by his Majesty's piety and wisdom be speedily and
resolutely settled in its best constitution; wherein to take good counsel is
Kingly and Christian; but to tarry till all Sects and sorts of people be agreed
and satisfied, will be to expose his Royal Authority to undervaluings, and this
Church to everlasting confusions.

. Nor does there need much counsel to know, or courage for to do, what is here
meet to be done, in order to satisfy the most, and I may say the best of all
sorts in this Kingdom, both as to minds, manners, and estates. For his Majesty
has not a new Church to build, but an ancient and well-modelled one to
restore: They are not foundations of faith or good manners, which are to be
laid, but either some necessary reparations to be made in reference to such
decays, as long time brings upon the best things under heaven; or such pinacles
be taken down as being much wasted with age, rather threaten than adorn the
Church of Christ; whose dilapidations, after all the covenanting complements
and reformings have been ten times more in these last twenty years under the
hands of bungling Reformers (who would needs do Church-work without the
Masterbuilders, The ruins of this Church the last 20 years for want of
Episcopacy.
Kings and Bishops) than they were for fourscore years since the Reformation in
England, yea, or the first Four hundred years of the Church, in the midst of
Persecution; when many godly Bishops were persecuted by Heathens and Heretics;
but this Age is the first Parent of that Prodigy, wherein Orthodox and
Reformed Christians, either Presbyters or People did persecute godly Bishops,
(of the same Faith and Profession) yea, and Episcopacy it self, though never
so regular and reformed; which could not justly be the meaning of the Covenant;
and if it were, it cannot thereby bind any man that took it, further than to
repent of his rashness, and to act contrary to so injurious, irreligious,
irrational and impolitick a sense. From which snare the Lord does undoubtedly
deliver every good man's conscience; for as God cannot tempt; so nor can any
thing in his name tie or bind men to any thing that is a sin: They that under
any such sinister notions and unjust ends lifted up one of their hands to the
most high God, to profane his holy Name, had need bend both their knees and
lift up both their hands to Heaven humbly to beg of God pardon for their folly,
and grace to return to that duty which they owe to God, to the King, to the
Bishops, to this Church, to their Country, and to their Consciences.

. Thus (Sir,) Conclusion.
have I in two days finished my answer and Solutions, as to the bondage and
scruple of the Covenant in the case of Episcopacy, wherein I hove freely set
down my most impartial sense and thoughts of it, being willing to reconcile it
to Reason and Religion, as far as may be; beyond which it can have no just
influence, power, or efficacy upon any man's conscience: Nor would I have it so
accursed of God, (though as yet it has been no Procurer of any great blessings
to us in the Church) as to be made the Jesuitick wedge to keep us ever from
closing with a right Episcopacy. Doubtless the sense of the Covenant has
lately quickened many men's consciences in their. Allegiance to the King, so as
to bring him (as David) home with infinite joy and triumph; Nor do I despair
but it may be applied so (as in Truth and Justice it ought) for the recovery
and restoration of the Church of England to such an happy Order, Unity, and
Government, as is most desired by all good Bishops, by all grave Presbyters,
and by all gracious People, who have zeal according to knowledge, and are not
like a Tailors Goose very heavy and hot, but blind and dark; apter to scortch
and oppress, then to enlighten and direct themselves or others.

Farewell. June 12. 1660.
FINIS.
Books written by Dr. Gauden, and sold by Andrew Crook, at the green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. HIeraspistes, A Defense for the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of
England.

2. Three Sermons preached on public occasions.

3. Funerals made Cordials, in a Sermon preached at the Interment of the Corpse
of Robert Rich, Heir apparent to the Earldom of Warwick.

4. A sermon preached at the Funeral of Dr. Ralph Brounrig Bishop of Excester
(December. 17. 1659.) with an account of his Life and Death.

5. A Petitionary Remonstrance in the behalf of many thousand Ministers and
Scholars.

(...), sive Medicastri, Slight healers of public hurts, set forth in a
Sermon Preached in St. Paul's Church, London, before the right honorable Lord
Mayor, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council, and Companies of the honorable
City of London, Febr. 28. 1659. being a day of Solemn thanksgiving unto God,
for restoring the Secluded Members of Parliament to the house of Commons, (And
for preserving the City) as a Door of Hope thereby opened to the fullness and
freedom of future Parliaments: The most probable means under God for healing
the Hurts, and recovering the health of these three British Kingdoms.

(...), Gods great Demonstrations and Demands of Justice, Mercy and Humility,
set forth in a Sermon preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at their
Solemn Fast, before their first sitting, April 30. 1660.


