TO ALL FATHERS OF NOBLE Families, and lovers of Virtue.
BE it known that Sir Balthazar Gerbier, Knight, erects an Academy, wherein
foreign Languages, Sciences, and all Noble exercises shall be taught, viz
French, Italian, Spanish, German, and Low Dutch, both Ancient and Modern
Histories, joynlty with the constitution and government of the most Famous
Empires and Stares of the world. Besides, the true experimental Natural
Philosophy. As also, what is most necessary and most noble of the Mathematics,
to wit, Arithmetic, the true method of keeping Books of Account, by double
parties, as is practiced in Italy and other parts of Europe, Geometry,
Geography, Cosmography, Perspective, and Architecture, as well for building as
for magnificent shows, and secret motions of Scenes, and the like. But above
all, what is most excellent of practical Mathematickes, whatsoever belongs
to Fortification, besieging and defending of places, Fireworkes, ordering of
Battallies, and Marches of Arms, Music, playing of all sorts of Instruments,
Dancing, Fencing, riding the great Horse, together with the new manner of
fighting on Horseback. And if there be any lovers of Virtue, who have an
inclination to Drawing, Painting, Limning and Carving, either for their
curiosity, or to attain unto a greater excellency in several of the
forementioned Sciences, (viz. Arithmetic, Fortifications, etc.) they may have
them as exactly taught as any of the other Sciences, and by a short method,
which shall give them a full insight in the Theoricall part of the said
Sciences and Exercises at the self same time that they shall be taught in the
Foreign languages, whereunto shall serve several Treaties held forth by the
said Sir Balthazar in the Foreign Languages aforesaid, the English tongue
being joined thereunto, together with diverse excellent Tables of very great use
for facilitating the matter, and helping the memory; which Treaties shall be
continually at Mistress Allens shop at the sign of the Crown in Pope's Head
Alley, near the old Exchange, London; so that all lovers of these Languages,
Sciences, and Exercises, may be pleased to address themselves to the said Sir
Balthasars house, at Bednall Green, beyond White Chapel, where Gentlemen, and
the sons of all such lovers of virtue, are received and accommodated to their
and their parents entire satisfaction, being a place most pleasant, healthful,
and fit for the studious, that are disposed to apply themselves, as aforesaid,
and there to improve themselves in such a short and convenient time, as that
they shall be the sooner enabled to travel as Gentlemen, who conversing with
persons of repute and worth, will leave a noble esteem of themselves in
foreign parts, when strangers shall find them to be well verst in Languages,
Sciences, and perfect in all noble Qualities; And that they shall not owe to
the said strangers, the merit of their education. Besides the other more
weighty considerations which conscience and loyalty to our own native Country
obliges all, parents to prefer, and especially in these evil times, when it
proves a general misfortune that a number of young Gentlemen abroad, are drawn
into evil company, where they hear and learn nothing but mere corruption both
of manners and language, besides destructive Principles to their native
Country, and to their Religion, it being also considerable, that the sending
of young Gentlemen to any of the Foreign Academies (where they shall learn no
more qualities then now they may get at home, nor altogether so many) as it is
incomparably more expensive, so it exposes them to many dangers and
inconveniences.

And although the principal scope of the Academie is for the education of
young Gentlemen, yet those of more mature Age, may find in it wherewith
abundantly to satisfy any laudable curiosity in any kind whatsoever, whether
only for enriching the mind, or for honorable profit.


