TO ALL Fathers of Noble Families and Lovers of VIRTUE
SIR Balthazer Gerbier desires once more that the Public may be pleased to
take notice of his great labors, and endeavors, by the Erection of an Academy
on Bednall Green without Algate; And as he conceives that he has at large
informed the Public that in the said Academy the Chief, Famous Foreign
Languages, Sciences, and Noble Exercises shall be taught.

That all Lovers of Virtue, of what Age soever, shall be received, and
Instructed, and that every one of them may select such Studies, Exercises, and
Sciences, as are most consonant to his Genius.

That Public Lectures shall be there read Gratis, on the said Languages, and
Sciences; and that every Wednesday in the afternoon, in Summer at three, and
in VVinter at two of the Clock, and that also a competent number of decayed
Families children, shall be there taught gratis: So that as at present there
remains nothing more to be declared on the same, but to represent how that all
Lovers of Virtue are bound both for honors sake the cherishment of Virtue,
their own profits and improvements, Now to embrace that which is so really and
sincerely proffered unto them, as well for the glory and honor of this Nation;
As that by this means all Lovers of Virtue may be freed from al those dangers,
and inconveniences insident to Travelers, who repair unto Foreign parts to
improve themselves, leaving the honor of their Education unto Strangers, Both
with the hazard of being shaken in the fundamental points of their Religion,
and their Innate Loyalty to their Native Country. That also the maine Motives
which caused the said Sir Balthazar Gerbier to present unto the public all
those Languages, and Sciences, which are to be taught in his Academy, are
these, viz. That no Foreign parts may have just cause to glory (to the
disparagement of this Nation) that they solely possess these abovementioned
Qualities.

So that it now proves a matter of great concernment to this Nation; not only
seriously to reflect on these proffers; But to embrace them vigorously, and
constantly to countenance and promote them; since that the Languages declared
to be taught in this Academy are, viz. Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Italian,
Spanish, High Dutch, and Low Dutch, Both Ancient and Modern Histories, jointly
with the constitutions and Governments of the most famous Empires and Dominions
in the world; the true Natural and Experimental Philosophy, the Mathematics,
Arithmetic, and the keeping of Books of Accounts by Creditor and Debtor. All
Excellent handwriting, Geometry, Cosmography Geography, Perspective,
Architecture, Secret motions of Scenes, Fortifications, The Besieging and
Defending of Places, Fireworks, Marches of Armies, Ordering of Battles,
Fencing, Vaulting, Riding the Great Horse, Music, Playing on all sorts of
Instruments, Dancing, Drawing, Painting, Limning, and Carving, etc.

At Robert Ibbitsons House (in Smithfield, near Hosier Lane) shall be had
constantly in Print, the Public Lectures, after they shall have been first
Read at the Academy, where they are Composed for the good of the Public.
October 31 London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson.


