THE GENERALS DINNER At the Lady CRISPES, with His LADY, and Officers of the
ARMY How his Excellency was invited by a Cook.

THE Manner of the Dinner, Their great danger of being all poisoned; and
remedies used to preserve them.

AND The COOK who was the Chief Actor, COMMITTED.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

THE GENERALS DINNER, At the Lady CRISPES, with hi^ LADY, and Officers OF THE
ARMY.
ILL men plot mischeife, and the good may su^fer, yet not always, The Acts of
treachery do n^^ ever prosper; The guard of heavenly power d^fend the Saints,
from the malice of hell, and wicke^ men.

A Design was laid against his Excellency S^^ Thomas Fairfax, what the
bottom of it was, is pr^vate only to the Plotters yet not hid from the deity.

A Cook who came out of France, (as he said,) with some gentlemen, came to
Hammersmith, to the Lady Crispes House, where he desired to speak with the
Lady herself.

The Lady Crispe coming to him, he told her that he was come from two
Gentlemen, newly come from France, who were there, well acquainted with Sir
Nicholas Crispe her Husband, who is now there in good-health, And they would
be very willing to wait upon her, (saving moreover,) that these Gentlemen had
some Officers of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army to invite to a dinner, And the
business of his coming at that time was to entreat the use of her house, for
him to dress the dinner for them, which would be a very convenient place for
that purpose, and a noble favor to those Gentlemen who would be glad to enjoy
that opportunity to acquaint her Ladyship, with some things from her Husband,
And that if she pleased to do that favor for them, They had appointed him,
to get the Dinner ready for them.

The Lady Crispe, being desirous to hear from her Husband, and willing to
accommodete, any Gentlemen with such a courtesy, especially in such a case as
this, and to receive such Guests, she told him, that with all her heart, her
house was at their service.

Then this Cook went to Turnham-greene, to the Generals Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax; where his Excellency then was with his Lady, intending to return from
his Lady, back to Putney after a day or two.

The Cook asked to speak with the Generals Lady: where he was demanded by
one of the Ladies Gentlewomen whom he came from, he answered, from (...) Lady
Crispe, upon a business which required a ^^^^aine Answer.

The Generals Lady came to him, and asked what he had to say to her, The Cook
told her Ladyship, that he was sent from (a noble Lady) the Lady Crispe Sir
Nicholas Crispes Lady, who is at Hammersmith to desire her Ladyship, that with
his Excellency, she will be pleased to honor the Lady Crispe so far as to
Dine with her, and that her Ladyship would take it for a very great honor, if
his Excellency, and her Ladyship, will be pleased to answer her expectations
herein.

The Generals Lady told her, that she knew the Lady Crispe, to be a very noble
Lady, and of good repute in those parts, And that she would speak to her
Husband, and suddenly return an answer.

Accordingly the Generals Lady went to his Excellency and told him, that the
Lady Crispe had sent to invite them to a Dinner, with her, The General was
unwilling to go, but by the persuasions of his Lady in regard of that good
repute which the Lady Crispe has in all those parts, she prevailed with his
Excellency to consent to it. And accordingly the Cook was told, that he was
desired to give thanks to the Lady Crispe; And that the General with his Lady
would wait upon her at the time desired.

The Cook returned, and acquainted the Lady Crispe, that the Gentlemen would
be there to trouble her house for meeting and dressing of a dinner, upon her
Ladyships consent: and for that purpose this Cook brought in meat, so much as
cost him only 16. s. and no more, which he dressed for dinner in the Lady
Crispes house.

About noone his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with his Lady, came to Lady
Crispes house, it being the time appointed; and with his Excellency, came
Colonel Reinsborough, Doctor Steines, with his Excellencies, and her Ladyships
attendance.

The Lady Crispe had news presently brought to her, that Sir Thomas Fairfax
was come thither, with his Lady and others, which did no little amaze her,
wondering what should be the cause of his coming thither, and yet it came into
her mind, that perhaps his Excellency might be invited by some eminent persons
though she knew not who they were, but in regard she knew nothing how things
were appointed, she was puzzled exceedingly what to do.

The General wondered as much that he should come and sit in the Hall, and the
Lady Crispe not come presently to welcome them, yet charitable thoughts made
the best construction of it.

His Excellency (after a while) was brought into the dining room; but the Lady
Crispe wondered that the General and his Lady were there, and no body but the
Cook to entertain them, so that she knew not how to carry herself in the
business; but she went in and saluted the guests, though she was very ignorant
whose they were, yet was loath to discover it, until she knew what the issue
would be, yet she did much admire that none should appear to invite such
guests but the Cook.

At last dinner was brought up, and his Excellency with his Lady, and Colonel
Rainsborough, and Doctor Steines late down with the Lady Crispe to dinner, the
General, and the rest of his company supposing it had been provided by the
Lady Crispe, and the Lady Crispe (though puzzled what to think of it, yet)
imagining that perhaps it might be sent in by the General.

There was of this meat which cost but 16. s. made above twenty dishes of meat,
all French Quickslas, such as none of the company knew what any of them were,
save only the Cook himself, yet they all had very good tastes, and it was
supposed they had been dishes of greater value: the General conceiving them
to be appointed by the Lady Crispe, she by the Generals Lady: but the Lady
Crispe called for wine, and what she had in the house fit for that table.

About the middle of the dinner, the usual time of discourse, and drinking one
to another, and bidding each other, much good do it you, and the like; the
Lady Crispe made an Apology to his Excellency, and the rest, desiring to be
excused, that she was so wanting in things fit for their entertainments, in
regard she had no knowledge at all of their coming, and that had she known
herself to be worthy of that visit, she would have had something fitting for
the entertaining of such honorable persons, the want whereof she desired to be
excused in, because of the sudden surprise.

With that they were all startled, and the invitation by the Cook (in the Lady
Crispes name) told: where upon the Cook was called for, who being demanded the
reason of his abuse therein: Answered, that he heard his Excellency wanted a
Cook, and he did not know how to present himself better to his Excellency,
then by making a visible demonstration of what he was able to do, and with
little cost.

The Cook hereupon is committed to the custody of the Marshall-Generall of the
Army.

And a great fear being had of some poison, that might be in the meat (as
probably some mischief was in it) They all had potions given them, and have
since been in a course of physic, so that (God be praised) they are all well.

FINIS.

