A MIRROR FOR Anabaptists, In three Rational DISCOURSES That may put the Blush
upon them, viz.

1. Paedobaptism Defended and Justified. 2. Anabaptism plainly Confuted. 3.
Some valid and suasory Reasons to draw them from the Error of their way, to
reembrace the Truth which they have deserted, and to return to the Church of
God from which they have departed.
By THOMAS GERY B.D. and Rector of Barwell in Leicestershire.

Prove. 23.23. Buy the truth and sell it not. London, Printed for Nath. Webb at
the King's Head, and W. Grantham at the Bear in St Paul's Churchyard, near the
little North-door. 1660.

A PREFACE.
HAving perused some of the late Elaborate and Learned Writings and Disputes of
our Modern Orthodox Divines, about Infant Baptism, in Justification thereof, as
also the voluminous, tedious and sophistical Cavils, and exceptions against the
Writings and Assertions of the aforesaid Authors, by one M. Tombs, an
Anti-paedobaptist, and a very able Scholar, yet no Anabaptist; as being no
Separatist from the Church of England: I find them all set forth, dressed and
adorned with so much Art and Eloquence, as transcends the capacity of the
Vulgar people; so that some of them are like Painted Glasse-Windows, that are
beautified with Pictures of diverse colors, which while they please the sight,
do hinder the Light.

Now because the vulgar illiterate people do stand in need to have the truth of
this Point of Faith about Infant Baptism, to be held forth and cleared up unto
their apprehensions, as who are mainly concerned therein; I did apprehend that
it would be both a charitable and an acceptable work to tender unto them some
plain and short explication of this Point, and justification of (...). And
therefore have here endeavored to epitomize and abbreviate the more large
discussions hereof before mentioned, and to lay the truth open with such
brevity, perspicuity and plainness, as that it may be obvious to the eye of
every rational and intelligent person that is not muffled with prejudice, and
may neither cost much money to buy, nor much labor to read.

If any shall deem this a frivolous and needless work, after so many learned
dissertions and discussions thereof; my Apology and excuse is this, That in my
communication and conference with some of the Disciples and Followers of
Anabaptists, these ensuing Arguments have prevailed to give them a sight of
their errors, and to renounce them. And therefore in hope that they may work
upon some more of them also, to this purpose (through his help, who works
many times by weak means, that his own power may shine forth with greater
luster) I have been induced to make them thus public; If they prevail not to
reduce any more Anabaptists from the error of their way, yet they may happily
prevent their seducing of others. I presume not herein to add any thing to the
Learned disceptations and discourses before mentioned, but only to abbreviate,
modifie and accommodate them to vulgar capacity and apprehensions.

If hereby I shall convince but one misbelieving person of their error about
this Point, or confirm but one in the right belief of it, I shall not repent me
of my labor, though hereby I expect to incur the displeasure and censure of
many.

To the AUTHOR.
My Reverend and Worthy Brother in the Ministry of the Gospel.
I Have to my best ability perused this learned and laborious Piece of yours,
wherein you have set before the face of all gainsayers, in a short and plain,
but pithy manner, all that is (or needs) to be collected from other accurate
Assertors of the contrary to what the Anabaptists of this age alledg for their
opinions without reason, and destitute of all proof, down from the Apostles
times and Primitive Churches: Your eludication of that 19 Chap. of the Acts, v.
1.2, 3, 4, 5. is most convincing, and your Arguments concerning precedence of
Faith not necessary in Infants; and the other both before and after that
Section, are irrefragable.

But Alas Sir! we find when all is done to these men, and other opposers of
those manifest Truths held out and maintained by ancient and the most Learned
of our Modern Fathers, and defenders of that clear truth which you show the
world in this your Glass, and wherein many holy Martyrs have lived and died;
yet, etiamsi nihil habeant contra nobiscum tamen non sentiunt; not because they
do not sufficiently understand, but by reason of a resolved on perversity in
the will.

And God knows, this is a common misery incident to men, and this has been and
is a knot full of perplexities, which is made up in that Conclusion, Ultimus
actus intellectus est Voluntas: which if it were absolutely true, then we might
to good purpose still labor in rectifying that Faculty of understanding, and
so the will must follow: But we find and feel it otherwise, for we all do many
sins, which even the Soul of our understanding, our Conscience checks us for,
and which we know ought not to be done: No wonder then, if these men so
abundantly convinced, will yet persist in error, and the evident reason of
their wilful stubbornness herein, is the same which is discovered in all
Schismatics, namely pride, accompanied with Faction and Singularity.

Your great and lasting Comfort is, to have so strenuously conflicted with
these unreasonable and absurd Disputers, and done enough, and more than
satisfies all impartial Readers of your Book. In the only way remaining, and
which you resolve to take, I shall cordially join with you in commending these
arrogant, and for the most part, ignorant men to Gods Mercy, and the Word and
Power of his Grace: Remaining, Sir, as you have obliged me,

Leicester, May 20. 1659. Your Faithful Friend and Fellow Servant in Christ
Jesu, THO. PESTELL.

A Mirror for Anabaptists.
The first Point that I am to begin with is, the Arguments justifying
Paedobaptism.

THE first Ground and Argument for Paedo-baptism, Mat. 28.19. Go, teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: All the exception against this is, that Teaching being first
enjoined, makes Infants incapable of Baptism, because they are incapable of
Teaching.

To this it is answered, that the teaching there enjoined, was the publication
and preaching of the Gospel to all Nations in the first place, before the
Sacrament of Baptism was to be administered unto them; which is most apparent
from St. Mark his expression of the same Commission and Precept, Mark 16.15. Go
ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every Creature. That which St.
Matthew phraseth [teach] or [Disciple] St. Mark expounds to be the preaching of
the Gospel. And this was necessary to be done in the first place, and
accordingly was done before ever any Nation received Baptism. So that when the
Gospel is preached to any Nation, and that Nation does receive and entertain
it, then is that Nation discipled or taught, and so put into a capacity and
susceptibility of the Sacrament of Baptism, and all in that Nation have a title
unto it, whereof Infants are a considerable Party; whose Incapacity of teaching
does not make them incapable of Baptism, because while they remain Infants,
they are not included among those that are to be taught: For our Savior did
not send his Disciples to teach Infants, but men of years: And therefore the
teaching pre-required, as antecedent to Baptism, is necessarily required only
of men of years, that be docible, and not of Infants that are indocible. So
that we acknowledge a necessity of a praevious and precedaneous teaching,
before Baptism of docible persons, but not of Infants; because they are capable
of Baptism, though not of teaching. I know that protervious and peevish Spirits
are able and apt enough to cavil at any truth, be it never so clear, and so its
probable, will cavil at the interpretation of this place of Scripture: But the
indifferent Reader may discern it to be both can did and consonant to other
Texts; for no where in Scripture is there any exception against this general
Command of battizing all. Nations that embrace the Gospel, amongst which
Infants are a considerable party (as was said before) And therefore where the
Gospel is preached and embraced, there Infants of that Nation are to be
baptized by virtue of that command. For a general Command in Scripture to
perform any duty appertains to all persons of what condition soever, unless in
the same Scripture some exception be added; whereas in this case there is no
any.

A Second Argument may be the testimony of the ancient Fathers o^ the Church,
who affirm it to be a^ Apostolic Tradition, and so of the same authority and
credibility with other Apostolic Traditions; such as these, The Apostles
Creed, The change of the Sabbath from the la^^ day of the week to the first;
an^ what Books of Scripture are Canon^cal, and what Apocryphal. Which
Assertions being received by the Church, as Apostolic Tradition^ are, and ever
have been, acknowled^ed and embraced as undoubt^^ Truths, though they be not
(in t^minis) word for word expressed i^ Scripture: And so in like manner has
Infant Baptism, as leaning upon the same ground with them; so that the
Anabaptists may as well question the truth of the Apostles Creed, an^ the
sanctification of the first day of the week for the Sabbath, and the Canon of
Scripture, as the lawfulness of Infant Baptism, in that they (...) lean upon
one and the same foundation, i. e. Apostolic Tradition; which was ever held by
the Churches of God to be of authentical authority, next unto Scripture it
self: For though the Reformed Churches disclaim Popish, Humane Traditions, as
men's Inventions; yet these Apostolic Traditions, they receive and reverence,
as unquestionable Truths. Now that the ancientest Fathers, as Dionysius
Areopagita, Justin Martyr, Origin, St. Augustine, with many others have
witnessed Paedo-Baptism to have been accounted and received as a Tradition
Apostolical, neither can, nor is denied by the Learnedest Anabaptists. But yet
they will not give credence to their testimony hereof, which how void of
Charity it is to censure such renowned Doctors, as reporters of an untruth,
especially in matters of Religion, I leave it to be considered of, by all
persons of understanding.

A Third Argument may be the constant practice of Infant Baptism by all
Christian Churches from the very next age after the Apostles, to this present
age. This was witnessed by Dionysius, who lived in the Apostles time, and
Ignatius, and Justin Martyr, and Iraeneus and Origin. This is proved at large
by many learned men, who of late have written of this Subject, and therefore I
will supersede the labor of rehearsing the particular proofs thereof;
especially considering that the most learned of the Adversaries of this truth,
do not deny this; but yet condemn it as an error and a very pernicious abuse,
needful to be taken away out of the Church of God, as is to be seen in Mr.
Tombs his Antipedo-Baptism, in the 3d Part, and Section the 98 about the
middle of the Section; which is a presumptuous censure, unfit for any
particular man to pass against the Church.

Now this practice of Paedo-Baptism by the Universal Church of Christ in all
ages and places is an Argument irrefragable and unanswerable, to prove the
lawfulness of it: For the Church is the ground and pillar of truth, so says
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.16. Particular Churches may err both in judgment and
practice, but the Universal Church cannot err in any important point of Faith,
such as this is; because of Christ's promise to it, both of protection and
direction in several Texts, as Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you always, even to the end
of the world; which could not be meant only of the Apostles, (as who could not
live to the end of the world) but of necessity of the whole Catholic Church.
And John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall send you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth. And
again, John 16.13. He promises his Disciples again, to send them the Spirit of
truth, which should guide them into all truth. Seeing therefore the Universal
Church for many ages, and those next succeeding the Apostles, have allowed and
practiced Infant Baptism, no intelligent godly Christian may oppose it, without
manifest contempt of the sentence and judgment of the Catholic Church; which
whose will not hear, is to be accounted as a heathen man, and a publican, Mat.
18.17. If some particular Churches only had practiced it, the Legality of it
might have been questioned; but seeing all Churches for many ages did practile
it, the legality of it is thereby made unquestionable.

A Fourth Argument may be the Circumcision of Infants in the time of the Jewish
Church. Col. 2.11, 12. Where the Apostle proves that the Collossians were
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, being buried with him
in Baptism; that is, because they were baptized in or into his name; for else
the Apostles argumentation were inconsequent, if Baptism did not come in place
of Circumcision; for in affirming they were circumcised, because they were
baptized, he declares Baptism to come in room of Circumcision: Hence therefore
it follows that as Infants were to be circumcised in the time of the Law, so
Infants are to be baptized under the Gospel.

I cannot conceive what exceptions can be brought against this argument, but
one of these two.

1. Either the unfitness to require a Covenant of a Child, that cannot speak to
declare it. Or,

2. Because there is not a particular Commanding Scripture for it.

If the first be objected, I Answer, That to lay an imputation of unfitness
upon Infant Baptism in that respect; is to charge God, himself with commanding
that which was unfit (which were audacious presumption, if not blasphemy) for
he commanded Infants to be circumcised, whereby they entered into a Covenant
with God, though they could neither express it nor know of it, Genesis 17.

To the second exception (which I find in Mr. Tombs, in the 3d. Part of his
Anti-paedo-Baptism, section, 11. near the end) I return a threefold Answer.

1. I answer, That what is colligible and deducible from Scripture by good and
undeniable consequence, (as Infant Baptism is) is of force and creditable, as
well as what has precept or example. For its an erroneous Principle (as the
learned and judicious Doctor Saunderson has observed and taxed in his Preface
lately prefixed to a new Addition of some Sermons of his that had been formerly
published) to hold that a man may do nothing (meaning about the religious
Service of God) for which there cannot be produced either command or example
from Scripture; for so he should be barred from deducting any doctrinal
conclusions from Scripture, but what are specified in it either by precept or
example; which would much infringe and straighten the Ordinance of preaching.

2. I answer, that though it were granted, that it is fit to have either precept
or example for performance of religious duties; yet for circumstances about the
pe^formance of them it is not necessary; and this is but a circumstance, Ergo.

3. I answer, that there is an implicit Command as well as an explicit, and
the former is a sufficient warrant, and that Infant Baptism has; namely in
Mat. 28.19. as formerly has been declared.

A Fifth Argument, Mat. 18.3. Where our Savior says, Except ye be converted
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
And from ( Mark 10.14. Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. This being granted that Infants are
saved (some at least, which is sufficient for the present purpose) it follows,
that then they are made members of the Church of Christ; for, extra ecclesiam
non est salus, out of the Church there is no salvation: It was the sentence of
Cyprian, Lib. de unitate Eccles. and it has ever been owned as a truth by all
Orthodox Divines; as which has its ground from Acts 2.47. Where it is said,
that God added daily unto the Church such as should be saved; which implies
thus much, that all such as are saved, are first added unto the Church. And Mr.
Tombs acknowledges this to be true, understanding by the Church, the
invisible Church of the Elect, in his Anti-paedo-Baptism, Part 3. Sect. 9.
pauso post medium, which is as much as we require to be granted.

Whence I argue thus, If Infants he members of the Church of Christ, then they
are cleansed from their sins by such ways and means as the Church is cleansed
(this is undeniable) But the Church is cleansed by the washing of water through
the Word, Ephesians. 5.26. i. e. by the Sacrament of Baptism, through the word; and
therefore Infants also, as which are members of it. And if so, then the
Sacrament of Baptism belongs to them, and may not be withheld from them,
neither in Charity nor Equity. For if they be members of the Church, which is
cleansed by the washing of water through the word, then this washing of water
through the word (which can be no other but Baptism) belongs unto them, as
being the means whereby they are made members of the Church.

If it be objected against this Argument (which is all that can be objected)
that some Infants are saved, and so are made members of the Church, and yet die
before they be baptized,

I answer, that such are saved after an unknown and extraordinary way, which
puts no bar to the ordinary way and means of salvation by God appointed, which
is Baptism; as the forecited Text of Scripture proves, with many other. For
Gods extraordinary works wrought either without means or against means, are no
Patterns and Presidents for us to follow, nor do at all warrant us to neglect
the use of ordinary means. Gods mitaculous preservation of the lives of Moses
and Elias forty days without food, is no warrant for others to fast so long:
Nor his miraculous work in providing a Whale to save Jonas from drowning, when
he was cast into the sea, any warrant for others to throw themselves into the
sea, and yet expect to be saved from drowning. And therefore Gods mercy to
Infants unbaptized, in saving them after an unknown and extraordinary way, is
no warrant for us to neglect to baptize Infants, which is the ordinary way and
means appointed by God for their sanctification and salvation, as in the next
Argument is largely proved.

If any Anabaptist can answer this Argument fully and fairly without shifting
and shuffling, I shall never trust my own Judgment again; but shall be ever
jealous of the shallowness of it.

A Sixth Argument; expect to attain to that end; as I might instance in diverse
particulars: But Baptism is a means of Grace and salvation, which Infants are
receptive and capable of, and therefore it is to be afforded and ministered unto
them.

That it is a means of Grace, i. e. of remission of sin, and so consequently of
salvation (which is all that I stand in need to prove) is often affirmed in
Scripture, Acts. 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, Acts 22.16. Arise and be baptized
(says Ananias to Saul) and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the
Lord. Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by Baptism into his death, i. e. made
partakers by baptism of the merits of his death and burial. Ephesians. 5.26. (the
Text before alleged) It is said, that Christ sanctifies and cleanses his
Church by the washing of water through the Word, Tit. 3.5. It is called the
Laver of regeneration, 1. Pet. 3.21. It Is called the Figure that saves us. Out
of all which Texts, (...) apparent, that baptism is appointed of God as one
means (together with other) of remission of sin, grace and salvation; which
though it does not alwaie; confer the same ex opere operato (as the Papists
erroneously affirm) yet always it does so, when God is pleased to vouchsafe
the concurrence and cooperation of his holy Spirit with it, which also of
necessity is required to all other means of Grace, to make them effectual, as
well as to Baptism; as namely, both to the Word preached, and to Prayer, or
they avail not. This then being proved, that baptism is a means of Grace by
Gods appointment, it necessarily follows, that it appertains to Infants, as who
are receptible of Grace as well as those that are of ripe years; and therefore
baptism which is a means of grace, ought not to be withheld from them.

All that is or can be answered to invalidate the force of this argument, is
this, That though Infants are in themselves capable of baptism, as being a
means of Grace, yet the Scripture puts a bar to them, because they want Faith,
which is required before baptism.

To this it is answered, that the precedence of Faith is required only of such
as are capable of Faith, and not of Infants which are not in a capacity of it;
which I thus demonstrate:

If Faith, and so consequently Remission of sin and Regeneration, were always
and of all, necessarily required before baptism, then baptism could never be a
means and instrumental cause to bring forth faith and regeneration: For if
Faith and regeneration must go before it, then it cannot be the instrumental
cause of Faith and regeneration; for the effect cannot go before the cause.

But that it is sometimes and to some a means of regeneration, remission of sin,
Faith and other Grace, is sufficiently proved by the Texts before quo^ed.

Therefore the precedence of faith is not necessarily required of all to be
baptized. I apprehend the force of this Argument, and the last before this, to
be such as will stall any Anabaptist whatsoever, to enevate or invalidate.

To these, Mat. 18.3. and Mark 10.14. and is justifiable by many other Texts of
Scripture) then the seal thereof also belongs to them.

But because this Argument is so largely and fully pressed already by diverse
learned men, I will omit all further prosecution of it: and conclude this first
point thus: Its an old adage and a consessed truth, that force united becomes
more forcible. Lay now all these Arguments and considerations together (the
least whereof will sway with any, but such as are forestalled with prejudice)
and paedobaptism will stand as a truth infringible, and a Fort impregnable and
insuperable.

The Second Point.
Having now sufficiently proved the lawfulness and necessary use of
Paedo-baptism, I come in the next place to confute what is repugnant to it,
which is Anabaptism, or dipping such as have been baptized in their Infancy.
And my first Argument I frame thus:

THat opinion or Doctrine in Religion, which is new,

But such is Anabaptism, or the rebaptization of such as have been baptized in
their infancy:

Therefore it is not true.

I prove the Assumption thus; because its not to be found in Scripture, neither
by precept not example, nor by good consequence to be deducted from it, but was
broached about 300 or 400 years after the Aostles, by one Donatus a Presbyter
about Carthage in Africa, as is testified by several Authors, amongst whom St.
Augustine is a principal; who writ a Book in confutation of him. I have heard
that some Anabaptists in answer hereunto, have alleged, Acts 19.2, 3, 4, and 5
verses, as a president and example for re-baptization. But I shall clear that
Text from warranting it, which I do demonstrate these two ways.

1. Because the Evangelist does not say of those there mentioned that they were
rebaptized, but baptized; he says not, (...), he says not, which when they
heard, they were rebaptized (which had been the more proper speech, if they had
been truly baptized before) but he says, (...), i. e. which when they heard,
they were baptized; which intimates, they were not rightly baptized till then,
and therefore that was no reiteration of their baptism, but their first baptism.

2. Its apparent from the Context, that they were not rightly baptized before,
that is, baptized in a right form; and therefore this was no rebaptization, but
a first baptism: For the right form is, to be baptized in the name, or into the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, or in the name of
the Lord Jesus, which is the same in substance with the former, though in fewer
words.

Now that they were not baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, is most apparent, in that they said in the second verse,
that they had not so much as heard, whether there were a Holy Ghost; which they
must needs have heard, if they had been baptized in his name. Neither were they
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus before, for in that its said, they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus then, it undeniably implies, that they
were not baptized in his name till then; and so consequently not truly and
rightly baptized till then: And so I hope I have cleared this Text from
warranting the Anabaptists rebaptization, or dipping those that have been
formerly baptized in their Infancy.

The Professors of Anabaptism at their first appearing in the Christian Church,
be the only true Church (which was done by Donatus and his Disciples, as was
declared in the former argument) were condemned by the Church then as
Heretics, and cut off as unsound members, and were so suppressed by it, that
for the space of 1000 years or thereabouts, there never appeared any face of
them again in any Christian Nation. This is a truth so clear out of all
Histories, that make mention of them, that I presume there is none of them that
have the face to go about to outface it.

But this, namely a cessation to be, can never befall the true Church of Christ,
witness many Texts of Scripture, as Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord,
shall be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed, but remains for ever. Mat.
16.18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. And Esaias 27.3. Lest any assail it, I keep it, says the
Lord. with many such like, which justify that the true Church of God cannot
fail and cease to be.

Whereas therefore there appeared no face of Anabaptistical Professors for so
long a time, it proclaims them to be no true Church of Christ, and so their
anabaptistical Profession not to be truth. This argument I once used in a
dispute with one Mr. Oats (a Coryplaeus and teacher of note amongst them) and
all the answer he returned, was this, that he had heard that there had been
some of their profession formerly in Hungary; which was both an insufficient
answer, and a tacit and clandestine confession, that they must either prove
the continuance of such profession and professors from the Apostles times,
(which they never can, nor (that I ever heard) attempted to do) or else must
yield themselves in a manifest and obstinate Error.

The Anabaptists interpretation of several Texts of holy Scripture, Peter's
Doctrine, who tells us, that no prophecy of Scripture is of any private
Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20.

Diverse of the Fathers affirm, that the Primitive Church received of the
Apostles not only the Scripture, but the genuine and true Interpretation
thereof, and this indeed in all probability was so. And therefore if the
Primitive Church held Paedo-Baptism to be agreeable to Scripture, and so
accordingly practiced it (as before has been declared) its out of doubt a
doctrine of truth, and the Anabaptists reclamation and opposition of it (as if
it were not warrantable by Scripture) a private and novel mis-interpretation of
Scripture, and therefore to be disavowed, detested and exploded.

Re-baptization of those that have been baptized before, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

But our Infants whom they re-baptize, have been truly baptized before. Ergo,
They act therein against Scripture. Now that our Infants are truly baptized, I
thus demonstrate; Those (whether men, women, or children) that are baptized in
the right and true form of baptism, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, expressly set down, Mat. 28.19. are truly baptized. But
our Infants are thus baptized, and therefore are truly and rightly baptized:
For its a known Canon in Logic, and received of all Learned men as a truth,
that [forma dat esse] the form of a, thing gives its being unto it. And
therefore Infants being baptized in this true and right form, are truly and
rightly baptized and so ought not to be baptized again.

That Profession of Christian Faith, Veritas non quaerit angulos, Truth seeks
not to sculk and hide it self in corners; but such is Anabaptism: Ergo. The
major Proposition I make good, from those many Texts of Scripture, where its
affirmed, that Nations, yea many nations should flow unto the Church of the
Gospel (which is the ground and Pillar of truth, where truth is to be found) as
Esaias 2.2. It shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the
Lords House shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. And the like
sentence is in Micah 4.1. which was fore-spoken of the state and condition of
the Church under the New Testament. And for the minor Proposition, let them
make it appear, that ever any Nation did openly and publicly, without
restraint, make profession of Anabaptism, and they shall be quit from the
Conclusion. But this was never yet done, nor indeed can be done, Esaias 49.23.
Its foretold of the Church of the New Testament, that Kings should be nursing
Fathers and Queens should be nursing Mothers unto it: That is, that there
should be some supreme Civil Magistrates that should be propitious to it, and
Protectors of it: But this honor was never done to Anabaptists; there was
never King nor Queen nor Supreme Magistrate, that has protected their
Profession, nor the Professors thereof, under that notion; but have always
declared their dislike and distaste of them; which undeniably secludes them from
being that true Church of Christ there spoken of, (which yet is their
Pharisaical boast) and proclaims them to be a Set and Sect of Schismatics,
that have groundlesly made a scandalous and dangerous separation of themselves
from that true Church of Christ, whereof diverse Civil Magistrates have been for
many ages, and still are the constant and resolute Protectors and Defenders.

The Third Point.
Swasory and Considerable reasons to bend and sway with all Anabaptists to
repudiate and renounce the error of their way.

THE first reason that I shall tender to their due consideration, John 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another: And being also a Badge of truth, as St. John affirms, 1 John 3.19.
Thereby (says he, speaking of Love or Charity) we know that we are of the
truth. The contrary thereto, which is uncharitableness, must needs be the
Livery of such as are adversaries to Christ and his truth, and therefore to be
abhorred and abandoned.

Now that they are uncharitable, appears these two ways.

1. From their separation of themselves from all other Christian Congregations,
and refusing Churh-fellowship and society with them.

2. From their ostentation and boasting of themselves to be the only Church and
people of God upon earth, and censuring all others as unregenerate Persons, and
so out of Gods true Church; and thereupon term them the world, (as one that was
of their Profession and Association, but is now reclaimed, has certified and
assured me) Whereas Charity thinks not evil, but believes all things and
hops all things, 1 Cor. 13.5, and 7r Now by this uncharitable censure of
theirs, they condemn not only all the Reformed Churches of Christendom (amongst
which there be Millions of Saints) but all the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days
here in England, and all the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, that never were
dipped after their Infant Baptism, Baptism, and yet lived godlily, and suffered
gloriously, and died comfortably.

That the Martyrs in the Primitive Church lived and died with signal and
apparent evidences of extraordinary divine Graces, and supernatural comforts
imparted and infused into them, is witnessed (as by other Ecclesiastical
Historians) so, by that creditable Author, Eusebius, in his Ecclesiastical
History, Lib. 8. Cap. 12. toward the end: where he testifies of them, That
they so shined throughout the world in their afflictions, that the beholders
wondered at their patience and noble courage, and that (says he there) was not
without cause; for they expressed and showed forth unto the world special and
manifest signs of the divine and unspeakable power of our Savior Christ
working by them.

And for the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, Mr. Fox in his History of them,
records many speeches uttered by them, which were manifest evidences of Gods
divine Graces and Comforts in an extraordinary measure and manner conferred and
breathed upon them. And therefore to censure both these and all other Christian
Professors in the world besides themselves, to be without God in the world,
sets a shameful brand of Pharisaical pride and uncharitableness upon them: And
is enough to make both the ears of all that hear it to tingle, and their hearts
to boil with indignation against them, and diverse wise and godly persons
wonder, that they are not more strictly dealt withal and restrained; this and
some others of their gross hallucinations and errors, and presumptuous and
irregular extravagancies and Practices considered.

A second Reason that I shall offer to their consideration, is this, them, and
that in all ages, even next to the Apostles, as has been formerly declared.
This is contrary to the prescript Rules, Directions, and Sanctions of the holy
Scripture, as in Prove. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes. And Prove. 26.12.
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of
him. Esaias. 5.21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight. Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself: Which selfdenial in one point of it, consists in the denial of a man's
own reason and wisdom, Romans 12.6. Be not wise in your own conceit. Its not to
be questioned, but that the Christians of the Primitive Church, and the Learned
holy Fathers that succeeded them (who were main and strenuous Props and Pillars
of the true Christian Faith, in defense thereof against the Heresies of those
times) as also the modern, learned and illustrious Divines, the late Reformers
of Religion, Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Junius, Beza,
Zanchy, Chemnitius, with many such of other Nations; and those Renowned, Pious
and Learned Divines of our own Nation, that lived but a few years since; as
Cranmer, a Bishop and a Martyr, Jewel, Whittaker, Reighnolds, Andrews, Perkins,
Bishop Usher, Bishop Hall, Hooker, with thousands more, who were Divines of
singular and transcendent piety and Learning: It Is not to be questioned (I say)
but that these men did seriously and searchingly and thoroughly sift and examine
this Point of Infant Baptism, yet concluded for it, and owned it to the last
period of their lives without any scruple at all. And is it likely that a few
Illiterate Persons (I speak it comparatively, namely, in respect of those so
profoundly Learned before-named) should espy out such an error to be crept
into Gods Church, as they were never able to discover.

Oh be humbled now in your selves, all ye self-conceited and perverse
Anabaptists, and lay your hands upon your mouths, and deny your selves, if ye
will be Christ's Disciples, as ye would be accounted. And take unto you these or
the like words, and say (as the truth is) Alas! we are weak men, and far
inferior to those renowned Worthies and glorious Martyrs now mentioned, both
in Learning, Perspicacity, Judgment, True Zeal and Piety; and therefore we do
acquiesce and submit to the Judgment and Sentence of those Learned, Judicious
and illustrious holy Ones of God, so far excelling us in all divine Graces and
Virtues. And the rather to bend you hereunto, remember how St. Peter has set
this Presumption and self-conceitedness as a black Brand upon the Heretics of
these last times, in 2 Pet. 2.10. Where he speaks thus of them, That they are
presumptuous, and stand in their own conceit, and fear not to speak evil of
them that are in Authority: And therefore it stands you in hand to beware that
you wear not this Reproachful Livery.

A Third Reason may be this, Cor. 10.32. Give no offense neither to the Jews,
nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. And Romans 16.17. Now I beseech
you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which we have learned, and avoid them. Herein they proclaim themselves
to be such vain ostentators, as God complains of, Esaias 65.5. Who said, stand by
thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou; and yet they were a
smoke in Gods Nose, and a fire that burned all the day, as in the next words
God himself pronounces against them. Hereby also they declare themselves to be
such Mockers, as St. Jude foretold should appear in these last times, in the 18
and 19 v. of his Epistle; in that they thus separate themselves from other
godly Christians; for these be they (says he) that separate themselves. If
they shall say, that it is an offense taken, and not given: Its answered, that
its the unanimous sentence and judgment of all Learned and Orthodox Divines,
both ancient and modern, and amply justifiable by Scripture, that neither
corruption in manners in a particular Church, nor errors in matters of
Ceremony, Circumstance, or in the manner of Church Government are a sufficient
ground or warrant for any particular persons to desert it and make separation
from it; but it must be some error in the Fundamentals of Religion, that will
justify a separation from any particular Church. Now the Church of England is
not culpable or chargeable in the least measure, of error in any one
particular Tenet, that strikes at the Foundation of Christian Belief, as I
doubt not but they will ingeniously confess. And therefore their separation
from the Church of England, is an offense given by them, and not an offense
taken by us, who profess our selves Members of the said Church.

I wonder that the example of our blessed Savior is no more minded and
regarded by them; who never refused to join himself to the Congregations of the
People of the Jews, though they were guilty of more foul errors, and gross
abuses by many degrees, than the Church of England is. And its very apparent
from St. Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians and Galatians, that neither errors
which are not fundamental, nor corruption in Manners, will warrant a separation
from any Church; seeing he acknowledges and owneth both these, as the Churches
of God; albeit he taxes them both, both for palpable errors and foul
misdemeanors (as is evident in the said Epistles) and such as were more gross
and dangerous errors that any the Church of England holds.

A Fourth Reason shall be this; Because their Sect has hatched several Broods
of Fanatic, Vertiginous, and Brain-^ick persons, that are looked upon by
prudent persons, as Monsters among Christian Professors, as Quakers, Ranters,
Seekers and Adamites, the very scum and shame of Christians: For these were
never heard of, till they sprang up from among their Disciples, which their
resorting still together does evince and evidence. Whereas therefore such
prodigious and abominable Brats, or rather Monsters are hatched in their Nest,
its a shrewd sign that the Brood is naught.

A Fifth and last Reason that I shall propound to them to be weighed in the
balance of their discretion, examples in Histories is very evident. One of the
first of this Sect, that showed himself openly, was one Thomas Muntzer, who in
the year [1523] published his doting errors of this sort, at the City of
Alsted in Saxony; who stirring up the People to sedition also and insurrection,
whereby great tumults were raised, grievous outrages committed, and many
Thousands slain, and himself being a principal Agitator and actor amongst them,
was at last apprehended by the Land-grave and the Duke of Saxony, at
Frankenhusium; where he was sentenced to death by the said Princes, and had his
Head cut off and fastened to a Stake. This story of him and diverse others of
their Sect, is at large recorded by one Mr. Alexander Ross, a late Reverend
Divine, in the latter end of his Book entitled, (...) Or A View of all
Religious in the world. Some question is made, whether these Stories of the
Anabaptists, were penned by himself or not; but it matters not, seeing the
truth of them is avouched by diverse other Authors.

After this, or about the same time, one Balthazar Pacimontanus, (a Clergy man
of Ingolstade in Germany) declared himself to be of this Sect (he was confuted
and convinced both by Luther and Zuinglius) who persisting obstinately in his
errors, was at last burnt at Vienna, a famous City of Austria in the said
Germany; as Bellarmine reports in his first Book, de Sacrament. Baptism. Cap.
8. from the Testimony of Johannes Cochlaeus.

Afterward appeared John Becold of Leiden, with his Associates, at the City of
Munster in Holland; who for their prodigious Errors, Blasphemies and wicked
Practices, were openly condemned and put to death, about the year [1537] as the
History of them is written both by Sleidan and diverse others, and notoriously
known to be true.

Lastly, (to omit very many other Instances) arises up one Michael Servetus, a
Spaniard by birth; one that Mr. Calvin labored much with to reduce from his
error of Anabaptism, and some other Opinions that were blasphemous, but not
prevailing with him, to reclaim him, he was at length sentenced to death by the
Senate of Geneva, and there burnt, in the year [1553] as Chemnitius witnesses,
in locis communibus, Part 1. Cap. 2. de tribus Personis divinitatis.

Consider now therefore with your selves what comfort or encouragement ye can
have to be the Disciples and Followers of such Leaders; who never yet were
approved of in any Christian Nation; but were ever exploded, proceeded against
and spued out as scandalous and criminous Offenders? Yea and even here amongst
your selves, diverse of your eminent Leaders and Teachers have been notoriously
and deservedly famed to be of loose and scandalous Conversation (whereof ye
cannot be ignorant) which greatly blemisheth your Profession; because ye
pretend to more Holiness (yea and make your boast thereof) than ye will
acknowledge to be in others, who are not of your Faith and Persuasion. If these
Reasons will not prevail with you, do desert the error, yea, the dangerous
error of your way, I have no more to say to you, but shall tender my Prayers
for you (as St. Paul did for the Ephesians) To the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, that he may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him, the eyes of your understandings being
opened, that ye may know, what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches
of the Glory of his inheritance in the Saints.

FINIS.
Books sold by Nathanael Webb at the Kings Head, and William Grantham, at the
black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MAster Isaac Ambrose, prima, media, and ultima, [First, Middle and Last
things] in three Treatises, in 4.

-- Looking to Jesus; a View of the everlasting Gospel, in 4.

-- Redeeming the time: a Sermon in 4.

Mr. Richard Tines on the Sacrament in 4.

Mr. Nathanael Hardy, several Sermons, preached upon solemn occasions,
collected into one Volume, in 4.

-- [The first Epist. General of St. John] unfolded and applied, in 22 Sermons,
in 4.

[History surveyed in a brief Epitome: or a Nursery for Gentry] comprised in an
intermixed discourse upon Historical and Poetical Relations in 4.

Mr. William Nicolson's Exposition of the Church Catechism, in 4.

Dr. Stoughton's 13 Sermons, being an introduction to the Body of Divinity, in
4.

Dr. John Preston [A Position delivered in Cambridge concerning the
irresistableness of converting Grace, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Cradock [Gospel Liberty] in the Extention and Limitation of it, in
4.

Mr. John Browning [concerning public Prayer, and the Fasts of the Church, in
4.

Mr. Rich. Lewthwat [Vindiciae Christi and obex errori Arminiano] A plea for
Christ, in 4.

Mr. John Lawsons's [Gleanings and Expositions of some of the more difficu^^
places of holy Scripture] in 4.

Mr. John Cotton [The way of the Churches of Christ in N. England] in 4.

Mr. Edward Thorp [the New Birth, or Birth from above] in 4.

Mr. John Ley's Discourse of Disputation^ in matters of Religion

[The Beacon flaming, with a non obsta(...) agninst those that plead for
liberty of Printing and publishing Popish Books] in 4.

Mr. Nathanael Stephens [A precept for the Baptism of Infants, out of the N.T.]
in 4.

Dr. Sam Annesly [the first Dish at the Wiltshire Feast] a Sermon preached
before many worthy Citizens of London born in that County, in 4.

[Communion with God] in two Semons preached at Paul's, in 4.

Mr. Edmund Calamy [The Monster of sinful self-seeking anatomized] preached at
Paul's.

Mr. John Warren [The Potent Potter] Sermon preached before the Parl. in 4.

-- [The unprofitable Servant [A Semon preached at an Assize, in 4.

-- Man's Fury subservient to Gods glory preached to the Parliament.

Dr. Robert Gell, Of Gods Government o^ the world by Angels, preached before the
Astrologers, in 4.

-- Noah's Flood returning, A Sermon.

Dr. John Wincop [Gods Call to weepin^ and mourning] preached before the P. in
4.

Mr. George Walker, A Sermon preached before the parliament, in 4.

Rich. Meggot [The Rib restored] or the honor of Marriage, a Wedding Sermon.

Mr. Will. Good [Jacob raised] a Sermon preached before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Goodwin [The great Interest of States and Kingdoms] a Sermon
preached before the Parl. in 4.

Mr. Sam. Kem, A Sermon preached upon the choice of Burgesses for the City of
Bristol, in 4.

Mr. Ambr. Stavely [Index Expurgatorius, A short Examination of the Doctrine of
Purgatory] a Sermon in 4.

Mr. Peter Sterry [the Clouds in which Christ comes] a Sermon preached before
the Parl. in 4.

-- [The teachings of Christ in the Soul] a Sermon preached before the Parl. in
4.

Mr. Robert Wild, the arraignment of a Sinner at the Bar of Divine Justice; An
Assize Sermon.

Mr. Giles Firmin, Stablishing against Shaking, or a discovery of the Prince of
darkness (Scarcely) transformed into an Angel of light, powerfully now working
in the deluded people called Quakers, in 4.

-- Mr. Stephen Marshal, The power of the civil Magistrate in matters of
Religion.

Mr. George Swinock, The Gods are men, An assize Sermon.

Mr. Ben. Needler [expository notes, with Practical Observations upon Genesis]
in 8.

Mr. Giles Firmin, Of Schism, against Dr. Owen.

Mr. Votier, Of Effectual Calling.

Mr. George Hopkins [Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ] or the Doctrine of
Sanctification, in 8.

Mr. John Trap, Theologia Theologiae A Treasury of holy truths, touching Go^^
Word, and God the Word, in 8.

BP. Davenant [An exhortation to Brotherly communion betwixt the Protestant
Churches] in 8.

Mr. John Simson, [The Perfection (...) Justification, etc.] in 8.

Mr. Hall, [The Loathsomness of long Hair] also against Painting, Spots, and
Naked Breasts, in 8.

-- [ Vindiciae Literarum, the Schools guarded] or the excellency and
usefulness of Humane Learning in subordination to Divinity, in 8.

Mr. John Warren [Principles of Christian practise] illustrated, with Questions
and Scripture Answers, in 8.

Mr. Daniel Evans [a Catechism about Infants Baptism, in 8.

[The Practice of Christianity] or the Epitome of Mr. Rogers seven treatises,
in 12

Mr Thomas Jackson [the true evangelical temper, etc.] in 12.

Mr. Tho. Gery, the Fort Royal of Christianity defended, to prove the
Scriptures to be the Word of God.

Mr. Mullard [celestial Soliloquies] several Divine Meditations and Prayers
drawn from the holy Scriptures, in 12.


