A PLAIN DISCOVERY HOW THE Enemy and Popish Faction in the North upholds their
Interest now under the Power and Authority of the Parliament and Army, Set
forth in a Letter from a Northren SOVLDIER.

Published by John Musgrave, an eminent sufferer under the Earl of Strafford,
the Prelates, the Common Enemy, and the Commissioners of Array in CVMBERLAND.

Pulcrum est pro patria mori.

June 21Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the READER.
NOt longer since then yesterday, being in company with Colonel Briggs,
discoursing of the affairs and state of our Country, he much complained of the
Malignancie and aversness of the Committees, and Justices of Cumberland and
Westmerland, and how, besides himself, there was not a Justice of Peace in
Westmerland, but such as acted for, and carried on the enemies designs, the new
Justices there assigned, refusing to take the Oath of a Justice of Peace, and
that some of the Committee of Cumberland, who joined with, and largely
contributed to the enemy in the last war, are the leading and powerful men in
that Committee, and how Mr. Howard of Naworth raised a troop, and acted for
Hambleton, yet by the connivance of that Committee he still keeps up that
troop, which doings of the Committees there, and their indulgence of
Delinquents, and Malignants, made the Colonel, as he said, weary and
disheartened longer to continue in those quarters, all which corresponding with
the following letter from my Northen friend, and now a soldier there, not
knowing otherwise how to communicate the same to the Parliament and Council of
State for the reasons in my Answer to that letter, I have made bold to commit
the same to the Press, not doubting a favorable acceptance thereof, having no
other end or aim, then the good and peace of my Country, under the present
Authothorities, for which, and their prosperity, I shall ever pray, and do
remain,

London, 16th. 6th. Month called June, 1649. Thy friend as thou loves this
Commonwealth, Jo. Musgrave.

Anccient Friend,
MEeting with strange Occurrances in the Journal, called The Perfect
Occurrences, in a Letter from the North, I being that Country man, and well
knowing the matter whereon that Letter treats, have taken upon me to write
something unto you in behalf of that great service done upon our borders, and
in vindication of Capt. Crakenthorpe, who is aimed at for to be aspersed for
not receiving Arthur Foster for Leiutenant; In the Letter there is a high
public spirit put upon Mr. Howard of Naworth, who, as is said, spared no
pains for his Countries service, the way is meant by his Troop, in
suppressing Moss-Troopers; the end why he is so set forth, is that some way may
be found out to put some Horse under his Command. I see if the public spirits
prevail, we will all turn public spirited, Latet anguis in herba; it is true
that Mr. Howard has had a troop of horse all this last Winter under his
Command, which was thus set on foot: Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and the Scots Army
being in the North the last year, most of the Gentry joined with them, amongst
whom Mr. Howard was not backward, for in Gilsland he called three Musters, viz.
On Thursday the 10th. of August, Monday the 14th. and Wednesday the 16th. of
August, 1648. the day before Preston battle, so raised one troop for the
Prince his service, whom he gave out was to meet at Barwick, but having news
that they had lost the battle at Preston, Mr. Howard being at a loss himself,
thought it best to convert his troop to the taking of border thieves, called
Moss Troopers, and though he did little service, yet found he it a good gloss
for his actions, and it took so well, that when we returned, and God had
subdued the Enemy, he got the favor as to continue his troop, and having past
well thus far, he looks a little further to make Arthur Foster, who should have
been his Lieutenant, Lieutenant to Capt. Crakenthrope, and so make two troops;
but the Captain soon perceiving the mystery, was unwilling to entertain Foster
for Lieutenant, giving these reasons, for that the said Foster was a Capt. for
the King in the first war against the Parliament: secondly, that he was in arms
in the Garrison of Carlisle, in the second war against the Parliament, thirdly,
that the said Foster had never served the Parliament: fourthly, that he had
been arraigned for murder, but it being pretended, that he was a fit man for to
serve against Moss Troopers, he answered, that Foster lived amongst that pack,
and who so knows that place, knows that none living there durst oppose the Moss
Troopers, that was any way notable, and that he was Sir Rich. Grahams man and
must do neither more nor less then he will have him; now you know all the Moss
Troopers, are either Sir Rich. Grahams, Sir Edward Musgraves, or Mr. Howards
Tenants, and our Northern and Scots Lords jump in one policy to make to
themselves great revenews of barren grounds, the Moss Troopers pay to Sir
Richard Graham one thousend pound per annum, and above, and to Mr Howard no
less, and to Sir Edward Musgrave a good revenew: now the Inhabitants of barren
grounds to pay such rents, what they cannot by their labors, they make up by
Moss trooping; under this consideration it has been anciently thought fit,
that the Landlords in those parts should make good the Tenants theft to the
owner and certainly if this were put in practice, we should nothear much of
Moss troopers; for thus it is carried, a young thief being entered to a
tenement, for which he is to pay fine, may steal without control but his theft
is Registered by his Landlord, and if he fall under his displeasure, he is
apprehended, and hanged at his Lords will, or if he has been a thief in his
youth, and grown rich by his craft, though for twenty years he stole not then
will his Landlord pick a quarrel at him, and for old done deeds hang him, and
take his lands and goods; to take such manner of thieves was Arthur Foster
employed, but not to meddle further, without his Lords Order: one of Capt.
Crakanthorpes troop being upon that service with Mr. Howard, asked him what
they were going to do, Mr. Howard answered, to take Moss troopers, well said
the trooper, there is one of the greatest now riding by you (which was Sandy
Kinman) upon which Mr. Howard called Kinman, and told him what the trooper
said, who answered, away Sir, away, misken him: In that its said Capt.
Crakanthrops troop marched unto Scotland, where he had, etc. this is altogeter
false, or that they took any Moss troopers by way of defeat, I love no vain
boasting, I am of that troop, neither did ever Foster take any but a few poor
sneakes out of their own houses, such as I tell you have fallen under their
Landlords displeasure, one of which told Foster it was not long since he rid
himself, and when the soldiers would have taken Arms as they found them in the
houses of the Moss troopers and their friends, Foster would not suffer them;
but Captain Crakanthrops has displaced Foster, and so that service so well
begun will fall. Truly Sir that Capt. is in the eye of a company of Delinquents,
and Semy-Parliamentiers, who pretend for the Parliament and Country, but
intend the ruin of both, had they but such as Mr. Howard, or other of their
creatures in places and power, and the Captain outed, all were their own; that
Captain has suffered more for the Parliament then any there, and stood closer
to the Country then they all, he was imprisoned near three whole years, had
his prison changed ten several times, laid in irons, coupled with now some of
his troopers for the Parliament, and the more to torment him, put amongst
whores, and murderers of their own children; he and other fourteen imprisoned
within the compass of fourteen foot long, and nine broad, and with his own
hands he was forced to cast out his own excrements for many days together, yet
was not these, nor many more cruelties able to alter the said Captains
affection to the Parliament: but while thus in prison, he weekly gave
Intelligence to the State of Scotland, of the enemies doings which cost him no
small moneys to obtain, devised a secret Character, which he directed you then
to read and write, by which were imparted (as you know) matters of high
concernment for the good of both States; they asperse him that he is no
soldier, because forsooth thus kept in the first war, which is so false, that
all that well know him know the contrary, he was a Captain before these wars
began; and though not in the first, yet in the second war ferved, where he
behaved himself so, that his adversaries, amongst whom he marched could never
lay any aspersion upon him, but on the contrary have in that way highly
commended him, he never showing the least fear or disorder, but did so order
his troop, that by his means and council, God made him instrumental to save
the rest, as at several places I could name, and for his deportment in the
Country, set aside some of the Committee that are Malignants, and have acted
in the Commission of Array, there is not a man has that impudency as to speak
evil of him at this day; for the ease of the Country he has devised a way to
take off freequarter for his troop, borrowing of the Committee so much money as
does only give the soldier 18. pence a day, which he is engaged to repay to a
penny what he has borrowed out of his pay, when he shall receive the same from
the Parliament, and does at present quarter his Troop, the Horse altogether,
over which he sets a guard, and the men within a mile or two of their horse;
that upon any occasion, are able within two hours, to march upon any Order, the
ground partly his own, and others taken for that purpose by him; and does with
the money borrowed, maintain twenty poor Families, not able to subsist of
themselves. Truly that Captain does endevor himself, and makes it his study, to
do good to all, nourishing the Lords people, having a Congregation of godly men
in his Troop; such as fear the Lord, will not suffer them to do violence to
ary, but makes them content with their wages, nay, without wages; yet
notwithstanding all this, and that none is able to lay any thing to his charge:
And though the Lord General at the instance of that honorable person, the
Lieutenant General, gave him a Commission to be in the establishment of the
Army, yet by the malignancy of some of the Committee, as Sir Wilfrid Lawson,
who has acted in the Commission of Array, entered into association against the
Parliament, sworn the oath to the Earl of Newcastle, raised forces for the
King, all which, and much more as fully be proved against him; by whose means,
the said Captain is sought to be reduced, and an order obtained to refer it to
him, and some other of his stamp to make choice of another; but I fear not, but
my Lord General, the Lieutenant General, and the honorable Sir Arthur Haslerig,
will prevent the designs of these men, and not suffer a poor Country to be
spoiled by such as are strangers; for its not to be thought that that Country
having but one man that has any estate there, who has served so faithfully,
as the said Captain, that he shall be reduced without any charge, and such as
are rather Soldiers of Fortune, and strangers, have command. Its fit, I say,
for the Moss Troopers service, which for want of Foster, its said will fall.
The said Captain has a Lieutenant, one Lieutenant Dowson, who was known to be
a man of such parts, and so well experienced in that way, that all that know
that Country know, that there is not a fitter Soldier in all England for that
service; a man of much approved gallantry, and more worth then ten Fosters. And
I dare say, if the Captain had but order to subdue that pack of thieves, that
it would soon be done; which service, he is so far from letting fall, as that
he intends to make suit, that he may do service against the Moss-Troopers.

Thus loving friend, you see, as was our sufferings of old, by the enemies of
God, and the Country; even so it is at this day, only a new way, and a new
device set on foot to ruin good men; for all the good, and faithful men in
these parts, are struck at in Captain Crakenthorp; but the Lord that has
carried us out in many troubles, will not leave us now; into whose hands we
render up our selves, and rest upon him.

Your ancient, and loving Friend, T. G.
Catterlen. 7. of June. WE think it fit that 205 l. be collected through this
County in general, for one month; which the High Constables are to pay over to
Captain Crakenthorp, he having engaged to repay the same to us for the County,
upon the receipt of the said money.

Given under our hands at Penrith, this 25. of May. 1649. John Barwis, Vic.
Com. Wilfrid Lawson. Thomas Chomley. Miles Hatton.




SIR,
SInce I received this Letter, Captain Crakenthorp has been here at London,
and made the difference between him, and Major Sk^if, known to the General, and
Lieutenant General, who both of them were so free from partiality, or wronging
the Gentleman, as upon right understanding the case, his Excellency writ
presently to Sir Arthur Haslerig, not to suffer any further proceedings against
the Captain, in prejudice to his Commission. I doubt not, but Sir Arthur
Haslerig will for the future, so provide for the protection, and indemnity of
honest men, as not upon the underhand Information, or other false suggestion of
their adversaries, though Committee Men, displace, or discountenance friends:
As for the Lieutenant General, though a stranger to us, he has done more for
us, then all that sit in Parliament, for our poor Country; not long since, he
sent 100 l. to the poor of Westmerland, by the hand of Captain Crakanthorp, and
has been ready to give us his assistance for freeing us of the pressures we
still lie under, for not coming to the Common Prayer Book, upon the penalties
of the Statute made 35. Eliz. yet unrepealed; while the Lord Howard, (Mr.
Howards father in law, having lately married his daughter to him) Burgess of
Carlisle, and others, as have the honor to sit in Parliament for Cumberland, are
regardless of our sufferings; and to this day, never procured relief, or
reparation for any of us that suffered there, under the enemy, for the
Parliaments Cause; so as unless the Lieutenant General, the Speaker, or some
other gallant man of the House, Commisserate our sufferings, and present our
condition to the Parliament, I am without hopes, ever to get access unto
Justice, either for my self, or my suffering-friends; for whom, I have here
attended at the Parliament door, more then two years; yet be not discouraged,
nor cast down. I hope, though our own Countrymen neglect us, strangers will
pity us.

Farewell, John Musgrave.
London, 15. sixth month, called June. 1649.
FINIS.
portrait of Charles I


