General MONCKS RESOLVTION To make good His DECLARATION With the loss of his
Blood. In a Letter from New Castle November twenty nine, 1659. To a Worthy
Person in London.
SIR.
YOur last I received with safety, and according to your desire have sent you a
true Account of the most material intelligence touching the present
transactions in these Northern parts, viz. The General Assembly do still
continue, and have three considerable Castles granted them by General Monck, to
be at their disposing as an assurance of his fidelity toward them. And for
ought I can perceive, there is very little or no hopes of Agreement, because
General Monck has set down his Resolution to make good his former Declaration
with the loss of his Blood; for he will not agree to any thing against what is
therein expressed. And as we hear General Monck is much offended at the Lord
Lambert, who has intercepred his Letters to General Fleetwood and opened them,
and Letters to his own Commissioners.

Yesterday came an express from him, and the Messenger accidentally having got
a fall, could go no further then this place, That the Lord Lambert opened the
Letters, and sent them by a Messenger of his own to the City of London. General
Monck writes to General Fleetwood, that he perceived his Commissioners had
agreed to some things contrary to his Order and Declaration, the which
Agreement he would not own; and he therein desired that 5 Commissioners might
be sent to this Town, and that he would add two more to his three to Treat with
those five Commissioners about an Agreement; But it much displeased the Lord
Lambert, so that he was fully resolved to march against him with as much
expedition as possible he could, but this day calling a Council of the Officers
of his Army, has a little stayed his March. We are much oppressed in these
parts with the continuance of the Arm here, The Lord support us, and carry on
all for his Glory, for the Good of the Church and People. General Monck is a
Resolved General. The Lord stand by them that stand by his Truth and Gospel.
One of the Letters sent by General Monck to the Lord Fleetwood was as
follows, viz. My Lord, I have received a Letter from your Lordship, and by
the same Packet an Agreement, signed by your Lordships hand, together with an
intimation, that the same was signed by those Gentlemen that were appointed by
the General council of Officers here, to treat with your Lordship. I am
exceedingly rejoiced to find in your Lordship, and the Officers with you, a
spirit so complying, and so tender of the Public peace, and shall upon
intimation had from my Lord Lambert, of what method he uses, in drawing off
the Forces which he has drawn toward us, observe the same here; but because I
am desirous that this Agreement of yours may be full and firm, and because I
perceive that there are some things remain here untreated of, and unagreed
upon, it is the resolution of my self and Officers here, to add two more to
their number, that they may confer with the like number of such as shall be
appointed by your Lordship, for the putting a final end to this unhappy
business; only desiring, that it may be as soon as possible; and if your
Lordship would permit it to be at Newcastle, it would very much expedite the
business, of which I suppose your Lordship can be no less desirous than I am,
because you cannot but be sensible, that the whole three Nations are in
expectation of this issue; till which, all public business must needs be at a
stand, unless it be that of the public enemy, who cannot but apprehend his own
advantages, and will very boldly let them slip. My Lord, As in this time of our
greatest misunderstandings and misapprehensions, there is nothing of personal
relation to your self, or any Officer with You; so it will be very easy to
return to that mutual confidence and Friendship, which on my part was never
lost; and I can as really and heartily as ever, subsribe myself,

Your most humle and faithful servant GEORGE MONCK.

LONDON. Printed for John Johnson, 1659.


