A WARNING FROM THE LORD TO THE Town of Cambridge.
September: 20 1655
TRemble, tremble, tremble, all sorts of people, who in profaneness lives: A
day of howling and bitter lamentation is coming upon you; your wicked
practices are in remembrance, before the living God of life and power brought,
who is dreadful and terrible to the workers of iniquity, and the day hastens,
wherein thou an account must give for all your filthy practices, and rewarded
thou must be according to thy deeds: Thou Cambridge, who with Corazin art
exalted above all other, because of thy humane wisdom; but down the dreadful
God of Heaven and Earth will bring thee, all thy Sorcerie will not save thee in
the day of the Lords fierce wrath, which is coming upon thee; all thy
profession will not cover thee, who art an enemy to the life of what thou in
words professest; now all thy coverings will not hide thee in this the day of
the Lord, who will reward thee according to thy actions; and thy stolen
expressions, which thou have stolen out of the Saints conditions, will not avail
thee in the day of thy calamity, for out of the Saints, life thou art found,
who gives thy meanings to the Saints conditions, and so wrest their words, to
make them suitable to thy carnal ends; but this Cloak is also too narrow, it
will not hide thee, for found thou art, covered with a covering, but not with
the Spirit of the Lord; therefore upon thee woe and misery is coming, for now
is the Angels of the Lords presence ready to execute judgment upon thee for thy
pride and haughtiness, and all thy filthy abominations, an account thou must
give; the dreadful day of the Lord draws nigh, and in this terrible day, all
thy natural Languages, and thy Logic, as Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which thou
calls the Original Language, will not save thee from the judgment that is to
come upon thee for the fierce Wrath of the living God is kindled against thee,
the Vialls are set open, and are ready to be powered down upon thee, who art
found filling up the measure of thy Fathers iniquity, the cry of the i^nocent,
is heard against thee, whom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth sent to forewarn
thee of the evil which is to come upon thee, whom thou whipped and persecuted,
for calling people to repentance, and exhorting them to fear the Lord, and the
Lord has since sent diver of his faithful Servants to forewarn you of this
wrath which is to come upon you, and yet you have shut your ears against them,
and have them persecuted and imprisoned, and grossly abused, and so has added
to your transgression, which will add to your Torment; you have drunk deep
draughts of the whores Cup, you are full of filthiness and abominations; and you
must now taste of the Wrath which is due unto you, you cannot fly from it, nor
escape it; and the Witness for God in you (which is the Light of Jesus Christ)
will testify against you, when the Plagues and Judgments of God, is powered
forth upon you, that his Judgments are just; therefore now take Warning, and
prize your time while you have it, and slight not this your day of visitation,
you Inhabitants of this Town of Cambridge, for the Lord will not always strive
with you, sit down in the dust, and repent, and with speed forsake the evil of
your doings, lest the Door of Mercy be for ever shut against you: Remember your
Father Esau, ho lived in profaneness, who would have repented, but he slipped
his time and there was no place of repentance for him found, art, covered with
a covering, but not with the Spirit of the Lord; therefore upon thee woe and
misery is coming, for now is the Angels of the Lords presence ready to execute
judgment upon thee for thy pride and haughtiness, and all thy filthy
abominations, an account thou must give; the dreadful day of the Lord draws
nigh, and in this terrible day, all thy natural Languages, and thy Logic, as
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which thou calls the Original Language, will not
save thee from the judgment that is to come upon thee for the fierce Wrath of
the living God is kindled against thee, the Vialls are set open, and are ready
to be powered down upon thee, who art found filling up the measure of thy
Fathers iniquity, the cry of the innocent, is heard against thee, whom the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth sent to forewarn thee of the evil which is to come upon
thee, whom thou whipped and persecuted, for calling people to repentance, and
exhorting them to fear the Lord, and the Lord has since sent diver of his
faithful Servants to forewarn you of this wrath which is to come upon you, and
yet you have shut your ears against them, and have them persecuted and
imprisoned, and grossly abused, and so has added to your transgression, which
will add to your Torment; you have drunk deep draughts of the whores Cup, you
are full of filthiness and abominations; and you must now taste of the Wrath
which is due unto you, you cannot fly from it, nor escape it; and the Witness
for God in you (which is the Light of Jesus Christ) will testify against you,
when the Plagues and Judgments of God, is powered forth upon you, that his
Judgments are just; therefore now take Warning, and prize your time while you
have it, and slight not this your day of visitation, you Inhabitants of this
Town of Cambridge, for the Lord will not always strive with you, sit down in
the dust, and repent, and with speed forsake the evil of your doings, lest the
Door of Mercy be for ever shut against you: Remember your Father Esau, ho lived
in profaneness, who would have repented, but he slipped his time and there was
no place of repentance for him found, And Judas who betrayed the innocent;
remember who received a just recompense of reward according to his Works, and
do not you think to escape the just judgments of God, who are found acting the
same things, for be assured it will come heavy upon you, for the Lord is
righteous, and with equity judges, and he will reward you for your
unrighteousness; yea Vengeance in Flames of Fire shall be revealed upon the
ungodly, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and his words shall not go forth
in vain. Therefore howl you proud, stiff-necked, rebellious ones, who wastes
and devours the creatures of God upon your lusts, now an Account you must give
to the Creator, who hears the cry of the oppressed, which lies groaning
under the bondage of Corruption; and the Lord will no longer wink at the
Oppressor, for he is now coming to cut down the oppressor, and set his
Creatures free, which has been kept long in Bondage by you who live in lust
and pleasures, fullness; and gluttonness; yea, the Sword of the Lord God is
drawn against you, you Belly-Gods, who feeds your selves withouthe fear of God;
for the slaughter ye are; the edge of the sword you cannot escape, you bloody
persecutors, haters and enviers of the righteous seed; against you the edge of
the sword is turned, and you cannot escape; for the Lord will cut you down; the
Lord sees your plotting, and secret actings against his dear servants and
children, you deceitful Priests, and corrupt Magistrates, who combine together
to murder the innocent, so far as your Power extends; but praised be our Lord
God for ever, who has your Power limited, so that you cannot go beyond your
bounds; your snares the Lord will break in pieces, which you make to catch the
innocent; and the Pits you dig for others you into them must fall; no weapons
which you form against the harmless shall prosper, the Lord has spoken it, who
is our Deliverer, who will be your Destroyer; yea, your day of Destruction draws
nigh; and the God of the world whom you pray unto, which so long has blinded
your eyes, shall not be able to deliver you in this day of the Lords fierce
wrath, who will plead with you by fire, and by his sword, which are already
kindled, and drawn against you; and the enemies of the Lord and his servants,
shall be consumed and utterly destroyed fore ever: for the Beast and the false
Prophet, which now bend their forces together to make war with the Lamb, shall
be taken, and into the Lake must be cast, that burns with fire and brimstone,
and the Lamb shall have victory over you, you bloody persecutors. And you
Scholars, who come hither to learn natural languages, who spend and wast your
time in idleness and prophanenefs, many of you living in pleasures and
wantonness; sporting your selves in the daytime: Consider what you are doing,
does not the Lord see and know these things? And will not he visit you for your
vanities and fooleries? Do you think to escape the just judgmenns of God? Nay,
your Logic and your vain Philosophy will not cover you; the Lord will find you
out, and you shall not escape unpunished; you according to you actions shall be
rewarded: Therefore to you (I say) repent, lest the Evil Day come upon you at
unawares, and there be none to deliver you.

And you that keep Taverns and Alehouses, who keeps Cards Dice and Shovel
boords in your Houses for to satisfy the lusts of vain minds, which delights
in gaming and foolerie, and fills wine and strong drink to men till they be
inflamed, and so are the Upholders of that filthy Thing Drunkenness, which is
one of the horrible, filthiest sins in the Nation.

Therefore, to You, (I say,) repent, and suffer such things no more to be used
in your Houses, (as is before mentioned,) least you partaking of their sins,
be made partakers of their Judgments and Plagues, which ts nearer you, then
yet you are aware of; for, Your cannot escape the Edge of the Sword, being
found TREES which cumbers the ground.

And You TRADESMEN, of what sort soever, who uses Lying and Dissembling for
Gain, and are in the many Words, out of the Doctrine of CRIST, who ^aith, Let
your, Yea, be Yea, and your Nay be Nay in all things; for whatsoever comes
of more is Evil: What will your cheating and cozening avail You? Consider,
though you may through deceitful waits and measures, and your crafty enluring
speeches, heap up much of the worldS treasure, what will it all profit you, in
the day wherein you must give an account for all your dishonest gain? then the
same Measure you meet withal, the same to you shall be measured again: To you
I say repent, and forsake the evil of your ways, and provoke the Lord no
longer, for the Lord God of Life and power sees and knows these things, and his
judgments are night you, and his fury and indignation you cannot escape:
therefore now I warn you in the name and fear of the Lord; Trades men, give
over deceit and cozening, and deal plainly and honestly with your Brethren in
your buying and selling, and give just weight and measure, and let your yea, be
yea, and your nay, be nay, and use not so many vain words in your bargaining,
for to the Lord an account you must give, for every idle word; therefore now
yon are warned, take heed of adding to your condemnation, for this is the free
love of God to your souls to give you warning, therefore prize it now while
your have time, lest swift destruction come upon you, for now has the Lord
left you without excuse, you cannot plead ignorance, and the Light in your own
Consciences (which is the Light of Jesus Christ, wherewith he has enlightened
you) shall bear true testimony against you, and witness for the Lord, that his
judgments are just, when they come to be executed upon you. And you
Magistrates who are sword-bearers, see that you bear the sword no more in vain,
but let the edge of the sword be turned against the seed of evil doers, that by
it all manner of Sin and wickedness may be cut down, and the RIGHTEOUS SEED
preserved, that the TOWN may be set free from evil doers, that RIGHTEOUSNESS
may run down your Streets, etc.

But first, sin and wickedness see in your own selves, cut down by the sword of
the Lord (which is his righteous judgments) that the righteous seed in you may
be raised up to rule and reign; that true judgment and justice may be executed
by you, for he that rules over men must be just, for he is righteous that
judges, and according to your judgment so shall you be judged. And to the
Vice Chancellor (so called) and to you who are the chief in Colleges (as you
call them) who study, and teach others natural Languages (as Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin) and the Arts of Lodgick and Philosophy, which is all for the fire, for
the knowledge of these things puffs up your minds, and keeps you from the true
knowledge of the living God, who can be known no other way but through his Son,
for none shall ever know God by studying old Authors, and learning natural
Languages (as Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which you call the Original) for
natural men cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God, God is a Mystery
sealed to that nature, which studieth these things before mentioned, for proud,
high-minded, selfewilled men, study and teach these Languages, but the secrets
of God are kept from such; God to his Son reveals himself, who is meek and
lowly, and those who knows God, keeps his commands, and knows him by the
revelation of his Son; and we, whom the Lord has made himself known unto,
through his Son, deny, and bear witness against all such as comes not in by the
door, but climbs up another way in their own humane inventions; therefore to
you, I say, cease from your own imaginations, studies, and natural Languages;
for all your Heathenish Authors, which your Liberaries and studies are so
furnished withal, are for the Fire, read A^ts 19.19, many who used curious
Arts (as you do) brought their Books, and burned them, when they came to own
the everlasting truth, which by the Apostles was preached; and as you come to
own the truth (which by the despised and persecuted ones is preached) your
books then will be of little value, which is now by you so highly prized, when
your minds comes to be turned out of your vain imaginations, to the Light of
Jesus Christ in you, which Jesus Christ has lightened you with, you need not to
study in old authors to know what meanings they gave, with their heathenish
inventions upon the Saints conditions, who spoke forth the Scriptures, as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost; nay, their meanings and their imaginations upon
them are accursed, and your meanings which you give upon the Scriptures, and
your imaginations upon them are accursed; for the Scripture which was spoke
from the life of the Saints, are of no private interpretations, and til you
come to own the Light of Jesus Christ, which he has enlightened you with, and
live in it, and receive it to be your Teachers, and even as it teach you to
abide in it, that with it you may be led into the holy life, which life gave
forth the Scripture; you cannot know the mystery of the Scripture, for it is
sealed to all the Worlds Wisdom, and one of the seven Seals you cannot open,
with which the Book of life is sealed, with all your rotten stuff, nay you are
not found worthy, your Lodgick and Phylosophie, and all your natural reason,
and natural Languages, is shut out of the Life of the Scriptures, you have the
letter which is the outside, the husk, and with that you feed people,
therefore they profit nothing by you; for both you who are Teachers, and take
upon you to teach others, you and they who are taught by you, are with the
Prodigal feeding among Swine upon the husk, and your souls are starved for want
of living food, for the Bread of Life you are strangers to, which if you once
come to taste on, you will then Witness with me, that upon the husk you have been
feeding; but this is childrens food, this is not to be cast unto Dogs; you who
are full of envy and bitterness, and feeds upon the Tree of Knowledge, you
cannot feed with children who hungers and thirsts continually after living
food; nay it is the hungry that the Lord feeds with good things; you who are
full and rich shall empty be sent away, your are they which are to be fed with
judgment; and judgment you shall find before Mercy; therefore to you I say
repent in dust and ashes, lest the door of Mercy for ever be shut against you
Vice Chancellor, and you who are chief in Colleges, and Chief Priests, who
above measure are exalted; you have builded your Nests on high, but the Lord
God of life and power will you pull down, though your building be as high as
Babel, yet the Lord will bring you down; he that can receive it let him: This to
you is a warning from the Lord,

Cambridge 14. day of the 5. month. 1655. By one of his Servants who is
despised of the world, known by the name of John Harrwood.

FJNJS.

