A GLASS FOR Weak eyed Citizens:

OR A Vindication of the Pious, Prudent and Peaceable PETITION (To the
Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Counsel assembled) now
in agitation, From the false Aspersions and Calumniations of a Seditious
Pamphlet, Entitled, A Dialogue, etc.

By one that has taken, and desires to keep his Covenant.

Very useful for all that have Subscribed the Petition.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for Tho: Underhil, at the Bible in Woodstreet. June 19. 1646.

READER,
IS not the very reading of this Petition more then sufficient to vindicate it
from the Aspersions and Calnmniations of this Pamphleter I have to deal with? I
prithee tell me, I am in earnest, Is it not a fair, sober, moderate, plain, and
peaceable Petition? Can envy it self quarrel with it? Can malice pick any thing
that is ill out of it? If not, let this man bear his own doom, I think in my
conscience some men will find fault with any thing. But let us hear what the
man says of it in his useless Dialogue, it is a very dangerous Petition, and
there is more mischief couched in it then you are aware of: A dangerous
Petition, Reader, peruse it again, it is worth thy reading twice over: In the
Preface it commends the Honorable Court of Common Counsel for promoting the
cause of God, gives them hearty thanks for what they have done for the Public
good, promising to adhere to them in all their just and legal proceedings, mark
that, Reader, this is according to our Covenant, thanking them for endeavoring
to remove the heavy pressing grievances that lie upon us, in that free and
necessary, yet humble and dutiful Remonstrance: There is no danger in all this,
unless the man thinks it is dangerous to keep our Covenant, and all the danger
is if we break our Covenant. Let Us hear what the Petitionary part is, sure the
dangerousnesse of it lies there, and the mischief is couched in that part; sure
they Petition for persecution of the Saints, and for rigid and harsh usage of
peaceable well minded men; not so, or else to desert the Parliament, and make a
breach between them and the City, which God forbid: Not so neither. What is it
then, where is the danger? Thus, they pray that Honorable Court to persevere
and go on; what, in any rude and propostrous or violent courses? No, but in all
pious and prudent means, to setle Religion, the Peace of the Kingdom, the Union
of both Nations; In a word, the keeping of the Covenant, in which we are
engaged unto God, the Righteous judge of all the world. All this is in the
Letter of our Covenant, and pray them still to go on in their humble Addresses
to the Parliament for a gracious Answer to their Remonstrance, and for all
other things that may put a happy period to our miserable Distractions; and
that themselves would put in Execution what the Laws of the Kingdom enabled
them to do for the safety of the City. Where the danger and mischief is, I
profess Reader, I cannot tell: But lets hear what the man can say against this
harmless Petition, and against the Subscribers of it: He confesses, though
honest and understanding men Subscribe it, and that with mature deliberation,
yet he cannot, because he lacks reason to rule him in this action; and he is so
Bru^ish to tell us, Honest men do Knaves Work, when they move regularly and
honestly, and according to their Covenant, which binds them heartily,
sincerely, and constantly to endeavor the Reformation of Religion, the total of
this Petition. Knaves work, he means the honest man that wrote these
Observations, whilst he was writing them, and busy in this work, was busy in
Knaves work, dixit, out of his own mouth he is condemned: He then talks of
cunning strains of desperate Malignancy, and here he would have spoken sense if
his wit would have done it; but where is the Malignancy? Reader, it lies here,
that whereas he was formerly a Malignant that would not take the Covenant, now
time has had such a turn, that to take the solemn League and Covenant, and to
make conscience in keeping of it, is Malignancy either in the Root or Branches.
The next charge of this innocent Petition, is Sedition in the abstract; But why
Sedition? Let Us hear his reason for it; for he says of himself, he is reputed
an understanding man, not rash, but rational.

First, It may prove an utter breach betwixt the City and Parliament: But
Reader, this may be does no make it Sedition; it may be, yea, it is like to be
the means to unite and sement the Parliament and City together; and this is the
end of the honest hearted Petitioners, and cursed be such Designs that endeavor
to divide them.

Secondly, it is Sedition, because the City has Petitioned and Remonstrated to
the House, the House showed no testimony of their acceptance, but rather
disliked it: What means the man by the House? This House he calls the
Parliament afterward: Now if the Parliament does dislike the Petition, it must
be the Houses of Lords and Commons; but if neither of these have given
testimony of dislike, then the man speaks falsely. The man cannot be ignorant of
the kind acceptance and gracious Answer the Remonstrance had from the House of
Peers; but by this man's Observation they be not the House, nor no part of the
Parliament: See, here is Sedition indeed, to divide betwixt the House of Lords
and Commons, sure this man is one of Mr. Lilburns Disciples; and as for the
House of Commons, they have not declared their dislike to i^: An did not this a
high breach of their Privilege, to anticipate their sense, their weighty
occasions permit them no^ leisure to consider of it, they say they will in due
time, and ^he City hopes to have a gr^cious and real Answer from them also: For
though this man can speak of nothing else but Malignancy in the Root, and
Sedition, the Ci^y is no^ conscious to it self, but that in making the
Remonstrance the^ discharged their du^ies, and m^rited blood for the
Parliam^nt: And thus this Famous City will do again, whilst Sectaries desert
them, and endeavor to al^er the Foundation and consti^uti^n of the Government
of this Kingdom, and no longer will cry up Parliaments, then they judge them
savoring of them; and when they appear otherwise, then they can talk and write
of calling ^he Parliament to an Account, and they that gave them the Power can
take it from them: is not this Sedition, Friend? But the man would know, Why
the Names of those that Subscribe not the Petition must be taken, and from what
Authority? If any did do so, it was not Authority that commanded it, but it was
their own discretion that put them on it, for these Reasons:

1. That we might know who they were that Subscribed the last Independent
Petition, because we would fain know their Names, and can prove forgery, pro
confesso, out of their own mouths, that men's Names were to it, that never saw,
nor at that time heard of their Petition.

2. That we might make it appear that the Sectaries are not so numerous, so
formicable as they would be esteemed, they are very inconsiderable
comparatively; and for all your witless Observations upon this Petition, in
many Parishes the resusers are so few, that we can write their Number with one
Figure, without the help of a cipher: Nay, the more hands will be got to it,
because they see Envy it self cannot charge the Petition with any crime; but
let the man make up a probable Tale if he can: He tells us, Malignant Ministers
come in and compound, and these may join with the Remonstrants; so he means,
and these with the Scots may make a party, etc. The man talks of Sedition, but
no such Sedition as this, to divide betwixt the City and the City, the City and
the Parliament, England with Scotland, one House of Parliament with the other,
and join these with Malignant Ministers and Popish Priests: But take this
Observation by the way, though all the Sects in the Kingdom shelter themselves
under the wings of Independents, yet the plain hearted Petitioners seek not
Malignants to make up their number; but though the Dissenting party will not
join with them in Petitioning what their own principles lead them to, yet we
shall be willing to join with them for the removing of these or any other
Grievances, which our Covenant obliges us to. Then the man finds fault with
our godly Ministers that Exercise every morning, Some out of conscience, others
byased with base ends have done, What? stirring up the Magistrate in their
popular Sermons at Westminister and Paul's, (to what man) to keep their
Covenant, to be zealous for God and for the Public good? Let all that love God
and the Peace of the Kingdoms, say, Gods blessing to their hearts. But in your
next take this Observation, That there are no Ministers in the City pray more
hearaily for the Parliament and the Armies then they do, (and that all our
Victories since our New Model has been, and then begun when this Lecture was
set up) I thought good to give him this hint, lest his impudence leads him at
last to blaspheme an Ordinance of God, which God has honored with incredible
success. (To speak a word to the particular charge) hearken Reader, the great
charge that is laid upon this honest Petition, what is it? they Petition for
setlement of Religion, the letter of the Covenant; well, if this be Malignancy
and Sedition, we will account it our honor to be so, and till we can be
disingaged from our Covenant, we will Petition, and Petition, and Petition
again for the settling of Religion: This doubtless is our duty, and cannot be
any breach of Privilege. Reader, take notice, no Word in the Petition can be
excepted against but Religion, but this he faith is meant Presbyterial
Government; but who told him so? how came he to know the sense of our Petition?
we did not make any Malignants or Sectaries of our counsel (the man in stead of
aspersing has vindicated the Petition) Religion is the worst word in it: well
then, to conclude, they that would have Religion (a word in our Covenant)
settled and reformed they that would have a happy period put to all our pressing
grievances, Ireland (poor bleeding dying Ireland) that lately has received a
mortal blow (if God prevent not) relieved, recovered; that would have Peace
settled upon the Foundation of truth, and a firm Union betwixt us and our
aspersed Brethren of Scotland, and an end of this uncivil Civil wars, come and
subscribe to this pious, prudent and peaceable Petition, and echo back, We
will all subscribe.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the useful Dialogue, etc.
1. SEe the wicked policy of Sectaries, because they fall from their own
principles, and to show their opposition to them that endeavor so keep the
Covenant, they charge the Presbyterian party with Sedition and compliancy with
Malignants and Cavaliers, when as the truth of the charge lies at their own
doors; guilty persons accuse first. 2. Look upon their impudence, condemning
that as seditious, dangerous, destructive to the Parliament, etc. which is the
declared judgment (upon serious and mature consideration) of a godly, grave,
wise and sober Court, the Representative of this Famous C^ty, without giving
any pretense or show of Reason for their graceless, groundless censures. 3.
Observe their Sedition, in hatching jealousies betwixt the Parliament and
Kingdom, presenting this City (whose fame for their zeal to the Cause of God is
gone through the Christian world) as Seditous, as joining with Malignants, as
deserting the Parliament, and presenting the Parliament as not regarding the
City, nor minding their grievances, nor their own Engagements, in leaving
takens of honor upon this faithful City. The Lord rebuke this lying Spirit. 4.
Behold them condemning the course of Petitioning, the way themselves take, the
only way left to the Subject to have their grievances removed; and that which
is the indubitable right of the meanest Subject must be denied to the
Common Counsel of London, humbly to Petition: Astonishing impudence,
unparalled Malignancy, prefound ignorance. 5. Reader, see sonce again, for
there is no end of baseness) they pretend love, Christian sweetness,
charitable opinions one toward another (take heed plain-hearted Christians,
here is a snare for you) when they talk and write of nothing that the
Presbyterians do, but what is dangerous, mischievons, seditious, increasing the
fire whilst they call for water: I must leave them, they be too subtle for
any plain-hearted man to deal with.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, The Right Worshipful the Aldermen and
Commons of the City of London in Common Counsel assembled.
The Humble PETITION of diverse wellaffected Citizens and Freemen of London,
under the Jurisdiction of the Lord MAYOR.
Shows:
THat the great care and uncessant pains of this Honorable Court, for promoting
the Cause of God is so eminently known, that your Petitioners conceive they
shall be too much wanting to their own duty and safety, if they should be
backward in the thankful acknowledgement thereof; Wherefore, as they give you
many humble and hearty thanks for what you have already done in reference to
the Public good, so being desirous, what in them lies, yet farther to
strengthen your hands to so glorious a work, they cannot but let you know their
Resolutions to adhere unto you in all your just and legal proceedings: Not
doubting but the same good hand of God that has hitherto been with you, will
still be upon you for good, while you endeavor in your places the establishment
of Truth and Peace, and the removal of those pressing Grievances that lie upon
us, as you have lately done in that free and necessary, yet Humble and Dutiful
Remonstrance and Petition to the Honorable Houses of Parliament. And however
there want not those for the present, who out of self-respects calumniate your
good Intentions therein, yet being persuaded that in very faithfulness to the
Public you have done it, your Petitioners not only approve of it, but rejoice
in it, the rather, since they know no other orderly way for obtaining remedy
for their common Grievances, then by your Addresses to the Parliament in their
behalf.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That this Honorable Court will be
pleased still to persevere, and courageously to go on in and by all pious and
prudent means, endeavoring the speedy settlement of Religion, the Peace of the
Kingdom, the Union of both Nations, the safety and welfare of this City, and in
a word, the performance of that Covenant wherein we are sol^mnly engaged to God
the Righteous Judge of all the wo^ld. In reference to all which good ends, your
Petitioners further pray, That you would still continue your humble Addresses
to the Parliament, not only for a gracious Answer to your said late
Remonstrance, but for all such other things as shall necessarily conduce to
putting a happy period to our present miserable distractions; And that in the
mean time you would put in execution, among your selves, so many branches
thereof as the Power wherewith (by the Laws of this Kingdom) you are already
invested, will extend unto.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.

FINIS.

