THE QUAKERS SHAKEN, OR, A WARNING AGAINST QVAKING. BEING I. A Relation of the
Conversion and recovery of John Gilpin, of Kendall in Westmorland, who was not
only deluded, but possessed with the Devil. II. A Vindication of the said John
Gilpin, from the aspersions of the QUAKERS. III. Twelve lying blasphemous
prophecies of James Milner of Beakly in Lancashire; delivered by him November.
14, 15, 16. IV. A Relation of a horrid Buggery committed by Hugh Bisbrown, a
QUAKER, with a Mare. V. A Relation of one Cotton Crosland of Ackworth in
Yorkshire, a professed QUAKER, who Hanged himself.


As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth; men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. LONDON, Printed
by S. G. for Simon Waterson, and are to be sold at his shop at the Sign of the
Globe in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

THE QUAKERS SHAKEN.
THe mind of man destitute of Gods Grace, does (like untilled ground) luxuriate
into wickedness and vanity, being very prone to close with the suggestions of
the grand adversary of his soul; yea, though he has had some taste of the
things that are excellent, yet such is his curiosity, that he will be seeking
after the novelties. Old truths (like the Manna to the Israelites, after a
constant and continued falling of it) become nauseous: the truth hereof has
been found in all ages by lamentable experience, but especially in these our
days, which have been as fruitful in new opinions in matters of Religion, as
Africa it self, of Monsters.

Some (though few in comparison) God is pleased to recall, who have gone astray
in this kind, and to bring them to a clear sight of their folly; of which
number, I (by Gods Grace toward me) am one; I desire to acknowledge him in it,
and to give him the praise of it, and think my self bound in conscience, as a
testimony of my thankfulness to God for my deliverance, to declare it to the
world, that others may hear and fear, and take warning by my example. They who
have been lately in the Northern parts of England, cannot be ignorant how
prevalent the imposture of quaking has been for these 9 or ten Months last
past, in which snare I my self (among many poor deluded souls) was taken in
May last 1653. though by Gods goodness toward me the snare is broken, and I
am escaped; a true account whereof take as follows.

I being desirous to associate my self with this Faction at their Meeting, and
to hear some of them speak (to use their own expression) acquainted one of
their own with it, viz. George Bayley of Kendall, who gave me great
encouragement herein from his own experience of much advantage received by him
in that way: Whereupon I went soon after to their Meeting at Richard Newby's
house, where I staid about two hours ( viz. from eight till ten at night)
where Christopher Atkinson was Speaker, whose drift was to deny all
Ministerial teaching and Ordinances, together with all notionall knowledge
formerly gained by use of such means, to become as though we had never
learned any thing thereby savingly, and to lay a new groundwork, viz. to be
taught of God within our selves by waiting upon an inward light, which (as they
assert) lies low hidden under the earth, viz. the old man, which is of the
earth, earthy. Hereupon I resolved to close with them, after which time I was
afraid to read any good Books, or hear any preaching Minister, or call to
remembrance any thing which I had formerly learned out of Gods Word, concerning
God or Christ, or mine own estate, or any other subject contained in Scripture;
for I was persuaded by their teaching, that whasoever I had learned out of Gods
Word, by hearing, reading, catechizing, etc. was but notionall, carnal, and
hanging upon the tree of Knowledge; in which condition whilst I abode, they
affirmed me to be under the Curse, applying this expression, though very
impertinently, Cursed is every one that hangs on the Tree.

After this, going a second time to one of their Meetings at Edmond Newby's, I
had some conference by the way with some of themselves which went with me;
amongst other blasphemies, one Robert Collison affirmed, that Christ was as
man, had his failings, for he distrusted God (quoth he) upon the Cross, when
he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? to whom I answered,
that then he suffered as an evil doer, and so could not purchase redemption
for us; after this coming home, he who then was Speaker, urged us to take up
the Cross daily, and to abide under it; saying, Carry the Cross all day, and
it will keep thee at night; that this would keep us low and humble, and kill,
and make alive: further, he endeavored to persuade his Auditors to harken to a
voice within them, teaching, that Gods voice was a still voice; after which I
resolved in my thoughts to wait for the manifestation of these things within my
self.

After a while, going a third time to their meeting, as I went I was somewhat
troubled in my thoughts at the remembrance of that hideous blasphemy uttered by
the party before named, whereupon I spoke publicly to them at their meeting
concerning it; telling them, that I would not any further join with them if
they were all of that mind, to which some of them (after much whispering)
answered negatively, wishing me not to let it trouble me; for he which spoke so
to me was not rightly called; with which answer I was at present satisfied, and
did adhere to my former resolution. Not long after I went to another meeting
upon a Lords day at Robert Collisons house in Kendall, where the aforesaid
Atkinson was Speaker, who beginning about 9 a clock in the forenoon, continued
til three in the afternoon, in which time he spoke much (according to his
usual manner) of the great experience which he had of God from the light
within him, which light I not finding to be in my self, was very much troubled,
apprehending my condition to be very bad, finding nothing but blindness and
hardness, yet I still expected the appearance of that light within me, and
earnestly desired that I might fall into quaking and trembling, apprehending
that I should thereby attain to the immediate discoveries of God unto me. Upon
my departure from thence, I perused a Pamphlet set forth by some of the same
Faction, being in York Castle, the main scop of it was against the Ministry;
immediately after walking in my Bedchamber, I began (as I have formerly
desired) to tremble and quake so extremely, that I could not stand upon my
feet, but was constrained to fall down upon my Bed, where I howled and cried
(as it is usual with them) in a terrible and hideous manner, to the great
astonishment of my Family: Nevertheless I my self was not at all affected with
fear, because it was satisfaction to my former desires, and I looked upon it as
the beginning of the pangs of the new birth and expected that the issue of it
would be good; when I had continued about half an hour in that condition, I
ceased from howling and crying gradually; after which I rose up again,
beginning to rejoice, thinking with my self that now I could bear witness
against the Ministers of England as false Prophets and Priests of Baal, because
I never found such effects and operations upon me by so long continuance under
their Ministry. After this, going to bed, I was much troubled all that night
following in my sleep, with dreams concerning my condition, and had a discovery
of my sins in particular, especially of my covetousness, the Devil working
strongly upon my imagination; I apprehended that all sin was about to be hewed
down, and rooted up in me, and (to my apprehension) the sin of covetousness had
great long roots which did visibly appear to me when it was rooted up:
Afterward lying awake, and thinking upon the dreams and visions I had formerly
been troubled with, I sencibly perceived something (as I imagined) lighting
upon my neck, giving me a great stroke, which caused much pain to me, and after
that another which was less then the first, and so a third and fourth, each
stroke being less then the former, and each stroke descending lower down, till
it came to the middle of my back, and then I thought something entered into my
body, which I persuaded my self (from Satan's instigation) to be the Spirit of
God descending upon me like a Dove, and entering into me, whereupon I heard (in
my conceit) a voice within me saying, It is day; whereupon looking up and
perceiving it to be light, I answered Yes; the voice replied twice over to me,
and said, as certainly as it is light, so certainly shall Christ give thee
light.

After this I continued two or three days waiting for further discoveries of
light within me, being wrapped up into an ecstasy of excessive joy, and sometimes
again exceedingly dejected with fears and doubts of my condition, whether it
were really good, or I were under Satan's delusions; yet still I waited for
further manifestations, and walking into the Garden, lying down upon the ground
with my face toward the earth, my right hand began extremely to shake, so as I
could not hold it still, the meaning whereof whilst I was wondering what it
should be, and apprehending my self as being shaken by the hand, I was brought
into another rapture of great joy, imagining it to be a figure of my spiritual
Marriage and Union with Christ. Then presently I was by the power within me
raised, and set upon my feet, and by the same power turned and laid upon my
back, with my face toward the sky; at which time all my sins particularly
were again brought into my memory, and at the remembrance of every sin, my hand
was carried round about with giving a little pat upon the ground, and then I
imagined I heard a voice saying, now such a sin is mortified; after which I
being persuaded by it, that all my sins were mortified by it one by one; the
power that I was then acted by, permitted me to arise up again of my self,
saying unto me, Ask whatsoever thou will of the Father, and he will give it
thee: I replied, I know not what to ask; and therefore desired that power to
teach me what to ask: he answered me again, and bid me ask wisdom in the
first place; whereupon I desired also, that God would give me such things as
were most for his glory, and the good of others; whereupon the power answered,
that my request was granted, and that I should also be endewed with the gift of
prophecy, and singing praises to God: wherewith being satisfied, I went to
another meeting within an hour after, at William Doddings house in Kendall,
which was the fifth and last meeting that I was at with them where Christopher
Atkinson being Speaker, I was much more affected with what he spoke then
formerly, as being able more inwardly to witness in part to what he spoke.
After he had done, and a little pause had, the Company rose up, as if they had
been ready to depart; I my self was ready to go away with the first, but the
Wife of the house ( Isa: Dodding) took me by the hand, and wringing it very
hard, bad me sit down again, which I did, and presently after one John Audland
stood up, and began to speak, saying, cannot ye watch one hour? and so
proceeded after the usual manner. In the time of his speaking I was by the
power within me drawn from the chair upon which I sat, and thrown upon the
ground in the midst of the Company, where I lay all night; all which time, my
body, and all the members of it were still in motion, I being turnned from my
back to my belly, and so back again several times, and making crosses
continually with my legs one over the other; my hands were carried to and fro
upon the ground by a compulsive power, as if I had been writing upon the
ground; in all which actions and motions, I acted not in the least measure by a
natural power of mine own, neither did I resist, or could I resist that power
which acted me, but was altogether passive; I was persuaded that it was the
immediate power of Christ, and heard to my thinking a voice speaking to me, and
saying, that that writing with my hand upon the ground, did signify the
writing of the Law within my heart. Having lain all night upon the ground in
the manner aforesaid, the power (as before in other actions) moved my hands to
my head, and laid them upon the top thereof fast closed together, whereupon I
heard a voice, saying, Christ in God, and God in Christ, and Christ in thee;
which words I was compelled to sing forth before the Company in a strange
manner, and with such a voice as was not naturally mine own: I sung also
diverse phrases of Scripture, which were given into me; after which I was
raised from the ground, and set upon my fect by the power within me, which bad
me be humble, and brought me down again upon my knees, and with a whispering
voice said to me, stoop low, low; and having stooped near the ground with my
face, it said to me, take up the Cross, and follow me: whereupon arising, I
was led out of the house (by the back door) down to the River, and back again
from thence into the Town another way, where I was sensibly drawn down the
street, and caused suddenly to turn aside to a door of an house (my self not
knowing who lived in it) two of the said company sollowing me all the time, (
viz.) William Dodding and John Audland, and seeing me to go to that door said,
whither will thou go? this is the Fiddlers house; I answered, whose house soever
it be, Christ leads me hither, and hither I must go, whereupon my hand was
carried to knock at the door, and commanded by a voice to say, Behold Christ
stands at the door and knocks: after a while the Fiddler opened, and I was led
into the house, not speaking any thing unto him: where my hand was carried to a
Base-violl hanging up in the house; I took it down and began to play upon it
with my fingers, and was immediately compelled a fall to dancing, which I
seldom or never in all my life did before: hereupon I questioned what power it
should be that carried me forth to such actions, to which the voice within me
replied, This is not because I love music, for I hate it, but to signify unto
thee what joy there is in heaven at thy conversion; as also what spiritual
melody thou shall have hereafter: then I was led out of the house into the
street, and so carried along through the Town, being moved to proclaim as I
went, I am the way, the truth, and the life, with other expressions to the like
purpose; after which I was brought to mine own house, the foresaid Will. Dodding
going along with me, acknowledged that he had no power to leave me all this
time: being come home, the same power would not suffer me to rest, but cast me
upon the ground, and caused me to make circles round about the house with my
hand, with many the like actions, telling me, that I was putting off the old
man; my hand also was carried to take up a stone which lay upon the flore
(which in my apprehension was in the form of a man's heart) the voice within me
telling me, that Christ had taken that stone out of my heart, and given me an
heart of flesh, and my hand was moved to hold it forth to the Spectators, and
my tongue to utter this sentence, except you see signs and wonders you will not
believe: and throwing the foresaid stone amongst them, I said, Lo here is my
heart of stone: afterward being cast upon the ground upon my back, the voice
spoke to me, saying, thou shall have two Angels to keep thee, whereupon
immediately two Swallows descended down the Chimne^ and sat upon a shelf over
against the place where I lay: this (...) in the house besides my self beheld,
and I cried to them, my Angels, my Angels, being persuaded that they were
angels from heaven, and that it was a fulfilling of the promise, I held out my
hand toward them, expecting they should have come to me, but they did not, but
ascended up the Chimney, though both the door and the window were open.

I was also by the same power carried out of doors upon my hands and knees into
the street, which my Wife and others seeing, endeavored to hinder me, but I
told them, I would not be hindered, but leave Wife, Children, and all to follow
Christ: in this manner I went up the street, thinking that I bore a Cross upon
my neck, and continued in this motion till some pulled me out of the mire and
dirt, and by force carried me into the house again; whereupon I was moved to
point to one of them which brought me in, and to say to her, Christ points at
thee, thou art a wicked woman, and have hindered the work of the Lord; then the
voice asked me where my Cross was, telling me I had scattered it, whereupon I
was moved to make a Cross with my finger upon the flore, and forced to set my
head upon it, playing topsie turvy, or bull necks, thinking then I had retaken
up my Cross. In these actions I was kept a long while, having many
Scripture-expressions given in, to the admiration of all that heard me;
sometimes I was forced to leap and dance, this expression being given in to me,
now I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, thinking my Redemption
then fully accomplished; but my joy continued not, for I was cast down again,
and the voice told me, I had offended God in attributing that to my self which
was proper to Christ; whereupon I was cast upon the ground, and lying upon my
belly, I was forced to lick the dust, and my hand carried to strike
extraordinarily upon my head, having a voice given me, that no sin must go
unpunished; so creeping up and down the house, I heard a voice saying, where is
thy Cross? upon which looking aside, I thought I saw a visible Cross hanging
in a thread, which with my hand I put behind my neck; I was kept in these
postures all that day till evening, when many Quakers came in to me, who spoke
nothing but thus, Be lowly, mind thy condition, and harken to the voice within;
^^^^ing any words of comfort or reproof, or putting up any ^^^^tion at all for
me, but departed, leaving me in this condition. My strength being almost spent,
and my body much consumed by continual restlesnesse; Two of them offered to
watch with me that night, but I refused, telling them I was well, whereupon
they departed. After this my Wife and Family being gone to bed, I being alone in
the house, began to recollect my self, and to question whether that power by
which I had been so strangly acted, were Divine or Diabolical? whereupon I was
immediately struck with a pannick fear, and my hand was carried to take up a
Knife which lay upon the Table, which being done, my hand was carried with it
toward my throat, and the voice said to me, open a hole there, and I will give
thee the words of eternal life; whereupon I answered, what, with a Knife? and
so threw the Knife away, being confident it was a temptation, from which I
desire God to deliver me. My wife being in bed in the next room, and hearing me
speak when none was with me, came out, and desired me to go to bed, which I did
at her entreaty: all the night following I was fully resolved that it was the
Devils power that had acted me all along formerly, and was persuaded that I was
really possessed with a Devil, which must be ejected; and in the morning I
verily thought that a Devil went out of me, at which instant I roared very
hidiously, crying, now is the Devil gone out of me, at which instant I and my
Family heard it thunder, (though none in the Town besides heard it) which made
me think it was the Devil, he being the Prince of the power of the air; soon
after the same power came under another notion and told me, that it was Satan
that had possessed and led me heretofore, but now Christ was come, and he by his
power had cast out Satan, and couvinced me, that what ever I had done the day
before was in obedience to Satan, and that as I had served the Devil all the
time before in my Clothes, so that day I must undo all that I had formerly
done, only in my spirit in obedience to Christ; which immediately I endeavored,
rising out of my bed, and going into the street with my shirt, only; but my
Wife and others soon laid hold upon me, and stopped me, whereupon the power
within me told me, that I must be carried into the house with four women, as I
had been the day before, or else I should perpetually stand their like a pillar
of Salt, as Lots wife did. So I was born in by 4. women, who carried me again
into my bed, which being done, I told them, I had been doing the Devils work
the day before, but to day I must do the work of Christ, and pointing at a
woman whom I had pointed at the day before, said these words, the Devil told
me yesterday that you were a wicked woman, but now Christ tells me that you are
Gods Servant: the woman being departed, I fell to acting in my shirt only upon
the bed, as I had done formerly upon the house flore, playing topsie turvy from
one bed to another, whereby I might have undon my self; but the power which
acted me, bid me not fear, for I will give thee strength. After this the power
told me, that the Devil had the other day commanded me to bear the Cross, but
now Christ commands me to lay aside thy Cross; for Christ takes no pleasure in
Crosses, nor will he have me worship them as yesterday I had done: Further, the
power said to me, the Devil made thee yesterday to lie all day upon the
ground, but now I have provided a bed for thee, giving in this Scripture to me,
my yoke is easy; promising also, to give me bread of life to eat, and water of
life to drink, and that out of my belly should flow rivers of living water:
whereupon my teeth were caused to move as if I had been eating; and I thought I
felt in my belly a flowing up and down, as of Waters: I was also persuaded,
that yesterday the Devils angels had waited on me, but now Christ's Angels
should guard me; whereupon I saw two Butterflies in the window, to which my
hand was carried, and having taken one of them in my hand, I was moved by the
power within me to put it into my mouth, and did swallow it down into my body,
which having done, I took the other in my hand, and was moved to put it to my
throat, the power telling me, it should enter in there, saying, nothing is
impossible to them that believe. After this I was caused to make circles upon
the bed, as I had done formerly upon the ground: whereupon I began to think,
that this was not of God, and so began to resist the power by which I was
acted, and thereupon fell into great fear and doubting, crying out, Lord, what
will thou have me to to do? but the power told me, that it was too late to cry
unto God, for sentence was already pronounced against me: whereupon I lay down
in my bed, much despairing, and was then convict, that it was the Devil which
had again deluded me: in which condition having lain a short space, I was again
assaulted by a power the third time, which told me, that it was a white Devil
that had deceived me the latter time, but now Christ was come indeed, and he
would cast him out; whereupon I apprehended that Devil also to be eiected:
after which, as I lay in my bed, all the members of my body fell a working, as
if the pangs of Death had been upon me, the power telling me, that it was the
pangs of the new birth, and that Christ was new born in me; with which I was
somewhat satisfied, lying in that condition a whole day; in which time the
power persuaded me, that I should work wonders, and cast out Devils in his
name; soon after two Quakers came to me, viz. Geo. Bailey, and J. Braban, whom
I told that I had two Devils cast out of me, but now Christ was in me for a
truth; then the power (pretending to be Christ) said these words, I was crowned
with a crown of thorns, but I will crown thee with a crown of glory, and bad me
(as a figure thereof) to set my fist upon my head, and it should appear to the
standers by as a glorious crown, though I saw nothing by my self, which having
done I spoke to the standers by, saying, what do you see? whereunto they gave
me no answer, (being Quakers) but turned their eyes another way, the power
telling me, that they saw the crown upon my head, but were so stricken with
admiration, that they could not express what they saw; immediately the power
bad me tell one of the Quakers then present that he had a devil in him, and
that I should have power to cast him out; whereupon I said unto him, O, thou
have a devil in thee; the power told me he should quake and tremble, which
immediately he did; the power bad me speak to him to fall flat upon the ground,
which he did, and after a little space rose again, and I asked him whether the
devil were gone out of him (having been before persuaded by the power that I
should cast him out,) to which he gave me no answer, but the power told me that
the devil was ejected. I was told also by the same power, who (of those that
came to see me) had devils, and who not; and that my wife and my mother had
devils in them, but I had power given me to cast them out. After this,
beginning again to question whether this were Christ or not, I fell into a
great fear and doubting, as formerly; whereupon the devil discovered himself to
be the devil, and told me, that all this while I had been serving him, and
blaspheming God; and that it was now too late to repent, whereupon I was
brought into despair for a time, thinking every thing which I either heard or
saw, to be the devil come to fetch me away: one while I thought that I should
be taken away in a flame of fire, or else that the earth would swallow me up
quick; whereupon I called my Wife, and desired her to bring up my Children in
the fear of God, for the devil would fetch me away, my self still thinking that
he was drawing me out of the bed; thus I apprehended my self wholly under the
power of the devil, and had no power to recover my self out of that sad
condition. At last I began (having bin so long deluded) to desist from harkning
to the voice within me, and apply my self unto God, in and through Christ, for
deliverance from the power of Satan, knowing, that God was able to deliver me,
though I were so far involved in the snare of the devil; thereupon my faith
was in some measure raised to believe that God would deliver me: whereupon I
was presently in a great agony, and did sweat extremely, in which condition I
continued all night, but was somewhat more cheerful in the morning, esteeming
my self in some measure rescued from the power of the devil: yet having not
resolved as yet finally to desert that way, I was soon again assaulted by the
same, power, telling me, that now the devil was finally cast out of me, and
that the room within me must not be left empty, but that Christ must come and
have the whole and sole possession, or else Satan would return and re-enter
with 7. other devils worse then himself, telling me withal, that he was
Christ, and soliciting me to entertain and embrace him as I had done formerly:
I resisted the suggestions of this power for a time, having been so often
deluded; whereupon as a motive to persuade me to entertain it, he represented
to my memory all, or most of the remarkable passages of my life, both in
England and Scotland, told me how long I should live, viz. ten years, and where
I should die, viz. at London, and that I had a weak body, but he would
strengthen it, and thereupon caused me to rub my body all over with my hands,
at which instant I conceived my body to receive strength, and the members
thereof to be more in substance then before; with diverse other passages,
promising me prosperity in the world, and speaking these words to me, Joh. 4.
29. Behold a man that has told thee all things that ever thou did, is not
this Christ? whereupon I was at last persuaded to embrace this power, thinking
that it was Christ indeed; whereupon I was presently sensible of a working
throughout my whole body, which soon ceased, and then I thought that my
condition was good, and Christ to be really in me: afterward this power told
me, that I had highly offended God in all my former passages, in giving way to
Satan, and that I was guilty of all sins, except that against the Holy Ghost;
but told me, that I did it ignorantly, and therefore he had pity on me; I was
further persuaded by the same power, that I should lie (seemingly dead,) which
I did, not daring to stir, till the power moved me. Lying thus a while, the
power began first to move one of my legs, and then the other; after that my
hands, and then my head, and at last my whole body; causing me to sit up in my
bed, and telling me that thus should my body be quickened and raised up again
at the last day: then the power told me, that I must pull off my shirt and my
cap, and the napkin which I had about my neck, saying, that whatsoever was
about me was polluted, and that he bated the Garments spotted with the flesh;
whereupon I pulled them off, and threw them on the ground, uttering these same
words, that I bated the Garment spotted with the flesh, the power also told me,
that all my bonds were broken, and my cords loosened, and that Christ had set
me free; whereupon calling for a clean shirt, and other linen, I arose,
concluding my self to be in a good condition; yet finding my self being up, no
better, nor my body more strengthened, but rather weakened, I began to see that
I had been deluded in this last business as formerly; whereupon I was stricken
with fear, and walking into the Garden, I thought one while that the Devil
would pull me into the earth, and another while that he would pull me into the
air, so that I was afraid to continue abroad, and came again into the house,
and suspected every thing that I heard to be the Devil waiting to fetch me
away; being in this perplexity of soul, I began to consider how grievously I
had offended God in rejecting the use of all external means: as reading,
hearing, prayer, etc. in the use whereof God has commanded us to wait upon
him, and therefore that it was most just with him to leave me to my self, and
to give me over to strong delusion, that I should believe lies, which was my
condition for a time, by the just judgment of God upon me, as for other
provocations, so especially for rejecting the revealed will of God in his word,
and harkening only to a voice within me; because what was spoken by it, was
seconded by lying wonders, of which God has given notice in his word, that so
his people might not give credit to them, nor be deluded by them. I hope the
Reader will so far give heed to what I have related concerning my self, as to
le^rn thereby to take heed of being imposed upon by the devil, though he does
transform himself into an Angel of light; which advantage if any reap by it, I
have my end: it has been no small burden to my conscience (since Gods
gracious deliverance of me from this snare) that I should so far gratify the
grand Adversary, as not only to listen to his suggestions, and embrace his
voice for the voice of Christ, but also wholly to neglect those means, in the
constant and conscientious use whereof God has promised to reveal himself unto
his people, and to give in comfort to them, which because I found not (though
through my own default) I did in effect say, why should I wait on the Lord any
longer? and so turned unto lying vanities. O! that all who affect novelties,
would seriously consider of it, and take warning by it; for, Turpi(...)
withstand the Devil at his first assault, than to expect him being once
admitted. Many besides my self, have been, and are in the like condition, but
few or none to whom the Lord has manifested his grace in such a manner as to
my self. I had before this made this known to the world, had I had tranquillity
of conscience, and composure of Spirit, which blessing the Lord having in his
Grace restored to me, I desire the Christian Reader to join with me in
returning praises unto the Lord for his goodness toward me. I rest fully
persuaded, and I think it does evidently appear (by what is mentioned in this
Relation) to persons unpreiudiced, that my quaking and trembling was of the
Devil, that I was acted wholly and solely by him, whilst in this condition; and
I do really believe, that others in the like condition which I was then in,
would be of the same mind with me, upon serious trial of their condition by
the principles of Christian Religion* and sanctified Reason. Lest the
strangeness of some passages in this Relation, should put the faith of any one
upon the rack, or make them question the truth thereof, I have not only given
testimony my self of it, by subscribing my name; but also procured several
persons of known fidelity, living in, or near Kendall, (those names are under
written) to testify the probability (if not the certainty) of the truth of
it, by what they have seen and heard.

JOHN GILPIN.
I believe this Relation to be true.

Edward Turner Mayor of Kendall.


By what I have heard of the carriage of John Gilpin, and his actings, J do
believe this Relation to be true.

Jo. Archer


J saw him when he went through the Town, declaring himself the way, truth, and
life.

Ja. Cock.


We believe this Relation to be true.

T. Walker, Pastor of Kendall J. Myriell, Master of the Free-Schoole there.
Rich. Prissoe. Thomas Sands. Allan Gilpin. John Washington. Robert Fisher.




FOr the prevention of any suspicion of the truth of what this contained in
this Relation, the Reader is desired to take notice, not only of the fidelity
of those witnesses, who have subscribed their names to it, (who dare not give
testimony to any thing, of the truth whereof they have not some grounded
certainty) but also of a tacit confession of the adversaries themselves; or in
a Pamphlet set forth by Christopher Atkinson of Kendall (wherein he pretends
to answer what is contained in it) there is no denial of the matter of fact,
but only a multitude of most unchristian expressions, cast out against the
person of this standing Monument of Gods mercy: but those who are acquainted
with this Generation, will not much wonder at this, seeing it is their usual
dialect toward all, not of their own faction. In the conclusion of that
Pamphlet before mentioned, John Gilpin is charged with drunkenness, and
returning again to his former filthiness, which is such a notorious falsehood,
that such as have had any knowledge of the said John Gilpin, since that time,
cannot but admire how any should arrive to such an height of impudence, as to
fasten such a calumny upon him. It Is true, there was information given in
against him for drunkenness, by a Quaker, Anthony Pearson.
to a Justice of Peace, (but not upon oath) but he being one of their own
faction, (and desiring to have it so) immediately sent forth a Warrant against
him; but the said John Gilpin (being altogether ignorant of it) was absent upon
a necessary occasion, being called to serve the Commonwealth, in the Garrison
of the City of Carlisle; but did not fly for fear of the Warrant, as that lying
Pamphlet does scandalously report. Some of his friends in his absence, knowing
the Warrant to have issued out upon misinformation, took occasion to examine
the matter further, and told those that were his accusers, that it was a gross
forgery, to which some of them answered, that it was not, for he was drunk with
sin; and this was all the charge that any of his adversaries would undertake to
justify against him. See whether these persons be not acted with a Jesuitical
Spirit, who can so grossly equivocate; but for the wiping off of this and all
other aspersions cast upon John Gilpin, by these Instruments of the Prince of
darkness, the Reader is desired to take notice of these two following
Testimonies, signed by men of unquestioned integrity, who by their acquaintance
with him, since the time of his deliverance from that grand delusion, have
fully known his manner of life.

Whereas several persons called Quakers, men of corrupt minds, and reprobate
concerning the faith, have aspersed John Gilpin as guilty of drunkenness, and
other licencious practices, since the time of Gods great goodness extended to
him in delivering of him from the grand impostures of the Quakers; These are to
certify all persons whomsoever, that we whose names are underwritten, have
since that time taken special and peculiar cognizance of his conversation
during the time of his abode amongst us, and have found it to be not only
civil, but also religious, and suitable to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and that
it has not been otherwise since his departure from us to Carlisle, is very
evident to us, from the following Testimony of eminent Christians there, whose
names are thereunto subscribed.

Kendall Jan. 27. 1654. The truth of this Testimony is attested by us Thomas
Walker Minister at Kendall. John Myriel, Master of the Free School there. James
Troughton.


We believe that Mr. Thomas Walker, Mr. John Myriel, and James Troughton, would
not certify any thing but what they know to be true.

Thomas Sands. William Jeninges junior. John Fisher. John VVashington. Robert
Jackson. William Sill.


WHereas our well beloved Friend and Brother* John Gilpin, is traduced by some
who are enemies of all righteousness, to be a man loose and scandalous in life
and conversation, and tainted with drunkenness, and other like lusts, These are
to certify all those, who desire to (and do so) sanctify the Lord God in
their hearts and lives, the contrary of our said well beloved Friend and
Brother; And that he is to our knowledge, one that walks soberly, humbly,
piously, and without reproof, being not in the least guilty of these
wickednesses, which we hear maliciously and slanderously, by some reported of
him, since his abode amongst us, which has been now above this twelvemoneth.
Nor did we ever hear otherwise by him, from any with whom he has conversed
heretofore, but that he has ever walked so as becomes the Gospel; that he has
been indeed, a man (as they will witness that knew him formerly) not only
virtuously inclined, but also of a very tender Conscience: in so much, that
than to affirm the contrary, We assure you, as those who dare not plead for
iniquity, there can nothing be more false, whereunto we have set our hands at
the City of Carlisle, this third of February, 1654.

Thomas Craister. Cuth: Scudholme. Thomas Turner, Master of the Free School.


The Reader may happily, and not without cause, admire how the mouths of any
should be open, to speak evil of one whose life appears, by the aforesaid
written Testimonies, to have been so blameless; and unreproveable; but let them
consider how exceedingly the Devil is enraged, as against all mankind in
general, so especially against those that are rescued from his snares; and then
he will not much wonder, that these his Children do, as in other things, so in
this imitate their Father.

The Prophecies and other passages of James Milner a Tailor, November. the 14.
15, 16. 1652.
1. HE told the people (I mean the gadding Tribe) who flocked to his house
those three days, that he had fasted fourteen days and nights, and that he
was to fast two days more for the saving of two souls, which (he said) were
Dorothy Barwick, and the Wife of Brian Fell of Vlverston.

2. That he must suffer as Christ did; and setting a dry and empty Basin in
the midst of his house, he went many times about it, Thomas Hutton holding a
knife over his head all the time; at last he asked the standers by, whether
they saw not drops of water and blood? Hutton answered, yes, and then (as
Milner himself said) he gave up the Ghost as Christ did.

3. That the fifteenrh day must be the day of judgment, and the last day of
the old Creation, and that Thursday the sixteenth must be the first day of the
new Creation.

That there must come down from heaven a four-cornerd she^^ with a sheep in the
sixteenth day, for confirmation (as was conceived) of his prophecies, but the
event not being answerable to his prediction, and the Quakers expectation, he
told them, they were fallen amongst the wicked, and so a Company of them (about
twelve) were sent with a Constable to search the house of John Goads in the
night time, for a stolen sheep, but found none.

4. He said there must be a Silver Mine in his Garden, a Mynt-house in his
fold, and James Barwick must be the Coyner; and trampling a long time upon a
part of his Garden, he asked the people if they saw not Silver arise out of the
earth: but they gave no answer. I know none shall see it (says Milver) but the
Prophet* Hutton and my Wife, whereupon she said she saw Silver bubble up like
pin-heads.

5. He told them there must be a Coal-pit in Sheep Park, and he paced out the
ground where it should be.

6. That a Mill must be built, and the water that should make it go, must come
out of a Well near his Garden, which (though it has seldom water in it) he
said should be a Well for ever.

7. That there should be the eighteenth day a great draught of Fishes which he
himself with Zebedee must draw, which (as it is reported) proved to be but a
Codling.

8. He said he was Abraham, and Adam, and his Wife was Eve, that Beakeley, (the
town where he lived) must be called Z^^r, and Gleast^n, another Town not far
off must be called Ninive.

9. That George Fox was John the Baptist, and he it was that was to come
after, whose shoo-latchet Fox was unworto unloose.

10. That he must live four hundred years upon earth, the clothes on his back
must never be worn, nor he ever greater or lesser.

11. That Richard Myars, the younger, must go and prophecy into other
Countries, and Thomas Hutton must prophecy in his own Country.

12. That there must be no more Judges at Lancaster, neither any more Rents, or
Tithe paid.

This pretended Prophet lives at Beakely in Lane ashire, where he delivered
these lying Oracles, whereof there were many, both eye, and ear witnesses, and
amongst others John Kilner, and George Fell (called Zebedee by the said Milner)
who are ready to attest what is here related, if called unto it: They were both
before that time bewitched with the delusions of the Quakers, But afterward
never followed them more, blesling God, that he had opened their eyes to see
the delusions of Satan, and those manifold snares, wherein they had been
entangled.

Reader, these following relations may at first view seem incredible to thee,
by reason of the abominable nature of the matters of fact contained in them:
But however I shall not conceal from thee what is notoriously known and
certainly believed, in those parts where it was acted, that so thou may have
a further testimony of their gross and palpable blindness, who a^e so great
pretenders of the light.

In the year 1653. In Summer time Hugh Bisbr^wne living at, or near Beethom,
was seen by two several persons, committing the detestable sin of Buggery with
a Mare, but being discovered in the very act, and knowing the penalty due
thereunto to be death, he soon after (upon information given in against him)
betook himself to his heels, and has not since that time been seen publicly
in the Country: This horrid fact was committed upon a Common in the Parish of
Warton near Silver-dale: the Parties who saw it were, Vnica Ba^ke, and the Wife
of Rich. Clarke, both of Beethom, who offered to depose before a Justice of the
Peace, that they saw them carnally conjoined: The Quakers since that time deny
him to have been one of their Sect, being ashamed of him by reason of his
beastly wickedness, but the evidence thereof is very clear from the testimony
of the Neighbors thereabouts, who do affirm with one consent, that for a long
space before, he never attended upon the public Ministry, but was frequently
present at the mettings of the* Quakers, refused to use any Civil Salutation,
and in all things else whatsoever symbolized with them: and had he not been
acted by that power (spoken of in I. G. his relation) he had never been carried
out to such abominable filthiness; Nor would the beast in all probability have
stood so quietly without the least motion (as the witnesses affirmed she did,
whilst he was doing that vild act) had not the same power by his means been
very prevalent in her.

Somewhat before the time above written, one Cotton Crosland of Ackworth (near
Pontefract in Yorkshire) a professed Quaker, pretending that he knew far more,
and higher things than ever any Minister did, or could discover to him, hanged
himself, and lies buried in a Crosse-way upon Ackworth Moor, with a Stake
driven through him, which may be as a standing mark to warn Passengers to take
heed of quaking, seeing that Spirit which is the cause of it, leads men into
such fearful miscarriages. Let the unprejudiced Reader judge whether the light
that leads men to such practices, be not gross darkness. Let it be the prayer
of every Christian Reade^ that he who commanded light to shine out of darkness,
would illuminate their understandings, who for the present lie in it.

FINIS.

