TWO ANATOMICAL EXERCITATIONS Concerning The Circulation of the Blood, To John
Riolan the Son, the most experienced Physician in the Universitie of Paris, the
Prince of Dissectors of Bodies, and the Kings Professors and Dean of Anatomy,
and the knowledge of Simples; Chief Physician to the Queen Mother of Lewis XIII.

The Author, WILLIAM HARVEY, an Englishman, Professor of Anatomy and
Chirurgerie in the College of Physicians at LONDON, and Doctor of Physic to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

London, Printed by Francis Leach, 1653.

The First ANATOMICAL EXERCITATION Concerning The Circulation of the Blood, To
JOHN RIOLAN.
THere did come forth not many months ago a little piece of the most famous
Riolan's, concerning Anatomy and Diseases; for which, as being sent to me by
the Author himself, I return hearty thanks: Seriously I do congratulate the
felicity of that man in undertaking a thing very commendable. To open to the
view the seats of all Diseases, is a work not to be achieved but by a divine
wit; Truly he undertook a hard task, that has set those Diseases, which are
almost obscure to our understanding, before our eyes. Such endeavors become
the Prince of Anatomists; for there is no Science which has not its beginning
from foregoing knowledge, nor any knowledge which is not beholding to sense for
its original: For which cause the business it self, and the example of so
worthy a person required my pains, and did invite me in like manner to put
forth and join my medicinal Anatomic, being chiefly fitted for Physical uses,
not with the same intention as he, by demonstrating the places of diseases,
from the dead bodies of healthful men, and rehearsing the diverse sorts of
diseases incident to those places, according to other men's opinions, which he
ought to have seen there; but that I might undertake to relate from the many
dissections of sick bodies, and the most grievous and wonderful diseases of
dead persons, in what manner, and how the inward parts of them are changed, in
place, bigness, condition, figure, substance, and other sensible accidents,
from their natural form and appearance, which all Anatomists commonly
described, and how diversely and wonderfully they are affected. For as the
dissection of healthful and well habited bodies conduces much to Philosophy
and right Physiologie, so the inspection of diseased bodies conduces chiefly to
Pathological Philosophy. For the Physiological contemplation of those things
which are according to Nature, is first to be known by the Physician, for that
which is according to Nature is right, and is rule both to it self and that
which is amiss; by the light of which, errors and preternatural diseases being
defined, Pathologie is more clear, and from Pathologie the use and art of
administering Physic, and occasions of inventing many new remedies do ocur.
Nor will any man believe how much in diseases, especially such as are
Chronical, the inwards are changed, and what monstrous shapes of the inward
parts are begotten by diseases: And I dare say the opening and dissection of
one consumptive person, or of a body spent with some ancient or venomous
disease, has more enriched the knowledge of Physic, than the dissections of
ten bodies of men that have been hanged.

Yet do not I disallow of the most famous and most learned Anatomist Riolan
his purpose, but think it highly to be commended, as being very profitable for
Physic, that he does illustrate the Physiological part; yet did I think that
it would not be less profitable to the art of Physic if I should set clearly
before your eyes to be seen, not only the places, but likewise the diseases of
those places, and rehearse them, after I had well viewed and observed them, and
from my many dissections declare my experience.

But such things in that Book concerning the Circulation of the blood found out
by me, which are translated, and seem to reflect only upon me, must first and
chiefly be taken into consideration by me. For so great a man's judgment,
concerning such a weighty business, is not to be set at naught (who is
undoubtedly thought the chief, and ringleader of all Anatomists of this age)
but the opinion of him alone, is more to be weighed for commendation, than the
verdicts of all others, which shall either applaud or contradict me, and his
censure more to be weighed and looked upon. He then in his lib. 3. cap. 8.
Enchir. acknowledges our motion of the blood in Animals, and takes part with
us, and is of our opinion, as concerning the circulation of the blood: yet not
altogether, and openly; for he says, lib. 2. cap. 21. That the blood in the
port vein contained, admits no circulation, as the blood in the vena cava, and
in lib. 3. cap. 8. That there is blood which is circulated, and circulatory
vessels, to wit, the aorta and the vena cava, yet he denies that the branches
of them have any circulation; Because, says he, the blood running out into all
the parts of the second and third region, stays there for nutrition, nor does
it flow back to the greater vessels, but being plucked back by force, when the
greater vessels are in great want of blood, or when it returns with a sudden
force, or exstimulation, to the greater circulatory vessels. And so a little
after. Whether or no the blood of the veins, does perpetually or naturally
ascend, or whether it returns to the Heart, or Whether the blood of the
Arteries do descend, or go from the Heart, yet if the lesser veins of the arms
and legs be empty, the blood of the veins in succession filling the empty
places, may descend, which (says he) I have clearly demonstrated against
Harvey and Wallaeus. And because daily experience and the authority of Galen
does comfirm the Anastomosis of the veins and arteries, and the necessity of
the Circulation of the blood; You see, says he, how the circulation of the
blood coms about, without the confusion of humors, or the perturbation of
ancient medicine.

By which words it is known, for what cause the most famous man would partly
acknowledge, partly deny the Circulation of the blood, and why he endeavors to
build a reeling and tottering opinion of Circulation. Lest, forsooth, he should
destroy the ancient Physic, and not moved by truth, which he could not choose
but see, but rather for fear he should violate the ancient rules of Physic, or
perchance, lest he ssould seem to resume or retract that Physiologie which in
his Anthropologia he had published before. For the Circulation of the Blood
does not destroy the ancient Physic, but furthers it; rather it show the
Physiologie of Physicians, and the speculation of natural things, and disallows
the Anatomical doctrine of the use and action of the heart, lungs; and the rest
of the intrals; and that these things are so, will appear partly out of his own
words, partly out of those things which I shall here set down; namely, that the
whole blood, in whatsoever part of the body living it be, does move and shift
place (as well that which is in the greater veins, and their branches and
fibers, as that in the porosities of the parts in any region of the body) does
flow to the heart, and flow from the heart, without interruption, incessantly,
and never continues in one place without damage; though I do not say, but in
some places it moves flower, in some faster.

First then, the most learned man denies only that the blood contained in the
Porta does circulate, which he could neither have denied nor disapproved of, if
he had not passed over the force of his own argument: for he says lib. 3. cap.
8. If in every pulsation the heart receive one drop of blood, which it expels
into the aorta, and does make two thousand pulsations in an hour, there must
needs a great deal of blood pass through. He is likewise forced to affirm the
same of the mesenterie, since through the caliacal artery, and the mesenterial
arteries, there is thrust in more than one drop of blood at every pulsation,
and is forced against the mesenterie and its veins: insomuch that it must
either go out according to the just proportion of that which enters, otherwise
the branches of the Porta would burst at last; nor can it (for the resolution
of this doubt) be probably said, or possibly be, that the blood of the
mesenteric should vainly, and to no purpose, ebb and flow through these
arteries, like an Euripus; nor the relapse from the mesenteric by those
passages and transplantation by which he would have the mesenteric disgorge it
self into the aorta, likely to be true; nor can it prevail against that which
is entering by contrary motion; nor can there be any vicissitude, where it is
most certain that without interruption, and incessantly, there is an influx;
but is compelled by the same necessity, by which it is certain, that the heart
does thrust forth the blood against the mensenteriu^. Which is most manifest;
for otherwise, by the same argument, they would overthrow all Circulation of
the blood, if thus he should, with the same likelihood of truth, affirm that
too in the ventricles of the heart, namely in the Systole of the heart the
blood is driven into the aorta, and in the Diastole returns, and the aorta
disburthens it self into the ventricles of the heart, as the ventricles again
into the aorta, and so neither in the heart nor in the mesenterie should there
be any circulation, but a flux and reflux, by turns, is turned up and down with
needless labor: Therefore if of necessity in the heart is proved the
circulation of the blood, for the reason aforesaid proved by himself, the same
force of argument takes place likewise in the mesenterie; but if there be no
circulation in the mesenterie, neither is there in the heart; for both these
assertions, namely, this of the heart, that of the mesenterie, hangs upon the
force of the same argument, only changing the words, and is established, and
falls in like manner.

He says, that the Sigma-like portals do hinder the regresse of the blood in
the heart, but there are no portals in the mesenterie.

I answer, neither is this true; for in the splenick branch, as likewise
sometimes in others, there are found portals. Besides, portals are not all
times requisite in the more profound veins, nor are they found in the deep
veins of the joints, but rather in the skin veins; for where the blood flowing
out of the less branches is prone naturally to come into the greater, by the
compression of the muscles about it it is sufficiently hindered from return,
but where the passage being open, it is forced; What need is there there of
portals? But how much blood at every pulsation is forced into the mesenterie,
is reckoned according to the same account, as if with an indifferent ligature
you should in the carpus bind the veins coming out of the hand, and entering
into the arteries; (for the arteries of the mesenterie are greater than those
of the carpus) if you tell at how many pulsations the vessel and your whole
hand swell to their greatest biguesse dividing and making a subduction, you
shall find much more than one drop of blood come in at every pulsation,
notwithstanding the ligature; nor can it return, but rather that in filling the
hand it forcibly distends and swells it, we may by calculation gather, that the
blood enters the mesenteric in the same quantity, if not in a greater, by how
much the arteries of the mesenteric are greater than those of the carpus. And
if any should but see and think with himself, with what difficulty and pains,
compressions, ligatures, and several means the blood is staid, that leaps
forcibly out of the least artery which is cut or broken, with what strength
(as if it were shot out of a spout) it throws off, and drives away, or passes
through all the bindings, I think he would scarce believe that any part of
blood which only enters, could against this impulsion and influx pass back
again, being not able to drive it back with force. For which cause, considering
these things with himself, I believe it would not ever enter his mind to imagine
that the blood out of the veins of the porta could creep back by these same
ways, and so disburthen it self into the Mesenterie, against so forcible and
strong an influx into the arteries.

Moreover, if the most learned man believe not that the blood is moved and
changed by circular motion, but being still the same, it stands and mantles in
the branches of the mesenterie; he seems to suppose, that there is a twofold
blood, diverse, and serving to diverse uses and ends, and therefore it is of
diverse natures in the vena porta and cava, because one of them for its
preservation needs circulation, the other needs not, which neither does it
appear, nor does he demonstrate it to be true.

Besides the most learned man adds in his Enchirid. lib. 2. cap. 18. A fourth
sort of vessels to the Mesenterie, which are called the Venae Lacteae (invented
by Asselius) which being set down, he seems to infer that all the nutriment
being drawn through them is carried to the liver, the forge of blood, which
being there concocted and changed into blood, (he says in lib. 3. cap. 8.) it
is carried to the left ventricle of the heart, which being granted, says he,
all the scruples which were anciently motion'd concerning the distribution of
the Chylus, and of the blood through the same conduit, do cease, for the Venae
Lacteae carry the Chylus to the Liver, and therefore these conduits are apart,
and can be obstructed apart. But indeed I would fain know how this can be
demonstrated to be true; If this milk be transfused and pass into the liver,
how shall it get thence through the cava into the ventricle of the heart?
(Since the most learned man denies that the blood contained in the numerous
branches of the porta and the liver can pass, that so circulation may be made)
but more especially since the blood seems to be a great deal fuller of spirit,
and more penetrative than the milk or chylus, which is contained in these
vessels, and is hitherto impelled by the arteries that it may find out some way
for its self.

The most learned man makes mention of a certain Treatise of his concerning the
Circulation of the blood, I wish I could see it, I might perchance recant.

But if the most learned man thought it more fit to place the circular motion
of the blood in the veins of the porta, and branches of the cava, (as he says
in his 3. Book Chap. 8. In the veins the blood does perpetnally and naturally
ascend or return to the heart, as likewise that which is in all the arteries
descends and departs from the heart. I say, I do not see, but upon this
position all difficulties which were objected of old of the distribution of the
Chylus, and blood, through these same conduits, should likewise cease, that
hence forward he should not need to enquire apart for, or to set down vessels
for the chylus; seeing as the Umbilical veins do draw their nutritive juice
from the liquors of the egg, and carries it to the nourishing and augmentation
of the Chick whilst it is yet an Embryon, so do the meseraick veins suck the
chylus from the intestines, and carry it to the liver, and what hinders us to
assert, that it does the like in those of riper age? for all difficulties
cease, when there are not two contrary motions supposed in the same vessels;
but that we do suppose that there is one continued motion in the meseraicks
from the intestines to the Liver.

I shall tell you in another place what is to be thought of the venae Lacteae,
when I shall speak of milk found in several parts of creatures new born,
especially in mankind, for it is found in the mesenterie and all its glandules,
as also in the chymus, likewise in the armpits and paps of Children; the
Midwives milk out the blood for their health as they believe.

But moreover it pleased the most learned Riolan, not only to deprive the blood
contained in the mesenterie of circulation, but also he affirms, that neither
the branches of the vena cava, or its artery, or any part of the second or
third region admits of circulation, so that only he calls the vena cava and the
aorta circulatory vessels, for which in his 3 Book Chap. 8. he gives a very
faint reason, Because the blood, says he, flowing into all parts of the second
and third region remains there for nourishment nor does it flow back to the
greater vessels, unless it be revulsed by the force and want of blood in the
greater vessels, or flow back, being stirred with a sudden force, to the
circulatory vessels.

It is indeed of necessity, that the portion which passes into nourishment,
should remain, for otherwise it should not nourish unless it be assimilated,
and stay there, in lieu of that which is lost, and so become one: but it is not
needful, that the whole influx of blood should remain there for the conversion
of so little a portion; for every part does not use so much blood for its
nourishment, as it contains in its veins, arteries, and porosities, nor is it
necessary in his afflux and reflux that it should leave no nourishment within
it; where fore it is not necessary that for nutrition it should all stay, but
likewise the most learned man himself, in the very same book in which he
affirms this, does seem every where almost to affirm the contrary, especially
where he sets down the circulation in the brain, and by circulation (says he)
the brain does send back blood to the heart, and so the heart is refrigerated.
After which sort likewise, the remote parts may be said to refrigerat the
heart, whence also in fevers, when the parts about the heart are grievously
scorched and inflamed with feverish heat, laying naked their joints, and
throwing off the clothes, sick people endeavor to cool their heart, whilst (as
the most learned man affirms of the brain) the blood being refrigerated and
allayd of its heat, does then go to the heart through the veins, and does
refrigerat it. Whence the most learned man seems to insinuate a kind of
necessity, that as from the brains, so there is a circulation from all the
parts, otherwise than before he had openly declared. But indeed he cautiously
and ambiguously affirms. That the blood does not flow back from the parts of
the second and third region, unless, says he being revuls'd by the force and
great want of blood in the bigger vessels, or that it does by a sudden forcible
motion flow back to the greater circulatory vessels, which is most true, if
these words be understood in a true sense; for by the greater vessels, in which
he says want causes a reflux. I believe he understands the vena cava, or the
circulatory veins, not the arteries; for the arteries are never emptyed, but
into the veins, or pores of the parts, but they are continually stuffed full by
the pulse of the heart. If all the parts did not incessantly refund blood in
abundance into the vena cava, and the circulatory vessels, out of which the
blood very suddenly passes, and hastens to the heart, there would quickly be a
great want of blood. Besides that, the blood which is contained in all the
parts of the second and third region, by the force of the blood directed and
driven by every pulse, is fore'd out of the pores into the veins, out of the
branches into the greater vessels, as likewise by the motion and compression of
the parts adjacent; for that which is contained is thrust out by every thing
containing it, when it is pressed and straightened: so by the motion of the
muscles and the joints, the branches of the veins passing between being pressed
and straightened, thrust the blood contained in the lesser vessels into the
greater.

But it is not to be doubted, that the blood is continually and incessantly
driven, and comes with force from the arteries, and never flows back; if it be
admitted, that in every pulse all the arteries together are distended by the
propulsion of blood, and that the Diastole of the arteries, as the most learned
man confesses, is from the Systole of the heart; nor does the blood once gone
forth, return into the ventricles of the heart, by reason that the portals are
shut, if (I say) the most learned man do believe these things, as it seems he
does, it will easily be understood in every part of what region soever, by what
stuffing or impulsion the blood in them contained is forcibly thrust down.

For so far as the arteries beat, so far reaches the influx and the force,
wherefore it is felt in all parts of every region, for there is a pulse every
where in the tops of our fingers, and under the nails, nor is there any part in
our whole body, either sore with boil or fellon, which does not feel the
pricking motion of the beating of the artery, and its endeavor to dissolve
the continuum.

But further it is manifest, that the blood does make a regresse in the pores
of the parts, in the skin of the hands and feet, for sometimes in great frost
and cold seasons we see the hands and joints, especially of boys, so cold, that
at the very touch they do almost resemble the coldness of Ice, and are so
benumbed and stiff, that there is scarce any life in them, nor motion, and yet
in the mean time they are full of blood seeming red or blew, which parts can
again by no means be warmed, unless by Circulation that refrigerate blood be
thrust out, and in its place, new, warm, and spirituous blood flowing in do
foment and re-warm the parts, and restore to them motion and sense; for they
should never be renewed or restored by external heat, no more than the members
of dead persons, unless some internal influent warmth did refresh them. This
indeed is the chief use and end of the Circulation of the blood, for which
cause, the blood by its continual course, and perpetual influence, is driven
about; namely, that all the parts depending upon it by their first innate warm
moisture might be retained in life, and in their own vital and vegetative
essence, and perform all their functions, whilst (as the Naturallists say) they
are sustained and actuated by natural heat, and vital spirits; so by the help
of two extremities, heat and cold, the temper of the bodies of creatures is
kept in its mediocrity: for as the breathing in of air does temper the too much
heat of the blood in the lungs, and in the center of the body, and causes the
eventilation of suffocating fumes; so also the blood being hot, and cast out
through the arteries into the whole body, does foment and nourish the
extremities in living creatures and hinders them to be extinguished by the
force of outward cold.

Therefore it were injust and wonderful, if every little part of what region
soever should not enjoy the benefit of the transmutation and circulation of the
blood, for whose sake Circulation seems chiefly to be appointed by Nature.
Therefore, that I may conclude, for you see how the Circulation of the blood is
performed without perturbation or confusion of the humors, in all the body, and
in every part, both in the greater and in the lesser vessels, and that by
necessity, and for the benefit of all the parts, without which, being cold and
impotent, they could never be restored, or remain alive. It is enough, because
its clear, that all influence of preservative heat does come through the
arteries, and is done by circulation.

For which cause most learned Riolan seems to me, when he says, that in some
parts there is no Circulation, to speak rather officiously, than truth; to wit,
that he might please most men, and oppose no body, and that he rather wrote
humanely, than gravely, in the behalf of the truth. As he likewise seems to do
( lib. 3. cap 8.) when he would rather have the blood to come into the left
ventricle through the septum of the heart, through uncertain and hidden
passages, than through the large and most open vessels of the lungs, being made
with Portals artificially to hinder its return. I desire to see the reason of
the impossibility and inconvenience which he says he propounded elsewhere. It
is a wonder, since the Aorta and vena Arteriosa, are of the same bigness,
constitution, and frame, that their function should not be the same. But that
is very improbable that the great River of the whole mass of blood should in
so great abundance go into the left ventricle by so blind and small a winding
of the septum, which should answer both to the entry from the vena cava in the
right side of the heart, and also its egresse from the left, which do both
require such wide orifices. But he has likewise produced these things
staggeringly, for in lib. 3. ca 6. he ordains the lungs as a sink or passage
from the heart, and he says, The lungs are affected by that blood which passes
through, whilst its filth flows together with that blood; so he says
likewise, That the lungs acquire corruption by distempered, and
ill-condition'dintralls, which furnish the heart with impure blood, whose fault
the heart cannot help, but by many circulations. He likewise in the same place,
concerning letting of blood, and shortness of breath, and communication of the
veins with the vessels of the lungs, says against Galen, If it be rue that the
blood does naturally pass from the right ventricle of the heart to the lungs
that it may be carried to the left ventricle, and so to the aorta; and if the
Circulation of the blood be admitted, who sees not in the diseases of the
lungs, that the blood flows thither in greater abundance, and oppresses the
lungs, unless they be first largely emptied, every part taking a share to case
them; which was Hippocrates advice, from all parts of the body, head, nose,
tongue, arms, feet, to take away the blood, that the quantity of it might be
impaired, and that it might be revulsed from the lungs, and so draws out the
blood till the body was quite without blood. He says likewise, The Circulation
being supposed, the lungs are easily emptied by breathing a vein. If this
counsel be rejected, I see not how it can be revuls'd from thence; for if it
flow back through the vena arteriosa into the right ventricle, the Sigmoidal
portals hinder it, and the three-pointed portals hinder the regress out of the
right ventricle into the vena cava. Therefore by Circulation the bload will be
exhausted, by cutting the veins of the arms and feet. And likewise Pernelius
his opinion in the affections of the lungs is destroyed, that blood is rather
to be taken out of the right arm than out of the left, for the blood cannot
return into the vena cava, unless it break through two gates and bars which
are placed in the heart.

He adds moreover in the same place, (lib. 3. cap. 6.) If the Circulation of
the blood be admitted, and that it does pass often through the lungs, and not
through the middle of the Septum of the heart, there is a twofold Circulation
of the blood to be assigned, one of which is perfected by the heart and the
lungs, whilst the blood leaping out from the right ventricle of the heart is
carried through the lungs, that it may come to the left ventricle of the heart;
for leaping out from the same inward part, it returns to it, then by another
larger circulation flowing out of the left ventricle of the beart, it goes
about the whole body, and runs through the arteries and veins to the right
ventricle of the heart.

The most learned man in this place might have added the third circulation,
which is a very short one, out of the left ventricle into the right, drawing
about a part of the blood through the coronall arteriese and veins, by its
branches, which are distributed about the body, walls, and septum of the heart.

He says, He that admits of one circulation, cannot deny the other. So might he
have added, nor can he refurse the third. For to what purpose should the
coronal arteries beat in the heart, if they did not drive blood thither? and
why should the veins, (whose function and end it is to receive blood put into
them by the arteries) but that they might draw blood from the heart? Moreover
in the orfice of the Coronal artery (as the learned man himself confesses, in
his third Book and his ninth Chapter,) there is a portal which forbids, all
entrance, and is patent to egresse: therefore truly he cannot but admit of the
third Circulation, who likewise admits of another universal one, and that the
blood does likewise pass through the lungs and the brain, (lib. 4. cap. 2.)
For neither can there be an admittance of blood by pulsation, in all parts of
every region, nor regresse by the veins after the same manner, and therefore he
cannot deny, but that the parts admit of Circulation.

Therefore it is clear from these very words of the most learned man, what his
opinion is, both of the Circulation of the blood through the whole body, as
likewise through the lungs and the rest of the parts; for the that admits of
the first Circulation, it is clear that he does not reject the other: For how
can it be, that he who has admitted of another Circulaon through the whole body
so often, and through the greater circulatory vessels, should deny that
universal Circulation in any of the branches or parts of the second or third
region? As if all the veins and those greater circulatory vessels, as he calls
them, were not numbered by himself, and by all others, amongst the vessels of
the second region. Is it possible that there should be circulation through the
whole body, and not through all the parts? and therefore where he denies it he
does it very stammeringly, and only staggers and palliates in his negations;
there where he affirms he speaks understandingly and as becomes a Philosopher,
and as a skilful Physician and an honest man, gives his advice in this case,
that in the dangerous diseases of the lungs the letting of blood is the only
remedy, against Gales and his beloved Fernelius: in which thing if he had been
doubtful, far be it from a Christian and so learned a man, to recommend his
expements to posterity, to procure death, and the hazard of men's lives, or
that he should recede from Fernelius or Galen, men in high esteem with him.
Therefore whatsoever he has denied of the Circulation in the mesenterie, or any
other part, in favor of the ancient Doctrine of Physic, or the Venae Lacteae,
or for any other regard, it is to be attributed to his civility and modesty,
and to be prdoned.

I think it does already appear clearly enough, both from the words and the
arguments of the most learned man himself, that there is a circulation every
where, and that blood wheresoever it is, does change place, and pass through
the veins to the heart; and the most learned man seems to be of the same
opinion with me; Therefore it needs not, yea it were superfluous to bring
hither my arguments which I have published in my Book concerning the motion of
the blood, for the further confirmation of this truth, which are taken both
from the frame of the vessels, placing of the portals, and other experiments
and observations; especially since I have not as yet seen the most learnedd
man's Treatise of the Circulation of the blood, nor as yet any of the most
learned man's Arguments, but only a bare negation, by which being induced he
should reject the circulation in the regions and vessels, which he allows to be
universal in most of the parts.

It is indeed true, that I did find out of the authority of Galen, and by daily
experience to be a refugium the Anastomosis of the veslels, yet so great a man
as he is, so diligent, so curious, so expert an Anatomist, should first have
laid open and shown Anastomoses, and those visible and open ones, and
whirlpools proportionable to the imperuous stream of the whole blood, and the
orifices of the branches, (from which he has taken away circulation) before he
had rejected those which were most probable and most open. He was obliged to
demonstrate and declare where they are, how they are framed, whether they are
not only fit for the intromission of blood (as we see the arteries inserted in
the bladder) and not for the return of it, or what other way soever they had
been. But perchance I speak too boldly for neither the learned man, nor Galen
himself, could by any experience ever behold the sensible Anastomoses, or ever
could demonstrate them to the sense.

I did look after them with all possible diligence, and was not at a little
charge and pains in the search of the Anastomoses, yet could I never find that
any vessel, namely the arteries, together with the veins, were joined by their
orifices: I should willingly learn from others who ascribe so much to Galen,
that they dare swear all which he says. Nor is there any Anastomosis in the
liver, milt, lungs, reins, or any other of the intrals, although I did boil
them till the whole Parenchyme was made mouldering, and like dust was shaken
off, and taken away with the point of a needle, from all the fibers of the
vessels, so that I could see the fibers, and the last grains of every division.
I dare therefore boldy affirm, that neither the vena porta has any Anastomoses
with the cava, nor the veins with the arteries, or the capillar branches of the
pore of the chollerbagg, which are dispersed about all the flat of the liver
with the veins. Only this you may observe in a fresh liver, that all the
branches of the vena cava which creep through the whole bunch of the liver,
have tunicles pierced with many holes like a sive, as it is in a sink, framed
so for the receiving of the blood which falls down. The branches of the Porta
are not so, but are divided into stems, and how that both the divisions of
these vessels, the one in the flat, the other in the gibbous part, do run
round to the very furthest rising of that intrall without any Anastomoses.

Only in three places do I find that which is equivalent to an Anastomosis.
There rises in the brain, from the soporall arteries creeping down into the
Basis, many and unintangled fibers, which afterward make up the plexus
chorois, and passing through the ventricles do at last end in the third
receptacle, which performs the office of a vein. In the spermaticall vessels,
commonly called preparatory, little arteries drawn from the great artery do
adhere to the veins preparatory aforesaid, which they accompany, and at last
are so received within their Tunicle, so that at the first they seem both to
have one and the same, so that when they end at the upper part of the testicles
where that part passes forth into a point, which is called the varicous and
vine-like body, we know not what to call them, veins or arteries, or the ends
of both. As likewise the last appearances of the arteries which go to the
Vmbilical vein, are obliterated in the Tunicles of that vein.

What doubt is to be made, if through such gulphes, the little branches of the
arteria magna, swollen with the impulsion and instuffing of blood, could be eased
of so great and so conspicuous a stream? Nature at least would never have
denied us visible and sensible passages, sincks and whirlpools, if she had had
intention to have turned all the flux of the blood thither, and by that means
have deprived the lesser branches, and the solid parts of the benefit of the
influx of blood.

Lastly, I will set down one experiment, which seems to be sufficient for the
clearing of the Anastomoses, and for the overthrowing of their use, and of the
passage of the blood, and return of it out of the veins into the arteries, by
those ways.

Opening the breast of any creature, and tying the vena cava by the heart, so
that nothing can pass that way into the heart, and presently cutting the
jugular arteries, not touching the veins on neither side, If by giving vent you
see the arteries emptied, and not the veins too, I hope it will be clear that
the blood is carried out of the veins into the arteries, no where but through
the ventricles of the heart. Otherwise (as Galen has observed) in a little
space we should see the veins emptyed, and destitute of blood by the efflux of
the arteries.

In what remains, Riolan, I both congratulate my self and you, my self for your
opinion, with which you have adorned my Circulation, as likewise I return to
you exceeding thanks for your learned, neat, succinct piece which you sent to
me, than which there is nothing more elegant, and I both owe and desire to
return deserved commendation, but I confess I am not able for such a charge.
For I know the name of Riolan will afford more praise to me in its
subscription, than my praises, which I wish as great as may be can do to his
Enchiridion. The famous book shall outlive all memory, and shall recommend your
worth to Posterity when all Monuments shall perish. To it you have very
handsomely adjoined the Anatomy of Diseases, and have very profitably enriched
it with a new Treatise concerning the Bones. May you, most worthy Man,
continually increase in this your worth, and love me, who wish that you may be
both happy and long lived, and that your most famous writings may be an
eternal Commendation to you.

William Harvey.

ANOTHER EXERCITATION, TO JOHN RIOLAN.
In which, many Objections against the Circulation of the Blood are refuted.
MOst learned Riolan, by the help of the Press, many years ago, I published a
part of my labor: But since the birthday of the Circulation of the Blood,
almost no day has past, nor the least space of time, in which I have not heard
both good and evil of the Circulation of the Blood which I found out: Others
rail at it, as a tender babie unworthy to come to light; Others say, that its
worthy to be fostered and favor my writings, and defend them; Some with great
disdain oppose them; Some with mighty appause protect them; Others say, that I
have abundantly by many experiments, observations, and ocular testimony,
confirmed the Circulation of the blood, against all strength and force of
arguments; Others think it not yet sufficiently illustratted, and vindicated
from objections: But there are who cry out, that I have affected a vain
commendation in dissection of living creatures, and do with childish slighting
dispraise and deride at Frogs and Serpents, Gnats, and other more
inconsiderable creatures brought upon the Stage, and refrain not from ill
language. But I think it a thing unworthy of a Philosopher and a searcher of
the truth, to return bad words for bad words, and I think I shall do better
and more advised, if with the light of true and evident observations I shall
wipe away those symptoms of incivility.

It cannot be eschewed but dogs will bark and belch up their surfets; nor can
it be helped, but that the Cynicks will be amongst the number of the
Philosophers: but we must take a special care that they do not bite, nor
infect us with their cruel madness, or lest they should with their dogs
teeth gnaw the very bones or principles of truth.

Detractors, Momes, and writers staind with railing, as I never intended to
read any of them (from whom nothing of solidity, nor any thing extraordinary is
to be hoped for, but bad words) so did I much less think them worthy of an
answer: Let them enjoy their own cursed nature, I believe they will find but a
few favorable Readers; neither does God give wisdom to the wicked, which is
the most excellent gift, and most to be sought for: Let them rail on still,
till they be weary (if not ashamed) of it.

If you will enter with Heraclitus in Aristotle into a workhouse (for so I
will call it) for inspection of viler creatures, come hithet, for the immortal
gods are here likewise; and the great and Almighty Father is sometimes most
conspicuous in the least and most inconsiderable creatures.

In my book concerning the motion of the heart and blood in creatures, I only
chose out those things out of my many other observations, by which I either
thought that errors were confuted, or truth was confirmed; I left out many
things as unnecessary and unprofitable, which notwithstanding are discernable
by dissection and sense; of which I shall now add some in few words, in favor
of those that desire to learn. The great authority of Galen is of so much
account with every body, that I see many make a difficulty as concerning that
experiment of Galen of the ligature of the artenie above the pipe, thrust
within the concavity of the artery, by which it is demonstrated, that the
pulse of the artery comes from the faculty pulsifick, and that it is
transmitted from the heart by the tunicles, and not by the impulsion of the
blood within the Concavities; and therefore that the arteries are stretched as
bellows, not as baggs.

This experiment is mentioned by Ves^alius, a man very skillful in Anatomy, but
neither Galen nor Vesalius says, that they tried this experiment, which I did;
only Vesalius prescribes it, and Galen counsels it to those that are desirous
no find out the truth, not thinking, nor knowing the difficulty of that
business, nor the vanity of it when it is done, since although it be performed
with all manner of diligence, it makes nothing to the confirmation of that
opinion, which affirms That the tunicles are the cause of pulsation, but rather
shows That it is set a-work by the impulsion of the blood. For so soon as above
the reed or pipe you have with a band tied the artery, the artery above the
ligature is presently dilated by the impulsion of the blood beyond the mouth of
the pipe, from whence both the flux is stopped, and the impulsion reverberated,
so that the artery under the band does beat with very little appearance,
because the force of the passage of the blood does no way assist it, because it
is returned above the ligature; but if the artery the cut off below the pipe,
you shall see the contrary, from the leaping of the blood which is thrown out,
and driven through the pipe, as in an Aneurism I have observed to come fro the
exesion of the tunicles of the artery, this (whilst the blood is containd
within the membranes) has a contentive vessel of its flux praenaturally made,
not of the dilated tunicles of the artery, but of the circumposition of the
membrane and flesh. You shall see the inferior arteries beyond this Aneurism
beat very weakly, whilst above, and especially in the Aneurism it self, the
pulsations appear great and vehement, although we cannot there imagine, that
the impulse or dilatation is made by the tunicles of the arteries, or by
communication of the faculty of the Cyst; but merely by the impulsion of the
blood.

But that the error of Vesalius, and the small experience of others may the
more clearly appear, who affirm (as they imagine) that the part under the pipe
does not beat when the band is tied. I speak by experience, if you make the
experiment rightly, that it will; and whereas they say, that upon the untying
the band the arteries below xdo beat backwards, I say that the part below beats
less when you have untyed it, then when it is tied.

But the effusion of blood which leaps out of the wound confuses all, and makes
the experiment vain and to no purpose, so that there can be no certainty
demonstrated, as I said, by reason of the blood. But if (and this I know by
experience) you lay open the artery, and hold with your finger close that part
which you cut, you may at your pleasure try many things which will evidently
make the truth appear to you. First, you shall feel the blood, being forced,
coming down into the artery, by which you shall see the artery dilated; as
likewise you may squeez out and let go the blood as you please: If you open a
little part of the orifice and look narrowly to it, you shall see the blood at
every pulse to be thrown out with a leaping, and as we said in the opening of
an artery, or in the perforation of the heart, you shall see the blood to be
thrown out in every contraction of the heart, in the dilatation of the artery.

But if you suffer it to flow with a constant and continual flux, and give it
leave to break out, either through the pipe, or by the open orifice, in the
streaming of it both by your sight and by your touch you shall find all the
strokes, order, vehemence, and intermission of the heart; just as you might
feel in the pulse of your hand water squirted through a syringe at diverse and
several shootings, so you may perceive both by your sight and by its motion,
the blood leaping out with a varying and unequal force. I have seen it
sometimes in the cutting of the jugular artery break out with such force, that
the blood being forced against the hand, did by its reverberation and
refraction, fly back four or five foot.

But that this doubt may be more clear, that the pulsifick force does not flow
through the Tunicles of the arteries from the hoant, I have a little piece of
the artery descendant, together with two crurall branches of it, about the
length of a span, taken out of the body of a very worthy Gentleman, which
turned to be a bone like a pipe, by the hollow of which, whilst this worthy
Gentleman was alive, the blood in its descent to the feet did agitate the
arteries by its impulsion; in which case nevertheless, although the artery
were in the same condition as if it had been bound or tied above the little
conduit-pipe, according to the experiment of Galen, that it could not either be
dilalated in that place, nor straightened like a pair of bellows, nor from the
heart derive its pulsifick force, to the inferior and lesser arteries, nor yet
carry through the solid substance of the bones that faculty which it had not
received; yet I very well remember that I often observed whilst he was alive,
that the pulse of the inferior artery did move in his legs and feet:
wherefore it must needs follow, that in in that worthy Gentleman the inferior
arteries were dilated by the impulsion of the blood, like baggs, and not like
bellows, by the stretching of the tunicles. For there must needs arrive the
same inconvenience, and interception of the pulsifick faculty, the tunicle of
the artery being wholly converted into a conduit or pipe of bone, as might
arrive from the reed or pipe which was tied, that the artery might not beat.

I knew likewise in another worthy and gallant Gentleman, the aorta and a part
of the great artery near the heart, turned into a round bone. So Galens
experiment, or at least one answerable to it, being not found out by industry,
was found out by chance, and does manifestly evidence, that the interception of
the pulsifick faculty is not intercepted by the construction or ligature of the
Tunicles, so that by that means the arteries cannot beat; and if the experiment
which Galen prescribes, were rightly performed by any it would refute the
opinion which Vesalius thought from thence to have confirmed. Yet for this
cause do we not deny all motion to the tunicles of the arteries, but do
attribute that to it which we grant to the heart, namely, that there is a
coarctation and a Systole in the tunicles themselves, and from their distension
a regress to their natural constitution. But if this is to be observed, that
they are not dilated and straightened for the same cause, nor by the same
instrument, but by several, as you may observe in the motion of all the parts,
and in the heart; it is distended by the ear, contracted by it self, so the
arteries are dilated by the heart, and fall of themselves.

So you may make another experiment after the same manner. If you fill two
sawcers of the same measure, one of them with arterial blood which leaps out,
the the other with venal blood, drawn out of a vein of the same Animal, you may
presently by your sense, and afterward too, when both the bloods are grown
cold, observe what is the difference betwixt both the bloods, against those who
do fancy another sort of blood in the arteries than is in the veins; namely
they do ascribe to the veins a fresher sort of blood, I do not know which way
boiling or blown up, swelling or bubbling, (like to honey or milk upon the
fire) and so taking up more room.

For if the blood which is driven out of the left ventricle into the arteries
should be leavened, so as to be blown up, and foam after that manner, so that a
drop or two should fill all the concavity of the aorta, no doubt it would when
it fell again return to the quantity of some few drops (which cause some do
allege for the emptiness of the arteries in dead men) and the same would be
seen in the cotyla full of arterial blood; for so we find that it comes to
pass in the cooling of milk or honey. But if in either cotyla the blood be
found of the same color, and congealed, of a not much different consistence,
and squeezing out the whey after the same manner, and if it take up the same
room both when it is hot and when it is cold, I think it will be a sufficient
argument to gain any man's belief, and to confute the dreams of some, that there
is neither in the left ventricle and sort of blood differing from that of the
right, (as you may find out both by sense and reason) for you must needs
likewise affirm. that the vena arteriosa should equally be distended with one
drop of blood foaming up, and therefore that there is just such bubbling and
leavened blood in the right as in the left, seeing the entry of the vena
arteriosa, and the egresse of the aorta, is equipollent and equal.

Three things are chiefly ready to breed this opinion of the diversity of
blood. One is, that in the cutting of an artery they see brighter blood drawn
out; Another is, that in the dissection of dead bodies they find both the left
ventricle of the heart and all the arteries so empty; A third is, that they
imagine that the arterial blood is more spirituous, and more replete with
Spirits; and therefore they think that it takes up more room: The cause and
reason of all which things why they come to be so, by inspection is perceived.

First, insomuch as concerns the color, always and every where blood coming
through a narrow hole, is as as it were strained and becomes thinner, and the
lighter part of it, and which swims above, and is more penetrable, is thrust
out: so in Phlebotomie, the blood which springs out with great flux or force,
and out of a greater orifice, and flies further, is always thicker, fuller,
and darker colored; but if it flow drops, (as it does out of a vein when the
ligature is untied) it is brighter, for it is straind as it were, and only the
thinner part comes out, as in the bleeding at nose, or that which is extracted
by Leeches or Cupping-glasses, or any way issuing by diapedesin, is always seen
more bright; because the thickness and hardness of the tunicles becomes more
impassible, nor yields so pliably as to give an open way for the coming out of
the blood: As it likewise happens in fat bodies, when by the fat under the skin
the orifice of the vein is stopped, then the blood appears thinner, brighter,
and as if it did flow from an artery. On the contrary, if you receive in a
sawcer the blood when you have cut an artery, if it flow freely, it shall
appear like venal blood, there is blood much brighter in the lungs, and
squeezed out from thence, than any is found in the arteries.

The emptiness of the arteries in dead bodies (which did perchance cozen
Erasistrasus, insomuch that he thought that the arteries containd only aerial
spirits) proceeds from hence, because that when the lungs fall (their passages
being stopped) the lungs do breath no longer, so that the blood cannot freely
pass through them, yet the heart continues a while in its expulsion, whence
both the left ventricle of the heart is more contracted, and the arteries
likewise empty, and not filled by succession of blood, appear empty: But if the
heart cease both at one time, and the lungs to give passage by respiration, as
it is in those who are drowned in cold water, or in those who are taken
suddenly with unexpected death, you shall find both the veins and the arteries
full.

As concerning the third, of the Spirits, what they are, and of what
consistence, and how they are in the body, whether they be apart and distinct
from the solid parts, or mixed with them, there are so many and so diverse
opinions, that it is no wonder if Spirits, whose nature is left so doubtful,
do serve for a common escape to ignorance: For commonly ignorant persons when
they cannot give a reason for any thing, they say presently that it is done by
Spirits, and bring in Spirits as performers in all cases, and like as bad
Poets, do bring in the gods upon the Scene by head and ears, to make the Exit
and Catastrophe of their play.

Fernelius and others do imagine aerial Spirits, and invisible substances; for
he proves that there are animal Spirit (just as Erasistratus proves them in the
arteries) because there are little cells in the brains which are empty, and
since there is no vacuum, he concludes, that in living men they are full of
Spirits.

Yet all the School of Physicians agrees upon three sorts of Spirits, that the
natural Spirits flow through the veins, the vital through the arteries, and the
animal through the nerves, whence the Physicians say out of Galen, that the
parts sometimes want the consent of the brain, because the faculty, together
with its essence, is sometimes hindered, and sometime without the essence. Over
and above besides these three sorts of influxive spirtis, they seem to assert
so many more, which are implanted. But none of all these have we found by
dissection, neither in the veins, nerves, arteries, nor parts of living
persons. Some make corporeal Spirits, other some incorporeal Spirits; and those
who make corporeal spirits sometimes say, that the blood or thinnest part of
the blood is the conjunction of the soul with the body; sometimes they say,
that the Spirits are containd in the blood (as flame in smoke) and sustained by
the perpetual flux of it; sometimes they do distinguish them from the blood.
Those that affirm that there are Spirits incorporeal know not how to tread, but
likewise do affirm that there are potential Spirits, as Spirits concoctive,
chilificative, procreative, and so many Spirits as there are faculties or parts.

But the Schoolmen tell us also of a Spirit of Fortitude, Prudence, Patience,
and of all the virtues, and the most holy Spirit of wisdom, and all divine
gifts. They think too that bad and good Spirits do assist, possess, leave, and
wander abroad. They think also, that diseases are caused by a Devil, as by a
Cacochima. But although there is nothing more uncertain and doubtful, than the
doctrine which is assigned to us concerning the spirit: yet for the most part
all Physicians seem with Hippocrates to conclude, that our bodies are made up
of three parts, containing, containd, and enforcing, by the forcing he means
Spirits. But if Spirits must be understood to be every thing which enforces in
a man's body, whatsoever has the power or force of action in living bodies must
be called by the name of Spirit Therefore all the Spirits are not aeriall
substances, nor powers, nor habits, nor incorporeal.

But omitting the tediousness of all other significations to our purpose.
Those Spirit which pass out through the veins or the arteries, are not
separable from the blood, no more than flame form the flakes about it. But the
blood and the Spirit signify the same thing, though diverse in essence, as good
Wine and its Spirit. For as Wine is no more Wine after it has lost its Spirit,
but flat sluff or vinegar, so neither blood without Spirit is blood, but
equivocally goar; as a hand of stone or a dead hand is no more a hand, so blood
without vital spirit is no more to be esteemed blood. So the Spirit which is
chiefly in the arteries, and the arterial blood is as its act, as the Spirit of
Wine in Wine, and the Spirit of Aquavitae, or as a little flame kindled in the
Spirit of Wine, and living by nouristing of it self.

Therefore blood when it is most imbued with Spirits, it does require and look
after more room, because it is swelled or leavened, and blown up by them (which
you may certainly judge in my experiment which I brought concerning the measure
of the sawcers) but like wine, because it has greater strength and force of
action and performance, in which it excels according to the mind of Hippocrates.

Therefore the same blood is in the veins which is in the arteries, though it
be acknowledged to be more full of Spirit, and more eminent in vital force: but
it is not converted into something more aerial or vaporous, as if there were no
Spirits but aerial ones, or none that had force but such as were flatuous and
windy: But neither are the Animal Spirits, natural, and vital, which are
containd in the solid parts, to wit, the ligaments and nerves (especially if
there be so many several sorts of them) thought to be so many aerial forms, or
diverse sorts of vapors.

Those who acknoledge Spirits in the bodies of creatures, but such as are
corporal, but of an aerial consistence, or vaporous or fiery, of them would I
fain know, Whether they can pass hither and thither, backward and forward as
distinct bodies, without the blood? Whether or no I say, the Spirits follow the
motion of the blood, as if they were either parts of the blood, or adhering to
it by an indissoluble connection, and an interrupted exhalation; so that they
can neither leave the parts, nor pass without the influx, reflux, and passing
of the blood.

For if, as the vapors attenuated by the heat of the water, the Spirits, by
the continual flux and succession of the blood, become the nourishment of the
parts, it will necessarily follow, that they cannot remain apart from the
nourishment, but do continually vanish, for that same reason that they neither
flow back nor pass any way, nor abide, but according to the influxion,
refluxion, or passing of the blood, as being either there subject, vehiculum, or
nourishment.

Then I would know, how they show us that Spirits are made in the heart, and do
make them up, either by the compounding of exhalations, or vapors of the blood
(raised either by the heat or concussion of the heart.) Are not such Spirits to
be thought much colder than the blood, since both the parts of which they are
compounded, to wit, air, and vapor, are much colder? for the vapor of boiling
water it self, and any flame burns less than the coal of a candle, and a
wood-coal less than iron or brass red hot.

whence it seems that such Spirits do owe their heat to the blood, rather than
the blood is heated by the Spirits, and such Spirits are rather to be deemed
fumes and excrements, flowing from the blood and body, (like smells) than
workers in Nature; especially since they being so frail and vanishing, do so
quickly lose that virtue, which in their original they receive from the blood.

From whence it were likewise probable that there should be an expiration of
the lungs, by which these Spirits being blown out might be ayr'd and purified,
and that there should be an inspiration into them, that the blood passing
through betwixt the two ventricles of the heart might be tempered by the
ambient cold, lest being heated, and rising and swelling with a kind of
fermentation, like boiling honey or milk, it should so distend the lungs as to
suffocate the creature, as in a dangerous Asthma we have often seen: To which
Galen likewise ascribes the reason, when he says, that this comes to pass by
obstruction of the little arteries, namely the venous and arterious vessels. I
have had experience of this, that by affixing of Cupping-glasses, and pouring
upon them good store of cold water, there has many been saved, who have been in
danger to be suffocated by an Asthma I have here, perchance, spoken
sufficiently concerning Spirits, which we ought to define, and show what and
how they are in a Treatise of Physiologie, only I will adjoyn.

Those that speak concerning innate warmth, as an ordinary instrument of Nature
in performance of all things, and tell us of the necessity of influxive heat,
to entertain all the parts, and keep them in life, and do acknowledge that it
cannot exist without a subject, because they find a movable body
disproportionable, by reason of the swiftness of the flux and reflux,
(especially in the passions of the mind) and because of the swift motion of
this heat, they introduce Spirits, as bodies most subtle, penetrative and
movalbe, and just as they say, that from that ordinary instrument, to wit, the
innate heat, proceeds the admirable divinity of Natural operations: so do they
likewise affirm, that those Spirits of a sublime, bright, ethereal and
celestial nature, are the bonds of the Soul; as the ignorant common people when
they do not conceive the reasons of things, think and say, that God in the
immediate author of them. that is comes through the arteries; as if the blood
could not be so speedily moved, not so full nourish; and in the confidence of
this opinion they are so far advanced, that they deny that there is any blood
contained in the arteries.

Whence they resolve, that the influxive heat does come swiftly through all the
parts, by the influx of Spirit, and And with very flight arguments they
endeavor to ground this, that the arterial blood differs from the blood of the
veins, or that the arteries are filled with such Spirits; and not with blood,
contrary to all that which Galen both from reason and experience brought
against Era^^stratus.

But it is manifest by our former experiment, and by sense, that the arterial
blood is not so different; the influx of the blood and Spirt with it being not
separate from the blood, but that it flows in one body through the arteries,
sense may likewise make evident.

You may observe when, and as often as the extremities of the hands, the feet,
and the ears are stiff and cold, and are restored again by the influx of heat,
that it happens that at the self-fame time they are colored, warmed, and
filled, and that the veins which were unseen before, do swell to plain
appearance, from whence sometimes when they are suddenly warmed again the parts
are sensible of some pain; from which it appeats, that the same which by its
influx brings heat, the same is it that fills and colors them, but this can be
nothing else but blood, as was demonstrated before.

Cutting off a long artery or vein any body may see this evidently by sense,
when he shall see the nearer part of the vein toward the heart let out no
blood, but the further part pour it abundantly, and nothing but blood (as
afterward in my experiment which I set down, which I tried in the inner
jugularie veins.) On the other side, cutting an artery, but a little blood
flows from the further part, but the nearer part shoots with a violent force
mere blood, as if it were out of a spout.

By which experiment it is known which way the passage is in them, either this
way or that way. Besides, you will know what swiftness there is in it, what
sensible motion, not by little and by drops, and with what violence to boot.

But lest any would make an evasion, by pretending of invisible Spirits; Let
the orifice of the vessel so dissected be let down into a vessel of water or
oil, for if any herial thing came out, it would break out by visible bubbles;
for after this manner Wasps, Hornets, and the like Insects, being drowned or
suffocate in oil, send out at last bubbles from their tail when they are dying:
from whence it is not improbable that they do take breath too whilst they are
alive.

For all creatures at last when they are drowned and stiffled in the water,
when they fail and sink, they use to send out bubbles out of their mouth and
lungs, when they give up the glost.

Lastly, it is assured by the same experiment, That the portals in the veins
are so exactly shut, that air when it is blown in cannot pass, much less
blood. I say it appears to the sense, that neither sensibly nor insensibly,
neither by little, nor by drops, the blood is remoy'd from the heart by the
veins.

And lest any should fly hither and say thus, That this comes to pass when
Nature is troubled, and does act besides Nature, not when she is left to her
self, and acts at her own freedom; seeing the same things appear in a sickly
and preternatural constitution, which appear in good estate of body, it is not
to be said, that cutting off a vein, since there flows so much blood from the
further part, that this comes to pass beside Nature, because Nature is
molested; for the dissection does not shut the further part, so that nothing
can get out that way, nor can it be squeezed out whether Nature be troubled or
no. Others do wrangle after the same manner, saying, That although when the
artery is cut near the heart the blood breaks out in so great abundance
immediately, yet for that cause the heart being whole, and the artery too, it
does not always drive the blood by impulsion. Yet it is more likely, that all
impulsion does drive something, nor can there be a pulse of the container
without the impulsion of something contained: Yet some, that they might desend
themselves, and decline the Circulation of the blood, are not afraid to affirm
and maintain this; to wit, that the arteries in living creatures, and being
according to Nature, are so full that they cannot receive a grain weight more
of blood: and so likewise of the ventrieles of the heart. But it is without
doubt, whenever, or how much soever the arteries and ventricles are dilated,
and contracted, they ought to receive greater impulsion of blood, and that
beyond many grains. For if the ventricles be so distended as we have seen in
the Anatomy of living Creatures till they receive no more blood, the heart
leaves beating, and continuing stiff and resisting, it occasions death by
suffocation.

Whether the blood be moved or driven, or move it self by its own intrinsecall
nature, we have spoken sufficiently in our book of the motion of the heart and
blood; as also concerning the action, function, contraction, dilatation of the
heart, how it is done, and together with the Dinstale of the arteries, so that
those which take arguments from thence for contradiction, seem either not to
understand what is said there, or else they will not try the business by their
own sight.

I believe there can not the attraction of any thing be demostrated in the body
but of the nutriment, which by succession of parts supplies by little and
little that which is lost, as the oil of a lamp by the flame.

Whence that is the first common organ of all sensible attraction and impulsion,
which has the nature of a nerve, or of a fiber, or of a muscle, to wit, that it
may be contracted, and that by shortning of it self it may stretch (...) draw
in, or thrust forward: but these things are more fully and openly to be
declared elsewhere, in the organs of motion in living creatures.

Insomuch as to those who do still reject the Circulation, because they neither
see the efficient, nor final cause of it, There remains, because I have as yet
joined nothing to it, only to say thus much; First you must confess that there
is a Circulation, before you enquire for what it is, for from those things that
do happen upon the circulation and allowance of it, the use and profits
accrewing are to be searched. In the mean time I shall say so much, that there
are many things allowed and received in Physiologie, Pathologie, and Medicine,
that no body knows the cause of, yet that there are such things no body is
ignorant, namely, of rotten fevers, revulsion, purgation of excrement, yet all
these things are known by the help of Circulation.

Whosoever therefore does oppose the Circulation of the blood, because so long
as the Circulation stands, they cannot resolve Physical Problems, or because
in curing of diseases, and using of medicaments, they cannot from thence assign
any cause of the Symptoms, or see that those causes which from their Masters
they have received, are false, or think it an unworthy thing to desert opinions
approved heretofore, and think in unlawful to call in question the discipline
which has been received through so many ages together with the authority of the
Ancients.

To all these I answer, that the deeds of nature, which are manifest to the
sense, care not for any opinion or any antiquity, for there is nothing more
ancient than nature, or of greater authority.

Besides, those Problemes out of Medicinal observations not to be solved, as
the Imagine, to the Circulation they object, and do oppose to it the declaring
of their own errors, to wit, that if the circulation be true there can be no
revulsion, since the blood is driven upon the part affected as before, and so
it is to be feared, that there will be a passage of the excrements and blood,
through the most noble and principal of our entrails. They do admire at the
efflux and excretion, when out of the same body at diverse holes, yea sometimes
and the same hole, foul and corrupt blood issues, whereas if the blood were
driven with a continual flux, pasing through the heat, it would be mixed and
shaken together.

They do doubt how these, and many other things that they fetch from the School
of Physicians can come to pass, for they seem to be repugnant to the
Circulation of the blood, nor do they think (as it is in Astronomy) that it is
enough to make new Systemes, unless you solve all scruples.

I thought fit to return no other answer at this time, but that the Circulation
is not the same every where, and at all times, but many things do happen from
the swifter or slower motion of the blood, either through the strength or
infirmity of the heat, which drives it, by the abundance, estate, or
constitution of the blood, the thickness of the parts, obstruction, and the
like; thicker blood hardly finds way through narrow passages; it is more
strained when it passes the streyner of the liver, than when it passes the
streyner of the lungs.

It does not with a like speed pass through the thin contexture of the flesh,
and parenchyme, as it does through the thick consistence of the nervous parts.
For the thinner, more pure, and more spirituous part is sooner streynd through,
the more earthy, cacochymick, and more tardy, stays longer, and is turned
back. The nutritive part and last aliment (be it the Ros or Cambium) is more
penetrative, seeing it is to be applied to every part, whether it be to the
horns, feathers, or nayls, if being every where nourished they increase in all
their dimensions; for this reason the excrements in some places are voyded,
thickened, or do burden us, or are concocted: Nor do I think that there is any
necessity that the excrements or ill humors, being once set apart, nor the
milk, phlegm, nor sperm, or the last nutriment (the Ros and Cambium) should be
returned with the blood, but that it behooves that that which nourishes should
adhere, that it may be agglutinated. Of which, and a great many other things
which are to be determined and declared in their proper places, to wit, in
Physiologie, and the rest of the parts of Physic, it is not fit to dispute,
nor yet of the consequences of the Circulation of the blood, nor the
conveniences nor inconveniences of it, before the Circulation if self be
established for granted.

The example of Astronomy is not here to be followed, where only from
appearances, and such a thing that may be, the causes, and why such a thing
should be, comes to be inquired after. But as one desiring to know the cause of
the Eclipse, ought to be placed above the Moon, that by his sense he might find
out the cause, not by reasoning of things sensible, in things which come under
the notion of the sense, no surer demonstration can be to gain belief, than
ocular testimony.

I desire that there may be one other remarkable experiment tried by all that
are desirous of the knowledge of the truth, by which likewise the pulse of the
arteries is both seen to be done by the blood, and evidenced to be so.

If the Gutts of a dog, or a wolf, or any Creature stuffed, and dried, such as
you see at the Apothecaries, you cut away a part of it of any length., and fill
it with water, and tie it at both ends that it is like a pudding, hitting or
shaking the one end of it, in the end over against it, by putting too of your
fingers (as we use to feel the pulse of the artery above the wrist) you may
find every stroke and difference of the motion clearly. And after this manner
in every swelling vein either of living or dead, you may to raw students
manifest all the diferences of the pulses to the sense, in greatness,
frequencie, vehemence, and rhyme. For as it is in a long bladder or in a long
drum, all the strokes of one of the extremes is felt likewise in the other;
Therefore in the Hydropsie of the belly, as likewise in all abscessions which
are filled with liquid matter, we use to distinguish an Anasarca from a
Tympanitis; If all pulses and vibrations made in one side be by touch clearly
felt in the other, we think it a Tympanitis, and not as it is falsely believed,
because it is like the sound of a drum, and is only by flatuousnesse, but
because (as it is in a drum) every light stroke passes through it, and every
shake goes through the whole; for it shows that there is a serous an wheyish
substance within, and not a tough and slimy, as in the Anasarca, which being
thrust retains the marks of the stroke or impulsion, and transmits it not.
Having opened this experiment, there rises a most powerful objection against
the Circulation of the blood, neither observed, nor opposed against me by any
that has hitherto written. Seeing in this experiment we see that there may be
Systoles etc Diastoles, without the egresse of the liquor, who will believe but
that it may be just so in the arteries, and that in them just so as it is in an
Euripus, from hence thither, from thence hither, it may be driven by turns. But
in another place we have sufficiently resolved this doubt, and now we also say,
that this is not so in the arteries of living creatures, because continually
and incessantly the right ear of the heart fills the ventricles with blood, the
return of which the three-pointed portals hinder, and so the lefs ear fills the
left ventricle, and both the ventricles in the Systole throw forth the blood
which the Sigmoidal portals hinder to return, and that it ought therefore
either pass some way, and continually out of the lungs and arteries, or
otherwise it would at last by restagnation and intrusion, break the vessels
which contain it, or suffocate the heart it self by distention, as we have
observed to be plain to the sense in the dissection of a live Adder, in my Book
concerning the motion of the blood.

To clear this doubt I will recite to you two experiments amongst many other
(of which I cold one before) by which it clearly appears, that the blood in the
veins, with a continual and great flux runs continually toward the hearts

In the internal jugular vein of a live Do, which I laid open before a great
part of the Nobility, and the King my Royal Master standing by, which was cut
and broke off in the middle: From the lower part rising from the Gl^vicule,
scarce a few drops did issue; whilst in the mean time the blood with great
force, and breaking out of a round stream, ran out most plentifully downwards
from the head through the orther orifice of the vein. You may observe the same
daily in Phlebotomie in the flowing out of the blood, if you hold the vein fast
with one finger a little below the orifice, presently the flux is stopped,
which after you let it go flows abundantly, as before.

In any visible long vein of your arm, stretching out your hand, and pressing
out all the blood downwards as much as you can, you shall see the vein fall,
leaving as it were a sorrow in the place, but so soon as you thrust it back
with one of your fingers, you shall presently see the part toward the hand to
be filled, and swell, and to rise by the return of the blood from the hand.
What is the reason, that by stopping of the breath, and by that means
streightning the lungs, and a great deal of it being within, the pectorall
vessels are straightened, whence the blood is driven into the face, and eyes,
with so much redness?

Nay that (as Aristotle says in his Problemes) all actions are performed with
greater strength by keeping in of the breath, than by letting it free? so you
get blood more abundantly out of the veins the brow, or tongue, by compression
of the throat, and retention of breath.

I have found sometimes in a man's body, newly hanged, 2 hours after his
execution, before the redness of his face was gone, opening up his heart, and
Pericardium, the right ear of his heart, and lungs much stuffed, and distended
with blood, many witnesses standing by, especially I showed them the ear, as
big as a man's fist, so swelled, that you would have thought it would have burst
with greatness, which, the body being afterward cold, and the blood having
found other ways, was quite gone.

So from these, and other experiments, it is clear enough, that the blood runs
through all the veins to the basis of the heart, and that unless it found
passage it behooved to be straightened, or shut up in other ways, and that the
heart would be o'rewhelmed with it, as on the other part, if it did not flow
out of the arteries, but were regurgitated, the oppression by it would quickly
appear.

I will add another observation: A noble Knight Baronet Sir Robert Darcie
father to the Son-in-Law of the most learned man, and my very great friend, and
a famous physician, Dr. Argent, about the middle of his age, did often complain
of an oppressive pain in his breast, especially in the night time, so that
sometimes being afraid of collapsion of spirits, sometimes fearing suffocation
by a Paroxisme, he led an unquiet and anxious life, using the Counsel of all
Physicians, and taking many things in vain, at last the disease prevailing, he
becomes cachectick, and Hydropick, and at last oppressed in a signal Paroxism he
died, In his Corpse, in the presence of Dr. Argent, who at that time was
President of the College of Physicians, and Dr. Gorge, a rare Divine, and a
good Preacher, who was at that time Minister of that Parish, by the hinderance
of the passage of the blood out of the left ventricle into the arteries, the
wall of the left ventricle it self (which is seen to be thick and strong
enough) was broken, and poured forth blood at a wide hole, for it was a hole so
big, that it would easily receive one of my fingers.

I knew another stout man, who did so boil with rage because he had suffered an
injury, and received an affront by one that was more powerful than himself,
that his anger and hatred being increased every day (by reason he could not be
revenged) and discovering the passion of his mind to no body, which was so
exulcerate within him, at last he fell into a strange sort of a disease, and
was torur'd, and miserably tormented with great oppression and pain in his
heart, and breast, so that the most skillful Physicians prescriptions doing no
good upon him, at last, after some years, he fell sick of the Scorbutic
disease, pined away, and dyed.

This man only found ease as often as his breast was pressed down by a strong man,
and was thump'd and beaten down as they do when they mould bread: his friends
thought he was bewitched, or possessed with the Devil.

He likewise had his jugular arteries distended about the greatness of ones
thumbs, as if either of them had been the Aorta it self, or the Arteria magna
in its descent, and did beat vehemently, and were to the view like two long
Aneurisms, which caused us try blood-letting in his temples, but that gave him
no ease. In his corpse I found the heart and the aorta so distended and full of
blood, that the bigness of his heart, and the concavities of the ventricles,
were equal in bigness to that of an Ox; so great is the strength of the
blood when it is shut up, and so vast its force.

Although then (by the experiment newly mentioned) there may be animpulsion
without an exite (inthe shaking of water up and down) in the pudding
aforementioned, yet cannot it be so in the blood which is in the vessels of
living persons, without very great and heavy impediments and dangers.

Yet from thence it is manifest, that the blood in its Circulation does not
pass every There with the same agility and swiftness, nor with the same
vehemence in all places and parts, and at all times, but that it varies much
according to the age, sex, temper, habir of body, and other contingents,
external internal, natural, or preternatural.

For it does not pass through the crooked and obstructed passages, with the
same swiftness as it does through those that are open, free, and patent; nor
does it pass through bodies or dense parts, and such as are stuffed or
constricted, as it does through those that are thin, open, and without
obstruction; nor does it run out so swiftly and penetratively when the
impulsion is slow and soft, as when it is drive with force and strength, and
thrust forward with vehemence and abundance. Nor is the thick blood or solid
mass, or when it is made earthy, so penetrative, as when it is more wheyish,
made thin, and liquid.

And therefore with reason we may imagine, that the blood in its Circulation
goes flowlier through the reins, than through the substance of the heart;
swiftlier through the liver, than through the reins; swiftlier through the
spleen, than through the liver; swiftlier through the lungs, than through the
flesh, or any other viscers of thinner contexture.

We may likewise contemplate in the age, sex, temperature, habit of the body
soft or hard, of the ambient cold, which condenses bodies, when the veins
scarce appear in the members, or the sanguine color is seen, or the heat
appears, the blood being made more liquid by reception of nutriment. So like
wise the veins do more conspicuously, and freely pour out the blood the body
being heated before opening of a vein than when it is cold. We see that the
passion of the mind (in the administration of Phlebotomie) if any fearful
person chance to sound, straight the flux of the blood is stopped, and a
bloodless palenesse seases on all the superfice of his body, his members are
stiff, his ears sing, his eyes grow dim, and are in convulsion. I find here a
field where I might run our further, and exspatiate at large in speculation:
But from hence so great a light of truth appears, from which so many questions
may be resolved, so many doubts answered, so many causes and cures of diseases
found out, that they seem to require a particular treatise. Concerning all
which in my medicinal observations, I Will set down things worthy your admiration.

For what is more admirable, than that in all affections, desires, hope, or
fear, our bodies suffer several ways, our very countenances are changed, and
our blood is seen to fly up and down? with anger our eyes are red, the black of
the eye is lessened in shamefastness, and the cheeks are flushed with
redness; by fear, infamy, and shame, the face is pale, the ears glow, as if
they should hear sone ill thing: young men that are touched with lust, how
quickly is their nerve filled with blood, erected and extended? But it is most
worthy the observation of Physicians, why blood-letting and cupping glasses,
and the stopping of the artery which carries the flux (especially whilst they
are doing) does as it were with a charm take away all pain and grief: I say,
such things as these are to be referred to observations, where they are
explained clearly.

Frivolous and unexperienced persons do scurvily strive to overthrow by
logical, and far-fetched arguments, or to establish such things as are merely
to be confirmed a by Anatomicall dissection, and ocular testimony. It behooves
him, who ever is desirous to learn, to see any thing which is in question, if
it be obvious to sense, and sight, whether it be so or no, or else be bound to
believe those that have made trial, for by no other clearer or more evident
certainty can he learn or be taught. Who will persuade a man that has not
tasted them, that sweet or new wine is better than water? with what arguments
shall one persuade a blind man that the Sun is clear, and out-shines all the
Stars in the firmament? So concerning the Circulation of the blood, which all
have had confirmed to them for so many years, by so many ocular experiments,
there has been hitherto no mau found, who by his observations could refute a
thing so obvious to the sense (to wit the motion of flux and reflux) by
observations alike obvious to the sense, or destroy the confirmed experience of
it, nay by ocular testimony none ever offered to build up a contrary opinion.

Whilst in the mean time there are not wanting person, who for their
unskilfullnesse, and little experience in Anatomy, having nothing agreeable to
sense to oppose to it, they cavil at it with some vain assertions, and such as
they adhere to from the authority of Teachers, with no solid supposition, but
with idle and frivolous arguments, and bark at it besides with a great many
other words, and those base ones too, with railing, and base scurvy language,
by which they do no more than show their own vanity, and folly, and their
baseness, and want of arguments, which are to be fetched from sense, so that
they with their false Sophistical arguments do rage against sense: Just as
when the raging winds advancing the waves in the Sicilian Sea dashes them in
pieces against the rocks within Charybdis, they make a hideous noise, and being
broken and reverberated hiss, and foam, so do these men rage against the
reason of their own sense.

If nothing should be admitted by sense without the testimony of reason, or
sometimes against the dictate of reason, there should be no question now to be
controverted.

If our most certain Authors were not our senses, and these things were to be
established by reasoning, as the Geometricians do in their frames, we should
truly admit of no Science, for it is the rational demonstration of geometry
from things sensible to demonstrate things to the sense, according to which
example, things abstruse, and hid from the sense, grow more manifest by things
which are easier, and better known, Aristotle advises us much better lib. 31 de
Genesis Anim, disputing of the generation of Bees, says he, you must give credit
to your senses; if those things which are demonstrated to you are agreeable to
those things which are perciptible by sense, which, as they shall then be
better known, so you may better trust your sense than your reason. Whence we
ought to approve or reject all things by examination leisurely made, but if you
will examine or try whether they be said right or wrong, you must bring them to
the test of sense, and confirm, and establish them by the judgment of sense,
where, if there be any thing feignd or not, sure it will appear. Whence Plato
says in his Critias, That the explication of those things is not hard, of
which we can come to the experiment, nor are those auditors fit for Science,
that have no experience.

How hard and difficult a thing is it for those that have no experience, to
teach such things of which they have no experience, or sensible knowledge; and
how unfit and indocile unexperienced Auditors are to true Science, the
judgment of blind-men in colors, and of deaf men in the distinctio of sounds,
dos plainly show. Who shall ever teach the flux and reflux of the Sea? or by a
Geometrical Diagram teach the quantities of Angles, or the computation of the
sides of a figure to a blind-man, or to those that never saw the Sea, nor a
Diagram? A man that is not expert in Anatomy, in so far as he cannot conceive
the business with his own eyes, and proper reach, in so far is thought to be
blind to learning, and unfit: for he knows not truly any thing concerning which
an Anatomist disputes, nor any thing, from the implanted nature of which he
should take his argument, but all things he is alike ignorant of, as well those
things which are gathered and concluded, as the things from whence. But there
is no possible knowledge, which arrives not from a pre-existent knowledge, and
that very demonstrable. This one cause is the chief reason why the knowledge we
have of the heavenly bodies is so uncertain and conjectural. Very fain would I
know from those ignorant persons, that profess the causes and reasons of all
things, why as both the eyes in beholding move together every way, nor
particularly one moves this way, and the other that way, so neither both the
ears of the heart?

Because they know not the causes of fevers, or of the plague, or the admirable
properties of some medicaments, and the causes why they are so, must therefore
these things be denied?

Why is the Birth that breaths not till the tenth month, not suffocated for
want of air? since one that is born in the seventh or eighth, so soon as he has
breathed in the air, is presently choked if it have no air? How can it retain
life whilst it is yet within the Secundine, or as yet not come forth, without
breath? but so soon as hecomes into the air unless he breath he cannot live?

Because I see many men doubtful in the Circulation, and some men oppose such
things which understand them not aright, as I intended them, I shall bridfly
rehearse out of my Book of the motion of the heart and blood, what I did there
intend. The blood which is containd in the veins (as in its own hold) where it
is most abundant (to wit, in the vena cava) near to the Bajis of the heart, and
the right ear, growing hot by little and little by its own internal heat, and
made thin, it swells and rises (like leaven) whence the ear being first dilated,
and afterward contracting it self by its pulsifick faculty, streightways
drives it out into the right ventricle of the heart, which being filled in its
Systole, and consequently freeing it self from that blood which is driven into
it (the three-pointed portals refusing passage to it) it drives the same blood
into the vena arteriosa (where the passage is open) by which it does distend
it. Now the blood in the arterious vessel being not able to return against the
Sigmoidal portals, but because the lungs are extended, amplified, and
restricted both by imspiration and expiration, and likewise their vessels, they
give passage to this blood into the arteria venosa: of which the left ear
keeping together equal motion, time and order, with the right ear, and
performing its function, sends the same blood into the left ventricle, as the
right tricle sent into the right, whence the left ventricle together, and at
the same time with the right (since it can gain no regresse, by reason of the
portalls which hinder its return) drives it into the capaciousnesse of the
aorta, and consequently into all the branches of the artery; the arteries
being filled with this sudden pulse, being not able so suddenly to disburthen
themselves, are distended, suffer an impulsion and Diastole.

Whence I gather, seeing the same is reiterated continually and incessantly,
that the arteries, both in the lungs, and in the whole body, by so many
strokes, and impulsions of the heart, would be so distended and stuffed with
blood, at least that either the impulsion would give over all together, or elfe
the arteries would burst, or be so dilated, that would contain the whole mass
of blood which is in the veins, unless the efflux of blood were disburthen'd
somewhere.

We may likewise reason after the same manner of the ventricles of the heart,
being filled and stuffed with blood, unless the arteries did likewise
disburthen, they would be at last distended and destitute of all motion. This
consequence of mine is demonstrative and true, and follows of necessity, if
the premises be true; but our senses ought of assure us whether such things be
false or true, and not our reason, ocular testimony, and no contemtplation.

I affirm likewise of the blood in the veins, that the blood does always, and
every where, run out of the less into the greater, and hastens toward the
heart from every part: whence I gather, that whatsoever quantity which is
continually sent in, the arteries do receive by the veins, that the same does
return and does at last flow back thither from whence it is first driven, and
that by this means the blood moves circularly, being driven in its flux and
reflux by the heart, by whose force it is driven into all the fibers of the
arteries, and that it does afterward successively, by a continual flux return
through the veins, from all those parts which draw, and streyn it through;
sense it self teaches us that this is true, and collections from things obvious
to sense takes away all occasion of doubt.

Lastly, this is that I did endeavor to relate and lay open by my observations
and experiments, and not to demonstrate by causes and probable principles, but
to confirm it by sense and experience, as by a powerful authority, according
to the rule of Anatomists.

From these we may observe what force, and violence, and strong vehemency we
perceive in the heart, and greater arteries by touch and sight. I do not say,
that in all the vessels which contain the blood, the pulse of the Systole and
Diastole is the same (in greater Creatures) nor in all creatures which have
blood, but that there is such a one and so great in all, that by that means
there is a flux of blood, and swifter course of it through the small arteries,
the porosities of the parts and branches of all the veins, and from thence
comes the Circulation: for neither the small arteries, nor the veins do beat,
but only the arteries which are nighest to the heart, because they do not so
soon send the blood out, as it is driven into them, for you may try, opening of
an artery, if the blood leap out in full stream, so that it come out as freely
as it went in, that you scarce found any pulse in that artery through which it
passes, because the blood running through, and finding passage, does not
distend it. In Fishes, Serpents, and colder creatures, the heart beats slowly
and weaker, that you will hardly perceive any pulse in the arteries, because
they pass their blood through very slowly; whence it is that in these as also
in the little fibers of the arteries of a man there is no distinction by blood;
because they are not pierced with impulsion of blood.

As I said before, the blood that passes through an artery which is cut and
opened, makes no pulse there at all, whence it clearly appears, that the
arteries suffer their Diastole neither by innate pulsifick faculty, nor by any
granted them from the heart, but by the mere impulsion of the blood. For in the
full flux, flowing out the length of its course, you may by touch perceive both
the Systole and Diastole, as I said before, and all the differences of the
pulse of the heart, their time, order, vehemence, intermission in the emanation
of th eflux evidently, (as it were in a looking-glass.) Just as water, by the
force and impulsion of a spout is driven aloft through pipes of lead, we may
observe and distinguish all the forcings of the Engine, though you be a good
way off, in the flux of the water when it passes out, the order, beginning
increase, end, and vehemence of every motion. Even so it is when you cut off
the orifice of an artery; where you must observe, That as in the water, the
flux is continual; though it be sometimes nigher, sometimes further: so in the
arteries, besides the shaking, pulse, and concussion of the blood, (which is
not equally to be perceived in all) from that time forward there is a continual
motion and fluxion in the blood, till the blood be again returned to that place
where it first began, that is to say, to the right ear.

These things you may try at your pleasure cutting up one of the longer
arteries, (as the jugular) which if you take betwixt your fingers, you shall
clearly discern how it loses its pulse and recovers it again, beats less or
more. And as these things may be tried whilst the breast is whole; so opening
the breast, and the lungs afterward being collaps'd, and all motion of
respiration gone, you may easily try it, to wit, that the left ear is
contracted and emptyed, that it becomes more whitish, and that it does at last,
together with the left ventricle, intermit in its pulse, beat leisurely, and at
last leave off: And likewise by the hole which you may cut in the artery, you
may see the blood come forth less and less in a smaller thread, and that at
last, (to wit, in the defect of blood, and the impulsion of the left ventricle)
no more will flow.

You may likewise try this same in the tying of the vena arteriosa, and so take
away the pulse of the left ear, and with untying it, restore the pulse at your
pleasure. Whence the same thing is evidently tried by experiment, which is seen
in dying persons, that as first the left ventricle desists from motion and
pulse, and afterward the left ear, then the right ventricle, and pulse,
lastly, the right ear; so where the vital faculty begins first, it ends last.

Which being tried by the sense, it is manisest, that the blood passes only
through the semptum of the heart, and not through the lungs, and only through
them whilst they are moved in respiration, and not when they are fallen or
disquieted. For which cause in an Embryon (not as yet breathing) Nature instead
of the passage in the arteria venosa, (that matter may be furnished to the left
ventricle, and the left ear) opens an oval hole, which she shuts in young men,
and those that breath freely.

It likewise appears, why those that have the vessels of their lungs oppressed,
and stuffed, or those that have any loss of their breath, it is present token
of death.

It is likewise clear, why the blood of the lungs is so flame-colour'd; for it
is thinnest that is straind through there. It is beside to be observed from our
former conclusion, in order to those who require the causes of Circulation, and
think the power of the heart to be the effecter of all things, and as it is the
author of transmission by pulse, so with Aristotle they think it the author of
attraction, and generation of blood, and that the Spirits are made by the
heart, and the influxive heat (and that by the innat heat of the heart, as by
the immediate instrument of the soul, or by a common bond and the first organ
for perfecting of all the works of life. And so the motion of the blood and
spirit, its perfection and heat, and every property thereof, to be borrowed
from the heart, as from its beginning; (which Arist. says is in in the blood,
as in hot water, or boiling pottage) is in the heart, and that it is the first
cause of pulsation and life. If I may speak freely. I do not think that these
things are so (as they are commonly believed) for there are many things which
persuade me to that opinion, which I will take notice of in the generation of
creatures, which are not fit here to be rehearsed; but it may be things more
wonderful than these, and such as will give more light to natural Philosophy,
shall be published by me.

Yet in the mean time I will say and propound it without demonstration, (with
the leave of most learned men, and reverence to antiquity) that the heart, as
it is the beginning of all things in the body, the spring, fountain, and first
causer of life, is so to be taken, as being joynd, together with the veins, and
all arteries, and the blood which is containd in the^. Like as the brain,
(together with all its sensible nervs, organs, and spinal marrow) is the
adequate organ of the sense, (as the phrase is.) But if you understand by this
word heart, the body of the heart, with the ventricles and ears, I do not think
it to be the framer of the blood, and that it has not force, virtue, motion, or
heat, as the gift of the heart; and next, that the same is not the cause of the
Diastole and distention which is the cause of the Systole and contraction,
whether in the ears or arteries: but that part of the pulse which is called a
Diastole comes of another cause, diverse from the Systole, and ought to go
before every Systole. I think the first cause of distention is innate heat in
the blood it self, which (like leaven) by little and little attenuated and
swelling, is the last thing that is extinct in the creature. I agree to
Aristotle's instance of pottage, or milk, in so far as he thinks that elevation
or depression of the blood does not come of vapors or exhalations, or Spirits
raised into a vaporous or eareal form, nor is not caused by any external agent,
but by the regulating of Nature, an internal principle.

Nor is the heart (as some think) like a charcoal-fire (like a hot Kettle) the
beginning of heat and blood, but rather the blood delivers that heat which it
has received to the heart, as likewise to all the rest of the parts, as being
the hottest of all. Therefore arteries, and the coronal veins are assigned to
the heart for that use which they are assigned to the rest of the parts, to
wit, for influx of heat for the entertaining and conservation of it, therefore
all the hotter parts, how much more sanguine they are, and more abundant with
blood, they are said convertibly so to be, and thus the heart having signal
concavities, is to be thought the Warehouse, continual fire, and fountain of
the blood, not because of the corpulency of it but because of the blood which
it contains like a hot Kettle, as in the same manner the spleen, lungs, an
other parts are thought hot, because they have many veins or vessels containing
blood.

And after this manner do I believe that the native heat, called innate, to be
the first efficient cause of pulse, as likewise to be the common instrument of
all operations. This as yet I do not constantly aver, but propound it as a
Thesis; I would fain know what may be objected by good and learned men, without
scurrilitie of words, reproaches, or base language, and any body shall be
welcome to do it.

These things then are as it were the parts and the footsteps of the passage,
and Circulation of the blood; to wit, from the right ear into the ventricle,
out of the ventricle through the lungs into the left ear, then into the left
ventricle, into the aorta, and into all the arteries from the heart, by the
porosities of the part into the veins, and by the veins into the Basis of the
heart, the blood returns most spedity.

By an experiment any man may try that pleases by the veins, let the arm be
tied as the custom is with a gentle ligature, and let it remain tied so long,
still moving the arm up and down, till the veins all of them swell exceedingly,
and the skin grow very red below the ligature, and then let the hand be washed
with Snow or cold water, till the blood gatherd below the ligature be cold
enough, then presently untying the ligature, you [shall find by the cold blood
which returns how swiftly it runs back to the heart, and what a change it will
make in its return] thither, so that it is not to be wondered at, that in the
untying of the ligature in blood letting some have sounded. This experiment
does demonstrate that the veins below the ligature do not swell with blood
attenuated, and puffed up with spirit, but with blood only, and such blood which
can be reverberated into the arteries through the Anastomosis of the parts, or
the hidden Meanders.

It likewise shows how those that pass over snowy mountains, are often
suddenly seas'd with death, and many such like.

Lest it should seem a difficult business, how the blood should pass through
the pores of the parts, and go hither and thither. I will add one experiment.
It happens after the same manner to those that are strangled, and hanged with a
rope, as it does in the typing of the arm that beyond the cord their face,
eyes, lips, tongue, and all the upper parts of their head are stust'd, with
very much blood grow extreamred, and swell till they look black, in such a
carcass untying the rope, in whatsoever position you set it, within a very few
hours you shall see all the blood leave the face and the head, and see it as it
were fall down with its own weight, from the upper to the lower parts through
the pores of the skin and flesh, and the rest of the parts, and that it fills
all the parts below and the skin chiefly, and colors it with black matter; how
much more lively and sprightly the blood is in a living body, and by how much
more penetrating it is through the porosites than congealed blood,, especially
when it is condensed through all the habit of the body, by the cold of death,
the ways too being stopped and hindered, so much the more easy and ready is
the passage in those that are alive through all the parts.

Renatus de Carts a most acute and ingenious man (to whom for his honorable
mentioning of my name I am much indebted) and others with him, when they see
the heart of a fish taken out placed upon an even board imitate a pulse (by
collecting it self) in its erection, up-lifting, vigoration, they think that it
is ampliated, and dilated, and that the ventricles of it become more capacious,
not according to my opinion. For when it is gathered, at that time, the
capacities of it are rather straightened, and it is certain that it is then in
its Sistole, and not in its Diastole, as neither when it falls weak and
flagging, and is relaxed, it is then in its Diastole, or distention, and thence
the ventricles become wider; so in a dead man we do not say that his heart is
in the Diastole; because it is flagging without any Systole, destitute of all
manner of motion, and not distended at all, for it is distended properly, and
is in the Diastole when it is filled by the impulsion of the blood, and
contraction of the ear, as in the Anatomy of living things is evident enough.

Therefore they understand not how much the relaxation, and falling of the
heart and arteries differ from their distention and Diastole; that distention,
relaxation, and constriction, come not of the same causes, but from contrary
causes, as making contrary effects; and diverse, as making diverse motions, as
all Anatomists know very well, that the opposite muscles in any part (called
Antagonistae) are the causes of several motions, to wit, of adduction, and
extension, so there is necessarily by nature framed contrary, and diverse
active organs, for contrary and diverse motions.

Nor dos this efficient cause of pulse which he sets down according to
Aristotle please me, to wit, that the ebullition of the blood shall be both the
cause of the Systole, and of the Diastole. For these motions are sudden
strokes, and swift hits. And there is nothing that swells so like leaven, or
boyls up so suddenly in the twinkling of an eye, and falls again, but that
rises leisurely, and falls suddenly; besides, indissection you may by your own
eyesight discern, that the ventricles of the heart are distended, and filled
by the constriction of the ears, and are increased in bigness according as
they are filled, more or less, and that the distention of the heart is a kind
of violent motion, done by impulsion, not by an attraction.

There are some who think, as there is no need of impulsion for the aliment in
the nourishing of Plants, but it is by little and little drawn into the place
of that which is spent by the indigent parts; so the vegetive faculty performs
its work alike in both, but there is a difference. Calid influxive is
continually required to the entertaining of the members of creatures, and
preserving of vivifying heat in them, and for restoring of the parts which
suffer by outward injury, and not for nutrition only.

So much of Circulation, which if it be not duly performed, or be hindered or
perverted, or go too swiftly, there follows many dangerous sorts of diseases,
and admirable symptoms, either in the veins, as swellings, abscessions, griefs,
haemeroids, flux of blood, or in the arteries, as swellings, boyls, strong and
pricking pains, aneurisms, tumors in the flesh, fluxions, sudden suffocations,
asthma's, stupidity, apoplexy, and others innumerable. Likewise it is not fit
to tell in this place, how as it were with an Enchantment, many things are
cured, and taken away, which were thought incurable.

I may set down such things in my medicinal observations, and discourses of
Pathologie, which I have hitherto known to be observed by none.

I will conclude (most learned Riolax) to give you more ample satisfaction,
because you think that there is no Circulation in the mesentericks; Let the
vena porta be tied near to the cymus of the liver in a live dissection, which
you may easily try, you shall see by the swelling of the veins beneath the
ligature, that same come to pass which happens in blood-letting by tying of the
arm, which will show you the passage of the blood there.

And when you shall hear any man of that opinion, that by Anastomosis the blood
can come out of the veins into the arteries, tie in a live dissection the great
vein, near the division of the crurals, and as soon as you cut the artery
(because it finds passage) you shall see all the mass of blood emptied out of
all the veins (nay out of the ascendent cava too) by the pulse of the heart, in
a very short time, yet that below the ligature the crural veins and parts below
are only full. Which, if it could any way have returned into the arteries by an
Anastomosis, should never have come to pass.

FINIS.

