A Letter from Lysbone, DIRECTED To Captain Thomas Harrison: Wherein is
contained a brief RELATION OF THE Several Transactions BETWEEN The Parliaments
Fleet, and Prince Ruperts, both lying in the River of Lysbone. Also the King of
Portugals Congratulation with the States General. Together with a List of the
several Vessels and Commanders of each Fleet.

April.13. LONDON, Printed for Lodowick Lloyd and Henry Cripps, and are to be
sold at their shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1650. 1649

A LETTER FROM LYSBONE, Directed to Captain Tho: Harrison, etc.
HONORED SIR,
MY Service tendered unto you, I desire to acquaint you of the Lords gracious
dealing with us, in this our design hitherto: for indeed it is very remarkable,
that such a Fleet of Ships, as ours, should run such a distance without losing
of company, or any other accident (in the least) happening to either of them:
For, blessed be God, setting Sail from the Cowes the first present, we arrived
with very seasonable weather in nine days (all safe and well) in Cast-Cales
Road, which was the tenth in the morning; and there understood that Rupert
intended to set sail within two days, which was very true; whereupon the
General sent to the King of Portugal for leave to come into the River of
Lisbone: And the next day, being the eleventh, we wayed, and intended to go
into the River, and lay them aboard forthwith, with as much resolution and
courage as I have seen in men. But when we came near the Castles, they both
shot at us (Julians and the other) diverse shot; upon which we came to Anchor
betwixt the Ketchupps, and sent a Boat a shore to know the Reason of their
shooting at us: The Captain of the great Castle (Julians) sent Answer, That he
had not Order from the King to let us come into the River. The Merchant ships
that came with us seeing this, set Sail for the Straights; viz. Captain Tho:
Ashly, Knight, and Captain Luttun carried the Agent for Saint Lucar. The
twelfth, the King sent one of his greatest Nobles to congratulate with the
General, desiring us not to come in, except the weather proved bad, whereby we
could not Ride where we were; it being his fear that we would quarrel or fight
in his Harbor: Upon the return of his Messenger, the King sent the General a
large present of provisions for refreshment. The eighteenth at night, the
weather beginning to prove foul, we came into the Bay of Wyers in the River,
two miles distant from Rupert; of what ships he has, I have enclosed you a
List: he has made three fire ships also. He leaves no means unattempted, by
lies and absurdities, to make us odious: his Declaration should have been
enclosed, but I conceive you will have it in print: his men come from him daily
to us: and the Swallow was coming to us also the last week, but was discovered;
they had one Anchor aboard: the Boatswain they have clapped in chains: Sir John
Mince is gone ashore sick, and I believe will hardly trouble them any more: We
are informed that their Admiral has not above forty Seamen, and very few
there are in the rest of his ships, only Renegadoes and Bandithoes: To write
the hellish expressions that come from their mouths, would make a man tremble;
in so much that I verily believe they are ripe to destruction: they are more
like devils, then men, say all that come from them. Here are diverse Merchant
ships, of whom two are coming home, viz. Mr Tanner, and Mr Heaman. Rupert
expects aid from the French, and we hear there are four sail coming to him with
three hundred men apeece: Our Agent had audience from the King the twenty
second present, of which I believe you will have more fully by others: but
Captain Molton went ashore the twenty third, to satisfy the King, in answer to
Ruperts Declaration, with its falsities. Truly Sir, I am confident God will give
these ships to us, before we part from them: but his time is the best time and
his way the best. To our assistance I hope we have the prayers of all godly
honest men, and we shall wait Gods leisure. I have not else at present, but to
give you thanks for diverse favors, and continue,

SIR, Your Servant in what I may John Hasclock.
Bonaventure in Lysbona River, March 28. 1650.
A List of Prince Ruperts Fleet.
Guns. PRince Rupert General. Capt. Kittleby Admiral, Constant Reformation, Mr
Fernes Master of Admiral. 52 Prince Maurice, Convertine, Viceadmiral, 46 Sir
John Mince, Swallow, Rereadmiral, 40 Second Charles, Capt. Marshal Captain,
(...) Yeustes Smith ship. 40 Capt. Gouldin, Black Prince, 36 Capt. Langley, A
Scot, 30 Capt. Barniby Burly, Rawbuck, Mr Hargroves ship. 30 Capt. Michel,
Capt. of the ship that was Mr Jacksons, Guns 30 Sir John Mucknel, in the Mary,
24 Blackamore Lady is said to be sold, 18 Black Knight, 14 Total Guns. 360

The Parliament of Englands Fleet.
Guns. General Blake. Capt. Thorowgood, Saint George. 57 Capt Maulto, senior,
Leopard, Viceadmiral, 56 Capt. Boddilow, Entrance, Rereadmiral, 46 Capt.
Harris, Boneadventure, 42 Capt. Baule, Adventure, Frigot, 40 Capt. Salting
stone, The John, 30 Capt. Benj: Blake, The Assurance, Frigot, 32 Capt. Moulton,
junior, Constant Warwick, 32 Capt. Peacock, The Tigar Frigot, 36 Capt. Pearce,
The Providence Frigot, 30 Capt. Wheeler, The Expedition Frigot, 30 Capt. Rose,
The Signet, a fire ship, 3 The Whelp, a fire ship, 8 The two Ketches, 12 Total
Guns. 454

FINIS.

