THE LIFE Of the Apostle ST PAUL, Written In French by the famous Bishop of
Grass, and now Englished by a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed by James Young for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at his
shop in Vine Court, Middle Temple. 1653.



To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord VAVX, Baron of Harroden, etc.
My Lord,
HAving obtained, by means of Your most noble Lady, a view of this choice
piece, which, through Your hands, presents in our idiome Saint Paul's Life, in
whom we Gentiles are so highly concerned. My Reverence to the blessed Apostle,
and my Duty to my Country, emboldened me to publish this elaborate
transposition of Your Lordships out of French into English, to a common perusal
of all our Contrymen, who, with S. Chrysostom, ought to delight more in him,
and in his simple, yet grave style, then all the swelling Criticismes, or vain
Philosophy of posteriour Writers. That I acquainted not Your Lordship with the
publishing, I find examples of great Saints to have paralleld my adventure,
as, of Saint Amand to S. Paulin, who, having published his Epistles, sent him a
fardle of them, which he would have forgotten to have been his own, if the
veracity and authority of the Publisher had not forced his acknowledgment. That
Your Illustrious Consort gave me your Book to read, and, if upon dicussion, I
should esteem it able to bear the rubbs of rigid Censurers, to print it, was
her commendable tenderness in order to Your Lordship, and Christian providence
in order to the Public; warranted by Great Saint Augustine in his 7th Epistle
to Marcelline, who desires severe Judges as Over-visours of his learned Works;
and S. Ambrose to S. Sabinus, Epist. 63. gives the reason, Because a man's own
writings deceive him, errors easily escape him, and, as Children, though
deformed, delight their Parents, so, ill digested conceits flatter the
Contriver. This Work, for the subject, commands Devotion and Reverence in the
Reader, for the accurate delineation of his Life, and learned intermixtion of
other contemporary Occurrences, deserve so ingenuous and pious a Translator, as
Your Lordship. In lieu of Translator, I might beg leave to say Interpreter;
for, You have not only given us in English the things signified in the French,
which is the duty of a Translator, but you have rendered the very mental
Conception of the Author, which, in Aristotle's style, is the office of an
Interpreter; and, in this, much obliged all, especially him, who had the
privilege to suck the first morning sap; which, by all duteous expressions I
must confess, who am

Your Honors Most obliged and faithful Servant F. D.

THE LIFE of the Apostle S. PAUL.
I Undertake to write the life of Saint Paul, which contains the History of
the Church in her Infancy. Affection I confess interesses me in this Subject,
yet I fear not to be suspected of any, because I dive only into pure Sources;
and scarce say any thing, that is not warranted by the authority of the Holy
Ghost. In this work you may behold both the power and wisdom of God, in the
Establishment of the Evangelical Doctrine; and all those virtues which belong
to a perfect Minister of the Gospel. I need not go about to color, or disguise
any matter herein, or seek excuses: For discretion marches here with zeal,
simplicity with prudence, meekness with power and command. The Synagogue is
here demolished, Idolatry overturned, Philosophy confounded, and the Cross
triumphant. Nor is this done without great opposition of the Infernal Spirits;
for they arm against one poor man, the covetousness of the Priests of the Law;
the pride of the Pharisees; the envy of their Doctors; the superstition of the
people; the authority of Magistrates; the Insolency of Princes, and the malice
of false Brothers. In the end they seem as it were victorious, having brought
Saint Paul to dye in the Capital City of the world. But they are deceived in
their malice. The blood which the Apostle shed, is the seed of Christians, and
by his death the Church takes possession of Rome.

The Ancient Philosophers were careful to write the lives of some particular
persons, illustrious either for their virtues, or remarkable for some accidents
of their lives, to serve for a model or pattern of imitation, by which they
might arrive to the same glory: much more ought Christians to endeavor to make
known those Heroes of the Church, whose whole actions have been examples of
sanctity, and in whom God would show the power of his grace, and the great
wonders of his mercy. For my part I have resolved hence-forward to labor in
such glorious subjects: I confess I ought not to begin my Apprentiship with the
life of Saint Paul: Yet the particular devotion, I have for that great Apostle,
has prevailed over the knowledge of my weakness; and makes me hope those
Readers who are reasonable, will excuse the zeal of a Disciple for his Master.

The Holy Ghost according to the promise of our Savior, was descended upon the
Apostles in the form of fiery tongues; and had fitted them with so Divine a
light, and Heavenly vigor, that Saint Peter who trembled at the voice of a
Woman, in the house of the High Priest, did not then fear the fury of the
Princes, Doctors, Pharisees, nor of the people; but in the midst of Jerusalem
he preached there aloud, that Jesus Christ, whom they had crucified, was the
Son of God, and the Messiah promised to their forefathers. At his first Sermon
there were three thousand persons converted; and at his second, which he made
after that famous miracle of the lame man, at the Gate of the Temple; where he
went up to prayer with Saint John; he gained five thousand souls. Every day the
number of the faithful increased. And the Sanctity of their lives served not a
little to confirm the Doctrine which they professed. The faith of Jesus Christ
united them in so strict a bond, that laying aside all difference, in respect
of body, mind, and fortune, they had but one heart, and one soul. They heard
the instructions of the Apostles with great respect, and they practiced them
with so much fidelity, that no earthly consideration could change them: they
employed almost the whole day in prayer in the Temple, where they met together,
and where they praised God with one mouth, and with one heart. They assembled
together sometimes in one house, sometimes in another; where they received the
holy Eucharist; and their repast was ever seasoned with an Evangelical
frugality. Their simplicity was without art, their meekness without
affectation, and all their actions so full of great examples of virtue, that
the people of Jerusalem loved them, and bare them great respect. Wealth, the
origin and cause of quarrels and divisions amongst men, was the Chain which
united that new association; for Charity made all things common amongst them.
The rich were ashamed to be so, because they believed in him that was born and
died as the poorest of men. They sold their Inheritances, and thought
themselves very happy, if the Apostles would receive the price; which they
brought and laid at their feet to be distributed amongst the poor. Ananias and
his Wife Saphira, for having concealed the best part, were punished with
sudden death, and thinking they had only lied to a man, found they had lied
to the Holy Ghost.

There brake forth about that time some little murmuring, amongst the Jews that
were born out of Judea, who to distinguish themselves from those who were born
in Jury, assumed the appellation of Greeks, because they spoke Greek, and made
use of that language in reading the Holy Scriptures, that is to say, of the
Septuagint translation. These complained that their widows, who served in the
daily ministry were neglected, that is, there was not care taken to assist
them in their necessities, and that the public Alms were not equally
distributed amongst them; or according to another opinion, that they were not
employed in the exercises of Charity toward the poor, as the widows of the
other Jews were. The Apostles to prevent the danger which that discontent might
cause, assembled the faithful together, and proposed the election of seven
discreet men, unblemished in reputation, and replenished with the Holy Ghost,
who might distribute those necessaries to the poor; holding it not meet for
themselves to leave the administration of the holy word (to which they attended
without any interruption) for this office of charity which was of much less
importance. The people followed this Counsel, and chose Stephen, Philip,
Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicholas of Antioch. The Apostles, to
whom they were presented, laid their hands upon them and ordained them
Deacons. Stephen held the first place amongst them, for the profoundness of his
Doctrine, the fervency of his Zeal, and the purity of his life. Saint Luke in
the Acts calls him a man full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost: He was not
content to distribute the material bread, but he also brake that of the word
amongst them, having care to nourish their souls as well as their bodies. His
Sermons were accompanied with miracles, which served to overthrow, what the
other had shaken. Every day he spoke in the Synagogue or Schools which were in
Jerusalem, against the Jews of diverse Nations, and against those of the
Synagogue of Libertines, (which in my opinion is to be understood of those who
were made Slaves in the precedent, or in some other war, betwixt the Romans and
the Jews; and had received their liberty in Rome, whether they were originally
Jews or Proselites of different Nations) against the Cyrenians, Alexandrians,
those of Cilicia, and the lesser Asia. These disputing against him, could not
resist the Holy Ghost, who spoke by his Mouth; and notwithstanding they were
confounded, they would not be overcome; but contrariwise, their confusion
stirred them up to animosity; and wanting reasons, nor yet willing to yield to
truth, they resolve to have recourse unto calumny, so to ruin him. The
pretense of Religion furnished them with an opportunity according to their
desire. They published by the means of some confiding and unsuspected persons,
that Stephen did frequently utter blasphemy against the Majesty of God, and
the Honor of Moses. The accusers affirmed to have heard that which they
reported, whereupon the people, who slightly examine things, especially when it
concerns their Religion, presently enter into fury. The Priests and Doctors
instead of moderating, increase the flame. In this heat Stephen was hurried
away, and conducted by those who had raised the tumult, unto the Council, where
matters of Religion were handled. There they made him to be accused by diverse
false witnesses, that he should say, Jesus of Nazareth would destroy the
Temple, and change the traditions of Moses. All the Judges fixed their eyes upon
him, and beheld a sparkling Majesty in his face, like to that of an Angel,
without the least sign of emotion; which was no small evidence of his
innocence. The High Priest asked him if he had spoken those blasphemies whereof
he was accused, and then he answered after this manner.

Fathers and Brethren; God who has no need but of himself, to be happy; and in
whom is contained a perfect collection of all good, at the time prefixed by his
providence for that purpose, appeared to our Fore-father Abraham, whilst he
yet inhabited Mesopotamia; commanding him to leave his Country, and betake
himself to another which he would show unto him; promising him in exchange a
better, and more fertile Land, a particular assistance against all kind of
Enemies, and an extraordinary Blessing unto all Nations in his Seed. This great
Patriarch presently obeyed the Commandment of his Lord, and with joy left his
Country, and Kindred: first of all he dwelt in Charon with his Father, and after
his death, he went thence to dwell in that Country promised to him, where
notwithstanding he lived as a stranger, and had not there the possession of one
handful of Land; The accomplishment of the promise being reserved for his
posterity. God told him they should be ill used, and live under a troublesome
bondage in a strange Country, for the space of four hundred years: but in the
end he would set them at liberty, having first by a dreadful punishment
afflicted those, who had oppressed them. At that time Abraham had no Son, which
might make him believe that Prophecy concerned his posterity. But when he lest
expected a lawful Heir to his possessions, in regard of his old age, and the
barrennes of Sara, he beheld himself the Father of Isaac. On the eighth day
after he was born he circumcised him, according to a command received,
whereunto also he had already satisfied in himself; esteeming it a great honor
to bear so glorious a mark of alliance with his Sovereign. Isaac begat Jacob,
and Jacob the twelve Patriarchs. Joseph whom his Father loved particularly, was
sold by his Brethren, who thought they had dealt favorably in not sacrificing
him to their jealousy, after a more cruel manner. God, who was his Protector,
raised him out of prison to the second place of Egypt: his unchaste Mistress,
whose indignation he had incurred by his continency, and fidelity, was the
cause, that Pharao became rather his friend then Sovereign, and made him Master
of his Kingdom, as well as of his Heart. In those days there was an
extraordinary Famine, which wasted the whole country of Canaan: And our
Forefathers having no corn left in their country, were forced to repair into
Egypt; where by the provident Economy of Joseph, the Kings Granaries swelled
in great abundance. Jacob sent his Sons thither, and in their second voyage,
they knew him whom they had sold, having before designed his death. They were
much terrified, when they found themselves in the power of them they used so
ill. But he forgot their cruelty, and showed himself to remember only that he
was their Brother. He wept with them, and made them known to Pharao and his
whole Court, and returned them home laden with presents, charging them withal
to bring his Father Jacob to him. The good old man surprised with these glad
tidings, was overjoyed to think he should satisfy his eyes before he left this
world, with the sight of him whom he had often bewailed as dead: he went then
into Egypt, and after he had lived there some years in great quiet and peace,
died in the arms of his Son Joseph. Our Ancestors also died there, and those
that descended of them, multiplied extremely in a few years. At last the time
of the Divine promise made to Abraham, drawing nigh; there sat in the Throne
of Egypt a Prince, who had never heard the name of Joseph, time having made him
forgotten; and seeing the daily increase of our Nation, after an extraordinary
manner, he began to apprehend, least those strangers should render themselves
Masters of his country: whereupon he employed both craft, and violence, to work
their extirpation: To this end there is nothing horrid in Tyranny, which he did
not impose upon them. But notwithstanding their labor and bad diet, they
thrived so well, that it seemed rather to contribute to their increase, then
ruin. Hence by an impious edict be commanded their Midwives to stifle all the
Male Children of the Israelites, and save only the Female. But this inhumane
command was not obeyed, and God abundantly recompensed the mercy showed to
those innocent creatures, whom a barbarous Tyrant would have sacrificed to his
jealousy. Moses was born in this wonderful persecution; His parents after they
had concealed him three months in their house, fearing least he might be
discovered, exposed him upon the River Nilus: Pharao's Daughter coming thither
to bath her self, perceived the Cradle of Bullrushes, in which he floted upon
the water; she sent to take it up, and by that means, was the instrument of his
preservation. She was not satisfied in exhibiting an ordinary compassion
toward him, but tendered him with a Motherly care; and of an Infant exposed,
she adopted him Son and Heir to a great Kingdom. His Education was answerable
to so high a fortune; and by the progress he made in all the Sciences of the
Egyptians, by the excellency of his wit, his solid judgment, his generous
courage, his modest behavior, and the greatness of his actions, he showed
himself worthy of the Scepter ordained for him. But God had other designs, and
would make use of him to destroy that Empire, which he seemed to be chosen out
to govern. At the age of forty years, God inspired him to visit those of his
Nation in the places where they dwelt: and there he found an Egyptian roughly
treating an Israelite, whence a just resentment transported him to revenge the
Injury done unto his Brother, by the death of him that abused him. The next day
seeing two Israelites quarrelling together, he said to them; you are Brethren,
why injure you one another? But he that abused his Companion without cause,
asked him, who has made you our Prince, and the Judge of our differences?
perhaps you will kill me, as you did yesterday the Egyptian. That discourse
troubled Moses, and by divine providence made him to fly into the Land of
Madian, where taking a Wife he begot two Sons. He was fourscore years of age
when in the Deserts of Mount Sina an Angel appeared to him in the midst of a
flaming bush unconsumed. This Prodigy astonished him, and drawing near to
behold it at a less distance, The Lord spoke unto him in these words: I am the
God of thy Forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob: put of thy shoes, for the earth thou treadest upon is holy. I have
beheld the affliction of my captive people, and their complaints have reached
my ears; I am descended to deliver them from this cruel bondage, and upon this
occasion I will send you into Egypt. Fathers and Brethren observe here, that
this Moses whom the two Israelites rejected with disdain; saying, who has
established thee Judge and Prince over us? was the Prince and Redeemer of the
Jewish people, with the assistance of that Angel which appeared to him in the
burning bush. Egypt wondered at the miraculous things of his Rod; the Sea
divided it self to make passage for the multitude he led in the Desert; The
rock yielded him water; for the space of forty years, a celestial Man^^ (...)
every morning from Heaven to (...) our (...). And a thousand other wonders
^^^ered his government fa^^us. May not we here behold an admirable figure of
the Savior which you have rejected, notwithstanding that he came to deliver
you from a more cruel captivity, and more miserable, then that of our
Forefathers? But this same Moses, whose Doctrine you accuse me to condemn, did
not he promise to you him (whose Gospel I now preach, and whose name is so
odious to you) when he said, God will raise from the midst of you a Prophet
whom you shall hear as you hear me, certainly you heard him, as our Ancestors
heard Moses; and whilst Moses was conversing with our Lord upon the Mountain,
those ungrateful people enforced Aaron to make molten gods, which should
conduct them, not knowing (as they saiea) what was become of Moses. They adored
the Golden Calf, and gave that honor to the work of their hands, which was due
only to their Creator. This horrible Idolatry so incensed God, that be
exterminated this great multitude by diverse punishments. Two only of them that
remained, besides those who were born in the Deserts, entered into the Land of
Promise, under the conduct of Joshua. The assistance of our Lord ceased not
with the death of this great Captain: Our Ancestors always found him
favorable, so long as they continued faithful to his service. The diverse
servitudes they were under, so long as the government remained in the hands of
Judges, were only caused by their Idolatry, and prostitution to all sorts of
wickedness. Ease and plenty corrupted those, whom the perils of War, and
fear of Enemies had kept within the bounds of fidelity. They contracted
unfortunate marriages with the daughters of their neighbors, and that
conjugall union occasioned their separation from God; for by little and little
they followed the manners of their Wives, and to make themselves good husbands,
they were not afraid to become wicked men. They left the God of Heaven, for the
stars which he had fixed there; and the purity of his sacrifices, for the
abominations of Moloch: Their ingratitude was not left unpunished; for our Lord
at several times raised Infidel Kings against them, who made them know their
sin, by the rigor they used toward them. The yoke of the Philistines was the
longest, and David delivered them entirely from it. He was the man according to
Gods heart. It was he whom God placed in the Throne, with a solemn promise that
his Posterity should reign for ever. This Prince, who was as godly as valiant,
desired to build a house to our Lord, that might be stable and firm; for since
they left Egypt, they had adored him in a Tabernacle which was portable. God
accepted his good will, but reserved to his Son Solomon the glory of building a
Temple, that testified no less his piety than his magnificence. This place
could not contain him, who not only fills all things, but is immense, who has
the Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool. Princes, who are
men, may busy and delight themselves in Palaces built by the hands of men. Our
God is a Spirit, which resides not in the enclosure of walls, and the most
magnificent works of Architecture are not worthy of his greatness. It is in the
hearts of men be delights to dwell, but those hearts must then be innocent.
They must be circumcised with a spiritual circumcision, of which that of the
body is but the mark. You have not these innocent hearts; but contrariwise I
may without injury call them uncircumcised, because they are tied to earthly
things, wherewith they are replenished and possessed with a horrid envy and
execrable rage against our true Redeemer. You are stiff-necked, and continually
resist the Holy Ghost. In this you show your selves true children of your
Fathers; for which of the Prophets have not they persecuted? Those heavenly men
have all of them announced unto you the coming of him, whom by a black and
ungrateful Treason you have murdered; you who received the Law by the
ministry of Angels, observe it not, but most impudently break it every day.
Jesus of Nazareth has been required with so much the more ingratitude, as his
graces were extraordinary. It is in him that God has fulfilld the promise
whereof a little before I spoke to you, that the Scepter should always remain
in the house of David. For he is descended from him according to flesh,
although you esteemed him the Son of a poor Carpenter. It is he alone that sets
at liberty, not only Israel, but all men that are captive under the yoke of
hell and sin. It is he that is descended from Heaven to establish a Celestial
Kingdom, who apprehends not the vicissitude of humane things, nor is subject
to the violence of Tyrants, and the inconstancy of the people. It is he that
has proved his Doctrine by miracles, and such as Israel had never found in the
Scriptures, nor seen in the extent of their Provinces; and yet his voice could
not soften the hardness of your hearts, his Miracles seemed to you to be
illusions. You have injuriously sullyed the innocence of his life. His humility
made you become insolent. His sufferings made you more bitter against him; his
patience made you furious; and you have as little respect to those who speak to
you in his name since his Resurrection. But you deceave your selves in your
designs. That party, which you think to root up, shall be victorious.
Innocence shall triumph over Calumny. The Church of him that is crucified,
which we announce unto you, shall not destroy the Law, but the Law shall serve
for a foundation to the Church. The true disciples of Moses will acknowledge
him in their legal observations, and they will hear him as their Master,
according to that Oracle of Moses which I alleged to you. Certainly no man can
reprove me to have spoken a word that savours of contempt against him, and the
testimony of my accusers destroys it self, neither their condition, nor their
virtue, render them so credible, that I need take much pains to clear my self
of their calumny. They say I have spoken against the Law, I deny it, and, by my
precedent discourse, you may understand my opinion of it; but it is rather you
that one may more justly accuse for the non-observance of it.

The Judges and others there present, hearing so bold and free a discourse, and
such sharp reproaches from Saint Stephen, were filled with despite and fury,
and began to grind their teeth against this generous Deacon, unto whom God
designed a more particular favor in this encounter: For as he lifted up his
eyes to Heaven, (and that his heart, filled with the Holy Ghost, elevated it
self by sublime acts of a most pure love) he saw the glory of God, which so
transported him, as he he cried out; I see the Heavens open, and the Son of man
standing on the right hand of God. All those who heard these last words, made a
great outcry, and seized upon him. The Judges stopped their ears, as if they
had heard blasphemy, and the multitude presently hurried him away out of the
City to stone him. There was no alteration in his countenance; and if any did
appear, it was rather that of joy. He considered the stones in the hands of
those Executioners, as precious stones prepared for the making up of his Crown.
And those that were most cruel, seemed to him most merciful. He sustained this
impetuosity standing, like a Rock that mocks at tempests, or rather as a Priest
who sacrifices himself. In all the time of his suffering he did not once
complain; and when he felt death approaching, he said, Lord Jesu receive my
soul. But when he prayed for those that stoned him, he kneeled down, knowing
their offense was so great, as to obtain their pardon; it was necessary to join
the humility of his countenance to the humility of his heart, and to use
violence, if it may be so said, to the goodness of God; He cried out, O Lord
let not this sin be imputed to them. It was to this so ardent and admirable
prayer, that God (according to the opinion of diverse Fathers) granted the
conversion of him whose life we write, and whom we will call Soul for a time,
as Saint Luke does in the Acts. He was not of the number of those who stoned
Saint Stephen; yet, in looking to their garments, he stoned him by their hands,
and made himself partaker of their impiety.

He was Cousin to the Martyr, and they were both brought up by Gamaliel in the
study of the Law; notwithstanding, the false zeal of Religion carried him
beyond the Sentiment of nature, and their fellowship in studies. And having
once with pleasure seen the blood of this holy Deacon spilt, he became thirsty
after the blood of those who professed the same Doctrine, and made himself
remarkable in that bloody persecution, which was enkindled against them. He
brake into houses, and those he took prisoners, were by himself conducted into
Dungeons, after which he solicited their condemnation. In a word, he was a
wild Boar in the Vineyard of the Son of God. After he had filled Jerusalem
with executions, he would extend his cruelty farther; and to that effect
demanded of the Princes and Priests, Commissions and Letters in his favor,
that he might take all those persons in the City of Damascus, who believed in
him that was crucified. His rage afforded him not one moment of rest. He
breathed nothing but the slaughter and blood of the poor disciples of Jesus
Christ, and pleased himself only with the thought of their punishment which
was at hand. He contrived in his imagination how he might take them all, and he
exhorted himself to use nothing of mercy, either to old or young, to whom, even
the most barbarous are wont to show some compassion and pity. He was entering
into the thirty third year of his age; and the heat of his youth, joined with
the temper of his mind, and zeal of Religion, easily transported him to
resolutions that were extreme. He was near to Damasco, when an extraordinary
light coming from Heaven, and invironing him, he was thrown down to the
earth, and heard a voice that said to him, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute
me? Jesus Christ was incapable of suffering persecution in his person; but he
suffered it in his members, that were so strictly united to him, as he reputed
all injuries done unto them, done unto his own person. This persecutor being
affrighted, answered, Lord, who art thou? I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou do
persecute, continued the voice; and it is in vain for thee to kick against the
pricks. Then Saul astonished, trembling, and, out of himself, cried, Lord what
will thou that I do? It was answered him, Rise up, and go into the City, and
there I will make known to thee what thou ought to do. Those, who
accompanied him, were wonderfully astonished at this conference: For they heard
the sound of a voice, but could not distinguish the words, nor saw they any
body. Saul rising up, found himself blind: The brightness of Heaven had
exteriourly blinded him; but his soul was delivered from his former darkness;
and this glorious blind man shall appear ere long one of the bright Stars of
the Church. He enquired not what should become of him, but made an humble
Sacrifice of himself to him whom but a moment before he had persecuted. His
Conversion was sudden and complete, and so it shall continue to his death. He
was led by the hand into the City of Damascus, where he was three days and
three nights without eating or drinking; but not without receiving the
nourishment of heavenly consolations, and those great verities whereof he was
to be the Apostle. Here humane prudence is at a stand, that God should choose
him a Preacher of faith, who but a little before was so furious an enemy to it.
But the wisdom of heaven wonderfully shows it self in this conduct; for by
this appears the efficacy of the grace of Jesus Christ, which can soften a
heart thus hardened without infringing our liberty; and of a mortal adversary,
make him his most faithful and courageous Champion. He was to be the Doctor of
this new grace, necessary to the state of corrupted nature. He was to heal the
infirmity of the will captivated to concupiscence, and rectify the ignorance
of the understanding: And how could he better conceive the necessary and
efficacy of this celestial remedy, then by his own experience. Certainly he who
had so long time before the heavy yoke of the Law, and having his inclinations
so contrary to the faith of Christ, had yet received it by a means so
extraordinary, whereby the Soul was illuminated, and the heart so suddenly
mollified; so strongly, and yet nevertheless so gently, could not believe that
man had the chiefest part in his own conversion; and that grace was not a slave
to the will, but rather a gentle and amorous Mistress, which prevents,
fortifies, moves, and makes the Soul active. He was far from imagining there
was any merit in him, in order to his election, and therefore he might with
more efficacy announce unto the Jews, That the works of the Law did not render
them worthy to receive the Gospel; and to the Gentiles likewise, If they were
called, that it was out of the mere choice, and pure goodness of God. He was to
labor in the conversion of sinners, and God to show him that he must deal
mildly and sweetly with them, made choice of him, even when he was guilty of
the greatest sin that man could commit. Before, for the same reason, he had
established Saint Peter Head of the Church, after he had thrice denied him.

Ananias, a Priest of very great piety, governed then the Infant Church of
Damasco. Jesus Christ by apparition commanded him to go into the house of one
Jude, and told him the street, where he should find a man named Saul, borne at
Tarsis, who was earnest in prayer. Ananias astonished, took the boldness to
answer him in a manner which showed he was accustomed to the like Visions.
Saying, Lord I have understood from diverse persons of the great harm this man
has done to your Church; and now he is here in this place with commissions to
apprehend all those who invocate thy name. Fear nothing, answered the Son of
God, he is no more a persecutor, but a vessel of election, and an instrument by
whom I will work great wonders. I have chosen him to announce my doctrine to
Nations, and to Princes, without fearing the fury of one, or the power of the
other. He shall preach to the Children of Israel those truths which he has
endeavored to abolish; and I will let him know what he is to suffer for my
name. Ananias replying no more, went presently and obeyed, He found this new
Convert, and approaching to him, laid his hands upon his head, saying, Saul, my
dear Brother, the Lord Jesus, who appeared himself unto you on the way to
Damascus, that you may see how dear to him your salvation is, has sent me to
you, to the end that in his name you should recover your sight, and be filled
with the Holy Ghost; that you may afterward pour it forth upon others, and
acquit your self of the Ministry to which he has ordained you. Immediately the
Scales which covered the eyes of Saul, fell from them, and he saw as he did
before, and at the same instant of this miracle he was baptized; and received
it with such disposition of mind, as we may imagine to be in one whose
Conversion was so extraordinary, and whom Jesus Christ himself took the pains
to instruct. For Ananias did neither Catechize him, nor send him to the
Apostles to be Catechized; knowing well, that he who had drawn him out of the
darkness of the Law, would have him immediately to receive from him the
Heavenly Doctrine of the Gospel, as being particularly his Apostle.

He issued from the water of Baptism, not only pure, but full of courage: And
unwilling to lose one hour of time without employing it to the honor of his
new Master, he began his Function, going into the Synagogues, and there
teaching that Jesus Christ was the Son of God. His condition, his Doctrine, the
fame which was spread amongst the Jews of his zeal for the Law, and the
design upon which he came to Damascus, made them at the first to hear him with
great attention. But when he was heard to speak of Christ crucified, as of the
Messiah, it was strange to see the astonishment amongst his Audience; they
could hardly believe their own ears. What (said they) this man who does now
announce unto us the name of Jesus Christ, is he not the very same who not long
since in Jerusalem showed himself to be so cruel an enemy to it, and
persecuted to death all those who invoked it; and the same that came hither
with express Commission to apprehend all those who made profession of that
impiety? Whence comes this so sudden a change? By what slight has he been so
quickly gained? How has he so soon forgotten what he own to his Religion, his
Country, and his own honor? From thence they passed to injuries and calumnies
which the Apostle generously disdained; and these Storms made him take deeper
root in the love of Jesus Christ: Every day the fire of his zeal increased; his
discourse was accompanied with so forcible reasons; he did so admirably expound
the Holy Scriptures; he unvailed with so much clearness the ancient Figures
which foretold our Savior; he so plainly showed them, that he whom he preached
to them was the true Messiah; as the Jews not being able to answer his
Arguments, remained shamefully confounded. After he had stayed some time with
those in Damascus, the Holy Ghost, who conducted him, put him upon the Voyage
of Arabia. We know nothing of what he did there; but we may well believe that
so ardent a zeal as his, and so eminent a knowledge of divine verities, could
not but produce effects worthy the Doctor of Nations. He returned to Damascus,
where he remained two years; and during that time, he preached the Gospel with
such success, that the Jews resolved to seize upon him, and to make him away.
The Governor, whom they had gained, permitted them to keep the gates of the
Town guarded, that he might not escape; But his disciples let him down from the
top of the wall in a basket. He was reserved for other Combats, and for other
Victories; and that which he had hitherto done, was but a little Essay of what
he was to do in establishing, the Law of him, who had called him to the
Apostleship of the Gentiles; though he might well expect to find more cruel
and powerful enemies in Jerusalem; yet he forbore not to go thither to see
Saint Peter, and to do him the honor due to the first Apostle; and this, not
out of any vain curiosity, or to receive from him the Apostolic Mission,
having already received it from Jesus Christ himself. When he appeared amongst
the faithful, every one was fearful, and shunned him as a common Enemy.
Barnabas, with whom he had studied under Gamaliel, and who was converted before
him, presented him to the Apostles, that is, to Peter and James, which two he
only saw in that Voyage. He told them of his miraculous Conversion, and what
he had already done at Damascus for defense of the Gospel. From that time every
one looked upon him as a main workman in the Vineyard of our Lord. He stayed
there but fifteen days, in which space he disputed so efficaciously against
the Jews of Greece, and the Gentiles, that they were resolved to kill him, which
was the cause that obliged the faithful to conduct him to Caesarea; from whence
he went to Tharsis, the place of his Birth. He fled not from thence out of
fear, or to avoid danger; but humbly followed the conduct of providence. St.
Luke makes no mention of what he did at Tharsis; and we choose rather to imitate
his silence, then to attribute actions to him of which we have no proof, during
the five years he abode there.

In the mean time those were not idle, who had left Jerusalem by reason of the
Persecution which happened after the death of Saint Stephen; obeying herein the
precept of our Savior, who wills us, if persecuted in one City, to fly unto
another. For they had preached the Faith in Phoenicia, and in the Isle of
Cyprus, and in Antioch of Syria. This Divine Seed abundantly increased in this
last City, both amongst the Jews and Gentiles. We are taught by a Tradition
received in the Church, that Saint Peter established there his first Seat,
which he held almost seven years, and then left it to lay at Rome the
Foundation of that of his Successors.

The news of the good Success of the Gospel, in a place so famous, and so
important for the East, was brought to the Church of Jerusalem; whereupon,
Barnabas, a man of eminent virtue, was dispatched thither to cultivate so
spacious a Field. At his Arrival he rejoiced to see so fair a Harvest: He
augmented it by his Preaching, by his Example, and by his Miracles; but judging
it was needful to have the help of an Excellent Labourer, he went to find out
the Apostle at Tharsis, and brought him to Antioch, as to a place proportioned
to his strength and zeal. The Success answered his hopes. There they stayed a
whole year, and during that time, the number of those which were converted was
found very great. It was there also that the name of Christian began first to
be given to the Disciples of Jesus Christ. At the same time certain Prophets
arrived there, and amongst them, one named Agabus, foretold a great famine,
which should happen in the time of Claudius the Emperor, who Succeeded
Caligula. The Christians being moved with charity, resolved to prevent the
necessity of their Brethren in Judea; and having gotten what Alms they could,
delivered it into the hands of our Apostle and Barnabas, to carry safe unto
those for whom it was gathered. This occasioned them to make a Voyage to
Jerusalem, where Herod endeavored to make famous his entry by the death of
St. Peter. But to understand this better, it is necessary we take the course of
this Story a little higher.

The Emperor Tiberius succeeding Augustus, made his Reign notorious, by all the
cruelties which may enter into the Souls of the greatest Tyrants. No condition
was secure from his jealousies a Rome lost her most noble and virtuous Citizens
by the impudency of Accusers, who permitted innocence to be no where safe. The
Noble Germanicus was his Victime in the East; Agrippina his wife survived him,
but to end her days by as cruel a death: Their Sons, Drusus and Nero, were
treated in the same manner by that Barbarian, with whom, reason of State, which
opens a passage to all the crimes of Tyrants, had more power then all the Laws
of nature. In fine, he was the Executioner of all his Friends. The obscurest
corner in the Isle of Caprea could not so conceal his brutish impurities, but
that the memory of them has reached even our Age; and their recital would be
too horrid to find any place in this History. Whilst fear silenced all the
World, the divine vengeance, which had for the space of two and twenty years
made use of him to punish the sins of Rome, hurryed him out of this World to a
punishment due to his crimes; and, by his death, the Universe was delivered
from a most dreadful Monster.

Six months before, Agrippa, Grandchild to Herod the Elder, was cast into
prison for wishing the Empire unto Caligula, who afterward magnificently
requited his affection; for no sooner had he attained unto it, but he set him
at liberty, and gave him a chain of gold of equal weight with that of iron,
wherewith he had been laden for his sake. To this he added the gift of those
Provinces which his Uncle Philip, who dyed without out Children, possessed, and
gave him leave to take the Title of King upon him. This dignity begot a
jealousy in Herod Antipas, who was the murderer of Saint John Baptist.
Herodias, who had set him on to commit that crime, persuaded him to go to
Rome, and court the Emperor, thereby to purchase that Crown to himself, which
with envy she beheld upon the head of his Brother. But at his Arrival, he found
the Emperor so strongly prepossessed against him, by reason of the great
provisions of war which he had made, and for the which he could give no
account, that he sentenced him unto Banishment, together with the incestuous
companion of his bed, who would not leave him in his declining fortune. Lions
was the place of their Exile, and the witness of their miserable, but just
death, since it revenged that of the Precurser of Jesus Christ. Caligula also
soon felt the justice of God irritated by his cruelties. Never was there beast
more savage, and less capable of being made tame. His nearest Friends could not
save themselves from his hands: In his indignation he regarded neither Dignity,
nor Age: All condemned persons he reserved to be the food of his wild beasts
which he kept for his delight, because the flesh of other creatures would cost
too much. He also set upon those which were innocent with the like brutality.
By his command some were branded on the Forehead, others condemned to the
Mines; These he shut up in Cages of iron, others he caused to be severed in two
by the middle with a Saw. He made Fathers to be present at the Execution of
their Children, and sent Litters to fetch those who excused themselves by
reason of their indisposition. After that, he invited them many times to Feasts
and Comedies, forcing them to show signs of joy. At one time he massacred all
that were banished, imagining they prayed to God for his death. He was angry
against the felicity of his Age, esteeming that of Augustus more happy, in
which the Legions of Varrus were lost; and envying that of Tiberius, memorable
in his opinion, for the fall of the Theater, which crushed to death twenty
thousand persons. All these were ralleries rather of a Monster then a Man. The
Books of his Library were reduced unto two memorials; the one was called his
sword, the other his dagger; and the rarities of his Closet were several sorts
of poison. His Successor caused them to be cast into the Sea, and their
malignity was such, as it killed multitudes of Fishes. In fine, his madness
came to that height, as he would be adored for a God; he made the Figure of his
head to be set upon the troncks of the Idols of Jupiter Olimpius. He placed
himself betwixt the Statues of Castor and Pollux, to receive adoration from
those who entered the Court. In the Temple which bare his name, the Sacrifices
were Peacocks, Pheasants, and such like extraordiry Fowl. He knew, that amongst
all the people of the world, the Jews have a horror to worship their Ancient
Gods, and would with greater reason refuse to yield him divine honor in his
lifetime; this increased a passion in him to have his Statue set up in the
Temple of Jerusalem. He wrote to Petronius, Governor of Judaea, in a style
that well showed he would be obeyed. The Jews hearing the news, were touched
with such sorrow as cannot be expressed. Petronius knowing their humor, and
fearing (as he had cause) a general revolt, judged it best to defer the
Execution of this wicked command: And to furnish himself with a fair pretext,
he summoned from the neighboring Provinces Ingravers, injoyning them to labor
with all possible care in making a Statue which might be worthy to represent an
Emperor, and fit for the place where it was to stand. He wrote a Letter to
Caligula, in which he handsomely excused himself, that he had not as yet put in
execution his orders. But the Emperor well perceived he had more regard to the
Prayers and Religion of the Jews, then to fulfill his will. Notwithstanding he
dissembled his wrath in the answer he returned him, and yielded to the prayers
and grief of Agrippa, whom he loved so far, as he agreed to let alone the
consecration of his Statue. But being very inconstant in his designs, he soon
repented the favor he had showed, and commanded that a Statue should be made
at Rome, of brass gilded over, intending to send it to Jerusalem, and place it
in the Temple before the noise of it should be dispersed amongst the Jews; but
death hindered the course of this execrable design. He that had wished the
people of Rome had but one head, was killed by Chereas and Sabinus, Captains of
his Guard, after the Reign, or rather, after the Tyranny of three years, and
some months. Claudius his Uncle, and Brother to Germanicus, succeeded in the
Empire, at the Age of fifty years. At his first entrance he confirmed to Herod
Agrippa the Kingdom which his Predecessor had given him, and restored to him
the Provinces of Judaea, and Samaria, as having heretofore belonged to the
Demain of Herod his Grandfather. This was not sufficient to satisfy his
Liberality, he added to it the Country which Lysanius held. In stead of
receiving so great benefits from the hands of God, and to lay the Foundation
upon his protection, for the glory and repose of his new Kingdom, he suffered
himself to be blinded with his Greatness, and followed the Maxims of the
unhappy Politician, who persuades Princes that crimes are to be permitted, when
profitable. It was upon this ground that presently after his Arrival at
Jerusalem, to gain the good will of the Jews, he caused the head of Saint
James, Brother to Saint John, to be cut off; a man even to his Enemies
venerable for his piety. To this death he would have added also that of Saint
Peter; but to observe a form of Justice, he made him to be bound with two
chains, and shut up in an obscure prison, with intention after the Feast of
Easter to please the people with the Spectacle of his Execution. This accident
astonished the Church, now in her Infancy, and moved her to ordain continual
and public prayers, conceaving the storm which then threatened, to be of
highest danger. Her members, careful for the preservation of their Head, prayed
night and day for the obtaining of his life and liberty, both which were
desperate according to humane probability. But Almighty God carefully preserved
him, to make him instrumental unto greater things then which he had already
done. The night before that day which was ordained for his appearance before
the people, an Angel descended from Heaven into the prison where he was, and
found him betwixt two Soldiers of his guard oppressed with sleep. The Dungeon
was instantly filled with a great light, and awaking him by a touch on the
side, at his command to follow him, the chains fell from his hands. He obeyed,
and passing the first and second watch, came to the iron gate that led to the
street, which of it self also opened. After he had gone some few steps, this
Messenger of Heaven vanished, and the prisoner, who till then thought he was in
a dream, found indeed that he was delivered out of the hands of Herod, and from
the fury of the Jews. He came and knocked at the door of Mary the Mother of
John, surnamed Mark, where many faithful were gathered together, praying for
his delivery. A young Maid named Rhodes, knew him by his voice, and presently
went up to tell the Assembly; some told her she was mad; but she affirming that
it was certainly he, they replied, it is his Angel, meaning him whom we call our
Angel Guardian, and who is given to every one of us. When the door was opened,
and that they saw him, they could yet scarce believe their own eyes. He
recounted to them what had happened in the prison: And giving order to make
known this good news to James the Brother of our Lord, who was Bishop of
Jerusalem, and to the rest of the Faithful, he departed toward the Coast of
Palestine, there to preach the Gospel. From thence he went to Rome, where he
began to make war against Idolatry, and to establish the Seat of his
Successors, which might be through all Ages of the Church the Center of
Ecclesiastical Unity. Herod advertised of his delivery, grew enraged astainst
the Soldiers to whose custody he was committed. He caused diligent search to
be made after him, but in vain; and the Divine Vengeance not long after failed
not to punish Herod himself. For he being at Cesarea, the Inhabitants of Tire
and Sydon, with whom he was angry (the cause is not mentioned in the History of
the Acts) sent Deputies to him to make their peace. He gave them public
audience; and to render this action more solemn, would appear adorned in all
the Royal ornaments of Majesty. At his Entry the flattering people clapped their
hands; and when he spoke, they cried, It Is a God that speaks, and not a man.
This unfortunate Prince took pleasure in this Sacrilegious Adulation, and with
joy received the honor which is only due to the King of Kings. But at the
same time the Angel of our Lord struck him with a horrible disease, that from
his Throne he was carried to his Bed, where the worms eating his flesh, made it
appear that it was the flesh of a mortal man; and that God is more elevated
above Sovereigns, then Sovereigns are above their subjects, that by the least
of creatures he knows how to abate the pride of the most formidable Tyrants;
and that piety and justice are the most solid Bases of an Empire.

The persecution of this wicked man gave occasion to the Apostles to leave
Judaea, and divide themselves into all parts of the world; for till then they
had resided in Jerusalem. Before they separated themselves, they composed a
Summary of Christian Doctrine, which is called the Apostles Creed; whether it
were that every one made an Article, or because it was the mark, or as it were,
the watchword whereby Christians might know one another, as being soldiers of
one Band. Saint Matthew wrote also before this separation the Gospel which
bears his name, and of which St. Hierome says he saw the Original in Hebrew,
in the Library of Pamphilius the Martyr. Saint Bartholomew going into the
Indies transcribed it with his own hand, and it was found in the time of Zeno
the Emperor, with the body of Saint Barnaby. In the mean time the Apostle
returned to Antioch with Barnaby, and another companion called John, surnamed
Mark. Their return caused great joy to that Church, but she enjoyed not long
their presence, for the Prophets and Doctors of which that Church was composed,
amongst whom was Simon surnamed the Black, Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manahem,
Foster-Brother to Herod, the Greek word signifies brought up with him. Whilst
they fasted, and were busied in the Ministry of our Lord, they received
command from the Holy Ghost to separate from amongst all the rest Saul and
Barnabas. Saint Luke places them in the rank of Doctors, for the work unto
which he had designed them. They presently obeying, imposed hands upon them
after fasting and prayer.

There is a great diversity of opinions amongst Interpreters, in Explicating
what the Imposition of hands signifies in this passage of the Acts, and what
was the Ministry in which those here named were employed. The word of the
Liturgy, according to some, signifies the celebrating of the Sacrifice of the
Mass. Saint Chrysostom Explicates it of Preaching. Others of any kind of
Ecclesiastical Function. By imposition of hands diverse modern Interpreters
understand Ordination to Episcopacy. Their ground is upon this circumstance of
the Liturgy, because the Church of Antioch did always accompany this action
with fasting and prayer. But although the Church do at this day celebrate
Ordinations with these Ceremonies, it is not therefore to be said they were
practiced from the beginning; nor, that every time they were practiced, it was
for Ordination. They add also, that there is no other passage in the New
Testament which shows St. Paul, and St. Barnabas to be consecrated either
Priests or Bishops. One might answer, that the Apostleship contains these two
Orders by that power which is called per Excellentiam; for the Apostles were to
found particular Churches which composed the Universal. Now those could not be
founded without Bishops, the Church being defined to be a people joined to
their Bishop. They ought therefore to have that Character which is necessary
for the Ordination of Bishops. Certainly it connot be showed in the Gospel,
that the other Apostles sent by Jesus Christ, were first made Bishops, and
afterward Apostles; nor is there any likelihood that the Apostleship of Saint
Paul, who (as St. Ambrose and St. Austin say) was not called by Jesus Christ
mortal, but by Jesus Christ totally God, that is to say, living by a divine
life after his Resurrection) did not comprise the excellency which the others
had, and was less extraordinary. Saint Chrysostom, whose authority is of great
weight in what concerns the Doctor of Nations, says that he was ordained
Apostle in the time we speak of. This opinion may be grounded upon this, that
Saint Luke in this passage ranks him amongst the other Doctors of the Church of
Antioch. Whence it is probable, if he had been considered as an Apostle, and an
Apostle of the Gentiles by eminency, or if he had exercised that Function, he
would not have given him a Title much inferior to the Apostleship: For Saint
Paul speaking of the Orders of Ministers of the Church, says, that God has
established first the Apostles, secondly the Prophets, and in the third place
the Doctors. And truly before this time Saint Luke relates no other Function of
his then those of a Doctor and Preacher. But to this may be objected, that S.
Paul says clearly he is no Apostle of men, nor by men, but Apostle of Jesus
Christ, and by Jesus Christ. How then can his Apostleship be immediately from
our Lord, if the Prophets and Doctors of the Church of Antioch ordained him
Apostle? He is so far from having any advantage over the other Apostles by his
Vocation, that it is much inferior to theirs; they having been sent
immediately by Jesus Christ, and he having received his Mission, it is true, of
Jesus Christ, but by way of Inspiration. and by the Ministry of those, who
themselves were neither Bishops nor Apostles, but simply Prophets and Doctors.
Certainly to me this objection seems unanswerable, unless we allow that by
Ordination to the Apostleship, and imposition of hands, Saint Chrysostom means
that Saint Paul was elevated to the Apostleship of Jesus Christ from the very
moment of his conversion, but did not exercise the Functions of it toward the
Gentiles, (for whom he had particularly received it) until the Holy Ghost made
it known unto him by the Prophets and Doctors of the Church of Antioch, and
that it was then time to begin the exercise of his Function; so that the
imposition of hands upon him was but a simple invocation of the Divine
assistance for him, accompanied with the divine sacrifice, with prayer, and
with fasting, to the end God would daign to bestow upon him all benedictions
necessary for the employment to which he was ordained. Although we might draw
from this passage a strong Argument for the Ordination of Bishops, yet I choose
rather to pass it over, then ground the proof of an undoubted verity upon a
passage that admits dispute; as if we had no other arms to defend our selves,
and sought more to heap together, then select Arguments. My design is to write
a History clear and plain, and not a Treatise controversy. Hence I offer mine
and others opinions, leaving afterward unto Readers the liberty of making
their own choice.

At this same time the Apostle was elevated unto the third Heaven, where he
learnt secrets which are neither possible nor fit to unfold to man in this
life. I know Interpreters agree not in this; but since it is a difficulty only
in Chronology, and not of much importance, I embrace that opinion as most
conformable to truth, which corresponds with the date assigned by the Apostle
himself in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says he knew a man
that was rapt into the third Heaven fourteen years since. Besides, I have
Authors very famous, and very considerable for my opinion; and certainly, if in
these questions of fact, reason may be admitted, this Revelation could not be
given to him in a more necessary time then that which we design. For then he
was to make war with all his force against Idolatry. It was then that Jesus
Christ imbarqued him upon that great Sea of Nations, to blazon amongst them the
sound of the Gospel, and to work wonders by means of his singular Apostleship
conferred upon him. Now to announce those sublime verities, it was necessary he
should first taste them at the Springhead, and be himself replenished, ere he
communicated them to others.

But there is yet a notable dispute betwixt both modern and ancient
Interpreters, about this rapture, and this vision. Some will have it, that he
saw in this ecstasy the distinction of the Orders of Angels, whereof he speaks
in his Epistle; nor find we any other Canonical Writer to distinguish them as
he has done. Others say that he did there know particularly the profund Mystery
of the Incarnation, and the vocation of Gentiles to faith; for in his Epistle to
the Ephesians he says; That to him who is the least amongst the faithful,
charge was given to make known to the Gentiles the inestimable riches of Jesus
Christ, and to illuminate all men, teaching them the dispensation of the
Mystery hidden in God from all Ages, to the end that the Principalities and
celestial powers should learn of the Church the different wisdom of God. In
effect the proper Ministry of Saint Paul was this vocation of the Gentiles, and
their incorporation with Jesus Christ. That was his charge; in this he was
distinguished from the rest of the Apostles; all his Epistle amply treat of
this vocation, which surprised and offended the Jews. This makes Saint
Chrysostom say, That the Apostle illuminated the Archangels, the
Principalities, the Powers, and the Angels. But I cannot believe that this sole
mystery was the bounds of the Revelation of Saint Paul, unless it may be said
it comprehends in it all the other mysteries of Christian Religion. Some
Doctors, amongst whom St. Thomas, have held that he saw the Divine Essence with
a momentary glance, and as it were in passing; and do they think to evade that
maxim of scripture, That no man shall see God, and live? however I cannot be
of that opinion, and it seems to me not to be maintained. I will give place to
none in my respect and affection toward him whose life I write; but yet me
thinks respect and affection to Saints ought to be squared by the verity which
is manifested to us, and not by the subtilty of our conceit, or by certain
congruities more ingenious then solid. The Apostle would not unfold to us the
manner of his Ecstasy; whether it was a separation of the soul from the body,
or a suspension of the vital functions of the soul within the body, during
which he saw those divine verities, whether this sight was imaginary, or
intellectual, and how long it lasted: It suffices him to tell us that he heard
secret words, which are not lawful for man to repeat; that is to say, he saw
ineffable Mysteries, which cannot be explicated by humane words, nor were it to
purpose to make them known, since men are not capable of them; besides, it
would not at all conduce to the salvation of those unto whom he was to preach.
This reservedness of St. Paul shows his humility; and that he spoke not of his
Ecstasies, unless in a manner compelled, which we shall explicate in another
place of this History. It may also repress the curiosity of Readers, and of
those who bear most honor and affection to him, and hinder them from
penetrating into that Abyss which his modesty would hide. It Is now time to
return to the course of our Narration.

Paul and Barnabas departed from Antioch of Syria immediately after they had
received that imposition of hands, which has occasioned this digression. The
first place they came unto, was Seleucia, which was not above fourteen miles
distant. From thence they went into the Isle of Cyprus, famous amongst the
Pagans for the birth of Venus, who was the Goddess of pleasure, and the Mother
of Love; but it was truly famous amongst the Christians for the birth of St.
Barnaby, and many other great men which she gave unto the Church. In Salamina,
since called Constantia, they preached to the Jews; and continuing their
Voyage, came to Paphos, where God prepared for the Apostle a most important
Victory. Sergius Paulus the Proconsul, a man styled in the Acts with the Title
of prudent, desired to hear him whose reputation was so great in the Country.
There was a Jew called Elimas, who counterfeited himself to be a Prophet, but
was an abominable Magician: This man opposed the doctrine of St. Paul, whereat
he justly offended, and in a tone full of authority, spoke in this manner. O
thou child of the Devil, thou man full of malice and deceit, will thou never
leave to oppose the designs of God, and pervert his ways. Thou do
endeavor to hinder the Proconsul from receiving the light of the Gospel, but
for a just punishment thou shall lose the light of the Sun, and for a time
remain blind. The effect presently followed his words, and thick scales
covered the eyes of this wicked man, who having feigned himself to be a God,
stood in need of a guide to conduct him. Yet this punishment altered him not,
for he continued in his impiety, and afterward composed a book against the
Christians. However his blindness gave light to the Proconsul, and finished his
conversion. He received with joy and admiration that verity which he saw so
miraculously confirmed, and afterward became a zealous preacher of it. The
Church of Narbone glories to have had him for her first Bishop; and the Roman
Martyrologe celebrates his memory on the 22. of March; but that is a dispute
which I leave to Chronologers. In this place Saint Luke begins to give the name
of Paul to the Apostle; and from thence some have drawn an argument, in their
opinion very strong, that till then he was called Saul; and that after this
great conversion, he took the name of his Cathecumen, as the Ancient Romans did
of those people they subdued by their Arms. But this is repugnant to the
humility of a man who says of himself that he was not worthy to be called an
Apostle. It is more likely that the Proconsul, in acknowledgement of the good
which he had received from him, desired him to take his name, which was one of
the noblest of Ancient Rome; and that he accepted of it not out of vanity, but
because it might gain him a better admittance amongst the Gentiles, to whom he
was particularly to preach. Some say, that perhaps he received both those names
at his circumcision; that the one was better known before his own conversion,
and the other more used after, this which we now relate. I should be of opinion
he had both those names, that amongst the Jews he was called Saul, and at
Tharsis, which was a Roman Colony, he took the name of Paul, it being a Roman
name. This dispute is of no great importance, and we speak of it only by the
way.

After the Proconsul's Conversion, his Family being also converted, and many
others, the Apostle departed, to sow the Seed of the Gospel (which had so
happily prospered in Cyprus) in other places. He did but pass by Pergen of
Pamphilia, judging that there was a greater harvest to be made in Antioch of
Pisidia. On a Sabbathday he went into the Synagogue, and mingled himself with
the Assistants to hear the Lecture which was made there out of the Holy
Scriptures. When that was done, the chief of the Assembly being willing to
honor him, according to the custom of the Jews, sent to him and to Barnaby,
to know if either of them would speak. Then Paul rose up, and making a sign
with his hand, inviting silence, began in this manner.

The Discourse I have to make unto you, Men, Israelites, and all you who have
the fear of our Lord, is of so great importance, as I must beg an extraordinary
attention. You know that God, who owns to be his all the Nations of the World,
chose through an admirable effect of his goodness the Posterity of Abraham and
Jacob to be unto him a particular people, and a beloved Nation. Whilst our
Ancestors were captives in Egypt, he took pity of their afflictions, and
delivered them by miracles worthy the strength of his Arm. He opened to them
the bosom of the Sea, and for the space of forty years fed them in the desert,
and with incredible patience suffered their revolts and murmurs. He brought
their Children into the Land of promise, the which he distributed amongst them,
after he had extirpated seven Nations for their sakes. He governed them by
Judges till the time of Samuel. This government not pleasing them, he
accommodated himself to their Ingratitude, and chose for their King Saul the
Son of Cis, of the Tribe of Benjamin. But he not answering to the favors
received from God, by his disobedience to Samuels command, by his attempt to
offer sacrifice to the Lord, and by his other wicked actions, occasion was
given to reprove him, and elect David, of whom God himself has vouchsafed to
give this testimony: I have found David the Son of Jesse, a man according to my
own heart, who will do all my commands. From his Posterity that Jesus Christ
the Savior of Israel is descended, according to the promise made to our
Forefathers. John the Baptist announced his coming, preaching to all people
the Baptism of penance. His Sanctity and Doctrine made men doubt if he were
not the Messiah. But instead of attributing that honor to himself, he told all
his Auditors that he was not the Messiah, but only his humble Precursor; and
that he held himself not worthy to unty his shoes. My dear Brethren, holy
Posterity of Abraham, it is for you that he is come. It Is unto those who amongst
you have the fear of God, that these tidings of Salvation are directed. The
Law given to Moses upon the Mountain is holy, no doubt, since the Author of
it is holy: But that only exhorts men to Sanctity, and cannot give it by any
peculiar efficacy of its own nature. It forbids our consent to the motions of
concupiscence, but does not furnish us with force to withstand those furious
assaults. Concupiscence is a Monster too strong for it, a poison which
surpasses all its remedies, a yoke of death, which the Law alone cannot break.
Our Fathers have groned under the weight, and have found it as difficult as
shameful: Notwithstanding it was good, and even necessary that our Nation
should remain long under this captivity, to the end men acknowledging their
incapacity of observing the precepts of the Law, and the weakness of the Law
in it self, might have recourse to that Physician and Redeemer, who is able to
cure all their evils, and free them from their servitude. This Physician, this
Redeemer is Jesus Christ which I announce unto you, it is he who offers unto
you the perfect liberty of the Children of God. Will you become enemies to your
own good fortune? Will you imitate the ingratitude of the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem? The envy of the Princes, of the Priests, and the fury of the
Sinagogue? Who instead of receiving him as the person promised by all the
Prophets, instead of acknowledging, that in him were fulfilled all the
prophesies, which are read every Sabbath in their Assemblies; without having
any occasion of complaint against him, or any shadow of accusation in the least
offense, suffered themselves to be carried away with so much ingratitude and
fury, and with such excess of blindness, as to urge Pilate to put him to
death: and after the Executioners had (without reflection) unfortunately
performed whatever the Scriptures foretold of him, by fastening him to an
infamous piece of wood, peercing his hands and feet, casting lots upon his
garment, giving him gaul and vinegar to drink, they took him from the Cross,
and put him into a Monument, but God left him not there long. The third day he
raised him again, and many days after he showed himself to those, who from
Galilee went up with him to Jerusalem, and who at this time declare as much to
the people, as having been eye witnesses thereof. We preach unto you the same
verity, which ought not to seem a novelty unto you, since in the second Psalm,
the Psalmist beholding in Spirit the life, which the Eternal Father was to give
to his Son Christ Jesus in the Tomb, for exchange of that which he had
Sacrificed to his Sanctity and Justice upon the Tree of the Cross, introduces
him speaking in this manner unto the Messiah. Thou art my Son, this day I have
begotten thee. He explicates the wonderful change, that the Resurrection made
in Jesus Christ, by this word of Generation; as the most proper to make known
the greatness and perfections of that new Condition, where no thing remains in
him of the old Adam, being now perfectly a new man. This state is no less
durable, then glorious for Jesus Christ, having once dyed, he dies no more. He
shall never return to corruption, as the same Psalmist foretold by these words.
Thou will not permit, that thy Holy One see corruption. Now it is evident this
could not be said of David. For that Monarch, after he had happily governed his
Subjects, and remained faithful to the commands of God, is dead, and he sleeps
yet in the grave amongst his Forefathers. It Is of Jesus Christ he intended to
speak, of Jesus that is no more subject to corruption, after that God had
raised him again. You must know that it is by him alone remission of sins is
given, nor is it to be found in the Law of Moses. The blood of Goats and Bulls,
was but a figure of that which he spilt, to take away all the iniquities of the
World. But now verity drives away figures, and the light darkness. We now
announce no more unto you a Legal justice, but a Christian justice; an
interior justice, a justice before God, a justice which glorifies God, and not
man, who possesses it; because it comes from God, who infuses it into man, by
virtue of his Spirit. If the Law could have given true justice; Jesus Christ
had dyed in vain. Therefore think no more of establishing your justice, by a
proud opinion of the value of your works, as if they were holy, or that their
Sanctity proceeded from you, or from the Law. Your actions may have the
appearance of goodness, as done in exterior obedience to the precepts of the
Law: you may practice that which it ordains, and abstain from that which it
forbids, and living after this manner, you are just in the sight of men, and
you deserve to receive praise from them; But God does not judge according to
appearance, he regards not simply the action which is done, but how it is done,
by what motive we do it, and for what end. If we believe there is no need but
of our own proper forces; if only to please men we do good; if only out of a
servile fear of punishment, which the Law ordains, we observe that Law; surely
we are guilty in the secret of our hearts; though exteriourly we appear
innocent. For if we examine well our inclinations, we shall find that we
should do evil, and omit the doing of what is good, if it might be done without
punishment. Whilst we act thus, God is not regarded by us, nor are we touched
with any love toward him, we consider him rather a Tyrant, from whose yoke we
desire to be freed, and which we bare with pain and contradiction, then a most
loving Father, and a lawful Master, who is ever obeyed with delight. It is in
this last quality we ought to serve him, For we have not received a spirit of
fear and servitude, but a spirit of adoption which empowers us to call God our
Father, and as his Children to hope for the possession of his inheritance. Now
we must not persuade our selves that we can deceive him, for he reads in the
bottom of our consciences, and sees clearly that which we hide to others. He
knows whether we seek him, or our selves, whether in him or in us, whether in
his grace or the Law we place our confidence. When we expect from him, by Jesus
Christ all our force, and following his design, we go unto him by the Law, to
the end he himself may work in us, and by us, that which could not be done by
its imbicility, in order to the cure of these wounds which it discovers to us,
and to the acquisition of strength to overcome the sin which it condemns.
Then I say, we work in holiness, and our works are the works of light, but
when we act otherwise, we render our selves worthy of his malediction: and
seeking after justice, even when we think to have found it; we go further
from it. Concupiscence reigns in us with more Tyranny, and we find that the
Law enkindles and revives it more, by reason of our corruption by being born in
the state of sin, which makes, that prohibition stirs up our desires, and
renders us unable to support any yoke, but that of self-love. We think our
selves to be in good health, when we have poison at our hearts; we imagine
that we have raised a great building, when we have failed in the foundation. In
a word we think to have deserved Crowns of honor, when indeed, we are
worthy of grievous punishments. Do not then despise the Gospel which discovers
to you so important verieties, and take heed least it happen to you as one of
the Prophets said. You that mock, see and behold, and be troubled, and justly
loose your selves. Behold, in your days, I work a work that you will not
believe when it shall be recounted to you.

Thus the Apostle spoke in the Synagogue. Those who were Jews in Religion but
not by birth, were much taken with his doctrine, and with this eloquence, which
was not like that of profane Orators, set out with florishes of words, but
with the ornament of a real beauty, they desired him to entertain them the next
Sabbath with the same subject. The assembly being dismissed, many of the Jews
and Gentiles that were faithful followed him and Barnabas to their lodging,
where they exhorted them with vehement words, to continue firm in profession of
the Gospel. Upon the Saboth following, on which day he had promised to speak
unto them, all the Town-flocked to the Synagogue to hear him. The Jews seeing
such a multitude of Gentiles, were transported with so furious a zeal for the
honor of the Law, that they rose up against the Apostle, and contradicting all
those verities which he had declared to them, uttered many blasphemies against
Jesus Christ. Then he and Barnabas told them boldly, It is to you that we are
bound to bring the first news of Salvation, but since you render your selves
unworthy of it, and testify by dispising the word of God, the little care you
have of eternal life, we will present to the Gentiles those graces which you
deserve not. The Lord has so commanded us, saying by his Prophet, I have sent
you to serve for a light to Nations, to the end you be their Salvation, even to
the farthest part of the Earth. The Gentiles who were in the Assembly hearing
them speak so much to their advantage, were touched with a pious joy, and all
those for whom, by an election as secret, as just, God had prepared eternal
life, received the Doctrine preached unto them, and believed in Jesus Christ.

The Gospel making a great progress through all that Province, and the Jews
not able to endure it, intressed the authority of the chief men of Antioch,
and the simplicity of some Women of quality, more zealous then the rest for the
Law of Moses, to raise a sedition against those who (as it seemed to them) went
about to destroy it. Their violence must take place. The Apostle shaking the
dust of his feet against those wicked people, left their quarters, and came to
Iconium, a Town situated near to Mount Taurus in Lycaonia. He converted there
by his preaching a great number of Jews, and Greeks; He stayed there a long
time, being dismayed neither with their ambushes, approbries, nor other
persecutions from the enemies of faith. His miracles confirmed his words, and
confounded the impiety of those, who were incredulous. It was in this place
where Thecla that famous Virgin, (whose Sanctity and Courage the ancient Church
has celebrated with so many Panegeriques) hearing him speak of the excellency
of Virginity, resolved to decline a marriage designed for her with a young man
worthy of her beauty and extraction. He loved her with extreme passion, and
seeing himself deprived of that hope, which he had so much nourished, his love
was changed into mortal hatred, in so much that he became her persecutor, when
she was exposed to the fury of Lions to be devoured by them; they kissed her
feet, and clothed themselves with that humanity which her Persecutors had cast
off. She was tied to Bulls to be torn in pieces, She was put into a hole full
of Vipers, a great Fire was kindled, where she was to be burnt alive, but her
Heavenly Espouse delivered her from all those torments, and in the end suffered
her to dye, that she might have the glory to be the first Martyr in his Church.
I know that the acts of her sufferings say, she died in peace, but the opinion
which I follow is more conformable to the sense of the ancient fathers, who
speak of her as of a true Martyr. The Ancients believed they could give no
higher praise to a Woman of eminent virtue then to call her another Thecla.

This conversion occasioned unto the Apostles new matter of persecution. The
Jews, who hated him mortally, made so strong a party against him, that they
were too prevalent for those, who were of his side, and without doubt they had
handled him rudely, nay perhaps stoned him to death, if he had not fled into
other Cities of Lycaonia, where he with his companion happily spread the
Doctrine of Salvation.

The people having beheld the miraculous cure in Listris, of a man born lame,
believed that Gods were descended from Heaven to visit them under a humane
form. And as error easily increases, they gave unto Paul the name of Mercury,
because he preached, and unto Barnabas the name of Jupiter. The Priest of
Jupiter followed by a great multitude, came before the door of their lodging
with Crowns and Bulls to do them the honor of sacrifice as unto Gods.

Then the Servants of the true God not being able to endure their impiety, came
forth and tearing their garments, cried out, blind men what go you about to
do? We are mortal creatures as you are, and come to declare unto you, that
Idols are Statues without life, that you must leave the worship of them, and
render honor and a doration to God, who has made Heaven and Earth. Till now be
has left the Gentiles in their errors, though by the order of his providence,
which so justly governs all things; and by those continual Benefits which he
poures upon men, giving them rain when it is necessary for the fruits of the
Earth, and heaping upon them a thousand favors, he has in all times exhibited
sufficient proofs of his divinity.

This discourse could scarce hinder the Licaonians from their sacrilegious
design; But soon after they fell into another extremity: For there came
certain Jews from Antioch, and Iconium, who knew so readily and dexterously how
to change their humors, that they were soon persuaded to assist these new
comers to Stone Saint Paul, whom but a little before they would have adored. A
remarkable example of the inconstancy of popular favor, and an adventure fit
for the disciple of him, who having been received in Jerusalem as King, fix
days after was conducted by the same persons as a Criminal to Mount Calvary.
These Executioners of the Apostle dragged him out of the gates, and there left
him for dead; But when the people were gone, he rose up, and environed with his
Disciples, went back into the City, from whence he parted the next day to
Darben with his faithful companion. After he had preached the Gospel there,
they returned to visit in Listris, Iconium, and Antioch, those whom they had
converted, teaching them better by their example, then discourse, to continue
firm in the faith of Jesus Christ, not to fear persecutions, by which they
must necessarily pass, ear they arrive at a heavenly Kingdom. They established
Bishops and Priests, in those places where there was need, and so left the
faithful of those parts, wishing them increase of all divine graces and
benedictions. They passed by Pisidia and Pamphilia and preached at Pergen, and
from thence went down into Attalia, and so returned to Antioch of Syria. The
Christians there rejoiced wonderfully at their return, but they were touched
with a more sensible joy, when in the first assembly they understood the
wonderful things which God had wrought by them, and the great Harvest they had
made amongst the Gentiles, to whom God had opened the gate of the Gospel, for
which they rendered thanks to Jesus Christ, and every one took occasion thereby
to be more inflamed with the love of him who rejects no person, but desires
that all should come to the knowledge of his name, without distinction either
of Sex, Nation, or Quality.

At this same time the Emperor by an Edict banished all the Jews from Rome,
amongst whom the Christians found themselves comprised, because there was noe
distinction then made betwixt the one and the other. The cause of this
banishment, it may be, was, that Saint Peter preaching the Gospel in the
Synagogue, many were obstinate in opposition to it, and many also embraced it;
which gave occasion of so many disputes, and troubles amongst them, that
Claudius to prevent the evil which might happen upon these differences, and
withal making little esteem of that Nation, commanded them all out of the
Town. The words of Suetonius give me ground, to attribute the banishment I
spoke of to this cause. For he expressly says, that the Emperor drove them out
of the City, by reason of the continual tumults about Christ. Now it is no
wonder (this Historian being not well versed in the affairs of Christian
Religion) if he explicate himself so imperfectly upon this occasion, besides,
the Jews were hated, and contemned by the Romans. Hence Saint Peter obeying
the command of the Emperor left Italy, and came to Jerusalem, where he happened
to be, by a particular conduct of the Divine Providence, to assist and preside
in the first Council of the Church. Certain persons coming from Judea to
Antioch, began both to publish that Circumcision was necessary to Salvation,
and that it ought to be received by those Gentiles, who were converted to the
faith of Jesus Christ. Many of the Pharisean Sect who made profession of the
Gospel, maintained this Doctrine, and Cerinthus (afterward a notorious
Heresiarch) was the chief of this faction that sprung up amongst the faithful;
which raised no small sedition against Paul and Barnabas. To hinder what might
happen upon so dangerous a division, it was agreed upon by common consent, that
the two last, and some other persons of the contrary opinion, should go up to
Jerusalem to consult with the Apostles and Priests of that Church about this
question, which had so much troubled the Church of Antioch. In passing by
Phenicia, and the Region of Samaria, Paul and Barnabas recounted to the
faithful, how great a number of Gentiles were converted, which caused an
extraordinary and very sensible joy in them. Arriving at Jerusalem, the
Apostles, Priests, and the rest of the Brethren received them with testimonies
of extraordinary love, and respect; and were much comforted to understand the
great things which God had wrought by them for the establishment of the Gospel.
The Pharisees that were converted, gave them little rest; for, presently upon
the conversion of the Gentiles, they made a great noise, maintaining that they
ought to be Circumcised, and were obliged to the other Ceremonies of the Law of
Moses. This occasioned the journey of Paul and Barnabas as we have already
said, and thereupon the Apostles and Priests assembled themselves at Jerusalem
to debate this difficulty, which they did with great care; Their opinions were
different, and every one upheld his own sense with strong reasons, so that the
question began to be more and more intricate, the more they endeavored to
clear it. Saint Peter seeing this, made a sign that he would speak; which he
did in this manner.

Brethren, you know long since God was pleased to make use of me to declare his
Gospel to the Gentiles, and conduct them to his faith; I had difficulty in it
at the beginning, and he with drew me from that error, as I have formerly told
you, by a vision which I had in Joppa, a sheet filled with all sort of
creatures by the Law unclean. A voice commanded me to kill, and eat. I
answered that I never used to touch any meat unclean, as those were I then
beheld, and it was replied to me, that nothing which God had purified, was
unclean. In the mean time I received a message from Cornelius the Centurion,
who by birth was a Gentile, but conversing with the Jews, had learnt to live
religiously and fear the true God. Then suddenly I understood what was meant
by the vision. I came to Cesarea, where I found him with a great number of his
friends, assembled to hear the word of life. He told me that an Angel had
appeared, and assured him that his alms, deeds, and prayers, were mounted up
to Heaven before God, and that by his command he had sent to seek me. Upon this
relation I preached the Doctrine of Salvation to the company, and I was happily
interrupted by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, by which they praised
God in Languages unknown to them before: So that I was no longer in doubt
whether it was needful to give them the Baptism of Water, having received
that of the Holy Ghost, which sanctified them. At that time I was blamed for
preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, but when I had reported to the same
Church that which had happened in Cesarea, every one was satisfied with my
proceeding, and all that heard me, praised the goodness of God: in that he had
withdrawn the Gentiles from the darkness of infidelity. Now since he is
pleased to show them this mercy, that he makes no difference between them and
us, and that he purifies the hearts of the one, and the other by faith in his
Son; why then would you impose upon the faithful, that which neither our
Fathers nor we have been able to bear, since we believe that they and we shall
be saved alike, by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Assembly were all
attentive to this discourse, which, Paul and Barnabas observing, took the
opportunity of their silence, and recounted the miracles, which God had wrought
by their hands, for the conversion of the Gentiles, and having ended this
relation, which gave much comfort to all there present; Saint James who was
Bishop of Jerusalem demanded Audience and said.

Brethren, I desire you to hear me. Simon has related unto you how that by his
Ministry God has visited the Gentiles, and how those whom we thought to be
wholly abandoned, are now made his faithful people, and obedient to his truth.
The testimonies of the Prophets do accord with this his Conduct. Amos says,
after this I will return, and I will rebuild the Tabernacle of David which is
fallen, and I will repair its ruins, and I will reedifie it, to the end the
rest of men may seek after the Lord, and all Nations by whom his name is
invocated, says the Lord that does these things: The work of the Lord is known
unto him before the beginning of all times. Let us not then be surprised, to
see that happen which has been foretold so long since. But rather let us bless
God, in that his goodness has accomplished his promises, in favor of the
Gentiles; and not through an indiscreet rigor, contrary to the liberty of the
Gospel, distaste them in the Faith which they have embraced. In this occasion,
to observe some moderation, and neither offend the Jews, in abrogating all the
Legal Ceremonies, nor yet discourage the Gentiles, with obliging them unto
observances too rigorous; my advice is, it will suffice to write unto them,
that they abstain from meats offered to Idols, from strangled meats, from the
blood of beasts, and fornication. For the Jews who are converted, they are
sufficiently instructed in abstaining from those things by the Law of Moses,
whose Books are read every Sabbath in our Assemblies, as well as in the
Synagogue. By this, we take away all occasion of complaint, that we despise his
Ordinances.

This opinion being universally received, it was thought good by the Apostles,
by the Priests, and by the rest of the Faithful, to send to Antioch Paul and
Barnaby, together with Judas, surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, men most esteemed
amongst them for their piety, who should carry the resolution of the Council,
which they committed to writing, as it is in this following Epistle.

The Apostles, Bishops, and Priests, assembled at Jerusalem, do wish to the
faithful of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia (who amongst the Gentiles have received
the Faith) health, having understood that certain persons coming from this
City, have troubled you with discourses, which we never gave them in charge to
make unto you, we thought good to assemble our selves, as well to examine those
difficulties controverted, as to apply a remedy to the evil already spread too
far. And at last we have resolved to send you two Deputies, our dear Brothers,
Paul and Barnaby, together with Barsabas and Silas, men who have a thousand
times exposed their lives in defense of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. They
are witnesses of what has passed here, and we desire you will give credit to
them.

It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, not to impose upon you any
other yoke then that, of abstaining from meats offered to Idols, from strangled
meats, from blood, and fornication; which things you shall do well to observe:
So fare ye well.

In these decrees, we may behold the Evangelical prudence of those that made
them; for all those things which they forbad (except Fornication) were
indifferent in their own nature, and the liberty of the Gospel permitted the
use of them to the Faithful, freeing them in that point from the yoke of Moses
Law, which forbad them to the Jews. But the Church being composed of Jews and
Gentiles, newly converted, it was necessary to find some way to unite two
sorts of people that were so different in their humors, customs, and
inclinations. The Jews were bent even upon a scrupulous observation of all
their Ceremonies, and could not endure that any should violate them, so that it
was absolutely necessary to accommodate things to their weakness; and on the
other side, they were to find out such an accommodation that might not disgust
the Gentiles, whose number was much more considerable, and who principally were
to form the Church. Behold wherefore the Apostles in the Council made choice of
two or three Legal observations, unto which they oblige all Christians without
distinction, forbidding the use of meats strangled, offered to Idols, and
blood. For as in the ancient Law, those who participated of the flesh of
Sacrifices which were offered, by that action, entered in some sort into a
society with God, to whom that Sacrifice was presened, and made a public
profession of the Religion where that worship was practiced. So the Jews were
of opinion, that those who did eat of the meats offered to Idols, although they
were Christians, did acknowledge their Divinity, and did enter into a certain
communion with those false Gods, of which they had a strange horror, it
appearing unto them an impiety altogether insupportable. We see in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, which was writ a long time after this Council, that
the Apostle treating of this Subject, gives it for a rule to the faithful, in
no sort to use those meats, lest their Brethren should be scandalized, in that
every one was to follow the judgment of his own conscience, it being a sin to
act contrary to our own secret persuasion and belief. In the Apocalips, the
Angel reprehended the Bishop of Thyatira, that he would endure a false
Prophettess to corrupt his servants, by teaching them to eat of meats offered
to Idols, which in a word derived from the Greek, are called Idolothites. The
Apostles therefore, to hinder this division, forbad the use of these meats,
which continued a long time in the Church, as well as that prohibition of the
blood of beasts in the time of Noah, a little after the deluge. Some
Ecclesiastical Authors, and the most ancient, were of opinion, that by the word
blood, the Apostles meant to forbid homicide; but nature and civil Laws
rigorously forbid that, both to Jews and Gentiles. Therefore this prohibition
we now mention, is to be understood of the blood of beasts, and we see it
renewed in the Councels of Gangren, Orleans, and Worms. The Pagans reproached
the Christians, that in their Night-Assemblies they used to kill an Infant, and
eat the flesh of it all bloody. But Tertullian answers them excellently; That
the Christians are so far from doing such an execrable homicide, that it is not
permitted to them to eat the blood of beasts; and therefore Executioners were
wont to present it to them, so to try their fidelity in the observation of the
precepts of their Religion. The Emperor Leo renewed this Decree, with
penalties against those who should violate it. But a little after, when the
Church feared no more division and scandal, being almost wholly composed of
Pagans converted, this Apostolical Decree against suffocated flesh was no
longer observed; and there are certain Fathers, who alleging this passage of
the Acts, make no mention at all of it. Nevertheless, it is certain the Apostles
expressed it, to content the Jews, who were not permitted to eat of any
suffocated creature, nor of any other before they had drawn out the blood.
Concerning Fornication, which is the last thing contained in the Decree of the
Council, the Apostles made no new precept, as if, till then it were not
forbidden, and had been an indifferent action. For there is no doubt but that
it is against the law of nature; which in the conjunction of man and woman,
tends to generation of children, and their education, and civil societies. Now,
Fornication is contrary to this end; for, those, who defile themselves in that
manner, think of nothing but voluptuousness, and those women ordinarily render
themselves incapable of conceiving, by their intemperance; and if they do
conceive, having no certain Father, their education is neglected, and
ordinarily they are prejudicial and burdensome to Commonwealths. The Jews
doubted not, but Fornication was unlawful, for they well understood that
precept of the Decalogue, Thou shall not commit adultery, which contained in it
this kind of impurity. The women of their Nation were forbidden public
prostitution, and P^inees merited the Priesthood for having killed an Israelite
that fornicated with a Moabitish woman. But it was not so with the Gentiles,
who had made many strict and rigorous Laws against adultery, and none against
fornication, nor keeping of Concubines; believing that neither nature, nor the
Republic, was interessed, or endamaged by this action, which a general
corruption had made common, and upon which the Civil Government had made no
reflection. The purity of the body, no less then that of the mind, is an
Evangelical virtue, and only Jesus Christ was able to teach a form of life to
men, that having bodies, they should live as if they had none. This digression
I thought necessary for those who are not so well instructed with the motives
which occasioned the Apostles in this first Council to make these Decrees.
Those who were appointed to carry the Letter, arrived happily at Antioch, where
having assembled the Church, it was read, to the wonderful joy of all the
Christians. Judas and Silas, who were great Preachers, did much comfort the
faithful, by the admirable discourses which upon diverse occasions they made.
After some few days, Judas returned to Jerusalem, leaving Silas with Paul and
Barnaby, who continued in preaching the Gospel with wonderful fruit, not
disdaining to have other companions in this Ministry, wherein they sought
nothing but the glory of Jesus Christ, and the salvation of souls.

It was at that time the famous difference happened betwixt Saint Peter and our
Apostle. The first having lived indifferently amongst the Gentiles of Antioch,
without making any other distinction of meats, then what the Council had
ordained, upon a sudden changed the whole manner of his life, and retired
himself from them, because he would not scandalize certain Jews who were newly
come from Jerusalem. This good intention of his, produced an ill effect; for
the authority of his example drew the greatest part of the faithful to follow
him, and Barnaby also began in his imitation to Judaise. Saint Paul seeing the
dangerous consequence of this proceeding, which might renew the disputes that
were happily appeased, and trouble the consciences of the converted Gentiles;
moved with an ardent and dis-interessed zeal for the salvation of the
Gentiles, opposed him (whom otherwise he extremely honored) in the face of the
whole Church; but in this occasion he judged him blameable, not carrying
himself according to the truth of the Gospel. Saint Peter, upon this
reprehension, did acquiesce, and in his own defense alleged not at all the
privilege of his Primacy.

There is no doubt but he had his reasons for what he did; and it is not to be
believed, that an Apostle so zealous for the glory of the Gospel, could propose
to himself any other end in this occasion, then the salvation of the Jews who
made profession of Christianity; and therefore he feared they might be
scandalized, to see him eat in their presence meats which they held polluted.
There is no doubt but the observation of the Legal Ceremonies was left to the
discretion of the Apostles, in what concerned themselves. And it appears in
effect; for after S. Paul thus had blamed Saint Peter, in that he seemed to
Judaise by his manner of living, he himself circumcised Timothy, because he
would not offend the Jews; and when he came to Jerusalem, he practiced the
Purifications ordained by the Law to the Nazarites, as we shall see in the
course of this History: But, as that which is permitted is not always fit, and
the same action which is done for fear of scandalizing some, many times does
scandalize others, who have different thoughts upon it; we must not wonder at
the carriage of Saint Peter, which was good, in respect of the Jews that came
from Jerusalem, yet wrought an ill effect in the Gentiles of Antioch; so that
the fault of Saint Peter was in the success, and, at the most, we can but
accuse him not to have well considered what evil the change in his manner of
life might occasion. Although we owe a great respect to the Head of the Church,
yet we must not violate the Holy Text, to excuse him from any the least
failing, and accuse his Fellow-brother, that he blamed him unseasonably, and
with too much vanity, as the enemies of Christian Religion, and Heretics do.
Some of the ancient Fathers believed, that this Cephas, of whom it is spoken,
was not the Apostle Saint Peter, but one of the Disciples of our Lord. This
opinion is overthrown by the ensuing Text of Saint Paul, who sets down the
Relation of this dispute. Many Authors of great note, amongst whom Saint
Chrysostom, have maintained that this difference of the two Apostles, was a
thing agreed on betwixt them for the salvation of the Jews; for seeing the
Jews (say they) notwithstanding the Decree of the Council of Jerusalem, were
always offended at the Gentiles eating of meats forbidden by the Law, they
agreed that Saint Peter should take occasion, upon the arrival of those who
came from Jerusalem, to retire from the conversation and table of the
converted Gentiles, and thereupon Saint Paul should reprehend him for this
action in the open Assembly of the faithful; to the which, he replying nothing,
but contrariwise by his silence acknowledging himself to have failed, the
Jews, doubtless convinced by the example of their Master, would leave their
superstition, and use the holy liberty which the Council allowed them, or at
least would not take it ill that the Geniiles should use it. They ground the
dissimulation upon this, that there is no likelihood, in their judgments,
Saint Paul could reprehend in Saint Peter a Judaical practice, when as he soon
after was to circumcise his disciple Timothy; and much less blame him in
public, which had been a scandal to the faithful. Saint Hierome follows this
opinion, but Saint Augustine holds it to be of dangerous consequence, for the
truth of the holy Scriptures, and for the honor and sincerity of those two
Apostles, believing, that to dissemble in a subject of so great consequence,
made a notable alteration. He honored Saint Peter, yet would not excuse him
from having failed, so, as to accuse Saint Paul of an untruth: It seemed also
to him as strange, as if to purge him from the reproach of having denied Jesus
Christ, one should say the Gospel lied, because it reports this weakness of
him. The difference of their opinions, produced betwixt them a contest by
Letters, which lessened not their charity, but was cause that the Church
received excellent instructions, both from the one and the other, and was no
less edified in her Infancy, by the generous liberty of St. Paul's correction,
then by the humility of Saint Peter, who received it. The necessity of
providing for the salvation of the Gentiles, who were endangered by that action
of Saint Peter, to be aversed from the Gospel, and the troubles again to be
revived, which the Council had happily quieted, obliged him who was their
Apostle, to tax in public, a public conduct, which he judged not to be
conformable to to the verity of the Gospel. But we must also admire the
generous and profound humility of him, upon whom our Lord had founded the
building of his Church, that he endured so mildely, and with such patience, a
public correction, without either alleging his Rank, or his good intentions
in defense of what he had done. Certainly, he who was reprehended in this
manner, appears more admirable then he who reprehended him, and much harder to
imitate; for it is more facile to see in another that which is ill, and correct
it, then to see what is fit to be corrected in ones self, and quietly to
endure reproach for it in the face of all the faithful, who, by that action,
might have a less good opinion of him then they had before.

This Dispute, which made no diminution of charity amongst those who propose
nothing for the end of all their actions, but the glory of God, was presently
followed with another Dispute, which also dis-united not their hearts, though
it did their persons. St. Paul judging it fit to visit the Churches where he
and Barnabas had preached, acquainted him with his design; he presently
approved of it, knowing well that those new Plants stood in need of being
cultivated by the same hands which had planted and watered them with so much
labor. But he was of opinion it was fit to take to their companion John
surnamed Mark. The Apostle held this choice neither reasonable, nor profitable,
because he had left them in Pamphilia, and came not with them to those Towns
which they were to visit; and so consequently being a stranger to all things
there, and unknown, he could not labor there with profit. Barnaby wanted not
reasons for his opinion; so that not agreeing, they chose rather to sever
themselves, and divide betwixt them the employment of their Ministry; and
this, no doubt, by the conduct of the Holy Ghost, which brought great
advantages to the places where they preached by their separation. The Apostle,
by this rigor toward St. Mark, intended to make him know the fault* he had
committed in leaving them; whether it was for the apprehension of
discommodities he was to suffer, or for some other reason, which Saint Luke
sets not down; or perhaps foreseeing he was to run more dangers, and greater
discommodities then before, and fearing he might not have sufficient courage to
resist, so that abandoning them the second time, it would increase the shame of
what he had formerly done. Barnaby on the other side, who loved him as his
Kinsman, thought this weakness of his was to be forgotten, and that he ought to
be received again into their company, to give him means thereby to repair his
error. Thus each of them had most pure intentions, and far from any
particular, or self-interests. But in the event, Mark profited by Saint Paul's
severity, and in his Epistle to the Colossians, he speaks of him as one of his
dear disciples.

The Apostles thus separated Barnaby and Mark took the way of Cyprus. Tradition
says he came into Italy, and there founded the Church of Milan. Ancient
Ecclesiastical Authors cite an Epistle under his name, which contains most holy
instructions. Some have attributed to him that Epistle which is directed to the
Hebrews, and received by the Church into the number of Apostolical and
Canonical Letters. But we will speak of this difficulty in another place.

The Apostle having chosen Silas for his companion, took leave of the faithful
of Antioch, who could not part with him without much sorrow, being very
sensible of his charitable obligations toward them. He passed through Syria
and Cilicia, and in all places where he came, confirmed, and exhorted all the
Christians to continue firm in their faith, and in the observation of the
Apostolical Decrees newly published. In Listris, a Disciple of our Lord, named
Timothy, the son of Eunice, a Jew by Nation, and of a Father that was a
Centile, lived in so great fame and sanctity, that the Inhabitants, and those
of Iconium; had him in great esteem. This man he took along with him; and lest
the Jews who accompanied him, might murmur, and also to open him a way, the
better to announce the Gospel unto others, he circumcised him. In all places
where he passed, the efficacy of his speech not only confirmed the faithful,
but converted unbeleevers, and produced daily to the Church a notable increase.
The Holy Ghost was their guide, and it was by his command, that passing by
Phrygia and Galatia, they preached not there. If one should ask the reason of
it, humane wisdom would be at a stand, but true piety will acknowledge that
she knows no other then the will of God, who owing to none the light of the
Gospel, injures not any, from whom, by a hidden judgment, this heavenly ray is
withheld, or to whom it is not discovered before the time he has ordained.
Being in Mysia, they meant to go to Bithinia, but the Spirit of Jesus would
not suffer them. Having therefore traverst Mysia, they descended into the Town
of Troad, where in the night the Apostle had this Vision. A man attired after
the Macedonian manner, appeared, and spoke to him in an humble and ardent way;
Come into Macedonia, and assist us. This was an evident proof to him, that it
was the will of God he should preach the Gospel in that Country. He would not
therefore defer it, but the next morning embarked himself with his company, to
whom, Luke the Evangelist, who penned the Acts of the Apostles, was joined.
From Troad they came directly to the Isle of Samothrace; from thence to
Neapolis, and afterward to Phillipis, a famous City of Macedonia, and then a
Colony of the Romans. It was there he began to preach the Gospel, carrying
himself with great prudence, because the Inhabitants were almost all Gentiles,
living under the Roman Laws, and under an Emperor, enemy to the Jews, who
were there but in a small number; so that a little Oratory without the Town
was sufficient for their Assembly. Upon a Sabbath Day the Apostle went thither;
and speaking to some women, whom he there met, there was one of them called
Lidia, whose Trade was to dye purple; the heart of this woman God opened, to
receive the Doctrine which Saint Paul announced. He baptized her, and all her
Family. She willing in some manner to acknowledge the great grace which she had
received by his Ministry, said unto him, If you believe that I am truly
faithful to our Lord, grace me so much as to retire into my house. The Apostle
granted her that consolation, and came to lodge in her house. Not long after,
as he went with Silas to the place of public prayer, a young Maid, in whom
the Devil spoke, and foretold hidden things, followed them, and cried out aloud
several times, These men are the servants of Almighty God, and they announce
unto you the way of Salvation. Saint Paul was angry to have this testimony from
the Father of lies; wherefore turning himself toward this young Maid, he said
to the Devil, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to go out of this
body, and at the very instant he departed from her. The Masters of this
Divining Maid seeing themselves deprived of the great gain which they made by
her means, laid hands on S. Paul and Silas, and carried them before the
Magistrates, accusing them to be Jews, and that they sought to raise sedition
in the City, and to teach a Doctrine which was not lawful for the Romans to
embrace. The people, without any other information, fall upon them; and the
Magistrates, seconding their fury, caused them to be cruelly whipped, and after
that punishment, sent them to prison, with express order there to be strictly
guarded; which the Jailer, being rigorous enough of himself, did easily obey.
He put them into a deep dungeon, and tied their feet in such sort that they
could not stir: But their minds were free, though their bodies were not: And
thinking not of what they had suffered, nor of what they might fear, when
every one slept, they sung hymns to God, who presently manifested how pleasing
they were unto him; for the prison was shaken with a great Earthquake; the
gates opened of themselves, and the chains of all the prisoners fell off. The
Jailer waking at this fearful noise, and seeing all the doors open, thought
those he had in custody were all fled, which so much troubled him, knowing his
life must pay for their escape, that drawing out his sword, he would have
killed himself; but Saint Paul cried out with a loud voice, Hurt not yonr
self, we are all here, and not one of us thinks of escaping. Those words
brought the Jailer to himself, and made him change the desperate desig^e he
had taken: And at the same time the grace of God assured him, that the
Earthquake which then happe^ed, and the flying open of the prison-dores,
proceeded not from any natural cause; and that those, who from the dungeon
could know what he was about to do, must needs be extraordinary men. He
lighted a candle, and going into the dungeon where the Apostle was, cast
himself at his feet, then led him and Silas into another room, where being
pressed by the secret impulse of his conscience, he demanded of them what he
was to do that he might be saved? They answered, Believe in Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved. After that they explicated to him, and to all his Family,
in what this faith consisted. The Jailer embracing it, was baptized, with his
whole Family; he washed their wounds, as they had done those of his soul. He
presently caused the Table to be covered, and gave his instructers to eat, who
had need of it, and devoutly rejoiced with them for the great mercy which God
had pleased to show unto him by their means. At break of day, certain Officers
came from the Magistrates into the prison, and commanded the Jailer to free the
prisoners they had sent thither the day before. What (says the Apostle) after
you have whipped innocent Citizens of Rome, and without any form of justice,
and after you have put them in prison, do you think to make them go thus
privately away without reparation, as if they were culpable of some crime for
which they had deserved to be so shamefully treated? No, we cannot do so great
an injury to our innocence. Therefore let those who sent us hither, come
themselves, if they will have us out.

The Judges informed of this discourse, perceived the error they had committed,
and the danger to which they were exposed, in treating thus persons whom the
privilege of a Citizen exempted from the punishment of whipping; For by Saint
Paul's discourse, they believed Silas had also the same privilege, although it
was only the Apostle that could claim it; but they would not make this
distinction, to terrify the more those who had so unjustly treated both of
them for one same cause. This answer caused them to come, and entreat the
prisoners with fair words to go out of prison, and out of the Town, and to
impute that which had happened, to the sedition of the people, for which they
were very sorry. The Apostles went away, and returned to the house of Lidia,
where, after they had stayed some time, and recounted to the faithful what had
passed, and by their discourse fortified their courage, they left this
ungrateful City; and taking circuit through Amphipolis and Apollonia, from
thence went to Thessalonica. St. Paul went into the Synagogue of the Jews
three Sabbath days successively, according to the custom which he observed;
first of all to speak to those of his Nation. He showed them by the authority
of Holy Scriptures, and by a clear Explication of the Prophets, that Christ,
who was promised them, had already suffered, and was risen again from the
dead. He announced unto them this Jesus Christ, and that he was the true
Messiah; whereupon, some who were by Nation, Jews, received the faith. He
converted a far greater number of Gentiles by birth, who made profession of
Iudaisme, or who, without observing the Law, believed in one sole God, and
feared him; for the Greek Text of the Acts may be explicated in this double
sense; and amongst them were diverse women of condition, who also embraced the
Gospel. The Jews that remained obstinate, unable to endure the success of the
Apostles preaching, gained some wicked men of the people, by whose means they
raised a sedition in the Town. They came in great numbers to the house of
Jason, where Paul and Silas lodged, and not finding them there, discharged
their rage upon their Host, and dragged him out of doors, together with some
other faithful, before the Magistrates: The pretense was, that they had
harbored seditious men, who troubled the public quiet, and offended the
Imperial Majesty of Caesar, giving out, that a certain Jesus Christ was King.
The principal Citizens of Thessalonica, and such of the people as understood
this discourse, were presently moved with choler; but Jason so well satisfied
them, whether by assuring that those who were accused, and brought before them,
had no more design then himself to trouble the public peace, or whether it
was by giving caution for their innocence, and undertaking for their appearance
(the Text of the Acts not mentioning what satisfaction he gave) that they
dismissed him, with the rest of his company. Saint Paul makes mention of this
Jason in his Epistle to the Romans; and some Authors will have, that he was
afterward Bishop of Tharsius. When night was come, the faithful whom this
danger had alarmed, conveyed Paul and Silas out of Thessalonica. Those who
performed this Office, in persuading them to retire, so to preserve their
lives, very necessary for the good of the Church, were of the most considerable
persons in the City. They had received the Doctrine of the Apostle with great
fervor, and would so firmly imprint it in their mind, that every day they
turned over the Books of the Holy Scripture which St. Paul had alleged, not
that they doubted of his sincerity, but to confirm themselves, by their own
knowledge, in the belief of those verities which he had declared unto them.
The Apostles following the shore of the Aegean Sea, turning toward the South,
and leaving Pella, a famous City, in giving birth to Alexander, they came to
Beroe, a City of Macedonia. The news flew as far as Thessalonica, from whence
the enemies of Saint Paul ran in great diligence, and being arrived, prefently
stirred up the ignorant people against him who announced truth unto them. This
caused the faithful to conduct him to the Seashore; some of them accompanied
him as far as Athens, where he was met by Silas and Timothy. This City once
famous for the Empire of Greece, and Sciences, after diverse revolutions, was
fallen under the power of the Romans: And although it was extremely declined
from its first splendour, and particularly from that of Philosophy, and other
Disciplines, for which Saint Greogory of Nazianzen calls it the seat and abode
of Philosophy, yet there was still conserved in it enough to make the Apostle
judge that it was very important for the glory of God, there to make known the
verities of the Gospel. Besides Learning, which there flourished, the Council
of the Areopagits, Sovereign Judges of Important Affairs, rendered it very
famous; but Idolatry dishonored it: For it seemed to glory in gathering
together all the Idols of the World, as if it feared only not to be
superstitious enough. After they had erected Altars to the known Gods, adored
by other Nations, they raised others to the unknown Gods of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, as some Authors write; and according to others, to the unknown God, as
it is set down in the Acts of the Apostles, to the end they might forget no
Divinity, believing that a great plague had happened to them for their neglect
to some unknown God. Saint Paul beholding this City so miserably plunged in the
impiety of false Gods, found his heart warmed with a new zeal, and touched
with a most sensible grief for the loss of so many souls. He disputed in the
Synagogues with the Jews, and the Proselytes; and in public places, to those
he met, he spoke of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Epicurean
Philosophers, and the Stoics disputed often with him. Saint Luke makes no
mention of Professors of other Sects. These cared not to embrace a Religion
that spoke of nothing but how to mortify their senses, and renounce the
voluptuous pleasures of body and mind, to follow Jesus crucified; for they
place their sovereign good in pleasure, denying Divine Providence, and the
immortality of the soul, which is the Basis of Religion. They also were more
alienated by the vanity of their Opinions; for they acknowledging no corruption
in humane nature by original sin (in which they agreed with the other
Philosophers) went yet further, making a God of their Wise man, or rather a
Devil of Pride. He only, according to their imagination, was knowing, happy,
powerful, exempt from error, unsensible of irregular passions, King of all
things, and of himself, and without need of any thing but from himself.

These principles were very contrary to the Doctrine preached by the Apostles,
which has for foundation man's ignorance in his understanding, and infirmity in
his will, whence it comes, that of himself (sin having put him into this
condition) he knows not what is fit for him to do, and Iess able to perform,
when he comes to know it. This double wound presupposed, and experience having
taught the Jews that their Law could not cure them; and likewise the Gentiles,
that neither the light of nature, nor that of Sciences, had the power to give
them a real remedy, it was not hard to dispose men to receive the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which brought with it perfect health; for every one desires to be
freed from error and weakness, when he comes to know that he is plunged into
it: And on the other side, we slight Physicians when we think we have no need
of them. Even so did these two Sects of Philosophers, of whom we speak; who
finding (as they thought) great absurdities in the Doctrine of the Apostle,
some of them called him a Talker, that proposed things which he could not
prove; others said that he discoursed of new Spirits, not being able to
comprehend that which he preached of the resurrection of our Lord, and of his
Divinity. This Contestation, which daily grew into more heat in the public
place of meeting, was cause that they conducted Saint Paul before the
Areopagites, to the end he might more clearly explicate the doctrine which he
taught, the novelty whereof had stirred up the curiosity of the Athenians, who
had no other employment all the day, then either to learn, or debate news. The
Apostle appeared in this place, where all others used to tremble, with a bold
modesty: There they asked him if they might hear this new Doctrine which he
taught; and when silence was made, he spoke in this manner.

Athenians; I observe, that in your religious worship you forget nothing; nay,
therein you are exact, even to excess. For you are not content to adore those
Gods you know, and to whom all the Earth does render homage, but, passing by
the public place of meetings, I saw an Altar with this Inscription, To the
unknown God. You have not raised this Altar, but with design to honor this
unknown God; and this day my design is to make him known unto you. Wherefore,
since I am to speak to you of a thing so important; and since I desire to
instruct you in that which you so solemnly desire to know, I cannot but in
reason promise to my self a favorable and quiet Audience. And this gives me
also great confidence, that I speak not to ignorant vulgar people, prepossessed
with common errors, so as to be incapable of understanding any truth contrary
to what they fancy. Those who hear me, are equally honorable by their Learning,
and by their Administration of justice; the one of these cannot have a more
noble Object then Divinity; nor the other a more considerable employment then
the settling of a true worship due to that Divinity. God, who has not only
created the matter of the world, but all things in the world, and has placed
them in that order, which we cannot behold without admiration, dwells not in
Temples made by the hands of men. He cannot be enclosed, because there is no
other place that contains him, but the incomprehensible immensity of his
being. He has no need of Victimes nor of Sacrifices, nor of the homage of men,
finding in himself his glory, his felicity, and an entire plenitude of all
things. It is he who has formed the body of the first man, and by the breath of
his mouth infused into him a soul, not drawn from his substance, or from an
universal soul, but created of nothing by his omnipotent power, to make the
most noble composition that was in the world. He has ingraved in him his own
image, making it intelligent, as he is intelligent, spiritual, and immortal,
as he is a Spirit immortal. All men are descended from this one man, and God
has given them the whole Earth for their habitation, dividing it amongst them,
according to the designs of his providence. They cannot excuse themselves who
know him not; for on which side soever they cast their eyes, they behold in
every creature the greatness of him that made them. It is to that end he has
made them; for he being a pure spirit, corporeal men could not know him, but by
corporeal things. He would (if it be lawful to say so) that they should touch
him, as it were, with their finger, and as blind men know, and discern those
objects by their touch, which they see not: So likewise by sensible, and
visible things, we arrive to the knowledge of a being invisible and immortal.
And truly herein we need no foreign Master to instruct us, nor any other
looking-glass then our selves. For if we will attentively consider what we are,
and what happens in us, the wonderful aeconomy of our soul and body, the
variety of their faculties, and operations, we shall be enforced to acknowledge
that God is not far distant from every one of us. What do I say? He is in the
very Center of our being, which he fills, which he conserves, which he makes to
act; so that it is by him we live, by him we move, and by him we are. Your
Poets were not ignorant of this verity, for one of them has said, we are the
posterity and race of God. If we have so great an honor, if we bear the
resemblance of our Creator and Father; how is it possible that being more
noble, not only in respect of our soul, but of our body also, then either
Gold or Silver; we can think that a statue made of those Mettles is a God, who
is so much elevated above all men. How can those of the weakest judgments
believe that the most Supreme being, resembles those extravagant figures which
depend upon the invention and conceits of Gravers? How can they admit for a
Religious worship, that worship which is ridiculous? How can they think that
Idols which have no ears can hear them. The true God has taken pity of that
unhappy ignorance, in which all the Nations of the world were involved, and in
which by his just Judgment he left them, until he thought it fit to discover
the truth unto them, to the end they might do penance, and avoid his wrath in
that dreadful day, where Jesus Christ (whom by his order, I announce unto you)
shall judge the living and the dead, with as much rigor as justice. The Jews,
instead of hearing him, called him a seducer, and in acknowledgement of the
miracles he wrought amongst them by curing their sick, raising their dead,
fastened him to the Cross. But God his Father, raised him again the third day,
and made him Judge of all men, to pronounce that Sovereigne decree of a life
eternally happy, or of miseries, which shall never end. In the mean time he
will for a while suffer the Devels to triumph, and exercise their rage against
him. They shall oppose his Doctrine by Kings, by the People, and by the wise of
the World, by Threats, by Promises, and by such cruel torments as the
Executioners themselves shall have a horror of them. But in the end his day
shall come, and he at once shall reveng e himself of all his enemies. At the
dreadful sound of a Trumpet, all the dead who sleep in their graves shall come
forth, and appear before the Tribunal of th is terrible Judge, and render an
account of all their actions.

The Audience taking these last words of the Apostle to be very extravagant,
interrupted him with great laughter, but some amongst them were modest, and
more discreet, told him they would hear him another time speak of this subject;
so he went out of the Areopage: notwithstanding his preaching was not without
fruit, for one of the most considerable Magistrates, called Denis, embraced the
Gospel. Saint Luke also adds, that a Woman called Damaris, was also converted,
and some Fathers say, that she was the Wife of this Denis; but others hold the
contrary. The Greeks in their Menology make mention of one Hierotheus, whom
the Apostle also converted, and who was one of the Nine Senators of the
Areopage; but besides that, the number of them is not determined, it is not
likely also, Saint Luke would forget to note the Conversion of so considerable
a man, whom Saint Denis calls his Master.

France glories to have Denis for her Apostle, and Paris for her first Bishop.
This tradition is not so constantly received of all the world, but that many
objections which seem very strong, are brought against it, the writings which
are attributed to him, give also great occasion of controversy, both in
respect of their matter and form; for in the style (in the judgments of many
learned men) corresponds not with the simplicity, and plainness, of the
Ecclesiastical writers of those primitive times. And for the matter which
concerns the Ceremonies in administration of the Sacraments, some are of
opinion they are more Modern. But I leave this nice dispute, and content my
self to note the diversity of opinions which are upon this subject as an
Historian, without interposing my judgment to decide them, either in favor,
or against an ancient tradition, which to many seems so venerable.

The Apostle leaving the Church of Athens under the government of this Denis
newly converted, went to Corinth. There he met with Aquila, and Priscilla his
Wife, whom the Edict of Claudius had driven from Rome: They were not only of
the faithful, and of the same Nation with him, but also of the same trade in
making of Tents and Pavilions; which he had learnt according to the custom of
the Pharisees, whose Sect obliged the followers to know and practice some
Mechanique Art. This was the occasion which drew him to lodge with them, nor
disdained he to labor with his hands, and get his bread by the sweat of his
browe, to fulfill the first precept which he gave to others, That he who would
not labor, should not eat. He might by the right of a spiritual Minister,
demand of those he instructed, things necessary for the entertainment of his
life. For, who is that Soldier (as he himself says) that fights at his own
cost, and does not receive pay of him, for whom he exposes his life? What
Shepherd looks to a flock, and watches* for their preservation, that has not
right to feed on their Milk, and to cloth himself with their Wool? But all
that was permitted, seemed not to him expedient to do, he would take away from
the enemies of the Gospel; all manner of pretexts, that they should not accuse
him of seeking his own interest or making a Commerce of his preaching. He would
preserve this glory to have announced the Gospel gratis to them, and by that
means might speak with more liberty. Many spiritual directours ought to
consider this great example of disingagement, and if they imitate it with
prudence, and courage, their conduct would be more honorable to them, more
profitable to those whom they govern, and more advantageous to the honor of
the Church.

The Apostle esteemed not this corporal exercise, to be any reproach to his
condition, since it did not any way hinder him from his times of prayer, or
from the Function of his Ministry. Every Sabbath day he preached in the
Synagogue of the Jews, and made it appear to them, as well as to the Greeks,
that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah, and true God, Silas and Timothy being
come from Thesalonica, he found himself more then usually moved by the Spirit
of God to speak; his zeal was enkindled a new, and he preached with more
efficacy to those of his Nation the Divinity of his Master. But when he
perceived, that instead of profiting by his words, they remained more
obstinate, and uttered more horrible blasphemies against Jesus Christ, he
shaked his garments, and told them, Your blood be upon your own heads, I have
my hands clean, and I will go from this Country, and carry to the Gentiles
this light which you refuse. This familiar fashion of speech to the Hebrews,
was as much as to say, that he had done all that lay in him, to bring them to
the knowledge of the truth, and they would not believe him, therefore he should
not be responsable for their perdition which was infallible. At the same
instant he changed his lodging, and retired himself to lodge with an honest man
called Titus Justus, one who feared God, whose house was near to the place,
where the Jews used to assemble. Crispus who was Prince of the Synagogue,
embraced the Gospel, and all his family, and many more of the City were also
baptized. This good success gave encouragement to the Apostle, and to augment
it, our Savior appeared to him in a vision; saying, Fear nothing, speak
boldly, take heed you hold not your peace, for I am with you, and none shall be
able to hurt you, I have many people in this Town. The event made him know the
truth of this revelation. He remained eighteen months in Corinth, and in that
time the Church was exceedingly increased by the conversion of diverse persons
of all sorts. He preached continually, and in the first Epistle which he wrote
afterward to them, he shows, that in declaring the Gospel to them, He made no
use of the flowers of humane eloquence, nor arguments of Philosophy, for fear
they might extinguish the virtue of the Cross; which wants not the art of words
to persuade the belief of it. He puts them in mind that he exercised his
Ministry amongst them, with fear, and with humility, and that he pretended to
know no other thing but Jesus Christ crucified, that he did not feed them with
solid meat, but with milk, because they were not capable of other nourishment.
We know not the particular things which he did at Corinth, nor what he endured
there for the name of Jesus Christ. He only says that the marks of his
Apostleship amongst the Corinthians were many pains, which he suffered with a
long patience, and that many miracles were wrought in confirmation of his
Doctrine.

The Jews who were never weary of persecuting him, found notin^ Gallion the
Proconsul of Achaya, and Brother of Seneca the Philosopher, a Spirit that would
easily embrace the injustice of their passions: to him they presented the
Apostle, and accused him of teaching a religious worship contrary to their Law.
But no sooner the accused offered to open his mouth in his own defense, when
Gallion told them, that if they would complain of any evil action he had
committed, he would hear, and do them justice; but if it only concerned some
controversies of their Religion, he would not meddle in it, but leave the
Judgment of it to themselves. With this answer he dismissed them. And they in
a fury fell upon Sosthenes Prince of the Synagogue, who was a Christian, nor
did the Consul hinder them from the prosecution of that insolent cruelty. Saint
Paul makes mention of this Sosihenes, in the salutation of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, and speaks of him, as of his Companion, which shows he was
considerable, both to the Apostle, and to that Church which he had care to
instruct; it may be also from him that Saint Paul understood of their
disorders, which obliged him to write unto them. Some Authors make him Bishop
of Colophone.

The Apostle applied not himself so much to the salvation of the Inhabitants of
Corinth, that he forgot the other Churches, and when he understood the
necessities of the Church of Thessalonica, he wrote two Epistles to them in a
short time one after another. His design in the first Epistle, was to confirm
the faithful in the profession of the Gospel, and to instruct them in the
mystery of the Resurrection, to the end they might take courage in their
present and future persecutions. He commended them for having made so great a
progress in faith, the report whereof was spread every where, and that they
served for an example to other Churches. Afterward he puts them in mind of
his manner of preaching, how free it was from any self-interest, never
consenting to be any burden to them. He expresses to them a great desire to
see them again, and assures them that he continually remembers them in his
Prayers. He exhorts them not to be sad for the death of their Parents, or
Friends, as the Gentiles are, who do not believe the happiness of a future
life, nor have any hope to be rejoyned unto them again: That the death of
Christians is but as it were a sleep, that Jesus Christ, who is their head,
being risen again, they who are his members shall also rise at the last day at
the voice of the Archangel, and at the-sound of a Trumpet they shall be lifted
up in the Air, and go before our Lord, who shall come in his glory to
pronounce the last sentence of eternal happiness, or eternal misery to men:
that his Elect shall follow him into Heaven, where they shall live eternally
with him in an unspeakable felicity. Many not comprehending well that which he
said of this last Judgment, conceived strange fears, which were increased by
the imprudence or malice of some false Doctors, who preached that this last day
was near at hand. This caused him to write unto them a second Epistle to
dissipate those fears which troubled them, to fortify them against those
persecutions which they then suffered, and against such as might still befall
them. He told them of signs which should preceed the day of Judgment; as
first, a general Apostasy, that is, the abandoning of the true worship of God;
Secondly, the appearance of Antichrist, whom he calls the man of sin, because
he shall be the greatest of all sinners, and shall draw almost all men to sin,
and to the greatest sin which can be committed. If Heretic, who say that the
Pope is Antichrist, would seriously consider the portrature of him, as the
Apostle sets him forth in this Epistle, they would find it very little
Cohaerent with him, and would be ashamed to believe so ridiculous a dream,
which the wisest and most learned amongst them with reason do make but a jest.

Thus did Saint Paul labor for the glory of Jesus Christ, both with his
tongue, and pen, at the same time, and did not let slip one minute of time
whilst he was at Corinth, which he employed, not in the Functions of his
Ministry. He departed thence, having stayed there eighteen months with Aquila
and Priscilla his hosts, but before he left Corinth he shaved his head, for
some reason which Saint Luke does not mention no more then he does the vow
which he made to let his hair grow. For the better understanding this place in
the Acts of the Apostles; I will tell you as it were in passing by, that in the
ancient Law, there were two sorts of Nazareans, that is to say, men separated,
and consecrated to God. The one of them were perpetual, and the other, but for
a certain time, according as their devotion invited them to make this vow; both
the one, and the other, were obliged to abstain from Wine, and from any other
Liquour that might cause drunkenness, and to let their hair grow. The time
allotted for the vow of these latter being expired, they were to present
themselves at the door of the Tabernacle where they offered the sacrifice which
was ordained for it. They were shaved, and their hair was burnt in the fire of
the Sacrifice of Pacifical Oblations with many ceremonies, which are set down
in the Book of Numbers. Now in the time of their Consecration, if they happened
to contract any pollution contrary to the law, either by the touch of some dead
body, or that by change any died suddenly in their presence, they were bound
at the same instant to begin to shave their hair, to finish it the seventh day,
and on the eighth day to offer the sacrifice, ordained for their purification.
I therefore easily believe that Saint Paul having made this vow of the
Nazareans to comply in some occasions with the weakness of the Jews, as he had
circumcised Timothy, to the end he might not scandalize them, or for some other
reason which St. Luke does not mention, might by chance have met some dead
Corpse, or touched some dead body; and this having happened in the company of
some Jews, who were converted and observed the Ceremonies of the Law; he shaved
his hair at that instant, remitting his offering sacrifice till he came to
Jerusalem as in effect he did, by the Counsel of Saint James and the Priests
of that Church, which we shall see in the Sequel of this History. It is true
some Authors say that Aquila made this vow, and not the Apostle: But Saint
Hierome, and Saint Augustine, Bid, and almost all Interpreters, maintain that
it ought to be understood of Saint Paul, and I have in this followed the common
opinion.

The Sea favoring Saint Paul, he arrived safe at Ephesus, and immediately went
into the Synagogue of the Jews to declare the Gospel unto them. They earnestly
desired him to stay some time with them, but he told them he could not,
desiring to celebrate the Feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem, but if it pleased
God he would return to see them. He went a Shipboard, and the weather being
favorable, landed at Cesarea in Palestine, from whence (according as some
interpret the Book of the Acts) he went up to Jerusalem. He only saluted the
Church of this City, and so went to Antioch of Syria. There he made his abode
some time, and having there given order in that which he thought necessary, he
went to visit the Churches of Galatia and Phrygia, where he confirmed the
faithful in their faith by admirable discourses, and by new miracles

At the end of this Voyage, which lasted at the least a year, he came back to
Ephesus. This City was very famous by reason of Diana's Temple, which was
accounted in the number of the seven Wonders of the World. Asia built it in two
Ages by a general contribution, and it was a place cautionary for the Kings,
Princes, and people of the East; but Nero, who seemed to be borne for the ruin
of all noble things, plundered all the riches of it; and under the Empire of
Galienus, the Goths entirely ruined it. The Idol of Diana was made of the wood
of Vines; and the Priests, making use of the peoples simplicity, brought them
easily to believe that it was descended from Heaven. The like thing was
believed at Rome of a Buckler, which for that cause was kept with great care.
The Apostle found at Ephesus twelve Disciples, who were only baptized with the
Baptism of John, and had never heard the Holy Ghost once spoken of. Some
Authors believe that they had been instructed by this Apollo, who came a little
before to Ephesus; and of whom Saint Luke speaking, says, He was an eloquent
man, and very well versed in the holy Scriptures; that he knew the Doctrine of
our Savior, and preached Jesus Christ with great fervor of spirit; but that
he knew no other Baptism then that of John, which is to say in my opinion,
that as yet he had only received that Baptism. Aquila and Priscilla finding
him so well disposed, taught him more particularly the verities of the Gospel,
which he presently declared to those of Corinth, where he confounded the Jews
by the force of his discourse, and by the authority of holy Scriptures which he
officaciously alleged to show them that Jesus Christ was the Messiah. For my
part, I believe that he and the others also of whom we speak, received their
baptism at the hands of Saint John himself in Judea. For it is certain, that
only the Precursor did baptize, and after him, this baptism was not practiced
as a thing necessary for those who believed in Jesus Christ. However it was,
Saint Paul teaches his Disciples that he found in Ephesus, John to have
baptized the people with a baptism of penance, ordeining them to believe in
him, who was to come after him, and to whose faith he prepared them by this
exterior Ceremony, intended to mind them of their uncleanness, and what
necessity there was of an interior parification, which could not be done but
by that Lamb which takes away the sins of the World; in fine he tells them
that the baptism of Jesus Christ is a renovation of the soul, by which she
shakes off the Old Man, to cloth her self with the New, that all those who
received it, were thereby interred with Christ, and as they had part in his
death, they should also share in his Resurrection; if as Christ, being once
dead, dies no more, they shall likewise being once delivered from the yoke of
sin, and there dead in baptism, commit sin no more. This discourse prepared
them with holy dispositions to enter into that celestial bath. They received
holy baptism, and the holy Ghost descended upon them, rendered them Prophets,
and made them speak unknown tongues; the Apostle desirous to gain all the other
Inhabitants, and principally the Jews, went to their Synagogues every Sabbath
for the space of three months, proving unto them by invinsible reasons, and
with an undanted courage, the truth of the Doctrine he preached. But, though he
convinced them all, yet he gained few of them, many remaining obdurate, and
perverse, even to the blaspheming of Jesus Christ, which obliged this faithful
servant of his, to separate himself from amongst them, together with those
Disciples, who believed and were converted by his discourse. He chose for the
place of his preaching, the School of a Sophister called Tyrannus, either
because he was converted to the faith, or perhaps God had disposed him to
afford this civility to his Apostle. For the space of three years he omitted
not a day to teach the Gospel, in so much as all Asia received these
delightful tidings, God confirming his words by diverse miracles, the very
touch alone of his Handcharchieffs, and Girdles healed the sick, and drove the
Devils out of bodies tormented by them. A man named Sceva, (in the Acts he is
called Prince of the Priests) had seven Sons, who made profession of being
Exorcists, and passed up and down for such, persuading simple people (to get
money from them) that they knew the secret of casting forth Devils. When they
beheld the command which Saint Paul exercised over Devils, and that the Devils
could not resist him, whether out of Emulation, or Covetousness, they would
needs exercise a possessed person in the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached. The
Devil, who was a very cruel one, answered them, that he knew Jesus Christ and
Paul, but for them, he scorned their Exorcismes, and flew upon them with that
violence, as they were forced to save themselves by flight out of the house
naked, and much wounded. This accident coming to the knowledge of the Jews,
and Gentiles, that dwelt at Ephesus, much astonished them, and made them highly
to honor the name of Jesus Christ. Many amongst the faithful were seized with
a holy fear, which made them confess publicly their misdeeds. It is observed
in Saint Matthew, that those who went to present themselves to the Baptism of
Saint John, confessed their sins; and, in my opinion, one passage explicates
the other. Saint Luke seems also to distinguish the first from those others,
whereupon he says, that they acknowledging the error and abomination of
Magic; to the which they were much addicted, burnt all their wicked Books; and
there were so many of them, and those so rare, as they were valued at a vast
sum of money.

It is not to be wondered at, for Ephesus at all times was much addicted to
Magic. Characters were there sold to obtain victory in their public games.
Suidas relates, how an Ephesian at the Olympic Games, overcame 30. Champions
at wrestling; that a Milesian trying with him, and no odds being betwixt them,
the Judges doubted that he had characters about him, as indeed they found, and
taking them away, he was easily overcome. Plutarch says, that by the name
Ephesian, Devils were cast out of bodies which they possessed. Eustathius
observes, that there were writings about the feet, middle, and crown of the
Statue of Diana. Apollonius Thianeus accomplished the corruption of this great
City, for he taught Magic publicly, and was so honored there, that they
erected him a Statue, as unto a God. The happy progress of the Gospel there was
stopped by great persecutions, raised by the rage of the Jews against the
Apostle. Writing to the Corinthians, he says, The toil he there underwent,
was such, as life became wearysome to him; and that he had fought against wild
beasts: But I conceive this ought to be understood Allegorically, and not
literally; wicked and cruel men being ordinarily in the Holy Scriptures termed
wild and furious beasts.

Demetrius well deserves this name. This man was a Goldsmith by profession, and
had great trading in works of silver which the Gentiles offered to Diana. Some
say they were Images, and others, little Temples of the false Goddess in the
form of the great one. He seeing, that by the preaching of St. Paul, his gain
with Idolatry daily decayed, assembles all the workmen that wrought under him,
who were many, and told them, They were now in danger to be reduced unto great
misery; for Paul declared in his Sermons, that Idols made by the hands of men
had no understanding, much less any Divinity in them; and this Doctrine once
received, they should not be able to get their living. They must leave their
trade, and that Temple of Diana, which Asia, and other Provinces of the world
adored, ran a great hazard suddenly to be deprived of Reputation and
Sacrifices. These reasons, in which they were concerned, put them into fury.
They running about the streets like mad men, cried, Great is Diana of Ephesus,
to see if they could excite the people to sedition; and unluckily meeting with
Gaius and Aristarchus, both Macedonians, and presently remembering them to be
companions of Saint Paul, whom they sought, they dragged them to the Theater,
to expose them to the fury of the people. The Apostle hearing of the danger
they were in, would have gone unto them, but his disciples and some others of
quality of Asia, that loved him, hindered it, and represented to him the danger
he would run to be ill treated by such a multitude in commotion. The Jews were
no less afraid then the Christians, because in this occasion there was no
difference made betwixt them, they being no less enemies to Idolatry then the
others. So to prevent the danger which threatened them, they sent to the Theater
one of theirs, called Alexander, to see if he could appease the people, and
stop the mischief which might arise from that sedition. He a long time made
sign with his hand that he had something to speak unto them: But when the
seditious called to mind he was a Jew, they made a greater noise then before,
and for two hours space ceased not to cry out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
At last, a Magistrate being there, behaved himself so well, as he appeased the
people, and spoke in this manner to them. O Ephesians! who is ignorant that
knows not how faithfully your City adores the great Diana, daughter of
Jupiter, together with her Image, sent down from Heaven, and in this worship
we surpass all the people of the Earth; nor is there in the world any thing
comparable to the glory of her Temple. All Nations acknowledge this; and these
things being without dispute, you need not fear any can attempt against the
honor of that Divinity which you serve, therefore take heed you undertake
nothing rashly. It is certain, these men whom you have brought hither to
destroy, are not guilty of any blasphemy against your Goddess. Wherefore if
Demetrius, and those of his trade which follow him, have any dispute with them,
why should you, for their particular interest, make this a general cause? Are
there not persons ordained to decide causes, and Magistrates who have power,
and ought to determine such differences? But if there be question of any other
thing, you must remit the clearing of it to a lawful Assemby, and not treat of
it in this, which seems to be altogether seditious. Consider therefore well,
that we are responsable for the evil which may happen upon this, and we run
the hazard to be accused of sedition, since we can give no good account of this
days tumult.

This discourse appeased the people, and happily saved the disciples of the
Apostle, who took resolution to leave this City, that he might execute his
former design of visiting the Churches of Achaia, Macedonia, and go to
Jerusalem, from whence he proposed to himself to go to Rome; but without
doubt in another manner then we shall see him conducted thither. He left his
dearly beloved Timothy to govern the Church of Ephesus, whom Eusebius will
have to be the first Bishop of that place.

He remained with them near three years; and during that time, Apollo, of whom
we have spoken, came to Corinth to preach the Gospel, the which he performed
with so much eloquence, as many taken therewith, and judging of things only by
appearance, be^an to despise the Apostle, who had taught them the same verities,
but in a more plain way accomm^dated to their weakness. Those who loved the
memory of their first Master, and remembered his holy wa^ of struction, defended
him with a little too much heat, insomuch as their Church began to be in some
danger of Schism, the sequel whereof might have proved very dangerous. Besides
this disorder, there was a man amongst them, who had abused the wife of his
Father. They differed also much in opinions about the use of meats offered to
Idols; and there was some abuse in the banquets which they call Agapes, that is
to say, Charitable, where they took irreverently the Holy Eucharist.

There was moreover a great division amongst them by reason of Suits of Law
pleaded before Judges that were Gentiles; these brought a scandal upon the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which recommends to the Professors nothing more then
charity and the contempt of worldly goods. These disorders obliged Saint Paul
to write his first Epistle to the Corinthians. There he fulminates
excommunication against incestuous persons, even to the terror of the most
confident, and to let them know what they were to expect; for it was neither
out of the heat of zeal, nor interest, or compliance, but to vindicate the
honor of the Church, and to save him, whom for a time it was necessary to put
into the hands of the Devil, to the end he might not for ever remain so. He
rebukes the Corinthians, who by their bitterness in Law-Sutes dishonored the
name of Jesus Christ. And told them, It was very ill done to plead one against
another; but much worse, and more considerrable, to do it before Judges who
were Idolaters. That they ought rather to choose the meanest persons of the
Church to accord their differences, who would be capable enough to judge of
such temporal things, the Faithful being only to judge the World and the
Devils. He put them in mind, that before Baptism they were soyled with
abominable ordures, but by their spiritual regeneration, they were become the
Temples of God, and the members of Jesus Christ; therefore this glorious
quality obliged them to be pure, and that their bodies were not given to serve
fornication, it being not their part to dispose of them, but our Lord, and that
God would raise them again. He instructs married people also, to use marriage
as a holy thing, and permits them to separate themselves, that they may be
vacant in prayer, which he means should be done but for a term of time, and
then to return to their conjugall society, as an innocent remedy against
incontinence. Notwithstanding, he protests that he permits it them by
indulgence, because the severity of Christian Laws in marriage allow the use
of it only for the generation of children; but man's infirmity requires it,
that he might resist temptations; so that (as Saint Augustine has since said)
the sanctity of Nuptials render pardonable that which properly appertains not
to marriages. From this Subject he passes to treat of Virginity, which he
councels by his example, and by reason, in that it does perfectly withdraw one
from the tie of creatures, and cares of the World. Those who are of opinion
that S. Paul was married, should do well to blot out the words he sets down in
this Epistle, if they will defend so new, and ill grounded an opinion.
Notwithstanding, he leaves this Angelical, rather then humane form of life,
under the bare terms of Counsel, and protests there is no precept of our Lord
for it; that he only counsels it, as believing it better, and of more
advantage to the Corinthians. He exhorts Widows to continue in their widowhood;
and if they cannot keep the purity of that state, to espouse themselves to our
Lord; that is to say, with a Christian intention, and with such as believe in
Jesus Christ, and not for sensuality. Concerning meats offered to Idols, he
teaches them, that the use is indifferent in it self, but yet they ought to
abstain from them, lest the simple people, who conceive them forbidden, should
be scandalized to see them eaten; and they themselves may thereby take occasion
to eat them after a superstitious manner. To confirm this Document, he
represents unto them, That in delivering them the Gespel, he would not suffer
them to furnish him with necessaries for his subsistence, although he had right
to receive, nay indeed to require it. That he seemed to be a Jew amongst the
Jews, and not to observe the Law amongst those that knew not the Law. In fine,
that he made himself all things to all, to gain all men to God. But there is
nothing he reproves with so much fervor, as the irreverence which they
committed, before their approach to the Holy Table. He shows the institution
of the Eucharist, and says, That as often as we eat it, we announce the death
of our Lord until his coming again; that is to say, this Sacrament is the
lively commemoration of the death of Jesus Christ; and so a participation of
his body and blood offered upon the Cross. He concludes, That he who drinks and
eats this unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of our Lord; which is to
say, he defiles the most holy thing under Heaven, and upon Earth. He
participates in the offense of those Executioners that fastened him to the
Cross. He crucifies him after a more outrageous manner, profaning a Mystery
wherein he is to be adored, and placing him in a heart corrupted with sin, as
if he were at the mercy of his enemies, and still carried about him the
likeness of sin; he who lives by the life of God, and resides in the bosom of
his Father. Hence he commands them diligently to examine themselves, before
they eat of this heavenly bread, and drink of this holy cup, lest, being not
well prepared, they drink and eat their judgment; that is to say, receive
Jesus Christ as a Judge, whom they intend to receive as a Physician, and make
it the food of death, which ought to be a nourishment of life. Certainly, if
those who go so slightly to the holy Communion, and who seem to fear a too
exact discussion, would attentively consider the words and threats which the
Apopostle fulminates in this behalf, they would be more wary. They would be
seized with a beneficial apprehension, and easily confess, that our
dispositions to a worthy receiving cannot be too pure; and consequently, those
who communicate, cannot be too exact; that severity, in this affair, is less
dangerous, then any compliance or remisness. It were to be wished that
Christians would communicate every day, as they did in the Infancy of the
Church; but then their lives should be also answerable to those Faithful of the
Primitive times. It is very good often to participate thereof; but then we must
make our profit by that participation; for the Table of our Lord cannot be
joined with that of Devils; that is to say, the use of the body of the Son of
God, cannot consist with the love of vanity, greatness, and pleasures of the
world, which are enemies to the Son of God. These irreverences of the
Corinthians which Saint Paul mentions, were but slight; it was only some
excess of drinking and eating in the Assemblies where they communicated. What
wonld he have said, if he had found them full of impurity, envy, vanity, and
ambition? In his Epistle, after he had regulated those things of most
importance, he sets down also how they should employ their free-graces, as the
gift of speaking al sorts of tongues, of interpreting holy Scriptures, of
foretelling things to come, and such like. That he would have the rule of their
actions to be the the glory of God, and the good of their Neighbor, and to the
end they might love that Charity which he teaches them; he makes an admirable
description of it, whence it appears his heart did perfectly possess that
which he set forth with so much grace and efficacy. Toward the end of the
Epistle, he treats of the great mystery of the Resurrection, of the condition
of a new life after the end of the world, of the new reign of God over Jesus
Christ, and over the Elect, of his ineffable residing in them, by the which he
shall be all things to them. He explicates to the ignorant the Resurrection, by
comparison of a grain of Corn, which rests in the earth where it is sowed, and
afterward springs up and produces many ears of Corn, nay ears of another
kind, then the grain from whence they come, the Corn being sowed without
those coverings of straw, and the ears coming together with the straw, the
which he applies to the difference of the state of a body before and after
Resurrection. He explicates this mystery which so much care, that he might
correct the errors of Cerinthus and Basilides, the one of them teaching that
Jesus Christ was not seen again, and the other, that men should not rise again
after death.

This explication of the Doctrine of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, in my
opinion will not be unprofitable to the Reader. But now let us return to the
course of our narration, and follow Saint Paul into Macedonia, which he
traversed all over, and carefully left not any Church unvisited, to confirm
there the faithful in the Evangelical Doctrine: After that, he took the way to
Greece by Sea, and in the course of his Voyage, established Titus his beloved
Disciple Bishop of the Isle of Creet, now called Candia. The customs there
observed were so infamous; luxury and other vices, abounded there with so much
impudency, as a Doctor no less vigilant and courageous then he, was necessary
to abolish them, and establish their contrary virtues. The Apostle before his
departure, gave him profitable Documents, and soon after wrote unto him
excellent instructions how to discharge well the duties of his Episcopacy. From
Nicopolis where he passed the winter, he sent a second Epistle to the
Corinthians, in which he takes off the Excommunication, he had thundered out in
his first against incestuous persons who had so much scandalized the Church. He
treats principally of the dignity of the Ministers of the New Testament, and of
the patience which they ought to have in their tribulations. He seems to
praise himself much in the eleventh Chapter, where he speaks of himself, of
his pains, and of his patience, in terms contrary to the humility of an
Apostle. It is true according to the ordinary rules of humane wisdom, it is
odious to praise ones self, and they are accused commonly of impudence that do
it, not blushing to speak those things of themselves, which they would blush to
hear another speak. It is a kind of usurpation, by which we take away from
those who are witnesses of our actions, the liberty of judgeing of them, and
giving testimony of the esteem which they deserve. For this reason the wise man
in the Proverbs advertiseth the Prince whom he forms, and all other men, not
to fall into this error. Let a stranger, says he, praise thee, and not thine
own Mouth. Notwithstanding it is certain there are occasions, when according to
the rules of Divine and Humane wisdom, it is not only permitted, but necessary
for one to praise himself without offending modesty or giving any cause of
reprehension, more then in telling other truths. To praise ones self to be
praised, is a shameful ambition. To praise ones self to rob others of praise,
is an envy full of baseness. But if one praise himself, either in a just
defense of his carriage against calumny, or for the good of such as we are
obliged to answer for before God, or to discredit those who make ill use of
their reputation; or for the glory of the Ministry which is imposed upon us:
In such occasions, I say, when one praises himself, he sins neither against
wisdom, nor modesty, but does that which is just. The great men of former
Ages have used it in this manner; and to allege no examples but sacred: Doc we
not see that Job in his Book makes as well a Panegyric of his patience, as a
Story of his miseries? David, in many of the Psalms, does he not set forth the
innocence of his hands; the purity of his heart; his zeal for the house of
God; his justice and his benignity? Now if any one ever had cause to imitate
these great patterns in this holy liberty, it was without doubt Saint Paul in
the Epistle we speak of; for in defending the Minister, and the sincerity of
his intentions, he defended the authority of his Ministry, and the verity of
those things which he had preached to the Corinthians. Amongst new Converts,
it is necessary to prevent the contemning of their Master, lest it should pass
to the contemning of his Doctrine; and false Apostes may corrupt their faith,
by a vain opinion of their Eloquence and Sanctity. The honor of Jesus Christ
was interessed in him, whom he had chosen to preach his Gospel to them, and
upon whom he had heaped so many extraordinary favors. The consequence also was
of great danger to the Churches which he had founded, and was to found; for
upon false rumors, the sincerity of his intentions might be brought in doubt,
and other Preachers of the Gospel might seem more considerable. Though these
reasons might justify the manner of his speaking of himself, yet he does it
with many precautions; as sometimes in that same Chapter he names himself a
senceless man, and often desires pardon, excuse, and to be supported if he
speak not like a discreet man; so that one may easily judge, and discern that
his Charity violenced his Modesty; and, that if he had followed the motions of
his heart, he had given leave to his enemies, and those that envyed him, to
triumph, leaving to them the glory of Eloquence, and opinion of Sanctity; the
rule of Consciences, and other worldly Preferments, to which they aspired,
reserving only to himself contempt, poverty, and an obscure life. You must
also observe, that after he had spoken of his advantageous qualities,
recounting his Visions and Ecstasies, he acquaints us with the temptation which
continually hung upon him; nor did the shame in confessing his weakness, hinder
him from taking notice of its violence, which made him so ardently desire to be
delivered from it; and lest the sublimity of his revelations might raise him
too high, God (as he himself says) sent him this Angel of Satan, who did
buffet him without intermission; and lest the discourses which he had made of
his Extraordinary Graces, should puff him up with vanity, or might scandalize
others, he would describe unto us the torments which he suffered, and such
shameful ones, to the end that in the same page both himself and the readers
might have a wholesome Antidote, to preserve the one from vanity, and the others
from scandal. I know very well Saint Chrysostom interprets the buffeting of
the Angel of Satan, whereof he complains, to be the afflictions which he had
suffered, and daily did endure for the Gospel. The tender love which this
excellent Father bore to the Apostle, would not suffer him to believe, that in
an Age so far advanced in years, and in so settled a virtue, there was any place
left for carnal temptations, which he thought were needful only to keep common
souls in humility and fear. Other Interpreters have explicated these words of
his, to be meant of some great pain of his head, or some other infirmity. But
although I commend their intention, I cannot approve their reasons, nor follow
their opinions; but on the contrary, I gather by this counterpoise the eminency
of his grace, and I admire the infinite wisdom of God in the conduct of him,
who on the one side lifted him up to Heaven by raptures; and on the other
plunged him into mire by those stings of concupiscence, to the end there might
appear in him the force of grace continued, which he had experimented in the
beginning of his Conversion. It was also in his person, to instruct all
Ministers of the Gospel, and likewise the rest of the Faithful, not to be
astonished if they feel the like temptations, when they think themselves
absolutely freed, either through Age, or by a long progress in virtue: And also
hereby we are taught, that during this life, the soul cannot become so
perfect, but that there will remain always something of the Old Man which
cannot be destroyed but by little and little, and that without the omnipotent
hand of God, there is no sanctity so solidly built, which may not in an instant
be overthrown; and contrary wise by the protection of the same hand, the most
violent assaults of the flesh are easily overcome. It is that which makes all
things turn to the good of those who are predestinate: It cures them by that
which might be thought would cause sickness: It enlightens them by darkness,
and purifies them by impurity. I have a little enlarged my self upon these two
points, which I thought of importance, both in defense of him whose life I
write, and for the instruction of those who shall read it. And now let us
return to our Narration.

From Cenchrea, a Harbor of Corinth, Saint Paul directs his Epistle to the
Romans, which so much troubles Interpreters. It contains the grounds of
Christian Religions as, the corruption of nature by original sin; the absolute
necessity of the grace of Jesus Christ; and that ineffable Mystery of the
Predestination of some, and the reprobation of others, by the pure will of God,
to show the treasures of his mercy, and the dreadful effects of his justice, in
the different lots of those who are wrapped up in the same mass of corruption
by the first sin, and subject to one and the same condemnation. There is need
of great light, but more humility, to conceive the profound discourses of the
Apostle in this Epistle, knowing proud men will find there continual Rocks,
and the simple, profitable Doctrine, which teaches them, by distrusting
themselves, to have recourse to the protection of the grace of God. The Apostle
does there rather mention, then explicate, the verities of Predestination, and
regards not whether humane reason be satisfied, so Jesus Christ be honored. It
is a strange error (me thinks) to reject an opinion, because it is not easily
explicated, or comprehended, as if its facility to be understood, were a mark
of its truth; and that we ought to satisfy the proud reason of man in
mysteries of Faith. If they be mysteries, they are obscure, they are sealed up,
and it belongs to the Lamb, not to the rash hands of men to unseale them. If
Faith propose them to us, our understanding is there to be captivated; there
are depths which are not to be sounded; and where are the Abysses and depths of
Gods judgment where the treasures of his wisdom if Divine Verities may be
explicated in a humane way, and so that the weakest understanding may
comprehend them, and the vanity of our heart become perfectly satisfied in the
power we have both over our selves, and over the grace of God, as if we were
absolute Masters of them? And he who has made all that he pleased, both in
Heaven and Earth, could do nothing he desired in our will without wounding the
liberty of it; he (I say) who has created it free, and who knows best how it
must be moved? It is just we should be careful of our will, but it is more
reasonable we should be careful of the honor and power of him that has
bestowed it upon us; and who, healing its infirmity, contracted by sin,
communicates this liberality unto us for the glory of his grace, and not for
the satisfaction of our vanity: we must not stop at verity because it is harsh,
and humbles our humane understanding; it is sufficient that it is an
Evangelical verity, which will have us to captivate our reason to the yoke of
Faith, and will not suffer that man should believe himself to have the
greatest part in the work of his salvation. The portion properly due to him, is
falsehood, and sin; and when God crowns his good works with the Crown of
justice, it is after he has given him those good works as the Father of mercies.
We hold of him both our will, and our acting; as he begins in us, it is fit he
should prosecute, and bring to an end the designs of grace and love, which he
sets on foot for our eternal salvation.

The Apostle was resolved to take the way of Syria, but the Jews way-laying
him, enforced him to lengthen his journey, and to turn back to pass by
Macedonia. Sosipater, of the City of Beroe, Aristarchus, Secundus, Caius, and
Timothy, all of them Thessalonians, Tichycus, and Trophymus went before to
expect him at Troad. Thither he came with Saint Luke, the Historian of his
life. After the Feast of Easter, he abode there seven days, during which time,
without intermission he announced unto them the Mysteries of God. Upon a Sunday
toward Evening, the faithful being assembled together to receive the
Eucharist, he made them a long discourse, the which (if we consider his divine
instructions) we may suppose was much after this manner.

This action we have now in hand fills me with joy beyond expression; for
certainly our Master could not leave us a better testimony of his extreme love,
then in giving this Bread which we break, and this Cup which we bless. For in
eating the one, do we not participate of his body? and in drinking the other,
do we not participate of his blood? And could he close up his life better then
in the institution of this adorable Mystery, by which he continues amongst men
to the end of the world? It Is he himself who has vouchsafed to reveal unto
me, that in that night when Judas delivered him into the hands of his enemies,
he took bread, and giving thanks to his Father, brake it, and gave it to his
Apostles, saying to them, Take and eat, this is my Body, which shall be
delivered up for you. Do this in remembrance of me. Likewise he took the
Chalice after he had supped, and said, This Chalice is the new Testament in my
blood; Do this in commemoration of me every time you drink of it. So that as
often as you eat of this Bread, and drink of this Chalice, you declare the
death of our Lord until his coming again. But what do you think Commemoration
is, and unto what in your opinions does it oblige you? I will tell you in few
words. You must not only call to mind the death of Jesus Christ, but you must
make it shine in your affections, in your desires, in your words, to be brief
in every passage of your life. You must become Preachers of the Cross without
speaking, and by the Sanctity of your examples, you must make that to be
honored and loved, which to the Gentiles is a folly, and to the Jews a
scandal. If you be animated with this Spirit, like persons grafted on the Cross
of Jesus Christ, you will produce fruits answerable to the root from which you
sprung up. If you hate the world, which the Cross condemns, and which the
Cross shall one day judge: If you have shame, ignominy, reproaches, poverty,
hunger, thirst, torments, persecution of strangers, displeasure of Parents,
deceits of Servants, treason of false Brothers, All which are fruits of the
Cross of Jesus Christ. I say, if you be thus disposed, and in the practice of
these things, then believe you are well prepared to eat the bread of which I
speak, and to thrive by its nourishment. But if contrariwise you love the
world, and are wedded to Honors, Riches, Reputation, Pleasures, and other
things of the Earth, either by enjoying them, or by an inordinate affection to
them. In a word, if you eat this bread unworthily, know that you are guilty of
high Treason against the Body and Blood of our Lord. God will not have the
Kings of the Earth to be touched; and declares, that he will revenge their
injuries, because they are his anointed, though only by an exterior and
material Unction. How severely then may ye think he will punish those who shall
pollute the Body and Blood of his Son, whom he has established King upon
Mount Sion, to command over all the Kings of the Earth; and who is his anointed
by the ineffable Unction of his Divinity which inhabites corporally in him. You
abhor those Executioners who fastened him to the Cross, pierced his feet and
hands, spit in his face, and crowned his head with thorns. But if you approach
unworthily to his Table, to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, you are the
greater offenders; for they were Infidels, and took him for a Criminal: But you
profess to believe in him, and know that he is the Holy of God, and the Source
of the Sanctity of men. Therefore try your selves diligently, without
flattering your selves in your evil customs. Make a strict scrutiny against
your selves; enter into the bottom of your soul, to discern there the
difference betwixt a lively, and dead Faith; betwixt a firm, and a faint
languishing hope; betwixt a true and a feined Charity; betwixt your love of
Jesus Christ, your love of creatures, and your selves. Notwithstanding this
examine, do not think your selves so saintly disposed, as is requisite to be
altogether worthy of this heavenly bread; for so long as we live in this world,
we cannot our selves be free from many defects and frailties. But there is a
great deal of difference betwixt faults which spring against our will from the
corruption of our natures, and the love of those defaults, or our obstinacy to
continue in wickedness. For I speak not here of dogs that live in filth, and
often turn to their vomit, biting their neighbors with their slandering
tongues. I have often told you, that netiher Fornicators, nor those who commit
other villainies, which I will not so much as name to you, nor Thieves, nor
covetous persons, nor envious, nor slanderous, nor proud, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Now all those who are excluded from a Heavenly Kingdom,
must be also banished from that which God has upon Earth, that is, his Church;
and consequently deprived of the food which he has prepared to nourish his
Spouse during her Pilgrimage; and if they eat it, they shall eat their
judgment; the body of Jesus Christ shall enter into their breasts, and there
engrave in characters undeleble the arrest of their death; and whilst they
think to receive a pledge of their salvation, it shall prove the assurance of
their damnation. For they will be not only guilty persons, but persons already
condemned and adjudged to death: and the separation of them from the Elect,
shall be justly grounded upon the little distinction they made of the body and
blood of the Son of God, taking ordinary meat with more care and
circumspection. Alas there are but too many who are guilty of this Sacrilege!
Men know them not; but they cannot lie hid from God, who reads their most
secret thoughts, and sees clearly the evil dispositions of their carnal souls.
We see young men perish in the flower of their age; we behold strong and lusty
men fall into languishing diseases, of which we know not the cause. Sudden
death daily takes away diverse persons, who, in respect of their age and health,
might have promised themselves a long life. These accidents are ordinarily
attributed to natural causes; but believe it, it is a secret punishment for the
profanation of the body of Jesus Christ. Therefore judge your selves, to the
end you be not judged. Yet be not seized with so great a fear as to hinder you
from approaching to him, who is as well bread to strengthen the weak and frail,
as to nourish the strong; and is a medicine, as well as food. Eat daily of this
bread; but then let your life correspond with your food; and as the one is
heavenly, let not the other savor of the corruption of the Earth. As you eat
of the same bread, and drink of the same cup at the Table of your Father; so
let there be a perfect union in your desires, and in your thoughts, as to be
one thing. This bread, which is made of many grains of corn, and the wine
which is drawn from many grapes, teach you to unite your hearts by charity.
You must be to one another as one bread, by an amorous communication of your
gifts, either spiritual or temporal, that all shadow of division, even of
singularity, may be banished from the Church. Go on then, my dear Brethren, in
such a manner as may answer the Sanctity of your name and vocation. You are
called Christians, and this name shows your Royal Unction and Priesthood
together. You are of that Kingly Stock; do not then make your selves slaves of
sin, which is the most infamous and cruel Master you can choose. You are
Priests, therefore cloth your selves with justice. Offer your selves to God as
a holy Host, immaculate by Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the Eternal Priest, by
whom, and in whom our oblations are made acceptable to the heavenly Father. I
behold here persons of all conditions; and therefore I will briefly set down
some rules how to perform the duty of Christians: Husbands and Wives, I would
have you know that marriage which has joined you together, is a great Sacrament
in Jesus Christ and his Church. It represents the adorable union of the
heavenly Espouse; and this Chaste Bride, whom he has purified from all
uncleanness by the word of life; so that she who before was black, and soyled
in the time of her disorders, now appears more white then Lilies, without any
spot or wrinckle to dishonor her. He has not only expressed his love to her
by these favors, but also given his life for her, and made his blood the Seal
of his love. Therefore love your Wives after this model, and consider their
bodies as a thing that is yours, and consequently ought to be the subject of
your care. But as the love which Jesus Christ bears to his Church is pure; so
let the love which you bear to the companions of your bed be likewise pure. As
Jesus Christ bears with the frailties of his Church; so you must bear the
infirmites of those, whose Sex being more frail, is more excusable, and may
better claim to be supported; when you love them, you love your selves, for
marriage makes that you are two in one flesh.

Wives, be you subject to your husbands, as to those who hold the place of our
Lord over you: they are your heads, as Jesus Christ is head of the Church. The
head conducts the rest of the body, take them therefore for the guides of your
life, and repose more trust in their conduct, then in that of your own reason.
As the Church is subject to the will of Jesus Christ, be you obedient to the
wills of your husbands; never give them any cause of anger nor occasion to
distrust you. Think not of pleasing any but them, and to that end adorn your
selves modestly, as Sarah did, and those holy women in times past, who were so
careful of gaining the hearts of their husbands, as they called them their
Lords, and were much more careful in the adorning of their souls then bodies.
Curled hair with affectation, your costly* Jewels, garments of gold and silver,
and other dressings of vanity, by which you desire to draw the eyes of others
upon you, are unworthy of a Christian wife, and, indeed, in stead of setting
her forth, renders her deformed.

Fathers and Mothers, breed your Children in the fear of our Lord: Suffer them
not in your presence to offend him, unto whom they appertain more then to your
selves, and for whose service you ought to bring them up. Be careful rather to
make them good then rich, and breed them rather for heaven then the earth.
Never provoke them to anger, nor make them despair by holding too vigorous a
hand over them, but rather use indulgence toward them to reduce them to reason
if they fly out.

Children, obey your Fathers and Mothers: the observance of this command, for
your encouragement, is recompensed with the promise of a long life. The honor
which you give them returns to God who is the fountain of all Paternity both in
heaven and earth. Bear with their froward humors, shun all occasions of
displeasing them, and assuredly believe, you can never acquit your selves of
the obligations you owe in duty to them.

You that are servants, respect your Masters with a sincere and upright heart,
and believe, that in serving them as you ought, you serve Jesus Christ. Do not
render them service only when they look upon you for hope of reward or fear of
punishment: but do it in conformity to the faith and religion you profess.
Consider your selves as Servants of our Lord, for the love of whom you serve
men, whose providence you ought to adore, that has put you in that condition.
Think not of freeing your selves of that bondage, but to use it well and to
make it voluntary. Expect from him the rewards due to your service, your
fidelity and diligence with love and obedience, and without murmuring or
replies; glorify the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and let Infidels see, it
belongs only to the Gospel to produce such servants.

Masters, do not abuse the patience of your slaves, nor continually torment
them: let not their ears be always filled with threats and reproachful
language, and much less use the staff or whip: Know you have all one Master
who is in heaven, who from thence sees in what manner you treat them, and who
makes no distinction of persons in his justice; give unto them those things
which are necessary, have a due regard of them in their health and sickness,
and remember that he who neglects them is worse then an Infidel, for even then
he renounces his faith: In baptism they are made your brothers; they are called
to the same inheritance, and that little distinction betwixt you and them in
the world will quickly vanish.

Virgins, be careful that you be as chaste in your minds as in your bodies.
Study only to please our Lord who is your Spouse, and who ought to be all
things to you. Shun all occasions that may withdraw you never so little from
him. Nourish your selves with prayer, and consider your bodies as an enemy of
whom you must be always in distrust.

Widows, if you have children, let your care be employed in governing yonr
families. You are deprived of a great support, in the loss of your husbands;
but God is called the husband of Widows, and if you put your trust in him, you
will not be forsaken: prayer ought to be your daily and nightly entertainment,
and let the modesty of your attire be such, as by it one may judge of the
inclinations of your heart, and the purity of your Widdowhood. All that savours
either of curiosity, affectation, or vanity, is very ill beseeming your
condition. You ought to be retired, and to love solitude. In fine, if you
plunge your selves in delights, what exterior profession soever you make of
piety and devotion, seeming to lead the life of the new man, yet it is certain
you are dead in the eyes of God.

Whilst the Apostle thus discoursed, the night advanced, nor were his auditors
at all weary to hear so admirable instructions. A young man called Euthicus
heard him from a window a great while, but at last surprised with sleep, he
fell down dead from the third story. This fearful accident interrupted the
Apostle, but it was an occasion to conclude his Sermon with a miracle: For he
went down from the room, and laid himself upon the dead body, and by that
sovereigne embrace restored him to life. Then presently he went up again, and
after he had eaten and distributed the holy bread, he spoke to the faithful
until the break of day, and then took his leave. His Companions went to a town
called Asson, near to Troad, and thither he came to them by land as he had
agreed. There they re-imbarqued together, and the first town they put into was
Mytilen. The next day they cast anchor before the Island of Chyo, the third day
before Samos, and the fourth in the harbor of Milletum. He would not go to
Ephesus, fearing he might there be stayed, and so hindered from keeping the
feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem as he had designed: notwithstanding he could
not pass so near this great City, where he had gained such glorious Conquests,
without informing himself of the condition of that Church since his departure.
For which cause he sent unto the Priests who governed there, to come and speak
with him. St. Irenaeus says, that he convocated the Bishops and Priests of
the next adjacent places. The text of St. Luke speaks nothing of it, but if we
will consider the form of Ecclesiastical Government in that time, there is no
doubt but by that word Elders or Priests, the Bishop of Ephesus who was the
chief of them was comprised. This news was very welcome to them, and after he
had embraced them all, he spoke in this manner.

Dear Brethren, being so near, I could not pass by without giving my self the
comfort of seeing you, and withal to assure you, the holy affection I bear you
is always residing firm in my heart. You may remember in what manner I lived
since the first day I came into Asia. I had nothing in my thoughts but the
service of my Master, and the health of your Souls. I have humbly delivered a
Gospel of humility. The persecutions which the Jews raised against me, I have
opposed only with my prayers and tears, nor did they at all abate my courage.
At all hours, on all occasions, in all places, both in public and private, I
have preached to them as well as to the Gentiles, the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ and the necessity of penance. In sum, my conscience does not accuse
me to have omitted any thing that might tend to your salvation. At this time
leaving my self to the conduct of the holy Ghost, I am going to Jerusalem, not
knowing what in particular might befall me, although in general the Spirit of
God assures me by prophetic revelations, through all the Cities where I am to
pass, that I shall suffer many afflictions. But I fear neither chains, nor
prisons, nor other punishments which attend me. For I think I can endure all
by the assistance of him that strengthens me; and I do not regard the
preservation of my life, in comparison with the performance of my duty. My sole
aim is faithfully to end my cariere, and perform the charge which I have
received of our Lord Jesus Christ, to declare unto men the happy tidings of his
grace. I know you will see me no more, and this being the last time I shall
speak to you, makes me beg with the more instance, that you will imprint in
your memories those things which I am now about to impart unto you. God has
raised you to the dignity of Bishops and Priests, and do not think he has done
it for the love of you; It is for the good of his Church, which you are to
govern with diligence full of fidelity. I will not lay before you many
considerations, to let you see the importance of this your duty, and the horror
of your punishments which will follow your negligence. It is enough that I tell
you, this Church whereof the holy Ghost has made you Pastors, to the end you
govern it, is the Spouse of Jesus Christ, and he has shed his blood for her.
You must know, it is not enough to speak to the fa^thfull, you must cry out,
you must urge them, you must conjure them, you must reprove them, and be not
afraid to be thought impor^une. There are souls which are presently gained,
and others that are not purchased but by violence, and must be healed by sharp
remedies; have great attention therefore and zeal in your conduct, that you may
gain every one to God. Regard neither condition, wit, riches, nor the like,
which may make you desist or condescend to any thing that is base or unworthy.
But be you irreprehensible Laborers, faithful Stewards, sincere Ambassadors
of our Lord; for it is by you that he declares his will to men, and it is at
your hands he will demand their souls. Think of feeding your Flock, and not
how to cloth your selves with their wool and drink of their milk. There is
nothing more shameful to a Bishop or Priest then covetousness, and the desire
of sordid gain: that justly takes away all credit from them, and much weakens
the force of their preaching. We brought nothing with us into the world, and
must go out of it naked. Therefore ^^udy not to hoord up any thing, but be
content with moderate food and clothing, seeking only to get riches of piety,
which is a great treasure, and sufficient to satisfy a heart that is truly
Christian. They, who desire to be rich, do easily fall into the snares of the
Devil, and open a gap in their souls to temptation, and to all sorts of bad
desires and disquiets. For covetousness of money is the root of all evils. Yet
for this we must not condemn rich men, but put them often in mind, that they
be not proud, nor put their trust too much in riches, which many accidents may
ravish from them, but rather to confide in the living God, whose enjoyment can
only render us truly happy. You must also avoid another extremity, which is the
neglect of your own families; for how shall he that cannot govern his own
house, govern well the Church. Your family must be like a Church, by the
exemplar life of all those that are in it; and your children born before your
ordination, must preach in silence to all the faithful under your charge, by
their modesty, and by the sanctity of their lives. After you have been heard
speak, men will cast their eyes upon the manner of your life, and if your
actions do not correspond with your words, your preaching will be unprofitable.
Be you your selves sober, to persuade sobriety; chaste, to teach others
continency; patient, when you suffer injuries, to learn others how to bear
them; and modest, to invite others to modesty. Let your humility confound the
proud, and the contempt you have of riches, reprove the covetous, and make them
ashamed: use hospitality, to the end you may encourage your Brethren that are
able to practice it. Love the poor, and be ye first in their assistance, that
by your example, others may respect and help them. Keep a watchful guard upon
your anger, that your hands which are consecrated to bless the people, never
strike any body. Above all, avoid temporal affairs, for you are Soldiers of a
militia that requires you entirely, and you serve a Master whom only you must
study to please. The sanctification and conduct of souls which he has redeemed;
the establishment of his kingdom by preaching his word are so glorious
employments, that you ought to contemn all others though presented to you by
the greatest Prince of the earth. When either the glory of our Lord, or charity
requires you to undertake any affair, be not negligent, but presently quit your
own repose and quiet. Without such like occasions, attend to cultivate the
field which is appointed for you. For Christians are the fields of God, planted
and watered by him, and to him it belongs to give the increase. It suffices for
your part, that you omit nothing to make the Gospel flourish. Be watchful, for
after my departure ravenous wolves will fall upon your flock, and devour them
without pity; and many false doctors shall rise amongst you, who will seduce a
great number of the faithful by their false doctrine. They will come with the
name of our Lord in their mouths; their looks will be modest, their words
Saint-like, their actions wary, their lives severe, and they will teach nothing
that is not delightful. But indeed they will be wolves in the skins of
sheep. They will be men that are lovers of themselves, fraught with inordinate
desires, puffed up with pride, obstinate in what they hold, jealous of their
opinions, and unsatiable in praise, honor and respect. They will be called
Masters, give rules to all, and concerning all things, have the first place,
and be considered as men that had nothing of earth in them. These blind guides
will lead many others, and so all fall into the ditch: you shall see them come
into houses, and inquire into the greatest secrets of families, not to reform
the disorders, but to soment them, so to make benefit of their indulgence. They
will abuse men by their false Maxims; they will make use of the simplicity of
women, whom they will lead by flocks, and make them believe they will free them
from the burden of their sins; they will entertain them with a thousand vain
and superfluous things, which shall render them always more curious, but never
more learned in the doctrine of piety, which they ought chiefly to know. In
fine, they will oppose truth, which is never favorable to them, and will rise
up against you, without any respect to the power which Jesus Christ has given
you, as Jannes and Mambres did against Moses. You are not the work of men, but
the work of Jesus Christ that Sovereign Priest, who has made you Priests, to
the end you continue the functions of his royal Priesthood. He, who is the
head of Men and Angels, will have you receive from him the influences of his
graces, to communicate them to his members; you are the head of his mystical
body, which cannot subsist without you; you are the eye to enlighten it, the
tongue to instruct it* and the bosom to harbor it, until our Lord J. Christ
be there formed. Labor faithfully in a work that is so admirable, be not weary
to behold after a long time you have not much advanced, resolve to sustain in
your selves continual throws, that you may beget souls to our Lord. Whilst a
woman feels the pains of her childe-bearing, she cries out aloud, but no sooner
is she delivered, when she forgets all her dolours, and rejoices because she
has brought a man into the world: What then will be your joy, when you shall
have given children to God? and how can all those agonies, those disquiets,
those persecutions, which you are to suffer before, seem troublesome to you? For
my self, I do neither glory that I am an Israelite, or that I am skilful in the
law, nor that I have been elevated up to heaven, nor that I am an Apostle, nor
in any other quality of my person. But all my glory is, that I have suffered
incredible persecutions for Jesus Christ. The most glorious badges of my
Apostleship is, to see me in nakedness, to see me in want of food, of drink, in
misery, in prisons, in chains, in affronts and scorns for the salvation of
those to whom God has destinated the light of his Gospel. It is now time that I
leave you: yet awake a while, and call to mind the verities which I have
declared unto you, during the space of three years. I leave you to the
protection of God, who by his goodness having promised a heavenly kingdom to
his servants, is both faithful and powerful to fulfill his word. For my own
part, I do not think any one can reproach me; I have not taken gold nor silver
of any one; I have furnished my self and those that were with me with things
necessary for our subsistence by the labor of my hands. I have lived after
this manner, to give you example how Charity ought to be dis-interessed, with
the which you are to provide for the necessities of the poor, and also to put
you in remembrance of that excellent Maxim of our Lord Jesus Christ, It is a
more noble thing to give then to receive.

The Apostle ended this his discourse, and, kneeling down, prayed with those
who were present. That expression of his, when he said, It was the last time
they should see him, caused a great resentment in them; they all embraced him
with signs of great love, and, with tears in their eyes, bid him farewell.

They stayed all upon the shore, until they lost sight of the vessel which
took its course straight to the Isle of Coo, famous by the birth of Hippocrates
the Prince of Physicians, as also of Apelles, so highly celebrated amongst
Painters. The next day they rode before the Isle of Rhodes, renowned for her
Colossus of an hundred and five foot high, with an hundred of a lesser sort
about it. From thence they came to Patara, the Metropolis of Lycia, where
finding a vessel bound for Phoenicia, they put themselves into it. He passed in
sight of the Isle of Cyprus, which he left on the right hand, and landed at
Tire, where he stayed seven days. The faithful there received him with
extraordinary respect, and with expressions of much tender affection. The holy
Ghost had revealed to them, that he was to suffer much persecution at
Jerusalem; and therefore they used their utmost endeavors to hinder him from
going thither. But the same reason invited him to make that voyage. He parted
thence against their wills, and was brought to the shore by men, women, and
children. After they had prayed on their knees together, he embarked in another
vessel, and advancing with full sails, landed in the Port of Ptolemais, where
he stayed but one day. The next day he came near to Ces^rea the new, called the
Tower of Straton, where the old Herod had made sumptuous works to gain the
favor of Augustus Caesar, from whom he gave it the name. Philip, one of the
first seven Deacons, lodged him, and his stay there was a very great
consolation to the faithful of that Church. His host had four daughters, who
being endued with the gift of Prophecy, declared unto him the evils which were
prepared for him. But Agabus, of whom we have already spoken, following the
custom of ancient Prophets, joined the sign to his words: For, taking the
girdle of the Apostle, and tying his own feet and hands with it, said to those
that were present, Hear the Oracle of the holy Ghost: The man to whom this
girdle belongs, shall be tied as I am, by the Jews, who shall deliver him up to
the Gentiles. This discourse much afflicted all those who heard it, and caused
every one with tears in their eyes to conjure S. Paul not to go to Jerusalem.
But his great courage could not be mollified, neither by the certainty of the
danger, nor by their entreaties, nor the tears of his Disciples. He said to
them, Why will you, by afflicting your selves, give me affliction, and hinder
me from giving testimony to my Master, how much I love him? I am not only
ready to be bound and imprisoned at Jerusalem, but if I be to loose my life, I
shall esteem my self happy to sacrifice it for the truth of the Gospel. This
answer stopped the mouths of the faithful, who replied no other thing then Gods
will b^ done. Some days after he departed thence with many Christians, and
amongst whom there was a Cyprian, named Mnason, with whom he was to lodge at
Jerusalem.

THE LIFE of the Apostle S. PAUL.
The second Book.
THe Apostle S. Paul arriving at Jerusalem, made it his first care to visit
James, called the Brother of our Lord, who was Bishop thereof, and in his house
he found all the Priests of the Church assembled there to receive him. After
he had saluted them, he made an exact relation of the things which God had
wrought by him amongst the Gentiles for the glory of the Gospel, every one
giving thanks for it to our Lord, who would so deliver the world by little and
little from the dark clouds of Infidelity. But as the salvation of the Jews
also was very considerable, and very important for the glory of God, and the
progress of the Gospel to unite by little and little these two people, and to
make them one. S. James and the Priests told him: You see, dear Brother, the
great number of Jews, who make profession of believing in Christ, but
notwithstanding their faith, they are very zealous observers of their ancient
Law for the honor of which they continue a most ardent zeal. Now some have made
them believe, that you are a declared enemy of it, and teach, That those Jews
who are spread amongst the Gentiles, ought not to circumcise their children,
nor practice any legal observance. In fine, they are persuaded you endeavor to
make them revolt openly against their Law. This report has scandalized and
animated them against you, so as we fear some troublesome tumult, when they
shall understand you are here, and shall see you in the Assembly which cannot
be hindered from being summoned upon your arrival. But if you will follow our
advice, you may appease these spirits, and purge your self of the calumny cast
upon you. We have here amongst us four men, who are to perform a vow they have
made to offer their hair to God in the Temple, according to the Ceremony
ordained to Nazaraeans. Do you join your self with them in this action,
contribute also to the charge of the necessary Sacrifices, and ohserve all that
is practiced in this occasion, that it may be known, those reports, which go of
you, are false, and that you observe the Law. Nor can this give to the Gentiles
any subject of murmuration or fear that the same yoke shall be imposed on them;
for we have determined long since, as you know, that it suffices for them to
abstain from meats offered to Idols, from blood, from strangled flesh, and from
fornication.

The Apostle was too charitable not to condescend to the infirmity of his
Brethren, and would not refuse to be a Jew with Jews, he that made himself all
things to all men, that he might gain all to Jesus Christ. The next day
therefore he began the Ceremony of Purification, as had been counseled him,
the which lasted seven days, as we have before observed. But as he was in the
Temple, offering the Sacrifice ordained by the Law for Nazarites, who had made
their vow but for a time, or whose vow was intermitted by some legal pollution;
he by chance was known by some Jews of Asia, who began to cry out, that this
was the mortal enemy of the law of Moses, and not content to spread his
doctrine in remote Provinces, was so impudent and wicked, as to introduce
Gentiles into that holy place. They meant Trophimus; for having seen him in his
company in the city, they believed, or would have others to believe, that he
had brought him into the Temple with him. At the name of Paul, all the town was
in commotion: the people got together from all parts, dragged him out of the
Temple, and he had certainly been killed, if Lysias (who commanded a band of
Soldiers appointed for the guard of the Temple on festival days to prevent
seditions) had not been informed of the Tumult that was beginning, and come in
haste with his Captains and Soldiers to appease them. The sight of him
stopped a little the fury of the people, who then ceased to strike and abuse
the Apostle. Lysias made him presently be bound with two chains, and asked him
what he had done, and what he was. But the noise and cries of the multitude
were so great, as neither the question nor the answer could be understood.
Wherefore Lysias was constrained to conduct him to Antoninus Tower, that he
might secure him, which he had no small trouble to do; for the people who
followed would have fallen upon him, crying out upon every one to kill him.

Not long before, there was an Egyptian in Jerusalem who counterfeited himself
to be a Prophet, and that by a word only, he could make the walls of the City
to fall down; this man had got a great multitude of followers, and amongst them
diverse murderers. The Governor Felix having notice of it, sent presently a
party of Soldiers, who falling upon these poor abused people, killed or took
the greatest part of them. The Egyptian saved himself, but some of those
murdering villains continued to stir up the people, and to burn the
villages where they found any resistance.

Lysias asked S. Paul if he was not the Commander of those rebels. He answered
him, that he was a Jew, and native of Tharsus in Cilicia, a Municipal town
well known. After the Apostle had made him this answer, he desired leave that
he might speak to the people; which being granted, he began his discourse,
relating how he had persecuted the Church, and his miraculous conversion, of
which we spoke in the first book of this History: he added moreover, that when
he came to Jerusalem, which I believe was the first voyage he made thither,
Jesus Christ appeared to him, as he was praying in the Temple, and said to him,
Depart quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive the testimony which
thou give of me: and he answering that they ought not to suspect his
testimony, having showed himself so zealous in defense of the Law, and was not
only present at the death of Stephen, but consenting to it, and kept the
garments of those that stoned him. Our Lord replied again, Go, do that which I
command, for I will send thee unto Nations.

At this word of Nations, the Jews lost all patience, and breaking silence
which they had willingly kept, hearing him to speak in their tongue, they cried
out in a fearful tone, He is a wicked man, and ought not to live longer upon
the face of the earth, let him be put to death: they added to those clamours,
actions which sufficiently manifested their fury, for they shook their
garments, and gathering up dust, threw it into the air, to make it known they
detested him that had spoken to them. This great commotion made Lysias command
that he should be led into the Tower of Antoninus; for S. Paul had spoken to
the people from the top of the stairs which lead up to it. Lysias his design
was to extort by stripes from him the reason of this great uprore. The Apostle
would willingly have suffered this great ignominy for the love of his Master,
but a secret inspiration of the holy Ghost moved him to tell a Captain who was
at hand, and had charge to see the orders of Lysias put in execution; That they
should take heed what they did; for, besides his innocence which ought to
exempt him from being whipped, he was a Citizen of Rome. This was presently
told to Lysias, who would be assured of it from his own mouth, saying, That
the Privilege of a Citizen, which he boasts of, had cost him a great sum of
money. The Apostle answered, it had cost him nothing, for my birth (says he)
obtained me this honor. Indeed, amongst many other Privileges, which Julius
Caesar and Augustus had bestowed on Tharsis in recompense of the services done
by the Inhabitants of that place, in the wars of Pompey and Brutus, one was
to be Citizens of Rome. Now by a Law of Valerius Publicola, confirmed after by
a Law of Sempronius, and by the Law Porcien, Magistrates were forbidden to whip
a Citizen of Rome. Whereupon Lysias caused the chains to be taken off the
Apostle, and that he might sound the depth of this business, commanded the
Priests of the Jews to assemble themselves the next day in some place near the
fortress, which accordingly they did. Thither they led this Criminal which made
a great uprore, and when silence was made, he began his discourse, with a
Protestation, that he had lived until till that time without any reproach both
before God and man. But he was presently interrupted by the Prince of the
Priests there assembled, who was called Ananias. This man very unworthy of the
rank he held, being transported with fury against the cause, as well as against
the advocate, or it may be, offended in that the Apostle had not given him
those titles of honor which he expected, saluting them all by the name of
Brothers, commanded those who were next the Apostle to buffet him. S. Paul
having as yet advanced no proposition of the Gospel, in revenge of which, to
have received this injury would have been delightful; and judging that in this
occasion he ought to defend the honor of his Masters ministry, told Ananias in
a prophetic spirit, and in the tone of a Master; God will strike thee, whited
wall. Thou sit here to judge me according to the Law, and contrary to the
Law; thou make me to be abused, before I have said any thing to deserve this
usage. Whereupon, one of the assistants said, What do thou mean to threaten
and injure the high Priest of God in this manner? The Apostle (whom passion had
not transported* and who perhaps had heard the voice of Annanias, and not
observed his person, in regard of the disorder in the Assembly, whence perhaps
he sat not in the accustomed place which was used in meetings; or for some
other reason, which imports not much to know) replied quietly: Brethren, if I
had known he had been Prince of the Priests, I had born him more respect,
knowing that it is written, Thou shall use no malediction or injurious word to
the Prince of the people. This answer did not appease those spirits, so that he
was fain to have recourse to a pious and prudent artifice to escape out of
their hands. He knew, in that Assembly there was a mixture of Pharisees and
Sadduces who were much averse one to the other, by reason of their difference
in opinions and manner of living: Now to break that union, wherein he saw them
combined to ruin, and to oppose the Gospel, he spoke in a loud voice: That he
saw in his cause, they would change a particular interest into an affair of
Religion; that he was of the sect of the Pharisees, and son of a Pharisee, and
that in hatred, because he believed and taught the resurrection of the dead,
(which the Sadduces denied as well as the immorality of the soul) they brought
him there unto Judgment. Presently the effect followed, as he foresaw: The
Pharisees and Sadduces began to rise up one against another; the Pharisees in
opposition to the Sadduces, rather then out of love to the Apostle, said, We
find not this man guilty of any crime. How do we know that the Spirit of God or
some Angel has not spoke unto him? Being thus uncertain, let not us oppose
him. So the Assembly brake up, but with so much heat of contestation, that
Lysias fearing lest the Apostle might be torn in pieces, conducted him into the
Cittadell. The night following, our Lord appeared unto him, and said, Be thou
constant, as thou have born testimony of me in Jerusalem, thou shall also do
the same in Rome. This vision replenished his joy, and wonderfully fortified
his courage against the obstacles which he found afterward in his preaching.

Certain Jews, whom zeal had made more furious then the rest, laid an ambush
for him the next day, whereinto he must needs have fallen, if divine Providence
had not discovered it. A nephew of the Apostle coming to the knowledge of it,
went to advertise him, that for certain there were forty men who had vowed
neither to eat not drink till they had killed him; and to execute their
design, it was agreed that the Priests and Ancients of the the Synagogue
should demand a second Assembly, to examine better his crime, or his innocence,
and upon the way as he should come to it, they would kill him. S. Paul was not
negligent in sending his Nephew unto Ly^as, to give him notice of this, who
found it so probable, as he gave full credit to it, and immediately ordered,
that two Captains should take two hundred foot, and as many Lanceers, with
seventy horse, which were to be in readiness to depart the third hour of the
night, to conduct the Apostle unto Cesarea, and to deliver him there into the
hands of Felix the Proconsul, doubting that he should not be able to defend him
from the violence of his enemies, and might afterward be accused to have
delivered him up to their fury for a sum of money. This Felix was brother to
Pallas, favorite of the Emperor Claudius, and by his recommendation had
obtained the Government of Judea, of which his birth, but more the infamy of
his manners, rendered him most unworthy. He had debauched Drusilla, sister to
the young Agrippa, who for love of him left her religion, and Azisis her first
husband, King of the Emes^eus. Tacitus speaking of him, says, that to the
baseness of a servile mind, all the insolences and cruelties of a Tyrant were
joined. After the death of Jesus Christ, God began to make the Jews to feel
the just punishment of their abominable parricide, by the evil usage of those
Governors whom the Emperors sent unto them. Jerusalem, heretofore the School
of Piety, was now become the receptacle of Magicians, Murderers, and
Impostors. In the Temple, upon solemn Feasts, horrible murders were committed,
and they were sure to escape punishment if they could content the avarice of
Felix, in this point a worthy successor of Cumane, under whose government the
Jews had suffered all sorts of outrages.

The Soldiers, who had charge of the Apostle, arrived safe at Ces^rea, and
gave unto Felix a letter from Lysias, in which he wrote: That finding the man
whom he sent ready to be slain by the Jews, in a sedition stirred up against
him, he forced him out of their hands, and the rather, because he understood be
was a Citizen of Rome; and searching into the matter of his accusation, found
it was about some questions of the Law, and for the rest he was not guilty of
any crime deserving either death or imprisonment: besides he had notice that
ambushes were laid to kill him; hence he was necessitated to send him thither,
advertising his accusers to repair unto him, there to produce their
depositions. Felix having considered this letter, caused S. Paul to be
committed to the Pretorium, that is to say, the Palace built by old Herod,
there to be kept till his accusers appeared at the time assigned them. The
fifth day, Annanias, and diverse old men that were of the Council, called by the
Jews Sanhedrin, who understood the affairs of religion, arrived at Cesarea.
They brought with them an Orator called Tertullus to plead their cause, and
when Felix gave them audience, he spoke in this manner.

Since the divine Providence, and the goodness of Emperors, most prudent and
excellent Felix, have constituted you Governor of Judea, we have seen Justice
flourish again Discord, which had made desolate this poor Province, has been
b^nished, and the disturbers of public quiet have met with punishments due to
their crimes, whilst honest people are seen to live in security. You are not
content to apply remedies unto things present, and past, but your prudence
extends even to things to come, and dissipates tempests before they arise. This
conduct of yours gives us a great respect to your person, and, if we should not
add to it an extreme love for the continual acts of grace we receive, we were
the most ungrateful of men. We are in hope you doubt not of it, and we easily
persuade that in our affairs, but principally our selves in public affairs, we
may assuredly have recourse to your protection. There will never be presented
an occasion of more importance then this which has brought us hither before
you, since the interest of State and of Religion are both in agitation at this
time. We will not longer abuse the honor you do us in hearing this cause, and
in one word we will tell you the subject of our complaints, which we doubt not
but you will judge to be reasonable. This lewd man you behold here before you,
teaches the world that pestilent doctrine of the Nazarean Sect, in which the
revolt against a lawful Prince is joined with impiety against God. After he
had spread his poison over all the earth, he came to Jerusalem (if he could)
to corrupt Religion at the Spring head; he has been so wicked as to violate the
sanctity of the Temple, by introducing persons, who by our Law are excluded the
place: We took him in these crimes, and we seized upon him, and if Lysias the
Tribune had not forced him by violence out of our hands, we had judged him
according to our customs. But we trust in your justice, that you will not
violate our Privileges, to let an impostor and seditious person be protected
by you. I do not desire you should give credit to my discourse; these men
venerable by their age and quality, who have chosen me their speaker, will
confirm by oath all these things which I have delivered.

So Tertullus ended his speech, and the Jews swore all that he said was true.
The Proconsul making sign to the Apostle to defend himself, he spoke after
this manner.

I am very glad I am to defend my innocence before a Judge, who by the long
abode he has made in this Province, may have come to the perfect knowledge of
the humors and interests of men. It is easy for you to know that it is not
above twelve days since I came to Jerusalem, there to adore God in the
Temple, and there is none can testify that he heard me dispute of Religion,
either in the Temple, Synagogue, or in any particular house, or that I have
been seen to do any thing that might stir up the people to sedition.
Certainly, if it be enough to gain belief impudently to accuse, there is no
innocence can be secure. They endeavor to make me be thought a blasphemer of
the Law of Moses, but I am far from being guilty of that crime. It Is true, I
make profession of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; I do not deny to be of that
Sect, which our Adversaries call Herese, with as great ignorance as impiety; I
adore the same God which our Forefathers adored; I believe all the holy
Scriptures, all the Oracles of the Prophets, and all the ordinances of Moses.
I believe, as they do, the Resurrection of the dead, the reward of good works
after this life, and the punishment of evil. For, besides that I am a Jew by
Nation and Religion, I have from my youth been of the Sect of the Pharisees,
the which amongst us are reputed more strict in the observation of the Law. In
a word, I have hitherto endeavored so to live, as neither to offend God nor
men. Some years being past, since my Conversion to the Faith of Jesus Christ, I
came now to Jerusalem to render my vows in the Temple, and to bring to the
poor Citizens those Alms which I had gathered out of diverse Provinces. In that
holy place, where I thought of nothing but to purify my self according to the
Ordinance of Moses, I was seized upon as a lewd person, and without any
further inquiry, cried out by a common voice, That some one should kill me as
an enemy of Religion. The Jews of Asia, who raised that sedition against me, in
which I ran the hazard of my life, ought to be present, because they are my
first accusers. Let those who are here say, if they could accuse me of any
crime when I appeared in their Council to answer that which was objected
against me. And if this discourse be seditious, I refer it to the judgment of
any that is not blinded with passion. In fine, since the accusations I am
charged with, are only general, and have no other proof then the testimony of
adversaries, I think it is a sufficient answer that I deny them, and the hatred
of mine enemies is so known, that it may justify my innocence.

This plain discourse, without art, made Felix see the truth, nevertheless, he
would neither condemn nor acquit him; on the one side, he was afraid to
discontent the Jews, and on the other, having observed in S. Paul's discourse,
that he spoke of great Alms which he had brought with him, he imagined some
part of the money might fall into his hands; wherefore he deferred the decision
of the cause to the arrival of Lys^as, and till he had a more ample
information. In the mean time he committed the Apostle unto the custody of a
Captain, with free liberty to all of his acquaintance both to visit and assist
him.

Some days after, by the persuasion of Drusilla, Felix's wife, who was a Jew,
he would hear the Apostle speak of the Evangelical dodoctrine; and we may
suppose it was after this manner.

I cannot refuse, most prudent Felix, to satisfy the desire you have to
understand the doctrine which I preach, and I heartily wish your des^re
proceeded not from curiosity, but from a ture sense and care of your salvation.

You must not expect from me fine language, as from an excellent Orator, I
confess I know not how to speak with the ornaments and acuteness of humane
wisdom, and were I capable, I should hold it unworthy to be employed in
declaring to you a God crucified. I know, at first this word will seem strange
to you, and you will believe that I go about to persuade you to a folly, rather
then to a paradox. But bear me, if you please, with patience, and you shall
see (if God so please) that I declare unto you the height of wisdom. God
being a pure Spirit, complete in himself, living by his own proper life,
immortal, happy, wise, omnipotent, infinite, cannot be seen as he is by the
feeble eyes of men, nor comprehended by their understandings. But to lead them
to the knowledge of his invisible perfections, he would produce creatures in
whom his Divinity might be seen. He has even engraved in the depth of man's
heart a secret impression by which he is drawn to know him, so that if he fail
in his knowledge, or adores him not as he ought, he is wholly inexcusable.
Nevertheless, we have been always wanting herein from the beginning of the
world. People have with passion framed Idols, and changed the glory of God
which is incorruptible, into the resemblance of a man subject to corruption,
and, that which is more execrable, into the forms of Birds, Four-footed
beasts, and Serpents. They have made of every creature an object of abominable
worship, and presented to the Devils so infamous sacrifices as modesty forbids
me to name. You, O Felix, are come from a city where you have seen with your
eyes that which I tell you; for Rome is as well the seat of Idolairy, as of the
Empire. The Creator thus offended, has punished this sin committed against him,
by permitting the most part of men to fall into other execrable s^ns in all
parts of the world. He has abandoned them to the desires of their heart; he has
left them to follow their ignominious and brutish passions, so to pollute their
bodies by strange impurities, that in dishonouring them, they have unawares
revenged the honor they robbed from God by their impiety. Men and Women have
violated their honors by detestable loves. Amongst nearest allies has been
seen nothing but enmities, envy, jealousy, and quarrels. Children have been
disobedient to their parents, Fathers have lost the love which they owe to
their children (...) in sum, the earth has beheld nothing but iniquity,
malice, covetousness, deceit, slanders, false accusations, strifes, wars,
murders, Parricides, Robberies, and sacriledges. During this profound darkness,
the Jews have been a little enlightened; Moses, by the appointment of God,
instructed them what they owe to him as their Sovereign, and to men as their
Brethren. He has given them a holy law to draw them to good by reward, and to
divert them from evil by the threats of punishment. But many are content to
hear this law, yet care not to observe it; others that have kept it are become
proud, and have attributed to themselves the glory of their good works, instead
of referring it to God. Thus all men were found to be slaves to sin, and worthy
of death, which is the price of sin. Concupiscence reigned absolutely over
them, and at every moment soyled them after some new manner. In this unhappy
condition, God had pity on humane nature, seeing, that Philosophy could not
cure the Gentiles, nor the Law those who made profession of it. All being
entangled in infidelity as in nets he sent down his only son, to the end, that
by his blood he shouldleffect that which was impossible for the law to do, and
that be himself should be given up for the redemption of all, as a holy and
acceptable victime to God. This he has wrought by dying upon the Cross,
whereunto he was fastened by the envy of the Priests suborning the people: so
that by how much it has been heretofore infamous, by so much the more is it now
glorious and adorable. This is the Tree on which we must necessarily be
ingraffed, if we will have true life. Jesus Christ is dead, to the end we
should die with him, and if this death be real and complete, we are assured to
live eternally in his society; for he now is living at the right hand of his
Father, who raised him the third day. There are many now alive witnesses of
this, and their deposition cannot well be suspected; for they are not weak
persons easily to be deceived, not interessed in it, to deceive others. These
who publish this verity, can hope for nothing at present but chains,
persecutions, prisons, and all sorts of infamy. It distastes all that hear it,
and passes for a kind of madness. Those then certainly who defend it with so
much constancy, and who are otherwise irreprovable in their manner of life,
ought to be believed as faithful Ministers of God, and not reputed as absurd
impostors. For my self, I speak as an eye witness: Jesus of Nazareth has
vouchsafed to appear unto me, although I be but as an abortive, and not worthy
the name of an Apostle, having so much persecuted his Church. I am so much the
more to be credited, because I was far from believing in him, and my former
actions clearly showed the zeal I had for the Law of my Forefathers. Open your
eyes, O Felix, and you Drusilla, who is letter ins^ructed then he in that which
I am about to say, acknowledge the divine Redcemer, figured in Abel, killed by
his brother; in Isaac, under the knife of Abraham; in the Serpent lifted up in
the desert, against the biting of Serpents; in Josuah, when he brought the
people into the land of Promise; and in so many other things of our Law as were
too tedious to relate. He excludes no person from salvation, nor chooses out
one Nation more then another, but by faith he will justify all sorts of
persons, great, little, Kings, Subjects, rich, poor, so that all may come to
eternal life. I do require of you a thing that is not very hard, believe, and
you shall receive innocence: Believe, and you shall live; for faith is the life
of the just man's soul. He that lives this lise is not troubled to submit to
what the Law prescribes; for he knows that he is a member consecrated to God,
and so not to be soyled in Formcation, much less in Adultery: Other sins,
which we commit, are without us, but when we are given to impurity, we sin
against our selves, against our own bodies' which we dishonor, and which is
not made for that use, but to be a Temple of the holy Ghost. From the beginning
of the world, God instituted marriage for the propagation of mankind: he
blessed man and woman, and said, They were two in one flesh, but they must be
careful to possess their bodies in sanctity, and not suffer them to follow the
disorders of Concupiscence, and those Brutalities which are common amongst
Gentiles. Their bed is holy, and their conjunction, not only lawful but
honorable. Death only can dissolve them; for that which God has united, who
can or dare separate? From thence therefore judge, what a horrible crime
Adultery is, which makes this disunion, and at the same time offends both God
and the Husband. Man sometimes is constrained by force to endure so great an
injury, and God bears a long time with those who commit it: But when the
measure of their iniquity is filled, when they have without reflection provoked
his utmost anger, at last, by the greatness of the punishment, he sati^fies for
his long forbearance: He shows a sinner that be was neither asleep nor blind,
but expected only his repentance. He revenges himself at one bl^w, for his
insolency in despising the riches of his goodness, and his long patience, by an
adominable obstinacy. O it is a dreadful thing, Felix, to fall into the hands
of the living God: He is a Judge not to be deceived; for he reads in the depth
of hearts, and makes the conscience of a sinner serve against himself; he has
power to revenge, and will do it eternally by the fire of hell which is never
extinguished, and by inward remorses, which exceed in heat eve^ this fire.
Fel^x being touched with these last words, interrupted the Apostle, whom
otherwise the heat of zeal would have transported to a higher pitch.

He had after this frequent conferences with him, but they produced neither the
reformation of the one, nor liberty of the other. Felix would have had money*
and the prisoner had not wherewith to content his avarice. In the mean time,
Pallas, who was his brother, lost the favor of Nero, the successor of
Claudius, and upon that, Felix was recalled, and Portius Festus appointed by
the Emperor to succeed him.

No sooner came this new Governor to Jerusalem, but the Princes of the
Priests, and the chiefest amongst the Jews, whose malice time could not
sweeten, addressed themselves unto him, and pressed him extremely to send for the
Apostle, whom Felix, to content them, had left prisoner at Cesarea; their
design was to murder him in the way, which Feseus perhaps understanding, told
them, He meant to stay only a few days at Jerusalem, that therefore they
should meet him at Cesarea, where he would hear their accusations, and do them
justice. They obeyed this his order, and coming to the appointed place,
repeated with much heat those accusations, which before they had deposed,
without any more proof this second time, then they had done at the first. The
Apostle answered likewise in his defense the same as before; and Festus being
desirous to gratify the Jews, though at the cost of the Apostles innocence and
life, asked him if he were not willing to go to Jerusalem to be judged there
by him. He answered, No; and that he appealed to the Tribunal of Caesar, for if
I have offended him, as I am accused, or done harm to any, it is there I will
suffer death. But if I be innocent of these crimes, wherewith I am charged, as
I maintain I am, and as you your selves well know, no man can oblige me to
suffer my self to be judged by my Adversaries. And I appeal to the supreme
Authority of Caesar. Festus surprised with this discourse, and having maturely
considered what he were best to do in this occasion, was enforced to tell him,
Thou have appealed to Caesar, before him thou shall go.

At that time, young Agrippa came to Cesarea, to salute Portius Festus,
together with his Sister Berenice, who had espoused in her first nuptials Herod
her Uncle, King of Chalcides, and in her second marriage Polemon, little King
of Cilicia. This young Prince was not above seventeen years of age, when his
Father, of whose death we have spoken in the first Book, left him the Scepter.
The Emperor Claudius, at whose Court he then was conserved to him all the
estates of his Father, except Judea, which he durst not trust in his hands, by
reason of his youth and the turbulent humor of the Jews. But Nero added to
them many little Provinces. Some days after his arrival, Festus spoke to him
of the Apostle, told him all that had passed concerning that business, and that
it was now suspended, because of his appeal to Caesar. Agrippa was very glad of
the news, for the reputation of S. Paul had made him a long time desirous to
see him. At the day appointed he came to the place ordained for public
audience in the company of his Sister Berenice, with whom the common rumor
famed him to have greater familiarity then honesty permitted. The Apostle was
brought thither, and Festus showing him to Agrippa said, This is the man of
whom I spoke to you, and against whom the Jews were so fiercely bent, as they
sought his ruin by all manner of means, although for my part I find him not
guilty of any crime. In fine, I intended to send him to Caesar, to whom he has
appealed, but being ignorant what to write in this affair, it concerning some
point of Religion, about a certain man named Jesus of Nazareth* whom the
accused affirms to be risen again after his death, and whom the Jews on the
other side condemned as an Impostor. I am very willing to have him speak before
so noble an Assembly* and before a Prince well versed in all those questions.
Hereupon, Agrippa made sign to the Apostle that he should defend himself, which
he did in this manner.

It is no small consolation to me, King Agrippa, that I am to speak this day
before you, in answer to the accusations of my enemies, because you are
perfectly instructed in all the questions of the Law, whereof I am accused to
be a public enemy. Hence also I assure my self, that you by your piety, being
interessed in this cause, will afford me a favorable hearing. Me thinks I ought
to be the least suspected of any person to be guilty of this crime wherewith I
am charged. For if my accusers would but acknowledge the truth, they will know
in what manner I have lived in Jerusalem all the time of my youth, amongst
those of my Nation. I was brought up under the discipline of the Pharisees,
which is the sect the most pure and of greatest authority in our Religion, and
I do not believe to have done any thing contrary to the rules of my Profession,
which might give the least occasion to fear the judgment of men, if there
were question of my behavior. But all my pretended crime has relatition to my
belief, and I find my self reduced to a necessity of defending my self in
public, because I place my hope in him, who was promised to our foreFathers;
and from whom I expect my salvation* as they have done serving God day and
night, and carefully observing all the precepts which he gave unto them for
that end. Now this hope does not terminate in this life; it is accomplished in
the other, by the resurrection of the body, which places man in a glorious
State, where he is to receive the recompense of his good deeds, and the
accomplishment of that salvation, which has been here the subject of hope:
Behold a second crime raised against me by some, who following the principles
of their Sect, deny what I believe, and what I teach concerning this point of
the resurrection. What is there in it, that seems to you incredible? who dares
say God cannot restore life to the dead? who had the power to give life when he
placed them in the world? For the first point of my accusation, I confess I
have had opinions far different from that of which they would now make me
guilty. For sometime I believed as others did, that I ought to do all things to
the dishonor of Jesus of Nazareth, and the more I showed my rage against his
name, the more notice was taken of my piety. The city of Jerusalem is witness
of the violences I used; I made search in all places after those who professed
that doctrine; I have cast many of them into prison, by authority from the
Princes of the Priests to that effect; and when they have been condemned to
death, I have not only by my vote approved the sentence to be just, but have
been the bearer of it. I went to all the Synagogues, endeavoring sometimes by
force, and sometimes by Stratagems, to make those who had embraced the belief
of the Gospel, to renounce it; and I esteemed it a great victory, when I could
corrupt any disciple of J. Christ. I deserved to have continued in my
blindeness, and to have found in the end the just punishment of my cruelty,
which extended it self even to foreign and remote Cities. But he, whom I
persecuted, had compassion of my ignorance, and would, in showing mercy to me,
show to all sinners the excess of his goodness and long patience. I went to
Damasco to imprison all those who believed in him, and in the way, about noon,
a great light environed me, and those who were in my company; we all fell to
the ground, and I heard a voice that spoke to me in the Hebrew tongue: Saul,
Saul, Why do thou persecute me? It is in vain to kick against the pricks.
I answered, Who are you Lord? The Lord replied, I am Jesus of Nazareth whom
thou do persecute; but, arise, and stand upon thy feet; I have appeared to
thee, to the end I may ordain thee a preacher of those things thou have seen,
and make thee boldly to render public testimony in all places of the world,
both of these and other verities which I will in due time reveal unto thee. Be
not afraid, I will deliver thee from the ambushes and violence of the people,
unto whom I send thee, that thou may open their eyes, and reduce them from
that deplorable siate of darkness in which they are, unto the light of my
Gospel; that thou may free them from the power of the devil, and place them
under the protection of God, to the end, they may from his goodness receive
remission of their sins, and share in the inheritance of Saints, by a firm
faith in my name. I rejected not by a misbelief, O King Agrippa, this heavenly
vision; for presently I began to preach to the Jews of Damasco, and afterward
at Jerusalem, and in Judea, and then to the Gentiles, exhorting them to return
to God by a true conversion of heart, and to do works worthy of penance, not
to obtain the possession of a land flowing with milk and honey, and such other
recompenses as are promised by a carnal Law; but to obtain the fruition of
heaven, which is infallible to those who live according to the Maxims of Jesus
Christ. This Doctrine is not new, I have deduced it from the writings of
Moses, and those of the Prophets, who all speak clearly of the sufferings of
the Messiah, of his ignominious death, and of the glory of his resurrection; in
which order, he with great reason holds the first place, since he is the
firstborn of God before all creatures. He is begotten in light, and he is come
into the world to enlighten the Jews and Gentiles, and to make of them but one
people, or rather one body, of which he is the head, diffusing admirable
influences of a new life amongst his members; for he is the new man, who
destroys the old in us, and who brings us all sorts of benedictions, as the
other had brought us all manner of miseries: it is he, after whom all our
Forefathers have fighted; it is he, who has taken upon him that curse to which
the Jews and Gentiles were subject; it is he, who upon the tree of the Cross
has abolished the fatal sentence of death in which all men were engaged. The
Law of M^yses had truly Sacrifices to expiate sin, but that expiation was but
exterior; the blood of Goats and Bulls could not purify the hearts of those
that offered it only: the blood of Jesus Christ has this divine virtue; and
indeed it is only he that has taken away all the sins of the world. It was
needful to re-iterate the Sacrifices of the Temple, but this divine Priest, of
whom I speak, being once offered, has drawn dry the very source of sin, has
for ever taken away that, which hindered sanctification; has appeased the
divine Justice, and opened to himself and to his members a heavenly Sanctuary,
which till then was shut up. This was figured by the high Priests entering once
a year into the material Sanctuary, with the blood of a Goat offered for his
own and the peoples sins; for, all that, which our Forefathers beheld, was in
figure. God would dispose them by carnal things unto spiritual, and by
shadows, conduct them to the light which his Son was to bring to the world in
the fullness of time, where he has contracted an alliance, incomparably more
holy and more glorious then was the first. Hear what a Prophet speaks a long
time before his coming: Behold, (says he) the days approach in which I will
make a new alliance with the house of Israel and Juda, far different from that
which I contracted with their fathers, when I withdrew them from the bondage of
Egypt: They were not faithful in the observation of my Law; they mocked at it,
and I treating them as they treated me, have scorned them. The testament which
I promise to the Children of Israel, is, that I will grave my ordinances in
their hearts; I will be their God, and they shall be my people; they shall not
need any laborious study or serious consultations with learned Masters, to be
instructed in my Truths, because I will be their Tutour, and by an interior
unction, will teach them all I would have them to know; so that one neighbor
shall not teach another with trouble; and one shall not say to another, Do
thou know the Lord? because, from the least to the greatest, all shall
perfectly know me: and I will remit their offenses with so full a pardon, that
I will not so much as remember them. Behold, in this passage, he speaks of a
new testament; the old then is to be abolished, and consequently another is to
succeed; and to the end there should be some resemblance betwixt them, it was
necessary this should be confirmed by the blood of the Testatour, as that was
given with a ceremony of blood, when Moses sprinkled the people, saying, This
is the blood with the which the Lord confirms his alliance, which he has this
day contracted with you. Behold, great Prince, that which I preach; Behold, how
I destroy the Law; Behold, how I am an enemy to God.

Festus, unable to comprehend the sublime discourse of the Apostle, interrupted
him, and called out, O Paul, thy great learning does make thee mad, thou do
utter extravagant things. The Apostle humbly answered, I speak nothing that is
extravagant; what I propose, is truth, and the King who has daigned me his
attention, perfectly knows those things which I have said. For what concerns
Jesus Christ, his life was so public, and so famous, and the wonders he has
wrought, so lately done, that there is not any amongst the Jews who can be
ignorant of them.

Having spoken thus to Festus, he addressed himself to the King, and said,
Agrippa, Do you believe the Prophets? I know you believe them. Agrippa,
touched in his conscience, and with the force of his reasons, could not but
answer; Paul, thou have almost convinced me to be a Christian. S. Paul replied;
I would to God, great Prince, that you, and all here present, had embraced the
Doctrine which I preach, and that you were like me in all, but my Captiv^ty: I
do not wish you the chains I bear, but on the contrary I would willingly give,
not only my liberty, but, even my life for you. At this word, the King, the
Governor, Berenice, and all the rest, rose up; and Agrippa said to Festus,
That if he had not made his appeal, he might be returned back absolved: But
the providence of God had ordained this means to bring him to the Capital City
of the world, where the Gospel, which Judea would not receive, should gain
noble victories over Idolatry.

Festus, willing to be rid of his prisoner, embarked him in an Affrican vessel
of the city of Adrumetum, and gave the charge of conducting him, and others who
had likewise appealed to Caesar, to Julius Captain of the first company of a
legion: Aristarchus, a Thessalonian, accompanied the Apostle, S. Luke also
followed* him in this voyage, the passages whereof he has carefully set down.
The next day after their departure, they arrived at Sidon, where the Apostle,
with leave of his Conductor, who used him very civilly, visited the faithful
of that town, and reposed himself a little. After their departure from thence,
a contrary wind forced the mariners to slack their course, and coast the
Island of Gyprus. They passed the sea of Cilicia and Pamphilia, and landed at
Lystris, a town of Licia, where they found a vessel of Alexandria that was
bound for Italy: Julius embarked his company in her, and [the weather proved so
foul, as they had much ado to get so far as Gnidos, which obliged them to
steer for Crete. They first reached a Promontory called Salmon, which lies
Eastward; from thence they sailed toward the South part of the Island, and
cast anchor at a place called Bonport, which is near to a little town of
Thessaly. The many difficulties which occurred, had made them let slip much
time, so that the season, apt to tempests, overtook them, and rendered
navigation very dangerous. In the Acts of the Apostles S. Luke says, the days
of fasting were past; but he not specifying what fast, and Interpreters much
differing in their opinions upon this subject, we cannot from thence draw any
light whereby to know precisely the time when the Apostle put to sea. Many
hold, that it was in the beginning of Winter, and about the month of December
or January, in which falls the tenth fast of the Jews, for the destruction of
the Temple, during the captivity of Babylon. Others hold, that he means the
Fast which falls in the month of September, because that was the most solemn,
and which was called the Fast per excellentiam. This I account the most
probable, and if we follow it, then the time should be about the beginning or
end of October. The Commander would have them put again to sea,
notwithstanding the Apostle told them they should run the hazard of shipwreck.
But he not knowing that S. Paul spoke from a cleerer light then the art of
Navigation, thought the harbor where they lay not safe, and that it was
necessary to remove to another, called Phoenix, which lay toward the South, and
was subject only to South and South-West winds, which are gentle, and more
tolerable in the Winter. This resolution being followed, they hoised sail, and
went from Asson with a favorable gale at first; but presently the wind turned
about North-East, and blew so strong, as the Pilot being forced to let go the
helm, the ship was carried against a little Island which lies direct West unto
Crete, at this day called Gosa. There they thought to take the Cock-boat, and
endeavor to stay the ship with cords and anchors, lest she should run her
self upon the banks of sand. But, to do that, they must first take down Mast
and Sails; and the storm increasing, they were constrained to cast all the
merchandise, and a good part of their provision, and all their arms into the
sea, to lighten the ship. They were deprived of the light of the Sun and Stars
by a profound darkness. The waves roared and went higher and higher, and there
appeared all the signs of a most horrid tempest nigh at hand; so that the
masters are now useless, there was no other refuge but to the assistance of
God. There the Apostle placed his hope, and desirous to encourage the dismayed
hearts of those that were in the ship, he told them, They need not fear, for
that the Angel of God whom he served had appeared to him in the night, and
assured him that none of those who were in his company should perish. The Lord,
to whom the winds are obedient, having granted their safety to his prayers;
for himself he knew he should infallibly be presented to Caesar, and that they
should all come safe to an Island. In fine, he was assured, that what he told
them by Gods appointment, would infallibly happen; wherefore he desired them to
be of good courage. They had been fourteen days in continual fear of
shipwreck, when this man of God spoke thus to them; and, not long after, they
conceived some sparks of hope, that his prediction might prove true. For, the
night following, the Mariners thought they saw land, and sounding, they found
they had not above twenty fadomes of water, and a little farther not fifteen.
This made them apprehend the dashing upon a rock, and obliged them to cast out
four anchors so to stay the vessel. Every one was impatient for day, that they
might better discern things: but whilst the passengers were at their prayers,
the Mariners thought to get in the Cockboat, and so to save themselves. S.
Paul perceiving this, told the Captain and the Soldiers, that if those men
stayed not in the ship, they should all certainly perish. The Captain believed
him, and forthwith cut the cable of the boat, letting it go whither the tide
and wind would carry it. At last the long desired light of day appeared. Then
the Apostle advised every one to take some sustenance, and, to give them
example, he brake a loaf the first; and, after he had given God thanks, he are
of it with so saintly a joy, as all those who were in the vessel (and the text
of the Acts says, they were in all two hundred threescore and twelve persons)
were so comforted and filled with a secret assurance of coming safe to land, as
they could not but express it. The Mariners perceiving a little bay, they
resolved to guide the ship into it, if it were possible; hence waying their
anchors, and plying the helm, they left only the top sail up, and so left the
ship to the wind and tide to gain the shore. But their project did not hit,
for they fell upon a neck of land which advanced into the sea, and there every
one gave himself for lost; for on the one side the prow was struck so far into
the sand that there was no moving it, and on the other side the poup was
shattered to pieces by the violence of the waves. Then the Soldiers thought to
fall upon the Prisoners and kill them, lest they should make an escape: but the
Captain, who desired to preserve S. Paul, hindered them from executing that
barbarous resolution, and commanded those that could swim to get first to
shore, and for the rest they made passage for them with boards and plancks, so
that they all gat safe to land: a while after, being come to themselves, they
found the Tempest had drove them upon the Island of Malta. It was at that time
inhabited with Barbarians, but such as were very humane, who received them with
much charity and courtesy, making fires to dry them. Whilst every one brought
wood for their provision, the Apostle took up an armfull of sticks, from whence
(by Gods permission, who would have him thereby known) a viper issuing forth,
fastened upon his hand, and there hung; the Islanders, according to their feeble
understanding, judged him to be some wicked man, whom the divine Justice had
saved from the fury of the sea, to punish more exemplarly and rigorously at
land: But, when they beheld him to shake the viper into the fire, and that he
had no harm by the biting of it. As the minds of the Vulgar in the same moment
are capable of different impressions, they presently took him for a God hidden
under a humane form. The marvelous cure of Publius his Father, Prince of that
Island, oppressed by a strong Fever and Disentery, increased their respect and
esteem of his sanctity, and caused them to bring to him, from all parts,
diseased persons, whom he restored to health, by invocating the name of Jesus
Christ. He converted there many to the faith, and, at this day, it is the
Bulwark against the fury of the Turks, who find it a stubborn rock to resist
their power, by the visible protection of God. He stayed there three months,
and at the end departed thence in a vessel of Alexandria, which had wintred
there. The wind was favorable to them till they came to Syracusa, where they
tarried three days; from thence, coasting along the land, they got to Regium,
and the next day arrived at Putzeoli. They found Christians there who conjured
him to stay seven days with them, to which he easily condescended, in
acknowledgment of their charity, and of the honor which they had done him. The
report of his arrival being spread through Rome, most of the faithful that
dwelt there, came to meet him; some as far as the market place of Appius, and
others to a structure called the Three Taverns, the sight of them afforded him
great consolation. He, with them, entered into this great City, which one may
call the seat of Idolatry, as well as of the Empire, and, in whose conversion,
that of the whole world was included. So great a work required a zeal no less
ardent, and a mind no less clear, then that of the Apostle, whom God had
ordained, together with S. Peter by their preaching, to found the principal
Church upon earth, to cultivate it by their cares, and, as we shall see a
little after, to consecrate it with their blood. The Captain who conducted him,
remitted him, with the rest of his prisoners, into the hands of the Prefect of
the Pretorium, who was named Burrus; this man was content to allow the Apostle
a soldier for his guard, so that though he was not entirely free, yet he might
go whither he pleased with his guard, who was fastened to him with the same
chain, as the custom was, but so as it hindered him not from walking: he by
that means with facility declared the Gospel to the Jews and Gentiles that
lived in Rome. He began first with the Jews, and the third day after his
arrival, assembled the principal of them together, and told them, That he was
made Prisoner at Jerusalem, and put into the hands of the Romans by those of
his own nation, although he was not guilty of any crime, either in word or
deed, against any particular person, or against the Law. That the hatred and
fury of his accusers constrained him to appeal to Caesar, that he came thither
to present himself, not to accuse his Countrymen, but only to defend his own
innocence: That he found his chain very pleasing, since he bore it for
declaring the coming of him who was the hope of Israel, and that he might give
them an account of all things, he defired them they would come unto him. They
answered him, they had received no letters from Judea, nor seen any body that
had made the least complaint against him; and, for the rest, they desired him
he would freely tell them what this new Sect was which he preached, and which
they understood was generally opposed with great contradiction. The Apostle,
unable then to satisfy their desires appointed them another day, when he
should have more time to explicate so highly important verities. They failed
not to come to this conference, and when every one had taken his place, S. Paul
spoke much after this manner.

Brethren, in the subject you desire to be instructed, it is a great advantage
to me, and likewise a great consolation, that I am not obliged to prove the
principles to you, from which I am to draw my Consequences. You receive Moses
for the Law giver, and with reason esteem his words as Oracles. Certainly it is
most reasonable we should hearken to him whom God treated with so much
familiarity upon the Mountain, and by whom he has wrought so many wonders in
favor of our forefathers. We must only be careful that we go not contrary to
the intentions of this great man: He has been faithful in the house of God,
but it has been in quality of a Servant. He has declared to the people the
will of the eternal Father, but as Interpreter. He has established
Purifications and sacrifices, but it was only for that time (according as
providence had ordained) which was to preceed the birth of the new Law giver
whom I preach, and who is no other then Jesus Christ. It is he Brethren, by
whom God has vouchsafed to speak to us in these last ages, having spoken in
the former by the Prophets, after diverse manners. This is the Son to the Father
of that Family, whereof Moses is a member. This is the truth of all our
figures, the end of the whole body of the Law, the object of all the
Prophesies. His death was figured in that of Abell, whose innocent blood Cain
spilt througy a raging jealousy. Moses, in delivering our Ancestors from the
bondage of Egypt, represents the exemption from the tyranny of sin and death,
wrought by him, whom I preach unto you. The brazen Serpent erected in the
Desert, which was a Cure for the biting of real Serpents, teaches us, that the
Son of man was to be lifted up from the Earth, and placed upon the Cross, and
that he should prove a saving Physician to the Mortal desease of humane nature.
The immolation of the Paschal Lamb, the sacrifice of the Goat emissary, on whom
were charged all the sins of the people, were the images of his bloody
oblation, which has opened us the way to eternal life, and which has expiated
all the sins of the world. The Prophet Esaias seems to have beheld it with his
eyes; and, unless you will blind your selves, you must acknowledge that which
he spoke of a Virgin that should conceive and bring forth a Son, who should be
the light, the hope, the leader, the Master, and King of Nations, in whom the
Spirit of Wisdom, Counsel, and Force, should reside, whose feet, and hands
should be pierced; who should be made a man of dolours, a man chastised by God
for the sins of his people, and in whom neither beauty nor comeliness should
appear; insomuch, that his very bones might be told; and lots should be cast
for his garment. Is not this Jesus, whose doctrine I preach unto you? This is
the Master whom David invites us to hear, speaking in the person of God. To day
if you hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as your Forefathers have done
in the desert; where I was made angry against those who durst distrust my
power, and censure all my works for the space of forty years. Their
infidelity shall not go unpunished; I will make them know, that I can revenge
my self, and in my wrath I swear they shall not enter into the place of rest
which I had prepared for them. Behold, dreadful words, and you will do well
to be warned by their loss, lest you be excluded also from that place of repose
which is offered to you. As it availed them little to give ear to the relation
of those who returned from the land of Promise, and informed them of the true
state of it, because they would not believe what was said; so it is not enough
to hear the Gospel preached, it must be received humbly, to the end you may
obtain by faith the fruition of that repose which is spoken of in the passage
I alleged. It cannot be that repose which God assumed, after he had made the
world, that being no other thing then a cessation from work; nor is it likewise
the repose of the Sabbath, whose institution was before the birth of David. In
sum, it is not that repose which our Fathers tasted in the Land whereinto
they were led by Joshua; for that long since is past: therefore, it must needs
be, that the Psalmist speaks of another repose more holy, a Sabbath more
excellent, which appertains to the people of God, and, in which the Just do
eternally repose from all their labors, as formerly our Lord did repose the
seventh day from all his works. Moses could not bring us into that place where
this divine Sabbath is celebrated: Jesus Christ entered there the first, to open
it to those who should receive his doctrine. This is the Priest deserving
adoration, who, to purify heaven and earth, and to reconcile man to God, has
not not made use of the blood of goats and bulls, but of his own, which he has
shed to the last drop upon the Altar of the Cross. The high Priest of the Law
was obliged to offer Sacrifices for his own sins, as well as those of the
People. Jesus Christ is the Sovereign high Priest, pure, holy, unpolluted,
incapable of any spot, and consequently needs not offer any victime for
himself: he has not received his Priesthood by way of a carnal birth and
succession, as the Priests according to Aaron did; but he has been established
eternal Priest according to the order of Melchisedec, as we learn by those
words of the Psalmist, which you confess are to be understood of the Messiah;
Our Lord has sworn thou art an eternal Priest according to the order of
Melchisedec. If the Levitical Priesthood, which the people received together
with the Law, guided to perfection, that is to say, gave true Justice, what
need was there that another Priest should come according to the order of
Melchisedec? and if the Priesthood be transferred, it then follows that the
Law is also changed, because these two things are inseparably linked together.
Now that there has been a translation of the Priesthood, it is not to be
doubted, since he, of whom that passage I alleged, speaks, was of the Tribe of
Judah, and not of Levi, out of which Moses ordained that the Priests should be
chosen. Observe, also that the Leviticall Priesthood was not established by
oath, as is that which I treat; and this circumstance shows the sanctity and
immutability of that thing unto which God has pleased to unite it. There were
to be many Priests, according to the order of Aaron, because they were mortal.
But the Priesthood of Jesus Christ is eternal as well as himself; he has
always power to guide those to eternal salvation who believe in him. He is
always in the functions of his Priesthood that is to say, in continual
oblation of himself to God, and in prayer without intermission; for he that
says Eternal Priest, says also Eternal Oblation. The Levitical Priests stood
during the exercise of their Functions; Jesus Christ having once offered the
Host of his body, is seated at the right hand of God, according to the words
of the Psalmist; The Lord said to my Lord, Take thy place, till I have put thy
enemies under my feet. Be not you of that number, my dear Brethren, you that
are descended from Abraham the Father of the Faithful, you whose Ancestors
have been so holy, you to whom those promises were made, and for whom Jesus
Christ principally came; do not permit strangers to carry away the benediction
due to lawful children, and having hitherto born the heavy yoke of Moses, do
not fear now to submit your selves to that of Jesus Christ, which is so light
and pleasing: And in this you will even obey Moses, by whom (as you know) God
promised, That after many ages he would raise a Prophet of your Nation, to
whom he would have you attend as to himself.

The Apostle spoke much after this manner, and his discourse raised great
Disputes amongst his Auditors; some blaming what others approved, some
believing, others continuing obstinate. S. Paul finding he could gain little
upon them, he told them freely; I know well, that ye will fulfill the
prophecy of Esaias, to whom God spoke in these terms, Go to the Children of
Israel, and tell them, You shall hear with your ears but shall not understand
with your minds; you shall see with the eyes of the body, but not with those
of the soul: for the heart of this people is suffocated with fat; they have
heard with their ears against their wills being incensed, and have shut their
eyes, for fear they should see by their eyes, take in by their ears, consent
by their hearts and wills, and so work their conversion and their cure.

The incredulous Jews were extremely offended at these words, and more, which
he added, viz. That the news of salvation should be carried to the Gentiles,
who would embrace it.

This discourse gave occasion of much dispute to the Audience, who not being
able to come to an agreement, every one returned home possessed with different
thoughts and opinions.

Hitherto we have proceeded securely, following the steps of Saint Luke, who
ends here his story, and leaves the Apostle in the Confusion of Rome, where he
says, he remained two years, and during that time preached the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ without any let, Receiving with freedom all those who came to see
him. Hence what concerns the rest of his life, we know little, yet I will
endeavor to ground, what I shall add more of this Subject, either upon
certain traditions, or from his own Epistles.

In the second Epistle which he writes to Tymothy his dear Disciple, he says,
that God will deliver him from the Jaws of the Lion, by which, probably, he
means Nero, to whom he was presented for the defense of his appeal. This
Prince began then the third year of his Empire, and, whether his wicked
inclinations were yet asleep, or, whether the continual exhortations of Seneca
his Tutor withheld him, or, that he dissembled till his authority was better
settled, he gave the people of Rome some hope that under his reign, they should
see a resemblance of their ancient liberty. Burrus, Captain of his guard,
presenting a sentence of death to be figned by him, he cried out, I wish it
pleased the gods, I could not write. This speech begot a belief in men, that
he was merciful, but it was not long ere he gave the lie to that opinion: The
Jews, to embitter his spirit against Saint Paul, and to make the worst
impressions they could, in order to his ruin, under color of Justice and
Piety, made use of one Alliturus of their Nation, who had gained great credit
with the Emperor by his Comoedian Art. But the Divine Providence frustrated
their wicked design, and made the Apostle obtain there a glorious pardon, where
in, humane probability, he might have expected his condemnation to an
opprobrious death. The fear of this his danger was so great, as, most of
those, who before was his followers especially those of Asia, abandoned him.
Amongst these cowardly and traiterous disciples, he names particularly
Phigellus, and Hermogenes; the last of these, Tertullian reckons amongst the
Jewish Heretics, who denied the Resurrection. But, at the same time, God sent
him Onosiphorus an Ephesian, who assisted him with so much charity, as he left
the memory of it to the whole Church, in his forementioned Epistle. The Greek
Menologue says, he was Bishop of Colophones, and the Romans celebrates the
memory of him on the sixth day of September. Besides this faithful companion,
he had also Titus and Tichius. But those he speedily dispatched to preach the
Gospel in diverse places, so that his care, as well as authority, was extended
to all the Provinces of the world; he preferred the interest of souls, before
the comfort which he might receive by the company of his Disciples; nor did
Jesus Christ leave this uninteressed zeal without recompense. For at that same
time when every one had abandoned him, he dained to appear unto him, that he
might fortify his courage, and resolution, he acquired much of glory, by his
persecutions, and the fury of his enemies which appeared at all the Tribunals
of Rome, made way to the preaching of the Gospel in those places where perhaps
no occasion of laying it open had ever been given. Many, even of Nero's
household were converted, and the Apostle salutes the Philippians from them.
Amongst whom the Martirologue mentions one Torpetes, who died courageously at
Pisa in Tuscany, in defense of that Faith. Tacitus speaks of one Pomponia
Graecina, who was accused for having embraced a foreign Superstition; and
being turned over to her Husband, he taking cognizance of the crime, according
to ancient customs, declared her innocent. Now that which this Author calls
foreign Superstition, is very likely to be Christianity. I find also great
probability, that Seneca and the Apostle were acquainted, although the letters
which are set forth under their names be counterfeit, and very unworthy of
either of them. This great Philosopher had too nere a relation to Nero, to be
ignorant of the Audience he had given to a criminal, whose cause the Jews by
their extraordinary Solicitation had made famous. And if he were present when
he pleaded, there is no doubt but the force of his discourse, and his subline
arguments might make him desirous of a particular acquaintance with one that
preached so new a Doctrine. Some Authors have said, it was by his means that
Nero condemned him not to death, but that is not founded upon any solid proof,
nor ought we to attribute this marvelous deliveance, but to the secret power of
God over the hearts of Princes, to incline them as he please.

Whilst Saint Paul labored to found the Church at Rome, he understood, that
the Ephesian Church was pestered with many false Doctors, who corrupted that
pure Doctrine which he had there preached; hence he wrote unto them an
excellent Epistle, in the which he principally instructs them in the profound
mystery of predestination and vocation of men to faith, and Union with Jesus
Christ, so to form an admirable body, of which he is the Head; and then he
treats of the duty of every faithful man, according to his condition. A little
after (some Authors say before, or at the same time) he was not satisfied with
instructing the flock himself, but would also give unto Tymothy their Pastor
wholesome rules whereby to acquit himself worthily of his charge. I know many
would have this Epistle to be almost the last that was written; but in my
opinion their objections are not considerable, and that the date we assign is
more certain. This difficulty appertains not to the subject we have in hand;
besides, we have already explicated it in the paraphrase we made of it.
Toward the end, he desires him to come unto him, which he performs, leaving
Tichius in his place. The Philppians hearing of the Apostles necessity, deputed
Epaphroditus with considerable alms for his assistance. The change of air, with
the toiles of his journey, made him fall sick at Rome: But S. Paul by his
prayers obtained his recovery, and sent him back to his Church with an Epistle
full of wholesome instructions, against the errors of Cerinthus, Simon the
Magician, and of other Impostors, whom he calls enemies of the Cross of Christ,
because they taught that our Lord was not really crucified, but some fantome in
his place. S. Ignatius Martyr, forty years after, wrote unto them upon the same
subject, and so did likewise S. Polycarpus. It Is true, there is doubt made
whether the Epistle of the former be really his. The Apostle had not preached
in the city of C^lossus, which is in the Province of Phrygia; yet knowing the
state of that Church assembled by Epaphras, he wrote unto them, that they
should beware of the Jews, of the Heretics, and of the Gentiles, which sowed
erroneous doctrine amongst them, touching Legal Observations, and the worship
of Angels or Genienses. Philemon after his conversion very much assisted the
faithful, making his house the place of their assemblies, and giving great alms
to the poor. One of his slaves, called Onesimus, ran away from his house in
quality of a thief; this slave coming to Rome, fell luckily into the hands of
the Apostle, who converted him, which obliged him particularly to write in his
behalf to his master for his pardon, and that he would receive him again, not
as a fugitive, but as a dear child which he had begotten in his chains.
Theodoret says, that Philemon sent him back to serve and assist S. Paul: and
S. Hierome reports, that he was first made Deacon, and afterward Bishop of
Ephesus: S. Ignatius speaks of him in his Epistle to the Ephesians, with much
honor; and, the Martyrologue keeps his memory the sixteenth of February, as of
a Martyr.

Whilst the Apostle gave these glorious proofs of his great Charity, Nero
being then in the fifth year of his Empire, let fly the reins to his wicked
inclinations; his mother Agrippina notwithstanding held him in a little, which
rendered him more attentive to those who represented her as an ambitious woman,
that would always keep him as ward. Poppea, of whom he was desperately
enamoured, used to reproach him with this, more bitterly then others, and often
times called him Pupil; for she detested Agrippina, because she opposed her
marriage, and labored that of Octavia, sister to Britanicus; she knew so well
how to mix tears and prayers with her complaints, that in the end she made
that love he owed to a mother, give place to her adulterate love. Those who had
power with the Emperor opposed it not, being well pleased to see her credit
diminished, who, in their opinion, used it too insolently, not imagining it
would have come to that last extremity of parricide. Agrippina on her part
sought to regain him by all sort of Caresses, and to that end she was accused
to have employed messengers to commit a horrible incest, if Seneca had not
hindered it by the means of Actea, one of the Mistresses of this detestable
Prince: But, in the end, he resolves to take his mother away, whose authority
was to him insupportable, and whose wit with reason he feared. First he tried
poison, then he caused the floor of her chamber to fall whilst she was
asleep. Neither of those succeeding, nor that of the ship, which he had caused
to be so built, as the sides should fall asunder in the middst of the sea, he
used open force, and made her to be stabbed in her bed. This parricide begot
strange frights in the mind of Nero, who did not consider the enormity of it
till it was done: the flatteries of those who congratulated his delivery from
the Ambushes of his mother; the exagerations made of her Insolences and
Cruelties during the life of Claudius, and under the reign of his Son; the
Thanksgiving to the Gods, the Institution of Annual Games, and the erecting of
a Statue near to that of Minerva; all these (I say) freed him not from horrible
fantomes which night and day beset his frighted fancy. To blot out in some
measure an action so cruel, he would do others of clemency; hence he recalled
many persons of quality, who had been banished, and set many prisoners at
liberty, amongst whom perhaps the Apostle might be one. Before he departed
from Rome, he wrote, according to the opinion of many Fathers, the Epistle to
the Galatians, to renew the memory of those verities which he had preached to
them, and to advise them not to make a dangerous mixture of Judaism and
Christianity: others believe it was written before his arrival at this great
City. It was likewise before his departure, that he composed his Epistle to the
Hebrews, whose style and matter are so sublime, that in my opinion there need
no other arguments to prove him to be the Author. It Is true, he puts not his
name to it in the Frontispice, as he does to the others, whence many believe it
was none of his: but this reason is not sufficient; for he being odious to the
Jews, as we have seen in the course of this his story; if he had put his name
in the Superscription of the Letter, it might have distasted and hindered the
reading of it. I confess, it is harder to answer the difference of style, which
appears evidently in this Epistle from the others, this being more pure and
less filled with Parentheses. There is in it much of S. Lukes way of speaking,
both in his Gospel and and in the story of the Acts: so that it might well be,
the matter of the Epistle was S. Paul's, and the style S. Lukes, who was his
disciple and companion. I willingly rank my self with those of this opinion,
for I cannot approve theirs who attribute it to S. Barnaby and S. Clement,
although it be ancient. We have the writings of them both, at lest they bear
their names, and there is no conformity to be found, neither in the matter or
language, with that Epistle whereof we speak. Besides, to speak of Sacrifices
and Levitical Priesthood so profoundly as that Author does, me thinks it
cannot be but S. Paul's, who had learnt those things at the feet of Gamaliel,
and confesses himself that he understood them more perfectly then any of his
companions. Although he was not properly the Apostle of the Jews, yet he
loved them as those who were of one nation and origin with him* and he has
showed, in all the course of his life, that he had always a great tenderness
for them, and a particular care of their salvation: wherefore, it is very
probable, that he would instruct them by writing, as well as by word of mouth,
and that many being spread abroad in Provinces, where they used the Greek
tongue, he made the Verities, which he taught S. Luke, to be written in that
dialect. They are wonderful high, and those who understand them well, may
boast that they know Jesus Christ, and the state of the Gospel, which is no
other thing then the accomplishment of the ancient Law, not only in figures,
all which related to the Son of God, but also in the deliverance of men from
the yoke of sin, and in their sanctification which the Law could not do. But
this discourse would draw us too far, and pass the limits of the historical
life of S. Paul.

We can say no more of that which he did till his death, unless we would
follow relations which are apocryphal. It Is not known, when he went out of
Rome, whether or no he went into Spain, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and many
other Fathers affirm it. The more modern writers add, that he passed amidst
the Gauls, and established the Proconsul Sergius Paulus (of whom we have
spoken) Bishop of Narbone; he shows in his Epistle to the Romans, that he had
a design to carry the Gospel into Spain, and this desire was very conformable
to the spirit of his Apostleship, which comprehended all Nations of the world.
Being now free, nothing could hinder him from this enterprise, by which he
might enlighten a people plunged in Idolatry; for having labored sufficiently
in the East, he would next steer his course to the West; and, indeed, so great
a harvest might well require such a workman: what he acted there, lies hid to
our knowledge, by a secret stroke of Providence; and, if we may judge by that
which he has already done, we cannot doubt, but that he gained a great
number of servants to his Master, and that the devil lost as much of his
authority there, as he had done in other places where his Temples were
overthrown. In this unknown voyage he spent eight years; during which time,
the Church lost many of her Masters and Children, or rather sent them to heaven
by a glorious martyrdom.

The death of S. James, who was called the brother of our Lord (according to
the testimony of Jesephus himself) drew upon the city of Jerusalem the horrid
calamities of that famous siege, which ruined it entirely. He had governed
that Church, twenty nine years, with so great a reputation of sanctity, that
the people, when he walked in the streets, thought themselves very happy if
they could but touch the hemm of his garment. Eusebius, and, before him,
Hegesippus, says; that he was sanctified in his mothers womb, that he ever
abstained from all sort of liquours which might cause drunkenness, and from
flesh; that a rasor never touched his head; that he was never in the bathes,
and that by his long continuance in prayer, there was a scale, like to the skin
of a Camel, grown over his knees. The Scribes and Pharisees, always the same,
could not support the credit and reputation of this man who converted sinners
by his example, as well as words. Wherefore, in a great assembly of the people,
they endeavored to persuade him publicly to profess Judaism; which he
refusing, was forthwith precipitated from the top of the Temple, where, at the
foot, a dyer with a Lever killed him outright. We have a Canonical Epistle of
his, in which he labors principally to prove the necessity of good works, to
refute the error of Simon the Magician, who said faith alone was sufficient to
salvation.

After him, Simon the son of Cleophas, also called the brother of Jesus Christ,
because he was his cozen, was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem. S. Barnaby, the
faithful companion of the Apostle in his peregrinations, at the same time time
received also the crown of martyrdom in the Isle of Cyprus.

On the other side, Mark the disciple of S. Peter, and one of the Evangelists,
after he had governed the Church of Alexandria with great sanctity, was taken
on a Sunday by the Gentiles, who put a rope about his neck, and so dragged him
for two days together about the streets, and in rough and uneven places,
where, in the end, he finished his life.

The Christians that were under his conduct led a marvelous holy life. Philo
the Jew composed a book expressly in their praise, called The Contemplative
Life, wherein he gives them the name of Essens, taking them for Jews, because
in that time they retained many legal Ceremonies. I know there are great
disputes among learned men, upon this passage: but since I write not for them,
it were to little purpose to go about to clear tha difficulty, more curious
then profitable, we shall do better to return to Rome, where the Church was
agitated with a horrible persecution. Nero, in the tenth of his Empire,
increasing in wickedness, as he grew up in years, gave fire himself to the
City of Rome. The streets were too narrow for him, and he had a mind to
rebuild it, that it might bear his name. The fire began in that part of the
Cirque which joined to the Mounts Palatine, and Caelius; and, from thence,
meeting with Magazines filled with combustible matter, and being carried with
the wind which began to rise, it spread it self with such violence, that
remedies were too late to resist its fury. The air ecchoed with the lamentable
cries of Women and children, who, in that apprehension of fear, knew not
whither to go for safety, and hindered those that would have helped them: for
whilst some, either expected, or would secure others, they so troubled one
another, that they found themselves encompassed with flames. In the narrow
streets, where there were many turnings, the throng was so great, there was no
passing. When men were gotten so far, as they thought the fire could not reach
them, then they were suddenly surprised by it, as it seemed rather to fly then
to creep along. Many, to save their wives, perished themselves; and others would
not outlive them, although they might easily have been saved. Fathers lost
their lives staying by their children; in fine, never was seen so horrible a
spectacle; such as would have brought water, or pulled down houses before the
fire, were hindered with Officers, who, at the corners of streets throwing
about fiery balls, cried out, that what they did was by order, meaning, by the
command of the Emperor; who, as is commonly reported, during this sad
calamity, was singing on the stage the Burning of Troy. Notwithstanding, he
sought to suppress this opinion, causing many hutts to be built in his gardens
for those who had lost their houses by the fire. Of fourteen quarters which
composed the city, there were but four left entire. The houses of three of
them, were entirely levelled with the ground, and, in the other seven, there
remained only the tops of buildings half burnt and ruined. Thus all the
riches, heaped together since the foundation of the Commonwealth, of so many
Statues, so many Pictures and other other rarities, transported from all the
Nations of the world, of so many Temples built with such magnificence, and by
the Superstition of the people rendered so famous and renowned, there remained
only a little heap of Ashes: a sad example of the vanity of all humane things.

But, to see that great City all in flames, was not so dreadful, as afterward
to behold a great number of Christians tormented by Nero, as authors of the
fire, without distinction either of age or quality; and, adding derision to his
cruelty, he commanded some to be covered with the skins of wild beasts, to
the end they might be worried to death by fierce dogs. Others, he nailed upon
Crosses, and caused their bodies to be rubbed over with pitch, and other things
apt to take fire, that, in the night time, they served for torches to light
those who passed by, whilst they consumed like living holocausts, for the
defense of the name of J. Christ. His gardens were the theater of this
abominable execution. Although the Christians were odious to the Romans, who
distinguished them not from the Jews and Heretics of that time, whose
abominations indeed by right deserved their public hatred, yet they had
compassion of these; for every one saw they perished not for their own crimes,
but to satisfy the unsatiable cruelty of the Emperor, who would justify
himself at their costs. This was the first persecution in which God would try
his Church amongst the Gentiles. It was a while interrupted by a conspiracy
discovered against this Tyrant, in which Seneca being accused to have a hand,
was forced to make satisfaction with his life let out by his veins; a greater
resolution could not be desired, then what he showed in his death, but, me
thinks, it is yet to be deplored, since this constancy was only Philosophical,
not Christian. Plautus Lateranus (whose Palace was afterward changed into a
Church, which yet bears the name of Lateran) and many other persons of quality,
perished for the same cause. Poppea followed not long after; for Nero loving
her like a Tyrant, slew her in a fury with a spurn of his foot. To these
Massacres, he added afterward the unjust deaths of many Senators, Thrasius
Paetus, and Bare^s Soranus. But, that of S. Paul was the completion of his
sacrileges, and, it is now time, after eight years absence, that we return
again with him to Rome.

He was imprisoned not long after his arrival. If we will believe S.
Chrysostom, the conversion of the Emperors Mistress was the cause. It is
likely also, the death of Simon the Magician contributed toward it. This
impostor had promised Nero to fly in his sight up to heaven; and, on the day
appointed for this famous enterprise, he was elevated in the air by the
devils, all the people beholding him. But, at the prayers of S. Peter and S.
Paul, (for S. Cyril of Jerusalem joins them both in this action) he was
precipitated in an instant to the earth, where he long survived not this
shameful fall. Hereupon, the Emperor, who loved him would revenge his death
upon those whom he believed to be the authors. S. Peter, after he had lain nine
months in prison, was condemned to be crucified, and S. Paul to have his head
struck off, as being a Citizen of Rome. Before the execution, they were both
whipped with rods, for the crime of impiety whereof they were accused; which
supposed crime, rendered S. Paul incapable of the privilege of a free Denison.
In the Church of S. Mary, beyond the bridge over Tyber, are yet to be seen the
Pillars, whereunto ('it is said) they were fastened. The Prince of the Apostles
would dye with his head downwards, to make, in that shameful death, a
distinction betwixt the Master and the Servant. S. Paul, on the way to his
execution, converted three Soldiers, who conducted him. During his
imprisonment, he, and his noble Companion, converted forty seven of their
guard, besides Processas and Martinian their Goalers; for whose baptism, God
miraculously made a fountain to issue forth in the prison. The Apostle prayed
for his Executioner, and offered his head with more joy, then if had been to
receive a Diadem: three times the head gave a leap, and, at every bound,
produced a fountain. A Tradition, approved by many ancient Fathers of the
Church, adds, that milk instead of blood ran out of his wound, which caused
no less astonishment to the Gentiles, then consolation to the Faithful.

I know, it is very hard to mark out the precise time of Martyrdom, both of
the one and other; but, it is certain, they suffered with a courage, suitable to
the transcendency of their Apostleship; and, it is the opinion of the Church,
that having been so strictly linked together in their lives, God would have
them likewise so in their deaths, by suffering for one and the same cause, on
the same day, and in the Capital City of the world, where they had assaulted
Idolatry even in the throne, and, preaching the Gospel, laid the foundation of
an Empire, against which, hell it self shall never be able to prevail.

Thus S. Paul ended his life in the sixty eighth year of his age, and the
thirty fifth of his Conversion. Nature had not bestowed upon him a presence to
his advantage, as he himself confesses; but she recompensed it in a vast
wit, and, a courage, which even dangers fortified. To the science of humane
Learning, acquired at Tharsus, he added a perfect knowledge of the Law of
Moses, which he learnt at the feet of Gamaliel a most eminent Doctor, both for
his doctrine and piety. His zeal for this Law, transported him into those
extremities of fury, which became the subject of repentance, in the whole
sequel of his life. He thought to be a faithful disciple to Moses, He must
needs be an irreconciliable enemy to Jesus Christ, and unto all those who
believed in him. The name alone of being his disciple, seemed to him a just
ground for his hatred; he thought he could not better testify a zeal for his
religion, then by forgetting all obligati^ns of friendship, and stifling in his
heart all sense and feeling of nature: though S. Stephen was his near kinsman,
yet nevertheless he was an assistant and complice in his death. His rage was
was not content with this spectacle, esteeming it an honor to be employed as
executioner in the cruel commands of the Priests, and gloried much, when,
either by force or cunning, he had drawn any one to deny the Faith of Jesus
Christ. The fury of his blind and impoisoned zeal could not be kept within the
limits of Jerusalem. He would also make it remarkable in the City of Damasco;
to this end, he obtained express orders, that he might seize on all the
faithful, and bring them prisoners to the Capital City of Judea, to make their
deaths more ignominious, by making it more public. But, in his most violent
excess of hatred against the Savior of the world, he found the effects of his
extraordinary goodness. For a light more radiant then the Sun, although it was
at mid day, dazzled his eyes, and a divine illustration cleared his
understanding. J. Christ reproved him for his persecution, and the persecuter
presently acknowledged him for his Master. The grace of J. C. manifested in
this change, its most miraculous effects, and shows men, who flatter themselves
with an opinion of their own merits, that it is not conferred upon them,
because they are Saints, but rather to make them Saints. It appears, there
needs not time to soften the most rebellious hearts, and that the most
obstinate must yield to the amorous violence of its impulses, by a happy
liberty, which places them in the holy and pleasant servitude of Justice.
Pelagius, a long time after, lest he should make a slave of man's will, made it
a divinity, but his error was sufficiently condemned by this Conversion.
Sinners may here learn to hope for the effect of some mercy, which purifies,
when it pleases, the greatest stains, and mollifies the most obdurate hearts.
Never any one has better known both the old and new man, in which consists all
Christian religion, then S. Paul: He has taught the world what miseries the
first has brought upon it, and the unhappy effects of his poison on those who
descended from him: He has showed the proud man, who flatters himself in his
own excellency, that he was the son of an offender, the slave of sin, and the
heir of death: He has represented to him all his deformities, discovered all
his ulcers, and convinced him in this, that he is frail and miserable: He has
made the wisest amongst the Gentiles, to observe, that their wisdom was indeed
true folly; that they were lost in their imaginations, and that their virtues
had but a false appearance of goodness: He so drew to the life the corruption
of manners, which attends Idolatry, as a just punishment of its blindness; that
those who were not wholly stupefied and obdurate, became at lest ashamed, if
not repentant. By his study and diligence, he learnt the letter of the Law, at
the feet of Gamaliel; by the light of Grace he knew the insufficiency of it, to
man's justification; he concealed it not to the Jews, that he might beat down
their pride, and teach them, they were to have recourse to the Faith of Jesus
Christ, if they meant to be delivered from the yoke of sin and concupiscence.
These verities, which they ought to have respected, put them into a fury, and
publication of irreconciliable enmity against him. In what place soever he
went, he found them prepared to cross his designs, and raise persecutions
against him: they laid ambushes for him both by land and sea, where horrid
tempests seemed to him less terrible then their hatred. To ruin him, they made
use of the authority of Goveruours, and employed their credit with Princes;
they abused the simplicity of pious women, to chase him out of Cities where he
preached with success. In Lystris, they made those throw stones at him, who,
but two hours before, would have adored him for a God. He bare the marks of
their cruelty upon his back, in the many stripes he received; and, had he
laid open to us all the other afflictions, which he suffered by their
persecution, we might behold the most admirable example of a perfect patience,
that ever has been, and the most horrid fury whereof men are capable. In these
few things which he relates of himself, we may behold his modesty, and courage
both tegether. He was wearied with no pains, and he compared not himself with
the other Ministers of the Gospel, but in his great sufferings for the defense
of it. He was oftener imprisoned then any other, and turned over to
executioners, who loaded him with stripes. He often suffered shipwreck at sea,
and ran dangers in the calmest rivers. In Cities, the people defamed him with
calumnies, and treated him rudely in his person; nor was he secure in
solitude. His patience was tried both in hunger and thirst, and he was so far
from yielding any pleasures to his senses, that he wanted necessaries for the
sustaining of his life. He felt the violence of cold in his voyages, nor could
the ice abate the heat of his zeal. He had not wherewith to defend himself from
the injury of the weather, and the poorest persons would have been ashamed to
wear his garments. He was an invincible Champion, that fought naked against
his naked enemies the devils. But whatsoever injuries he suffered by the Jews
and Gentiles, those he endured from false brothers, were more dangerous, and
more insupportable. The profession which they made of the Gospel in outward
show, covered their hatred, ambition, and covetousness, and being not the least
suspected of any ill design, were, by that, the more able to do him harm. His
great reputation made his greatest crimes: they could not endure his sublime
doctrine, which had nothing of terrestrial in it, nor the discretion of his
zeal, which was according to knowledge, nor the constancy of his courage, which
would not bow in any thing that concerned the glory of God, nor his
disinteressed charity, that sought no advantages to himself. There were no
calumnies so black which they cast not upon him, or dispersed not cunningly
amongst those, who knew not the ground of their malice, and the motives of
their hatred. To hear them speak, they seemed to be no ways interessed, but in
the defense of truth, and regarded only the salvation of souls. But they vented
their passion, and many times those were the instruments of their vengeance,
who ought to have been the Judges.

But their fury found it self deceived in all designs, and hurt none but those
who had so unjustly entertained, and so cruelly nourished it. The Mystery of
iniquity was discovered; and every one saw that the false Apostles, who
persecuted him with so much obstinacy and fury, were true Wolves in
Sheepskins, and that they hated him as offenders hate their Judges. All their
injuries could not move him to any bitterness, he always rendering blessings
for the maledictions they charged upon him. He remembered that he was Apostle to
him, who bore the name of Impostor, Seducer, and Samaritan. All things seemed
sweet to him, if tending to the progress of the Gospel, and all his care was,
that it might have no obstacle. Although in his rapture he had seen the most
profound mysteries of God, yet he accommodated himself to the weakness of his
disciples, and stammered it out with them. His Charity comprehended all the
world, and his care was extended unto Slaves as well as Princes. His preaching
was plain, and he corrupted not the words of Jesus Christ, by the ornaments of
humane learning. His reasons were so forcible, that the most learned, if not
persuaded by them, were at lest confounded. His Epistles are Abysses of Divine
knowledge; one may see the light of his understanding there to sparkle, and in
every line, the fire of his Charity. The proud are there dazeled, and the
humble may find wholesome instructions. The Flower of human Eloquence are not
seen there, but all the beauties of Heavenly rhetoric shine in them. This
style is not always elegant, but the art in discussing matters, and managing
the Spirits of men, is there admirable. Prudence appears in all his precepts,
and all the profane Politiques come not near them. Christian morality is found
there in its purity, and every one may there learn the duty of his condition,
without disguise, without subtilty, and without those pernicious imitations
which have corrupted the good manners of these latter ages. He neither sought
his own reputation, nor the applause of men, and one of his chief maxims was,
that we could not please them, and be servants of Jesus Christ. He regarded not
men, but as they bore the image of his Master, and all his cares were but to
imprint that in their souls. He having received the Evangelical verity, as a
sacred pledge, he would never alter it, out of any complacence. He stooped to
the capacity of his Disciples, but he made not their capacity the rule of his
Doctrine, as if he were only to tell them what they could comprehend. In stead
of satisfying humane reason, which is very fecund, and insolent in her doubts,
he placed it under the yoke of faith, remitting it to the secrets of Gods
Divine judgments. The beloved Disciple reposed upon the bosom of Jesus
Christ, but we may say that Saint Paul entered into it, and saw the operations
of his Divine life, and the influences diffused from thence upon his members.
Never any one better knew the Economy of the mystical body, and her
correspondence with the head. Never was the ardor of zeal so admirably mixed
with prudence, for the framing and sanctifying of this body: proper interest
was unknown to him. He was so far from making any sordid commerce of the
Gospel, as he would not accept of necessaries for his life. His charity toward
the faithful governed his power, and he had rather diminish his authority, then
give the least cause of murmur. His poverty was the more Evangelical, in that
it was despised. He was not ashamed to take pains for his living, with the same
hands that wrought miracles, and write instructions to all the Church. He
complied with all men by an admirable condescension, and never had Father more
tenderness for his Children, then he for his disciples. The Pharisees, the
Scribes, the Priests, were not able to speak before him. Athens was astonished
to hear him, the Are page admired him, and there he made conquest of the most
renouned of their Judges. At Rome he set upon Idolatry in the Throne, and of a
Mistress of error, he made her a Mistress of truth over all the earth. He, who
first founded it, soyled it presently with the blood of his brother, and the
Apostle consecrated it with his blood, to establish there the Empire of Jesus
Christ. Her authority is more extended by a religion of humility, which he
taught, then for many ages she could bring to pass by force of arms. He
advanced his conquests even to the Palace of Nero, making the domestics of a
most cruel and infamous Tyrant, to become the servants of Jesus Christ. Once he
escaped the Jaws of this Lion, because God had shut them up, that he might
make known his name to all the earth. But when the time of his Coronation was
come, he loosened the reins to this monster, who sacrificed him to his cruelty,
and what could be expected less from him, who had not spared his own Mother?
The condemnation of the Judge was a proof of the Criminals virtue. After his
death, the Church hears him as her Master, and the Schools of Christians
receive all his words as infallible Oracles. He is one of the eyes of the body,
whereof Jesus Christ is the head. He is the shrill Trumpet of the Gospel, which
is heard over all the earth. He is the Apostle of the Son of God, not mortal
and passible, but glorious and living the life of resurrection. He is the
illustrious triumph of his grace, the subject of his mercies, the vessel of a
singular election, the instrument of his greatest wonders, the interpreter of
his will, and the treasurer of all his secrets. The Minister of his greatest
favors, the Ambassador of his most holy aliance, the Oracle of his highest
verities. From this fountain the holy Fathers have drawn what they have most
admirable. It Is from this Mine they have fetched all their riches. It Is from his
spoils they have taken all their noble ornaments. They never went astray when
they took him for their guide. They have always triumphed when they used his
arms. It is his fire that warmed their zeal, as his light enlightened them. It
is with his Thunderbolts they have overthrown the insolency of Heresy, and
the rebellion of Schism. It is by his rules they have formed their morality.
It is by his counsels they have governed the Church. It is by his maxims they
have cleared the doubts of the faithful, satisfied their scruples, and
discovered the snares which were set to entrap them.

We have endeavored in this History to represent the marvelous actions of his
life, and though we are neither able, nor willing to aspire to the glory of
Eloquence, yet we may promise this to our selves, that all unpartial Readers
will confess we have herein been very faithful and disinteressed.

FINIS.

