THE Rise, Growth, and Fall OF ANTICHRIST: Together with The Reign of CHRIST.

By Edw. Haughton Minister.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple Gate, 1652.

HAving perused this Discourse concerning the Rise, Growth, and Fall of
Antichrist; together with the much desired and waited-for succession of the
Reighn of our Lord Jesus Christ: I conceive the publication of it in Print,
very useful and seasonable for these Times; both to settle the minds of some,
about the Great Motions and Changes (through the wonderful Providence of God)
lately made among us; and to stir up the spirits of all to higher actings and
more earnest prayers toward the accomplishment of that more glorious Change.

October. 10. 1651. Joseph Caryl.

To the Reader.
IF thou art learned and studious in Divine things, these Thursday Lectures at
Horsham in the county of Sussex.
Country-pieces were not intended for thee. That they now appear in the Light,
must be ascribed to that, commonly, pretended (but trully in this, no so)
Midwife of Friend-Sollicitations (drawing me much beyond my first Purposes) who
hearing them preached, were at a stand, as if so be some new and strange things
had been brought to their ears, (such is the darkness of these parts, in the
great things Christ is about to do) but freely and frequently confessed, they
brought the evidence of truth and certainty in their very foreheads: and so
diverse of them grew impatient to feed also their eye with them, that whetting
them upon their spirits by study and meditation, they might come more fully to
understand these ways of God, and grand Designs Christ has in hand.

Here thou have the Picture of the Pope Rampant (I would it were more in the
hearts and mouths of the People, that he is the great Antichrist) his strange
but certain ruin, and the application of both. Thou have a Discourse engraffed
concerning Kings (the Subject fairly leading to it) particularly, of the last
Race of the English Monarchs, and upon what account the late Charles fell, these
Wars on foot being indeed part of the Battle you read of in the 16. and 19.
chapters of the Revelations: I say the begun quarrel between Christ and
Antichrist, and that he with his Armies fell, as the Popes second: Howbeit they
neither did, nor yet do think so, the Devil having put other glosses and
interpretations upon things. I pray God open men's eyes more generally, to see
into the devices and depths of Satan's delusions in playing his game.

A Tract also of the so much talked-of, and desired Kingdom of our Lord; (some
oppose it, by forcing the streams of Prophesies to run in other channels,
thereby sufficiently discovering both their wilful blindness (for they say
they see) and dis-affectation to Christ and Holiness) which God will build up
and establish upon the ruins of the Man of Sins Kingdom. Therefore I thought I
had not done my Work, till I had spoken something to that also, enough only to
provoke abler Wits and Pens.

And now if thou shall make (by these my Labors) any addition to the Stature
of thy Knowledge, Zeal, Resolution of contending for the Faith delivered to the
Saints, and Kingdom of our Lord, against the Common Enemy, as thou wilt answer it
another day, banish me out of thy thoughts in giving Glory to Him who sits upon
the Throne, and to the Lamb.

These two things are enough for me.

1. That a few Saints confessed their bowels refreshed by them (yet nothing
thence is due to me.)

2. That I have the clear Testimony of my Conscience, in this undertaking (both
in the Preaching and Publishing) I had no Design above or equal to this, the
Advancement of Christ and his Kingdom in the World: it is the constant
breathing of his Spirit at the Throne of Grace, who is,

Thine, E. H.

TO MY Godly, learned, and reverend Friend, Mr. Edw. Haughton, Upon his Book
called The Rise, Growth, and Fall of Antichrist; With the Reign of Christ.
SEe, see what desolation now appears
In many Countries! mourn and shed thy tears,
O wretched Rome! thou blind and bloody place!
For thy foundations God intends to race.
What mean the Wars of England; and the fall
Of Kingly, Lordly, and Episcopal
Power? I pr'e thee see what alterations
Are lately made in three adjacent Nations.
Read Stories both Profane and Scriptural,
Thou shall not find such Conquests in them all,
As GOD has given to his Servants here:
Can thou know this, and not be filled with fear?
Surely this Cup of Trembling makes haste
Unto thy palace; thou (O Pope) must tasaste
The dregs of Gods displeasure: Thou have slain
The Saints of Christ; and this will cause thy pain.
That we may sing for joy, now Babylon
Is like to mourn; let us often look upon
This Book of Comfort; for it does contein
Antichrists Ruin, and Christ's Gospel-Reign.
Randolph Yearwood.

Carmina quaedam Latin, De opere Autoris optatissimo.
PErdite Papa, precor, quo vades? nonne coronane
Christus habet? nunc est Romaruina tua.
Descendit regnum Domini nunc omnipotentis
In terram; praese flectet and omne genu,
Christ, venito, veni! sic Spiritus orat, and omnes
Sancti, cum toto cord precantur. Ego
Amen (...) dico, Randolphus Yearwood

THE Rise, Growth, and Fall OF Antichrist, etc.
2 These. 2.3. That day shall not come, except there come a falling away first,
and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition.


THe Devil transforming himself into an Angel light, brought some into the
Church of the The ssulonians who taught, [the day of Christ, (...) Was just at
hand.] would take them in the flesh. This shakes their hearts exceedingly that
they are in danger of denying, and casting off the whole fath of Christ. Now
for the clearing up of their understanding in the point, their confirmation in
the Doctrine and work of Christianity; the Apostle does beseech them, as
brethren; yea adjure them by the coming of Christ, and their appearance before
him to receive rewards of glory, that they would not be shaken in their minds,
or troubled at the Doctrine broached amongst them, what plausible pretenses
soever they had for it; though they pretended the [spirt] for many false
spirits are gone out into the World, whereof this is one; though they pretend
the [Word] i. e. that we have imparted this Doctrine privately to them by word
of mouth, as if it were an Apostolical tradition; No nor yet though they show
you [a letter] for it, as from us; believe it not, it is a forgery. Thus the
Apostle plucks up every foundation-stone those false teachers could possibly
buid upon, Spirit, Word, Epistle; though they offer to confirm their Doctrine
by any or all these ways or testimonies: yet be not deceived by any wile, by
any means, be not moved or troubled at it, it is all false. And to his
assertions and exhortations he adds (as a back of steel) a strong convincing
argument taken from Gods decree concerning the order of transactions, For that
day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin
be revealed, the Son of perdition.

The text branches it self thus. 1. The delay of Christ's last coming; that day
shall not come. 2. A preceding general defection from the faith; Except there
come a falling away first. 3. The unmasking the detection of the great
Antichrist, or ringleader of that Apostasy; The man of sin revealed. 4. His
doom, The Son of Perdition. For that day shall not come, except etc.

My purpose is not to speak any things concerning Christ's putting off his last
coming to judgment; nor yet to give you the Commonplace of Apostasy: but that
which I aim at, is to discover Antichrist to you in his own colors; for all
writers, both Popish and Protestant, say, that by [Man of sin] here is meant
the great Antichrist; by [Son of Perdition] his most remarkabe destruction.

Well then, without any more ado, the point I hold forth, and undertake (by
Gods assistance) to make good to you, is this;

The Popes of Rome are the revealed man of sin, the [now] well known
Antichrist, of Whom Daniel, Paul, and the Apostle John, have spoken such vile
and fearful things: I say in all they have said of the great Antichrist, they
have pointed the singer at the Popes of Rome.

To make this good, first, thus, Daniel in Chap. 7. ver. 2. saw the four winds
of heaven strive upon the great Sea. i. e. great commotions in the States of
the World, out of which there came four great beasts, the first like a Lion,
shadowing forth the Babylonish Monarchy with its Pride and Violence; the second
like a Bear, of a churlish and ravenous disposition; such a one was the Persian
Monarchy; the third like a Leopard, having upon his back four wings, very
subtle, and very swift upon the prey; such was the Grecian Monarchy set up by
Alexander the great, but he saw a fourth exceeding terrible and dreadful,
having Iron teeth, and it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue
with his feet, and 'twas diverse from all the rest, and had ten hons upon his
head. Who these beasts were, you have the Angels interpretation, Dan. 7 17.
These great beasts Which are four, are four Kings Which shall arise out of the
Earth: but so monstrous was the fourth, that Daniel would needs know the truth
of him; the Angel speaks to that ver. 22. and 24. The fourth beast shall be a
fourth Kingdom upon Earth, which shall be diverse from all Kingdoms, and shall
devour the whole Earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces; and
the ten horns out of this Kingdom, are ten Kings that shall arise, and another
shall arise, etc. It Is well known, that the Roman Monarchy has been the fourth
great Kingdom of the World, then in its greatness and glory of domination, when
Saint John writ his Revelation, who will tell you yet more of this beast and
business. Rev. 17.3. I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored beast, having
seven heads and ten horns. ver. 9 [the seven heads are seven Mountains] the
Palatine, Capitoline, Aventine, Esquiline, Quirinal, Viminal, and Janicular,
Mountains, upon which Rome in its greatness stood. And the seven heads are
expounded also to be seven Kings, ver. 10. There are seven Kings, five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come and when he comes he must
continue a short space. [Seven Kings] i. e. seven Supreme Kings or forms of
governments in Rome, which made good the saying of Daniel, that the last beast
was diverse from all the rest; Now says St. John [five are already fallen]
Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators, these five were all fallen and
gone in Saint John's days, [one is] viz, government by Emperors, which made up
the sixth head of the beast, [The other is not yet come] he does not say, the
seventh, but the other, (as one has very well observed) pointing doubtless at
the Christian Emperors, who did not differ from the Heathen Emperors, as a
distinct form of Government, but only in the quality of their persons, the one
persecuting, destroying, Christianity, the other protecting, advancing,
Christianity [and when he comes he must continue a short space] for the
Christian Emperors did not reign in their full strength and greatness above
seventy or eighty years, as Historians make it evident. It follows, ver. 11.
And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven.
[The beast that was,] The Papacy was in respect of the body of the Empire, but
[is not] in respect of any present being, for it was not in Saint John's time;
[Even he is the eighth] if you reckon the Christian Emperors for one; but in
that you ought not so to reckon [He is indeed of the seven] or one of the
seven; for there have not been eight but seven forms of Governmnt at Rome, the
last whereof is called the beast by way of eminency, the great whore, the false
Prophet, Antichrist himself. So then, find out the last head to the Roman
Empire, and you may say of him, this is [ the man of sin the great Antichrist.]
Now who is he? why, lets reckon again, the Kings had their time of Governing,
that is one; the Consulls theirs, that is two; Tribunes theirs, that is three;
Decemvirs theirs, that is four; Dictators theirs, that is five; Emperors theirs,
that is six. All these are fallen and gone; and if I should put the question in
this Congregation, who is the seventh head of that beast, or who since
Emperors, have Governed Rome, I am persuaded the most ignorant man or woman
could tell me, they are Popes; therefore ye Popes of Rome are the man of sin,
and the great Antichrist. And with this agrees that of the Apostle Paul a
little after my text, 2 These. 2.6.7.8. Ye know what withholdeth that he might
be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity does already work; only he
who now lets will let, till he be taken out of the way. And then shall that
wicked be revealed. That the Papacy was working in St. John's time, is evident,
if you search Scriptures what errors were then taught, and what Doctrines the
Church of Rome does now teach; Antichrists Limbs and Joints were then a
framing, a knitting; the Pope was then a young Embrio, and was still growing in
the womb, but could not break forth till the Emperors had made way for him, by
removing from Rome, and seating themselves at Bizantium, or Constantinople.
Tertullian, Hierom, Chrysostom, and the more judicious of the ancient Fathers,
have still thus expounded this place. When Constantine had endowed Churchmen
with indeed too much temporal greatness, especially the Bishops of Rome, they
then began every day to look more and more like Popes, i. e. like the great
Antichrist, and play Rex, which you know they could not do while the Emperors
seat was at Rome; the Imperial presence and greatness withheld them; but when
the hand of Providence took them out of the way, then they became Popes, and
manifested themselves to be the seventh distinct Roman Government, the last
head of that beast. Thus you see how both Saint John and Saint Paul were guided
by one Spirit, when they describe Antichrist, to point the finger at the Popes
of Rome. Take it thus. He that succeeds the Emperors in the Government of the
Roman State, or he that is seventh head of Daniels fourth beast, he is the
great Antichrist: but the Popes of Rome succeed the Emperors in the Government
of the Roman state, or they are the seventh head of the fourth great beast;
therefore the Popes of Rome are the great Antichrist.

Secondly, Antichrist is the man that sets himself above all Rule, and all
authority. 2. These. 2.8. then shall the wicked be revealed; that's our
translation, but the Greek is, (...) the lawless man. v. 4. Who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that
he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. How
must men forfeit their Intellectuals to fasten all this anywhere but upon the
popes? For first they are Churchmen, their seat is in the Temple, or reputed
Church of God. The great Turk, let his pride and domination be what it will,
yet he sits not in the Temple, he is no Churchman, but the Pope is. Secondly he
is (...) the Lawless man. PopeGratian in his decrees, reckons up several Laws,
public, private Laws, the Laws of Nature and Nations, written and unwritten
Laws, civil and canonical, the Laws both of God and man; but the conclusion of
all he makes, is this, that they are all subject to the Popes interpretation
and dispensation, and that he is the spiritual man who judges all things, and
himself is judged of none. He allows such marriages as God has forbidden; You
all know he allowed Henry the eighth of England to have his brother Arthurs
wife, which God expressly forbids, Levit. 18.16. Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy brothers wife. And when the sinfullness of it was discovered,
he would not untye the knot, or allow a divorce (though it got him nothing) and
so justified the sin of uncleanness, and the trangression of Gods Law. He
absolves people from the Laws of obedience to the Powers that God has set over
them, contrary to that, Let every soul be subject to the [High powers] so the
Greeks, or the Powers that are set up on high, Romans 13 To kill a Protestant, is
no murder; to blow up a Parliament, is meritorious; nay though he carry plures
animarum currus ad tartara. none may say unto him cur ita facis? Thus he puts
all Rule and Law under his feet. Thirdly, He apposeth and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or is Worshipped, meaning all civil Powers and
Rulers of this World; the beast has lift up his paw at them all; yea and
fetched them under too. Rev. 17.12.13. The ten horns are ten Kings, those have
one mind, and give their power and strength to the beast i. e. he had conquered
them, and they yielded themselves his slaves; their power, their strength,
their all should be at his service, vigorously to promote his designs. Bellarm,
in his fifth Book de Romans Pontif. has these words, Omnes Imperatores Pontifici
Romano debent suum imperium, all Kings and Emperors owe their Crowns and
Scepters to the Bishop of Rome; And hereupon the Pope styles himself Rex Regum,
Dominus Dominantium, King of Kings, Lord of Lords; and it is not bare words; but
he acts accordingly in deposing Kings, and giving away their Kingdoms. Pope
Innocent the third deposed King John of England, and gave this Land to Philip
Augustus King of France, but at last he absolved him, upon condition he would
hold his Kingdom in Fee of the Church of Rome, and that he should pay yearly a
thousand Marks of silver in token of his subjection. Pope Alexander the sixth
gave the West Indies to the Spaniard, the East Indies to the Portugal, and set
them their Limits. Pope Pius the fifth pronounced the sentence of degradation
and deposition against Queen Elizabeth. The Monks whipped Henry the second of
England, upon the death of Becket, and when he spoke some angry words to them,
Domine (say they) noli mirarii; nos enim nullas minas timemus, qui de tali
curia sumus quae consuevit imperare Regibus and Imperatoribus; never threaten
us, we fear no threats, we are of such a Court as rules our kings and
Emperors. I think I could have furnished you with a hundred stories of like
nature. Fourthly, he sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.
Non ait dicens, sed ostendens (says one.) hoc est, operibus, signis and
miraculis nitens ostendere quod sit Deus; He does not say it in words at
length, that he is God; but his carriage, and the prerogatives Royal he claims,
are such, as if he were God himself. This they stick not to speak out, idem est
dominium Dei and Papae, the Rule of God and the Pope are the same, and Jus
ecclesiasticum est jus divinum, their ecclesiastical Law is Divine, and must
bind the conscience as well as any Laws of God: Hereupon one expounds it
(meethinks) very well, in templo conscientiarum, he sits in the Temple of men's
consciences. He forgives sin as God does, he makes Articles of faith as God
does, he takes to himself the Names and Titles that God does; the Council of
Lateran styles him [tu es alter Deus in terris] another God upon Earth,
[Dominus Deus noster para,] our Lord God the Pope; he takes Divine worship to
himself as God does; they bow before him, and kiss his feet, which an Angel of
heaven would not receive of John, Rev. 22. see you do it not, Worship God; Nay
he takes upon him to do that which God will not do, to dispense with Laws moral
and natural, (as I said before) to give Indulgences to sin for time to come;
there have been Leases granted for years. Schoolmen affirm, Deum non magis
homini indulgere posse, ut (...) sese gerat, quam justitiae suae ordinem
overtere, and seipsum negare, God can as soon destroy his order and course of
Justice yea deny himself, as give men Indulgences to transgress his Laws, to
walk disorderly; but the Pope has not so bound his own hands; he can be
Dominus Deus, and yet (upon good consideration and advantages) indulge men to
violate any or all the laws of God and Nature; He takes upon him to deliver
souls out of Purgatory, to Canonize Saints at his pleasure; so that what is
said of God, is said of the Pope, and more also. Take the sum of all thus; He
who is the great Churchman, above all Law, and above all Earthly power, and who
carries himself as if he were God, he is the man of sin, the great Antichrist;
but the Popes of Rome are seated in the temple, have subjected all rule and
Authority to themselves, and behave themselves as if they were God; therefore
the Popes of Rome are the man of sin, the great Antichrist.

Thirdly, Antichrists Name is written in his forehead Rev. 17.5. [Mystery]
Brocard a Venetian does avouch it, that the word [Mystery] is written in the
Popes Mitre; and many others who have been at Rome, do profess to have seen it,
as Dr. James the late keeper of the Library at Oxford, will further satisfy
any man in his Dedicatory Epistle to his Treatise of the corruption of the
Scriptures. What mystery it is that is written upon his forehead. Saint Paul
tell you 2 These. 2.7 [Mystery of iniquity:] As the Doctrine of the Gospel is a
Mystery of Godliness, so the Papacy is nothing else but a Mystery of iniquity.
The Pope pretends to be more for Christ then any man in the World, Christ's
Vicar, Christ's Vicegerent, the visible head of Christ's Church, Saint Peter's
successor, to feed the flock of Christ, and still he has Christ in his mouth,
and who but Christ with him? I tell you he pretends to be more for Christ then
any man alive; but let me tell you withal that there is no man alive so much
against Christ as he is; and therefore most properly called [Antichrist] which
signifies both [for] and [against] Christ, (...) in Greek is [pro] as well as
[contra] Ioh. 1.16. (...) Grace for Grace. The great Antichrist is one that is
pretendedly for Christ, but is really against Christ; which cannot be affirmed
of the great Turk, or of any other beside the Pope; but of him it may most
clearly. That he bears the World in hand, he is Christ greatest friend, I need
not prove; I suppose we will all take that for granted; but let me show you how
in truth he is Christ's greatest Enemy in all points. One mediator between God
and man the man Christ Jesus 1 Time 2.5. There are other Mediators, says the
Pope, both for satisfacton and intercession; for satisfaction, the propitiatory
sacrifice of the Mass, the blood of Thomas, the merits of the Church; for
intercession; the Virgin Mary, Saints and Angels are intercessors to God (even
as to our particular necessities) for us, there is but one says Christ; there
are more says the Pope. Christ alone is Prophet of his Church, to be heard in
all things whatsoever he shall say. Act. 3. and for this end he opened the
sealed book, bids every one of his, search the Scriptures, grow in knowledge,
walk in the light of Gospel Truth: the Pope expressly contradicts this, and
tells you that the Doctrine Christ has left in the Scriptures, is not
sufficient without his daily supplements of unwritten Traditions, which are of
equal Authority with the word of Christ, and must be believed upon pain of
damnation. Of the written word, what he pleases he makes authentic; what he
pleases he cancels; he teaches and interprets all by an infallible unerring
Spirit; He has sealed up the book or Bible which Christ opened to them,
forbidding the people the use of Scriptures; Latin Scriptures, Latin Service,
all must be to them in an unknown tongue; he tells them that ignorance is the
mother of devotion; and to believe as the Church believes is knowledge and
faith enough. Christ has forbidden all kind of pictures and Images in the
Worship of God, Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. Take good heed unto your selves (for ye saw no
manner of similitude in the day the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb) lest ye
corrupt your selves, and make a graven Image, etc. John 4.23. The true
worshippers worship the Father in Spirit and in truth; the Father seeks such
to worship him: No says the Pope, you shall make Images of the Trinity, and
pictures of the Cross, and shall kiss and worship them with the worship of
(...), the same worship ye give God and Christ. You shall make Images of Saints
and Angels, and shall worship them with worship of (...) a religious worship,
though not the highest, you shall pray unto them, and fill all your Churches
with them, for they are Laymens books. Christ has taught us that our own
righteousness is as menstruous rags; upon our best performances we are
unprofitable sevants; that we are justified by faith without the works of the
Law; It Is not so, says the Pope, good Works are meritorious: there is a merit of
congruity in them before conversion, and a merit of condignity in them after
conversion; nay that some men do works of supererogation, more then the Law of
God requires, or is their duty to do, whereby they are not only justified
themselves, but the overplus of their merits helps to justify others. Christ
says, he will have the Sacrament of the Supper administered in both kinds. 1
Cor. 11 23. to 27. I have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, take, eat, this is my body;
after the same manner he took the cup, saying, this cup is the new Testament in
my blood; this do ye as oftenas ye eat this bread and drink this cup, etc. This
St. Paul received of Jesus Christ, delivered it in charge to all and every of
the Churches of Corinth, both what and how they were to receive: It shall not
be so says the Pope: the Priest shall receive in both kinds: the People shall
have nothing but the bread. Christ teaches that marriage is honorable in all,
and the bed undefiled. Heb. 13. No says the Pope, it is not honorable in the
Clergy (so they call them) it is not lawful for a Priest to marry. Christ says,
Let no man judge you in respect of meats, or drinks, or an holy day Col. 2. You
are now freed from the observation of days and meats; every creature of God is
good if it be received with thanksgiving; No says the Pope, ye shall observe
Saints days; and for meats, touch not, taste not any flesh on such and such
days and weeks of Lent. But to what end should I thus go on? I profess I can
hardly name one Doctrine of Jesus Christ, but the Popes of Rome have thwarted
it, either directly or indirectly, and quite subverted it. The Pope may see
himself in those old Heretics, the Antitactae, as in a glass, who held it
religion to contradict the Laws of their Maker, and instead of Gods Laws,
brought in their own inventions and fooleries. Take it thus. He on whom such a
mystery of iniquity is found as to pretend to be wholly for Christ, and yet in
every thing crosses and opposes Christ, he is the man of sin, the true and
great Antichrist; but upon the Pope is this mystery of iniquity found, to
pretend to be wholly for Christ, and yet in every thing he crosses and opposes
Christ; therefore the Pope is the man of sin, the true and great Antichrist.

Fourthly, Saint John Rev. 13. having described the Roman State under six of
its heads or Governments, ver. 11. he brings forth the last head viz.
Antichrist (that beast) by himself: of him he says [He had two horns like a
Lamb, spoke like a Dragon, and exercised the power of the first beafi that was
before him.] How this Description agrees to the Pope, you shall see. 1. He has
two horns like a Lamb; two horns in his Miter, two Keys in his hand, a twofold
Power, Sacred and Secular, Spiritual and Temporal, as being both King and
Priest of the Church. Boniface the eighth in the year one thousand three
hundred, who instituted the first Iubile, came out one day in his Pontifical
habit; the next day in his Robes imperial having two swords carried before him,
he caused the Herald to cry, Ecce duo glady, behold two Swords; he might as
well have caused him to have cried, Ecce duo cornua Antichristi, behold the two
horns of Antichrist. Secondly, as like a Lamb as he looks, yet he has the
Dragons tongue in his mouth, he speaks like a Dragon i. e. like a raging Devil,
swelling words of great terror, Rev. 13.5. There was given unto him a mouth
speaking great things and blasphemies. He. speaks on this wise, whosoever will
not worship the beast and his Image, and receive his mark in their hand or
forehead, they shall not buy nor sell, they shall be killed; he will shut
heaven against them, and pass sentence of Damnation upon them, they shall go to
Hell. That furious Dragon, the Devil, speaks nothing but terror to Saints; has
the Pope a good word for any that do truly fear God? He calls them Heretics,
he thunders out his Bulls and Excommunications against them; he speaks nothing
but Inquisitions, Blood, Death, Hell unto them. Truly the Pope speaks as like
the Dragon, as if he had been spate out of his mouth. John 12. ult. Our Savior
says of himself, Whatsoever I speak, even as the Father said unto me so I
speak: the Pope may take up the words thus, Whatsoever I speak, even as the
Dragon said unto me so I speak. Thirdly, He exercises all the Power of the
first beast that was before him. Look what Power was in the hands of any or all
the Roman Governors, Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators, Emperors,
the Pope has got it all to himself, and hereupon is called the Image of the
first Beast. He has brought Kingdoms and People under him as the former did;
Rules over them with as much Pride and Tyranny as the former did; has
suppressed the preaching of the Gospel as much as ever they did; is as great a
hater, persecutor, shedder of the blood of Saints as ever any or all of them
were; Lives in as great sensuality, pompous glory, as any did that were before
him. So then, He who has two horns like a Lamb speaks like the Dragon, and
exercises the Power of the first beast, he is the great Antichrist: but the
Pope has two horns like a Lamb, speaks like the Dragon, and exercises the
Power of the first beast; therefore the Pope is the great Antichrist.

Fifthly, Antichrist shall comfirm his Doctrine, Laws, Kingdom, by Miracles,
Rev. 13.13, 14. He does great Wonders, so that he makes fire come down from
heaven on the Earth in the sight of men; And deceives all them that dwell upon
the earth by means of the Miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the
beast, etc. This none in the World attempts to do beside the Pope. Heb. 2.3, 4.
Christ did sufficiently confirm that Doctrine, Gospel, Kingdom he set up, by
Signs, Wonders, and diverse Miracles so that Austin long since said, If any man
looked for Miracles, he himself was a Miracle. And therefore it is evident, the
Pope has another Doctrine, Gospel, Kingdom to establish and advance in the
World; that to persuade men to receive and submit to, he must be put to the
working of new Miracles; Miracles are so in esteem with them, that they are
made a mark of the true Church; and ours is a false Church, because we can work
no Miracles, whereas indeed our Savior makes them a note of false Christ's, and
false Prophets, Mark 13.22. False Christ's and false Prophets shall rise, and
show signs and wonders to seduce, if it were possible, even the Elect; The Pope
has come as near seducing the Elect as any man did that ever lived. And Saint
John here makes them a mark of Antichrist and his Church, so also does Paul, 2
These. 2.8, 9. Then shall that wicked be revealed; even he whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all Power and signs, and lying wonders. In Gregory
the great his time, when Antichrist was near to be revealed, Miracles of all
sorts began to be multiplied; there were apparitions for confirmation of
purgatory, praying to Saints, praying for the dead. I have read many stories of
their Miracles, which here I will not trouble you with; they will serve well for
winter-tales; Only this one word, it is said of Pope Hildebrand (called Gregory
the seventh) that he would as often as he pleased, shake fire out of his Gown
sleeves, to the great terror and astonishment of the People. Their own
Historians tell us, that above twenty of their Popes have been abominable
Nigromancers, who by their sorceries and divelish wonders have deceived the
World, so gaining credit to their way. But it may be some will ask me, what
shall we think of the many and great Miracles that are amongst them? I Will tell
you, Those Miracles Papists say they now do, are done with the Antipodes, in
the furthest parts of the world; for my part, I am resolved I will not go to
disprove them; I believe the most of them are mere fained lies: or else they
are but mira, not miracula, as applying activa passivis may produce very
wonderful effects: sometimes the senses of men are bemisted add deceived as
Pharoahs Magicians did their Spectators: Many times the fancy is deluded, they
persuade some People they are possessed, and then persuade them they are
dispossessed: but they do it by Holy Water, Crosses, Exorcisme, not by the
Power of the word as Christ did; and Christ did cast out devils by daylight,
before many witnesses, yea his very Enemies; but Priests cast them out closely
in their chambers, in the night, and will have no spectators but such as are
their sworn friends. Our Savior did other Miracles, He gave legs to the lame,
eyes to the blind, he raised the dead to life, but these can do nothing but
only this about devils; therefore I am assured there is some gross delusion or
other in it. But well, gloria Miraculorum is their badge; and it is most evident,
if Saint John may be believed, it is a mark of Antichrist and his Church: Take it
thus. He that since the Apostles and first primitive-Christian times will
confirm his Doctrine, and set up his Kingdom by Miracles, is the great
Antichrist: But the Pope (and none in the World else) since those times,
confirms his Doctrines, and sets up his Kingdom by Miracles; therefore the Pope
is the great Antichrist.

Sitxhly, Antichrist shall challenge to himself a Power over all Nations and
Churches upon the face of the Earth, in reference to Christ, as being his
Vicegerent, Rev. 13.7. Power was given him over all Kinreds, Tongues, and
Nations, ver. 16.17. He causes all, both great and small, rich and poor, bond
and free, to receive his mark, and that no man might buy or sell, save he that
had the mark, etc. This Power the Pope assumes to himself, and has had it; for
no man in the World lays claim to it but he; though the great Turk lays claim
to all, yet not in reference to Christ, as his Deputy; but the Pope does. It is
Antichristian to challenge Power over the faith and conscience of one man or
Church; it is more Antichristian to challenge Power over many Churches, as
Bishops do; it is a further degree of Antichristianism to claim a Power over
whole Provinces, as Archbishops do; it is yet more, to Lord it over the faith of
many Provinces and Kingdoms, as Patriarks do; but to challenge such Sovereignty
over all the Churches in the world as the Pope does that's the great Antichrist
of Antichristianism. And (as one wittily says) lest he should wrong himself by
too modest a claim (for you must know he is a modest soul) he does not only
challenge a Power over all this world, but in Heaven and Hell also where ever
Christ has power, yea and even in Purgatory too, where Christ has no Power.
Mr. Fox in his book of Martyrs records Pope Leo the tenth his Bull against
Luther, where he charges all Patriarks, Metropolitans, Primates, Archbishops,
Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical Orders downwards, even to the begging
Friars: and then all Kings, Electors of the Empire, Princes, Dukes, and so on,
and at last all men throughout the universal World upon pain of the great
excommunication, that they do not embrace Luthers Doctrine, adhere to, or favor
his person. Judge you now, if this Language be not the very same with that of
the great Antichrist, Rev. 13. And let me tell you, the Popes of Rome have
exercised this supremacy for many hundred years. Before I close this in hand;
let me in a word answer a quaere or two the Church of Rome are still putting to
us: Where was your Doctrine, and where was your Church before Luther? Why, as
for our Doctrine, my Answer's thus, It was where theirs never was, in the
Scriptures. And as for our Church, where that was, my Answer runs thus. I. Our
Protestant-Divines have abundantly cleared it to them, that in all Ages there
were some (they have named the men, and the junctures of time in which they
lived) that opposed Pope and Popery. Secondly, if we had none before Luther,
how came they to have so much work for their Inquisitions before Luther, for
their Armies against the Albigenses and Waldenses five hundred years ago? and
how came Thomas Arundel Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and his fellow Bishops in
the reign of Henry the fourth and Henry the fifth of England, to condemn and
execute so many of the followers of Wickliff; and amongst the rest, that
gallant and famous Saint, Sir John Old-Castle. It Is strange there were none of
our Church before Luther, when there were (its well enough known) so many in
every Kingdom apprehended and executed for opposing the Pope, for denying and
rejecting popish Doctrine and worship. Surely all they may very well be
reckoned of our Religion; for they would die before-they would be of theirs.
Thirdly If by this they mean, where was your Church visible, it is a Nonsense
quaere; for Rev. 11.2. the holy City (meaning the visible Church of Christ)
shall they tread under foot forty two Months i. e. all the time of Antichrist;
and Rev. 13. He had Power given him over all People. Nations, and Languages,
and all the World wondered after the beast. It Was an impossibility and
inconsistent with Gods eternal counsel and decree, that we should have a
visible Church during the [height] of Antichrists reign. It is enough for us
that there have been two witnesses in every age Prophesying in sackloth against
him, some few haters and opposers of him, (very closely and secretly; you might
hear of two or three Heretics in a Kingdom or in a County; but perhaps you
should not know, many times, where to find one of them, the Beast had so got
all the World under his paws) Take it in this Syllogism. He that usurps
Authority over the faith and conscience of all the Kingdoms and Churches in the
World, he is the great Antichrist; but this the Pope has done, and does do at
this day (at least presumptively and intentionally; he will tell you, it is his
right,) therefore the Pope is the great Antichrist.

Seventhly, The Holy Ghost has (upon the matter) named him to us. Rev. 13. and
last verse, Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of
the beast; for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred
threescore and six. As if the spirit of God had said, it is not over difficult
to find out his name, seeing it is the number of a man, a number that a man may
find out or reckon: Then he commends the finding of it out for a special piece
of wisdom and understanding, that so every one might be encouraged to set
himself to work, it being natural unto men to desire to be accounted wise. In
the Hebrew (...) Romagnosh Romanus, a Roman, the numeral letters make up six
hundred sixty six. In the Greek (...)(the man that uses the Latin tongue so
much.) the numeral letters make up six hundred sixty six. You know no
expression pleases but this, ecclesia catholica [Romana,] and the Latin
Tongue, Latin Bible, Latin Service, all must be in Latin; out of this number
(says Saint John in effect) find out his name that is so much for the Latin.
In the Latin tongue, this [Generalis dei Vicarus in terris] makes up six
hundred sixty six. And to give him not only the name he desires, but the name
he deserves, In our English [The Pope by superiority is the devils Leiftenant]
the numeral letters hereof make up six hundred sixty six. This number may be
found in such names and terms as do rightly set him out in diverse Langaages.
But the Jesuits object, that this number may be found in many other names: We
shall easily grant it may, without weakening what has been delivered: for they
can bring no other name to whom all the other properties of Antichrist do
agree. The Holy Ghost does not send us here barely to find out a name, but such
a name out of them as will grasp in all the other descriptions of Antichrist,
such a name as suits to all that is said of him in the Rev. or elsewhere; such
a name as will hold forth [the man that succeeds the Emperors in the Government
of the Roman State, or that is the seventh head of Daniels fourth beast; that
sits in the temple of God, as the great Church man, Lording it over the Faith
and Consciences of all men in the world; and (in ordine ad spiritualia)
subjecteth all civil rule and Authority to himself; that highly pretends to be
for Christ, and yet in every thing crosses and contradicts Christ; That
looks like a Lamb, speaks like a Dragon, and exercises the Power of the first
beast, viz. King, Consuls, etc.] When we put them to find a name out of this
number, that points out a man to whom all these particulars do agree, they are
at a stand, they cannot give us one, though their Kingdom, and their All lie
upon it. Wherefore I conclude; That that name whereto all the descriptions of
Antichrist do agree, is that Saint John bids us here seek after, and is the
name of the great Antichrist; but the names before given (pointing out the
Pope) are such, as in every one of them all the descriptions of Antichrist do
meet and concentrate; therefore this is the name; and consequently the Pope is
the [man of sin,] the [great Antichrist.] Thus you have a sevenfold-scripturall
demonstration of the point. It Is good to make sure-work, when we have to do
with so unruly a beast.

But why did not the Holy Ghost speak expressly who it was? might not he as
easily have said, the [Popes of Rome] are [the man of sin,] the great
Antichrist, as expressed it thus darkly, and left it so liable to doubt and
controversy?

I answer, It Is not for us to teach God how he shall speak, but duty, when he
has spoken, to set our selves, with reverence, to spell out his mind; I might
put you off with this. But yet think, I may with safety venture to give you
some reasons, why God carried it on thus, in the clouds and in the dark. I.
'Twas out of a tender respect he had to his People, the prevention of their
utter ruin; for had he said, that the Bishops of Rome, and consequently
Christians, should be Lords of Rome, yea make Kings and Emperors bow before
them, nay be Masters of the World; this (inhumane conjecture) would have armed
the Heathen Emperors (as one man) against the Christians; and Christians talked
so much of a Kingdom, that they had some thoughts and jealousies in their heads
and hearts of them already; therefore certainly if Saint John had spoke out,
their jealousies had kindled into a flame against them, that they would have
set themselves to have destroyed the name of [Christian] from of the Earth,
which was this way prevented. Secondly God would show himself to be the God of
secrets, and depths of wisdom above weak shallow man. This book of the
[Revelation] has brought many great and learned men to let fall their plumes,
the high thoughts of their own wisdoms and sufficiencies, has set them a
studying, has exercised their best Intellectuals, brought them upon their
knees to God in prayer, that he would be pleased to give them a Revelation of
the Revelation; the things he has opened in this book, that he would open them
more, and give them his own key; for none else can unlock the Cabinet. How has
it set men of admiring, that if there be such hardness, such depths in Gods
[Revelations,] what unsearchable secrets and depths of Mysteries are there in
the heart and bosom of God himself infinitely above the reach of the
understanding of all Men and Angels? God loves to lay vain proud men low; he
loves to bring them to the knowledge of themselves; and it is a great mercy to us
that he does so. Thirdly, God sent Antichrist as the greatest judgment on men
that ever was in the World. Rev. 6.2. God there sends forth Christ in his
Apostles, Evangelists, and others riding swiftly on the white horse of the
Gospel, and you know how quickly they rid clean through the world, ( Psalm.
19.34. with Romans 10.18.) but the world did generally despise the Gospel of
Salvation offered to them. In the following verses of that chapter God sends
out The red horse of War, The black horse of Famine, The pale horse of
Pestilence: and his name that sat upon him was Death, and Hell followed him,
verse the twelfth, There comes a great Earthquake, which (upon the same
account) shakes down all the heathen Gods and Monarchies, brings Constantine
the great into the Throne, sets up Christianity in the World, and now (Regis ad
Exemplum) every one turns Christian; but yet the mere formality of name and
notion served their turn, the generality of men received the Christian faith,
but not in the love of it; they held the truth of God in unrighteousness; and
this (doubtless) angered God more then the Heathens open contempt of the
Gospel; whereupon God set himself to bring forth some greater judgments on the
Christian world then he had on the Heathenish, when first he had secured his
own By sealing the servants of God in the forehead Chap. 7. In the eighth
Chapter the Trumpets sound, whereby all Expositors agree, haereses and
corruptelas verae Doctrinaepraesignificari; In the four first, chiefly,
Heresies and Corruptions of sound Doctrine are presignified, (Temporal miseries
not excluded) but it is something hard, I find, to assign the right heresy, and
who was the broacher, to every Trumpet. Chap. 9.1, 2. Tht fifth Angel sounded,
and I saw a star fall from heaven, and to him was given the key of the
bottomless pit; And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose smoke out of
the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun, and the air were darkened
by reason of the smoke of the pit. Here Hell breaks loose upon them; and now,
in the Popes of Rome, or the great Antichrist, was wrath come upon the
Christian World to the uttermost; there were all Judgments in this one, 2
These. 2.8. to 13. Then shall that wicked be revealed, whose coming is after
the manner of Satan, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
Perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
sved; for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie, that they [all might be damned,] etc. Now if God had named the
Person, and time of Antichrists coming, there are such fearful things spoken of
him, that all the World would have set against him, and so God had crossed the
decree of Divine Justice: but being expressed thus darkly, the Pope has been
able to corrupt and deceive all the Nations of the Earth, whereby the
determined wrath is come upon the souls and bodies of Hypocritical and ungodly
Christians. This kind of revealing of him was most suitable and serviceable to
the great design God had upon the base, rotten Christian World. Fourthly, The
revelation of him in this Book and elsewhere, is sufficiently clear to all the
Elect who have set themselves to find out Antichrist. As it fared with the Jews
concerning Christ, Romans 11.7. so also with the Gentilish Churches concerning
Antichrist; The election have obtained knowledge of him when the rest are
blinded, by their own wilfulness, by their self interest; and God holds their
eyes, (in a just judgment) that they shall not see and know him. Dan. 12.10.
None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand; If the
sense of the Context be rightly drawn down, it speaks to this present business
concerning Antichrist, and bringing in the Kingdom of our Lord; the men of the
world will be blinded to the last, but the spiritually wise do discern and
judge of all things. Rev. 15. ult. The Temple was filled with smoke from the
glory of God and from his Power; and no man was able to enter into the Temple
till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. This verse will bear
a double Interpretation; one of them is this; the Temple or Church of Christ
(gained out of the hands of Antichrist) has the glorious presence and Power of
God abiding in it; for the smoke that filld the Tabernacle and Temple upon
their dedications, had that signification, whereto the Holy Ghost here alludes:
God has been powerfully and gloriously present amongst his Saints since the
Vials began to be poured out. The other, (which I aim at) is This, the Temple
or Church of Christ to the eye of the Antichristian Party, (as a powerful and
just judgment of God upon them) is full of the smoke of Apostacy, smoke of
Errors, Heresies, the smoke of Schism, the smoke of Treason, the smoke of
Rebellions: the Church of Rome and Popish Faction can see nothing of
Righteousness, Equity, Honesty, in any or all those ways the Saints take
against them; their Assemblies and Councels, their Doctrines and doings are the
darkness and grievance of smoke unto them, and will be so yet a while; for none
of them (says the text) can come into the Temple; To be true members of the
Church of Christ, to own the Assemblies of the Saints in their worship and
ways, till the seven plagues of the seven Angels be fulfilled: I say till then
(such a smoke is in their eyes) they will not be able to get any clear vision
of things, though there be the light of noon day to guide us in our work and
way. The whore has laid Kings, mighty men, Merchants, and all them (both
great and small) that dwell upon the Earth, (except two poor witnesses,
dead-drunk with the wine of the spiritual fornication. Rev. 14. Those who are
drunk with Heresies, Errors, their own Inventions, and Opinions, can have no
right understanding or discerning spirit in them, neither of themselves nor of
the great Antichrist, nor of the true Church, nor of God in Christ; God in his
works or worship; they know no body, they know nothing, but what their drunken
fancy and strong delusions suggest to them. Popery is a mystery, 2 These. 2.
Rev. 17. and do you wonder if Papists and carnal impenitent People, do not, or
cannot understand mysteries? See but one text more, Hos. 14.9. Who is wise, and
he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the
ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them; but the
transgressors shall fall therein. This Scripture can hold truer in nothing then
in this business between Christ and Antichrist; wicked men are blinded in it;
they stumble at it and fall, but the Saints of God being wise and prudent, they
discern, they know, and go on in the right ways of the Lord. I am persuaded
there is no man in the World that has the Spirit of Jesus Christ in him, that
is a Saint indeed, but if he set himself to study this point, which Humility,
Diligence, Faith, and Prayer, he shall be led into the very City of Rome, and
there comparing predictions with the Popes actions, (for Paul had no other way
mightily to convince the Jews, that that same Jesus who was born of Mary,
suffered so ignominously under Pontius Pilate, was the very Christ, but by
laying his birth in the circumstances of it, his manner of Life, Doctrine,
Miracles, Death, Resurrection, to the Prophesies that went before of him; and
this did it) I say when he shall have taken a full veiw of things. there,
comparing the Popes carriage with what Daniel, Paul, and the Apostle John have
spoken of him, and see how fully they join and cloze one with another, he shall
be forced to sit down satisfied that the Popes of Rome are the great
Antichrist; and the oftener he reads this Chapter of Paul to the Thessalonians,
and Saint John's Revelation, he shall wonder at the clearness of this truth
shining and breaking in upon him more and more, and marvel that any who ever
read Saint Paul and Saint John, do not see it. Though God has expressed things
darkly in this point, yet clear enough to all the Elect; if the rest be
deceived and perish, he matters it not; it is the Elect he intends, to
Communicate secrets, Mysteries, and do good unto.

But the Bishops of Rome that were once (by common confession) such good men,
some of them even Martyrs for Christ; they were planted (as Jeremiahs
expression is) wholly a right seed; how were they turned into the degenerate
plant of a strange Vine, into the Vine of the Earth? Rev. 14.18. How came they
to so much vileness, as to make up the man of sin, the great Antichrist?

For satisfaction to this; 1. Those of them that were truly good, righteous and
holy persons, doubtless their seed abode in them; so they lived and so they
died; their Righteousness, Holiness, Services, Sufferings went along with them.
Secondly God has not so annexed grace to any Function or Rank of man, not yet
to any one place in the World, but in process of time that Function may fail,
that place basely degenerate. Sure if God had Entailed grace and goodness on
any succession of men, it was Aaron, and those that followed in the Priesthood;
but how it was with them, may be known if you read 1 Samuel 2.12. to the end of
that Chapter. The Holy Ghost spoke nothing bad, but all good of the Angel and
Church of Philadelphia; yet now it is the Synagogue and habitation of Turks and
Devils. But a most ominous Prophetical Warning did Paul give the Church of
Rome, Romans 11.17. to 23. If some of the branches be broken off, and thou being
a wild Olive Tree were graffed in among them, and with them partakest of the
Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree: Boast not against the Branches; if thou
Boast, thou bear not the Root, but the Root thee. Thou will say then, the
Branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in: Well, because of unbelief
they were broken off, and thou stand by faith; be not highminded, but fear;
for if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God; on them that fell
severity, but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou also shall be cut off. Are these Bugbears, windy Bladders? Can
these words possibly import less then that God and Grace were not so made over
to them, but time might produce a change both in Pastors and Church, from good
to bad, from bad to worse; and that if they did not walk humbly, and watch to
the keeping of the Faith, they should certainly be cut off. Thirdly, Together
with Constantines large Endowments and Immunities, there arose abundance of
Idleness, Errors, Images, Superstitions, Pride, Affectation of outward
greatness, especially in the Church of Rome; and thus she forsook her first
Love; and the spirit daily quenching, yea dying, in them, they knew no way to
keep up, but by supporting themselves with a carnal and outward strength.
Socrates, in his seventh book and 11. Chapter, says, Now began an ill name to
stick on the Bishops of Rome, who beyond their priestly bounds, have stepped into
principality. This was in the days of Theodosius the younger, scarce fourscore
years since their low poor condition, which Constantine raised them from. The
next remarkable thing we read of, was this; Philippicus and Leo, with some
other Emperors after them (not without the advice of Pratriarks and a whole
Eastern Council) threw Images out of Churches, as being decreed Idolatrous:
Whereupon the Bishop of Rome seizes the City and Territories about into his own
hands, makes himself Lord thereof, which till then was Governed by a Greek
Magistrate, absolves all Italy of their Tribute and obedience due to the
Emperor, upon this goodly occasion. Then to bear himself out in these pranks,
he takes upon him by Pap^^^ sentence to unthrone Chilpericus, gives the Kingdom
to Pepin, and so made him his fast friend and Champion; for by him he presently
got all Ravenna, and annexed it to the Sea of Rome as lawful prize to Saint
Peter. I must not now stand to tell you, how, throughout the fifth and sixth
hundred years after Christ, diverse of the Bishops of Rome did openly contend
for supremacy, but were suppressed in several Councels, of Carthage, and
Chalcedon. It Was not long after when Phocas murdered his Master, the Emperor
Mauritius, and then (says the Historian) Bonifacius obtinuit a Phoca, ut Romans
Ecclesia esset caput omnium Ecclesiarum. Pope Boniface obtained of Phocas, that
the Church of Rome should be head of all Churches. From that time forward, that
Antichristian Jurisdiction and Supremacy grew still more and more, till it
became an overgrown Monster, even to give Laws to all the Kingdoms and Churches
in the World. Fourthly, It is said Rev. 13.2. The Dragon gave him his Power,
and Seat, and great Authority. The Pope has the Keys of the bottomless pit (
Rev 9) in his hands; the devil freely bestowed them on him, and made him the
great steward of his house; his heart rests securely in him. Fithly, God made
them Antichrist, in that sense which he is said to harden Pharoahs heart: They
not receiving the truth in the Love of it, but holding the truth of God in
unrighteousness; for this cause God gave them up to what you have heard, to
receive in and upon themselves that recompense of their Errors and sinfulness
which was meet. Thus you have the cause of his Rise, and Growth.

But happily, some man will say to me, Is not the Pope Saint Peter's successor?

My Answer's this. That he is the great Antichrist, has been (I think)
sufficiently cleared; then whether he is Saint Peter's Successor, or no, I leave
thee to judge. But for your clearer light in this point, what if Saint Peter
were never Bishop of Rome? as for my part, I verily believe he was not. And
because here is the very foundation of their Papacy, give me leave to speak to
it: not doubting but I shall say enough to convince thee; there is no just
Warrant to make it a point of thy Faith, that Peter was Bishop of Rome.
Whatsoever Bellarmine says concerning Peter's Journals (for he speaks as
punctually as if he had traveled with him from first to last) has no solid
ground to rest the sole of its foot upon at all. He says, in the fifth year of
Christ's passion, Peter was made Bishop of Antioch, and continued in that
Bishopric seven years: Then he went to Rome the second year of Claudius,
ibique sedem fixit ann. 25. there he pitched, and Bishop'd it, five and twenty
years; Et ibidem vitam finivit, there he ended his days.

But that ever Peter was seven years Resident at Antioch, (for that's required
in a fixed Bishop) and twenty five at Rome, or most part of those years in
those places, he brings not one text of Scripture to prove either; you have his
bare word for it; but who will take that for good proof in his own cause, I
wonder. For the former of these, we read concerning the Church of Antioch, who
gathered and constituted it. Act. 11.19.20, 21, 22. ver. 25.26. We find also
who were the chif Prophets and Doctors of it, Act. 13.1. We do not find in all
the Scripture that Peter was at Antioch, but in one place, Gal. 2. and that in
transcursu, he took it only in his way. Is here sufficient ground to conclude
him Bishop of Antioch for seven years together? I have stood the more upon
this, to show you, that if upon such slender grounds they have concluded him
Bishop of Antioch for such a space of time; certainly they will catch at small
things to constitute him Bishop of Rome; whereby their own turn is so much
served: Search all the New Testament from one end of it to another, and where
ever you find Rome named, if you find mention of Peter's being there twenty five
years, or ten years, or one year, or one day, then let me pass for a liar. Yea
says Bellarmine, it is evident he was at Rome, Ex eo quod fuit in Babylone, in
that he was at Babylon. 1 Pet. 5.13. [the Church which is at Babylon salutes
you.] Roma autem in Apocalypsi passim vocatur Babylon, Rome in the Revelation
is still called Babylon; his very words.

1. Let God have the glory of his own truth out of his Enemies mouths. Rev.
17.4, 5. The woman was arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet color, and decked with
Gold, and Precious Stones, and Pearls, having a golden Cup in her hand etc. And
upon her forehead was written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of
Harlots and the abominations of the whole Earth. All this then by Bellarmines
own confession must be understood of Rome; and the great whore or Antichrist is
not to sit at Jerusalem (as he says in another place; liars had need of good
memories) but at Rome. The Holy Ghost tells us, He must reign in Babylon;
Bellarmine interprets, and sais, that is at Rome.

Secondly, Though by [Babylon,] we must always understand Rome in the
Revelation, does in therefore follow that by [Babylon,] we must understand Rome
in all other places of the New Testament? because John in his mystical and
typical visions by [Babylon] points out Rome: must therefore Peter needs in the
bare salutation of an Epistle, by Babylon, mean Rome? is there either Example
or reason of speaking mystically, and by a figure in a mere Salutation? (The
Church that is at Babylan salutes you) conclude who will from this, that
therefore Peter was at Rome; I am loath upon such easy terms to forfeit my
Intellectuals, though a thousand Bellarmines should say it.

But briefly to give you my reasons (beside the Scriptures deep silence in this
point) why it cannot be thought that ever Peter was Bishop of Rome.

First, Peter (we all know) was an a Apostle, and consequently had an unlimited
commission in respect of place, (according to that Mat. 28. Go teach all
Nations) and to be a Bishop also fixed to one place, is not this (diminutio
capitis) to fetch him a hole lower then Christ had set him? are not these
(...), utterly inconsistent? Did Christ make him an Apostle, and dare they
degrade him, and make a fixed Bishop of him? It seems they dare dishonor Peter
(after they have given him a Complement or two) if they can thereby Honor
themselves, and pull down an Apostle to set up a Pope.

Secondly, That Paul was at Ann. Christi 66. Ann. Neronis. 11.

Rome, and that in the reign of Nero, when Peter was fixed Bishop there (as
they say,) tha's evident from Scripture: but in all Paul's occurrences and
transactions, we can nowhere find either expressions or hints concerning
[Peters] being there, much less Bishop there. Of those who first saluted and
congratulated Paul's coming to Rome, see Act. 28.14.15. So from Puteoli we went
toward Rome. And from thence when the Brethren heard of us they came to meet
us as far as Appii forum: Here Is all; surely had it been as the Church of Rome
teaches, Paul would have used more civility toward the prince of the Apostles,
and universal head of the Church, then to have jumbled him in undiscernably
among the [Brethren] Then after three days Paul sends for the chief of the Jews
ver. 17. to clear his innocence and honesty in coming thither; yet no mention
of Peter, unless they can find him in that expression [Men and brethren.] It is
said ver. 30. Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received
all that came in unto him: but we read not that Peter ever gave him visit at
his own house or elsewhere. During the time of Paul's abode at Rome (how long
it was in all we are not certain,) he wrote diverse Epistles, but in none of them
does he speak ought of Peter's being there, but seems rather to hint the
contraty, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all
men forsook me; I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.
Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, that by me the preaching might be
[fully] known, and that all the Gentiles might hear; and I was delivered out of
the mouth of the Lion. It Is strange, did Courageous Peter desert him? but
suppose him not to be at [that time] at Rome; had he with all his faithfulness
and pains no better learned them Christ and Christian carriage, then to forsake
one another in suffering times? nay to leave an Apostle in his trial to the
merciless paws and teeth of a Lion: But it is more probable, Peter had never
taken pains with them at all, from the following words, [that by me the
preaching might be fully known,] there having been nothing of Christ and his
ways known but what the brethren who were there occasionally, set on foot.
Paul made the Gospel [fully] known to them; he revealed the whole Counsel of
God to the Jews at Rome, and in the ears of all the Gentiles also. Had Peter
been fixed Bishop there, surely Paul could not have carried this honor from
him. Peter long before this would have, [fully] preached the Gospel of the
Kingdom to all, both Jews and Gentiles; the work had not been to do when Paul
came. Col. 4.7. to 13. He there reckons up a few names, whereof Peter is none;
These (says he) are of the Circumcision, and these [onely] are my
fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, which have been a comfort to me. From
Paul's first arrival there, to the time of writing this Epistle, Peter could not
be at Rome; if he had, of a certainty he had made these lines false; for he
could not but have been a chief fellow-worker with and comforter of Paul.
Whence an argument may be drawn from the less to the greater (which is more
then argumentum ab authoritate negative,) that if Paul mention inferior
persons, those whose welfare and respects it was of less concernment to speak of
at present; then much more would he have mentioned Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, him to whose care and charge they were all chiefly committed (being
made universal head of the Church) had he been there at any of those times that
Paul writ either to, or from Rome; But he does not once name him, neither in
that Epistle he wrote to the Saints at Rome, nor yet in these he afterward
wrote from Rome to other Churches; therefore surely Peter was far from being
fixed Bishop there. And let me tell you, this has more Authority and
prevalency to determine my faith in the Point, then all that Papias, a
suppositious Clemens, and Higisippus, the first Authors of Peter's Episcopacy
there, have; men (it is well known) much given to unwritten traditions, deceiving
and being deceived thereby (as the Apostle speaks,) which is manifest from that
discord and contradiction in those authors who do assert this, not only to the
Scriptures, but among themselves.

Thirdly, For Peter to have been fixed Bishop of Rome, contradicts the voice or
conclusion of Divine providence in the eminent success of his Ministry. Gal 27,
8. The Gospel of uncircumcision was committed to me (says Paul,) the Gospel of
circumcision unto Peter: For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the
Apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the
Gentiles. And when it was evident to them all, that God would work effectually
and mightily with Peter's ministration for the good of the Circumcision or
People of the Jews: is it likely that Peter would or durst so thwart the spirit
and mind of God, as to fix his seat among the Gentile? were they not bound to
lay forth themselves best for the advantage of the Gospel? yes doubtless; and
therefore you may find them giving one another their hands and solemn
Engagements that Paul and Barnabas should be preachers to the Gentiles:
hereupon says Paul Act. 19.21. After I have been at Jerusalem, I must also see
Rome: and God confirmed this conclusion of their, Act. 23.11. The Lord stood by
him, and said, be of good cheer, Paul; for as thou have testified of me in
Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome: And at Rome you find him,
Act. 28. I profess, had they taken the Rise of their succession from Paul, they
had puzzled us more then now they have; for Paul was at Rome; and the Spirit
speaks expressly, That he was not behind the very chief of the Apostles, spoke
with more tongues then they all, the care of all the Churches lay upon him: I
say, had they made themselves a Church, and claimed Supremacy from Paul, they
had put us more to it: but God has befooled them in their Counsels; they lay
claim to all from Peter's fixed Episcopacie there, contrary to the mind and
spirit of God in that eminent success Peter still had in laying forth Christ to
the Jews; as also contrary to that solemn and well-grounded Covenant among
themselves, that he together with James and John should be minister of the
Jews. Oh says Bellarmine, it is meant principaliter Judeorum chiefly of the Jews.
It Is very true, but I would it had been considered by him, that at this very
time Peter, (supposing him twenty five years Bishop of Rome) had already spent
some years of his fixed Episcopacy, and presently after this Engagement was to
return to his seat and office, and there spend out his days: how could such an
Engagement stand with wisdom or honesty of Spirit? his in accepting, theirs in
putting it upon him? Therefore what an errant dissembler and Covenant-breaker
do they make their first Bishop and head of their Church? But for my part, I
verily believe Peter did take the Engagement with much wisdom and honesty of
Conscience; it so nearly concerned the greater Growth and Advantage of the
Church, that he did lay forth his ministration (though now and then as
occasions were started to the Gentiles) principally, and for most part, to the
Jews. And indeed consider

Fourthly, how Scripture looks with a full face toward this, to make it good.
Gal. 1.18. Then after three years (meaning of Paul's conversion) I went up to
Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. Paul found him there
and left him there, and this was Anno Christi thirty seven. Eight years after
this he was at Jerusalem; for Herod had him in Prison. Act. 12. and this was
the forty fifth year of Christ, and third year of Claudius. Six years from that
he was at Jerusalem; for Paul writes Gal. 2.11. then fourteen years after,
(that is, from the third year of Paul's conversion mentioned Gal. 1.) I went up
again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me also. Where he found
Peter, ver 7.8 9. and this was in the year of Christ fifty one; At which time,
the learned say, that council spoken of Act. 15. was held viz. in the
eighteenth year of Christ's passion: but if that famous council was after the
time that Paul came up by Revelation Gal. 2.2. it still makes more against
them; for Peter was at the council. Act. 15.7. From the council he did not
return to Rome (for thence all the Jews were Banished by Claudius) but
traveled up and down those Countries, teaching the scattered Jews, to whom he
had writ his former Epistle, and in this peregrination he came to Antioch,
where Paul withstood him to his face. Gal. 2.11. In the sixty third year of
Christ and eighth year of Nero, Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, where he
salutes by name all his familiar friends and acquaintance, but not a word of
Bishop Peter: was [he] not one of Paul's dear friends; or was he not there at
that time? No say they, he was gone to visit and confirm the Churches; but are
they sure Paul knew as much, that upon that ground he should forbear to mention
him? but suppose he had known of his absence, it would have stood both with
wisdom and piety to have saluted and sent commendations to him.

For, First, It would have manifested to them all how worthy Peter was of
Remembrance, and very dear to Paul, and provoked new flames of affection on in
their hearts toward their absent Pastor, which Paul was used to do. 1 Thessa.
5.12.13. etc.

Secondly, If this Salutation could not have been conveyed to him by letter
from some of the Church: yet upon Peter's first return to Rome he had doubtless
met with it, which could not but have been a great refreshing to his wearied
spirit. Four years after this Epistle was written, Paul himself came Prisoner
to Rome the sixty sixth years of Christ, and eleventh year of Nero; he lived two
whole years in his own hired house (as I showed before,) and was there some
time more in another way; that is implied; Now Bellarmine tells us, both Paul
and Peter suffered under Nero, the last year of his reign; he reigned in all
but thirteen years, eight months; when his thirteenth year and somewhat more
was expired, it is evident Peter had not been at Rome. A strange fixed Bishop who
is never mentioned in any of the letters either to or from Rome; none that ever
were there could either see or find him there; no nor yet he himself left any
[indubitable] testimony of [his) Episcopacie amongst them. Therefore I am
satisfied that Peter made-good his promise and Engagement, laying forth his
Apostleship principally and generally to the Jews, and at Jerusalem; and so
neither was nor could be a fixed Bishop of Rome at all, much less for twenty
five years together.

But In the next place, suppose (and I do but suppose) it that Peter had been
at Rome yea had lived and died Bishop there, what ground or warrant can they
show which necessarily infers, that he must have a Successor in that
Prerogative and Dignity? There is no Law or Command in all the Book of God for
it; and was there ever any Kingdom or Sovereignty Spiritual or Temporal, (and
this of theirs is both) without Laws made touching the Succession thereof, and
forms of Election? but here is no such thing.

Besides, Peter wrote his second Epistle to the Universal Church [indefinitely,
to them that had obtained like precious faith with him, and the rest of the
Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.1.] I cannot but wonder why he did not then declare to all
the Churches in the world, that the Bishops of Rome were to inherit
Successively, his place and honor of Universal Supremacy; and willed them
after his death, to receive and own the Bishop of Rome still under that Name
and Notion; especially when he had so handsome an opportunity of bringing it
in, 2 Pet. 1.14. [Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even
as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.] Might he not have brought it in very
patly here? But you see he did not; for doubtless there was never any such
thing in his head or heart.

Christ had showed nothing of that.

But further; Suppose we grant a necessity of a Successor in that Dignity and
Office; did it not of right fall to S. John, who was an Apostle, and lived many
years after S. Peter's death? The Apostle whom Jesus so loved.

Certainly if any one could have been found fit and worthy to have been left
Universal head of the Church, 'twas he: but Peter did not at his death confer
it upon him, willing the Church of Rome to signify so mcuh to him, and bring
him to that See: for surely Peter was acquinted with no such office, much less
necessity of such a Succession. Whereunto add but this one word. They
themselves confess an Apostle to have been above any Bishop (it is a truth more
clear then could ever yet be denied;) now, how could Linus if he succeeded
Peter in the place of universal Supremacyship, but be above the Apostle John?
and yet with the same breath they say, an Apostle is above a Bishop. But you
know it is a Mystery of Lying Iniquity, abovo admalum, from the root to the
very fag end of it.

But well: In the last place, the Pope will needs be Successor to an Apostle. I
confess I think he is; but it is to Judas; and my reasons are these following.

1. The Pope continued a great while in the Church undiscerned; a close
Hypocrite, but a real hater of that he did profess to love, as Judas did.

2. He Is a Theif as Judas was, and bears the bag too.

I told you how he first came to possess himself of Rome, and all Italy; and
presently after, of all Ravenna: just as a thief gets a purse on the high way.
Do I need to tell you what vast Treasures of wealth their Sorceries, and
Legerdemain of Pardons, Indulgencies, Purgatory, Canonization, and the like,
have brought them in yearly? they make Merchandise of men's souls; Vendit
Alexander claves, Altaria, Christum; and what is this but mear cheating and
thievery?

Judas (you know) was such a thief and lover of the bag, that he grudged his
Master the Ointment the good woman poured on him; the Pope, it is the grief and
vexation of his heart, that a drop of mercy or comfort falls upon Christ in any
of his Members.

3. He is as perfect at Hail Master, and kissing Christ, and then betraying him
in his Truths, Worship, Saints, Discipline, Kingdom, to be spit on, reviled,
crucified, as ever Judas was.

4. Our Savior calls Judas the son of perdition, Joh. 17.12. which very
expression the Holy Ghost here takes up, and calls him also the Son of
perdition.

It is said, Judas went to his own place, Act. 1. The same is said of the Pope,
Rev. 17.11. He goes into perdition: And Rev. 19.20. The false Prophet was
taken and cast alive into the Lake. The Pope in the pride and baseness of his
heart, makes himself S. Peter's Successor; but God in Wisdom an Justice,
declares him to be Judas Successor; and this (indeed) is the true foundation
upon which the present Rome, or stately Babel of Papacy is built.

Ve. I shall now make some improvement of the point by Application; and first
be informed, That as the Jews have framed a Messiah to themselves: so the
Popish Clergy have framed an Antichrist that God never made mention of; for
the Descriptions they give of him, when applied to the True One, are all of
them most false and frivilous.

1. One of them is this, That the Great Antichrist must be a single individual
person, as the Article oe denotes; therefore the Pope cannot be he; for there
have been many Popes.

Reader, it thou think there is any thing in this, be pleased to take better
information; The Article oe does not enforce any such thing, Mark 2.27. (...)
and not [Man] for the Sabbath. Luke 4.4. It is written, (...) that [Man] does
not live by bread alone. 2 Timothy 3.17. (...) that the [Man] of God may be
perfect. Will any one who is Master of Common Reason, say that the Aricle oe in
these places denotes an individual single Person? Therefore the prefixed
Article cannot enforce it upon us, that Antichrist is one single man.

2. All the Rulers of the four great Monarchies are set out by Daniel, as if
every Kingdom had had but one, Dan, 7.17. These great beasts which are four,
are four Kings, whereas we know there were more in every one of them. The last
Beast or Kingdom had seven heads or Rulers; seven Kings make up the first, and
they are all called one head, and so one.

The Emperors, S. John moulds them all into one, Five are fallen, and [One]
is, speaking of government by Emperors. The seventh head of this fourth Beast,
is the Great Antichrist; and why should he be thought a single person, rather
then any of the other six? As each of the former must be taken Collectively, so
doubtless must this be, unless better reasons be given against it then
Bellarmine, or any other of his way have yet held forth.

3. Jesuits themselves call the whole bulk and succession of Popes, One visible
head of Christ's Church; therefore give us leave to learn of them, and call the
whole bulk and succession of them, that one Antichrist, or one head of the
Antichristian Church, which was arising in S. Paul, and S. John's time, and is
not yet fallen: and tell me what single person can be head of a body of such
continuance.

The second thing they fancy of Antichrist, is, That his Seat must be at
Jerusalem. It Is needless to speak much to this; can any man read the 17. chap.
of Rev. where the Angel tells John, That his Seat is the City built upon seven
Mountains, and that has seven distinct forms of Government; and the great City
which in S. John's time Ruled over the Kings of the earth? Of courtesy tell me,
can any man understand this of Jerusalem? was Jerusalem built upon seven
Mountains? had ever Jerusalem seven heads, or distinct forms of Government? did
Jerusalem in S. John's time reign over the Kings of the earth, or was it not
rather it self in Vassalage.

2. Whereas it is said, It Is the City where our Lord was crucified, Revel. 11.
this will not carry it in their sense.

For first, Let them reconcile this to the former description, which I am
confident they can never do.

2. Antichrists seat is called Jerusalem, Spiritually or Mystically, as it is
also called Sodom and Egypt; Erroneous, Profane, Murtherous Jerusalem, take it
in that state or posture, and Jerusalem was a Type or Shadow of Rome
Antichristian. Antichrists seat is at Jerusalem not Literally, but Mystically.

3. When Christ was crucified, Jerusalem was one of the streets of Rome; for
there you should hear the fear of Caesar swaying all, [If you let this man go,
you are not Caesar's friend.] You should see a Roman Judge, Roman Soldiers, a
Roman Death, and all Canaan within Romes boundary; and so upon the matter,
Christ was Crucified at Rome; therefore Antichrists Seat must be also at Rome.

The Third thing they weakly, or rather wilfully say of him, is this, That his
whole reign is but for three of our years, and a half.

1. But doubtless this must be understood of Angels years, according as Daniels
seventy weeks, and threescore and two weeks are meant of weeks of years; this
is spiritual counting by Gods own direction, Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6. I have
appointed thee each day for a year. 2. Is there any likelihood in reason, that
in the space of three of our years and a half, he should compass all that the
Scripture speaks of him?
First, he must seduce from Christ (by corrupting their judgments) all the
world, except two witnesses, a small number of the Elect; and what time must
this take up, set the shortest for it in reason that you can?

Secondly, He must teach them his own Doctrine and Worship, and make them all
drunk with the wine of his abominable fornications.

Thirdly he must build a great and stately Temple to sit in, and there be
worshipped as God (say they;) but suppose all the materials at hand, it would
spend most, if not all that time before it could be finished; and his sitting
times surely will be but short, considering what his work must be, if his whole
should be but three years and a half.

Fourthly, He must wage war, and fight great battles, bring down mighty Kings
and Kingdoms, and make himself drunk with the blood of all the Saints.

Fifthly, He must have a flourishing reign without any visible or considerable
opposition. Rev. 11.2. The Court which is without the Temple, measure it not;
for it is given to the Gentiles, and the Holy City shall they tread under foot
forty two months. Rev. 13.7. Power was given him over all Kindreds, Tongues,
and Nations. ver. 3. All the World wondered after the Beast and ver 4. Who is
like unto the Beast? Who is able to make war with the Beast?

Tell me now, that likelihood in reason is there that all this should be
effected in three years and a half? Thus you see they who wilfully left God,
have left, yea lost both Religion and common reason, in that which most nearly
concernd them to be quick-sighted in. But I wonder not, if they that are dead
drunk, ravingly talk their own irrational Fancies. Other fond and groundless
descriptions they give of that Antichrist they have framed to themselves; but
these three being fallen, the rest cannot stand. It Is not worth while to
trouble you or my self any further with them, as those who will search after
them cannot but confess; and I judge it better to say enough, then all.

Use. 2. Is the Pope Antichrist? You see then, First, what a sad case they are
in, who of Protestants turn to be Papists; they submit themselves to the Beast,
and stand engaged to fight against Christ, his Kingdom, and their own
Salvation; and what the issue of that will be, you shall hear upon the next
Subject, and they shall feel hereafter.

Secondly, You may hence gather what it is to be an able, a learned Papist;
this; a grown strong man armed, a Goliath, defieing God, the Israel of God, and
the Gospel of God with all its grace and hopes. We use to say of Jesuits, quo
meliores, eo deteriores, the better they are, the worse they are; it holds true
of all Papists whatsoever.

Thirdly, the Pope being Antichrist, you may easily know what all Popish
Ordinances are, their Doctrines, Auricular confessions, Pennances, Holy water,
Crucifixes, Beads, Extreme Unctions, Altars, Bloodless Sacrifices, Merits,
Satisfactions, Images, the Worship of Saints and Angels with Invocation of
them; Indulgences, Pilgrimages, Burying in a Franciscans-hood, Purgatory,
Canonization; all this will all other appurtenances of their Religion, are all
Antichristianism; the Holy-Ghosts expression of them, is, They are the blood of
a dead man. Rev. 16.3. No bettter then the polluting, Choking, Killing blood
of a dead man: therefore take heed and beware of their Religion; hate it with a
right perfect hatred, even all those forms of worship, Formalities, Ceremonies,
any thing, every thing that is a kinn to it, as you would hate, when you are
athirst, drinking blood.

Fourthly, You may hence also learn what healing balm for a wounded Conscience,
what true comfort for him that is weary, and burdened heavily with his sin, the
Church of Rome and their Religion can afford; Alas what balm, what
heart-consolations can Antichrist, Antichristianism hold forth? They themselves
are so far convinced of this, that they have made it a Doctrine and point of
Faith, that to talk of assurance of Salvation is presumption; only Apostles
and extraordinary Christians have attained to assurance; but it is presumption
and boldness for the People to think of it; to believe as the Church believes
is enough. Cold comfort, this, the Lord knows, for an enlightened and wounded
Conscience at the hour of Death, to have nothing to take off the guilt of sin,
to break the power of lust, to appease an angry God, and deliver the poor soul
out of the jaws of Death and Hell, but a few Beads and Crucifixes, and
Relics, and the menstruous rags of creature-righteousness, and performances,
a few empty wishes, and hopes, and believing as the Church believes; how may
all such cry out, as one of them did, O animule, quo vadis? Poor despicable
miserable Soul, whither go thou? Cornel. E. Lapid. in his Comment on the
eleventh of Numbers tells this story of Pius Quintus who Excommunicated Queen
Elizabeth, Cuus essem religiosus, sperabam been de salute animae meae;
Cardinalis factus, extimui; Pontifex creatus, pene despero. When I was in
Religious Orders, I hoped well of the Salvation of my soul; being made a
Cardinal, I was sore afraid of it; but since I was created Pope, I even despair.
Rev. 9.5. And to the Locusts was given that they should not kill men, but that
they should torment them five months; and their torment was as the torment of a
Scorpion when it strikes a man. Natural Locusts come in April, and continue
till September, five months; whereto the Spirit of God here alludes, and says,
those mystical Locusts that came out of the smoke, the bottomless pit, should
torment men five months, that is, throughout their whole duration: and their
torment is as the torment of a Scorpion when he strikes a man; Now the sting
of a Scorpoin, is not at first perceived: but when it is, it works after such a
lingering manner that it affords some hopes of life, yet does certainly bring
death in the end. When the poor soul is enlightened, and conscience stird with
appredension of Divine displeasure, Popish Ordinances and Administrations prove
no better then the stings of Scorpions to them; afflicted and vexed they are
with them; yet some faint hopes they have from them; but at last finding
themselves deluded, they vainly wish Death it self, as if that would help them,
ver. 6. They shall desire to die, and Death shall fly from them, leaving them
still to the mercy of Popish racks and torments. Know assuredly that Pope and
Jesuits by any thing that is in their Religion, are not, nor can they be, but
skinners over (at the best,) slight healers of the wounds of Conscience;
miserable Comforters, Physicians of no value: the Lord in mercy keep all his
own out of their hands.

Use. 3. The next Use is exhortatory, that every one of us would admire and
bless the Lord and his goodness, that he has brought us forth in such a
juncture of time, and cast our lot in such a place, that we are not constrained
to receive the mark of the Beast in our hands or in our foreheads. I desire to
bless God every day, that God did not bring me forth in Spain or Italy, but
that I am born an English man, and at such a time when Popery is not the
Religion of the Nation, but the light of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ
shines amongst us, and into us. Troubles I confess we have seen and felt, but
put them all together with their utmost aggravations, (so far as concerns the
outward man,) and they are not worthy to be compared with the exceeding great
happiness we enjoy in our deliverances from the Egyptian darkness and bondage
of popery; especially if you take in the light and comforts of Christ's blood
and Gospel Truths we walk in. What would have become of thee (poor soul) had
thou lived in times wherein the Sea of Ordinances were no better then the blood
of a dead man? The Lord grant every one of us to know our Gospel-happiness and
privileges, to rejoice in the light and work the works of him that sent us
(while we have the light) even comfort and Salvation to our selves, glory to
Christ, advancement to his Kingdom; and all this by receiving the truth in the
love of it, and holding forth the word of life.

Use. 4. Is the Pope Antichrist, and Popery Antichristianism? Why then, let it
not trouble you, when ever, or where ever you see Christ and his Armies (in the
greatness of their strength and fury) marching out against them. The Pope has
long time been Apollyon, a destroyer of others, even of the Church and People
of God; but he himself shall be destroyed, Filius perditionis, the Son of
perdition.

2 These. 2.3. That day shall not come, except there come a falling away first,
and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition.


IN the former Treatise, I held forth the (...), and the (...) also, both the
Rise and full Growth of Antichrist: It remains that I now show you his (...),
the Ebbing or declination of that proud Tide; the many several paces and
degrees whereof, from first to last, do make up his total ruin, and give him
his name [Filius Perditionis] the Son of Perdition. Taking him in his largest
capacity, the Point will be this;

The Pope and his Kingdom are appointed of God to most remarkable destruction.

First, God has foretold and threatened it. Rev. 13.9.10. If any man have an
ear, let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity: He
that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. Here is the
Patience and Faith of the Saints. God has proclaimed it to all who have
spiritual ears to hear, that he has captivity and a killing sword in store for
those who have been such cruel enemies to his People. And he would have all his
Saints act their faith in believing this threat, and their patience in waiting
the full Execution of it.

Secondly, Christ (into whose hands all power in heaven and Earth is committed)
has sworn it; I say, God has not only threatened it, but Christ has sworn
it, Rev. 10.5, 6. The Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth,
lifted up his hand to Heaven: And swear hy him that lives for ever, who
created Heaven, the Earth, and Sea, with all things that are therein, that
there should be time no longer. The Angel of the Covenant, set one foot upon
the Sea, the other upon the Land (Sea and Land, you know, make up the
terrestial Globe) whereby is prefigured his throwing Antichrist out of all, and
taking possession of all the World himself. He lifts up his hand, the ancient
ceremony of an Oath. The thing he swears, is this, That there should be time no
more; not simply, but for the Man of sin to reign, havocking and destroying his
Church. Look upon the structure of the Church of Rome, the power and policy of
its constitution and Government; and who could in reason conceive that Babylon
should ever be destroyed? Says Christ, you have my word for it, you have my
Oath for it, it shall shortly come to pass, that the time of their domination
shall be no more. I will certainly ease you of her; God willing, more
abundantly (as the Apostle speaks Heb. 6.) to show unto the Heirs of promise,
the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: that (by two
immutable things (his Word and Oath) in which it was impossible for God to lie)
we might have strong consolation in the assurance of Romes headlong downfall.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost brings it in as fully performed, as either said or
sworn, in the Gross or Lump, and also in the Particulars of it.

First in the Gross and Lump. Dan. 12.1. At that time shall Michael stand up,
the great Prince which stands for the children of thy People, and [there
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to
that same time;] and at that time thy People shall be delivered. You have a
Parallel to this, Rev. 16.17.18.19. The seventh Angel poured out his vial into
the air, and there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the
Throne, saying, 't is done. And there were Voices, and Thunders, and
Lightnings, and there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great. And the great City was
divided into three parts, and the Cities of the Nations fell, and great Babylon
came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
feirceness of his wrath. Such an Earthquake will God raise under them, such
showers and storms shall God send down upon them (as it is in the last verse of
that Chapter. There fell upon men a great hail out of Heaven, every stone about
the weight of a Talent, that made them curse and blaspheme; for the plague
thereof was exceeding great.) I say such terrible Earthquakes and plaguing
Storms of troubles will befall them as never any Kingdom in the World felt or
heard of. Rev. 14 19, 20. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the Earth and
gathered the Vine of the Earth, (the Church of Christ is a Vine of Heaven, its
root is in Heaven, all its fruitfulness is from Heaven, and for Heaven;
whatsoever constitutes or compleats it, is from God out of Heaven, Ezekiel. 16.8.
to 15. But the Church of Rome is the Vine of the Earth, its origination is of
the Earth, Earthly Head, Earthly Members, Earthly Doctrines, Earthly Worship,
Earthly Discipline; whatever is peculiarly theirs, is of the Earth Earthly.)
The Angel thrust in his Sickle, and gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it
into the great Winepress of the wrath of God; And the Winepress was trodden
without the City, and blood came out of the Winepress, even unto the horses
bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. This speech of
the Holy Ghost is doubtless hyperbolical; the import of it is this [a slaughter
that has dimensions, height and depth, length and breadth in it.] Rev. 18.8.
Her plagues shall come in one day, Death, Mourning, Famine, and she shall be
utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God who judges her. Take one
text more for it, Rev. 10.3, 4. He cried with a loud voice as when a Lion
roareth; and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices. And when
the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write; and I heard
a voice from heaven, saying unto me, seal up those things which the seven
thunders uttered, and write them not. I take it, this Scripture contains as
much terror in it against the Antichristian State, as any in all the book of
God. Most fearful and stupendous things are written against Antichrist; but as
the Church of Rome would not content themselves with written Doctrines, but
would have also their unwritten Doctrines and Traditions to fight against
Christ and his Church withal, for more full execution sake: So God will not
content himself with Judgments upon them that are written in this book (though
they be exceeding many and great) but he has Judgments also that are not
written, for more remarkable execution and ruin of them; even seven
Judgments, every one whereof is clothed with thunder, sealed up and kept
close in Gods armory, to be certainly brought forth in that day, beside all
men's thought and expectation.

Go as far in Imagining the terribleness of their destruction as the line of
your Fancy will be stetched to, and the event or issue will surely exceed
whatever formidable things you have Framed to yourselves; the thunder of a
sevenfold wrath and displeasure from God will come upon them over and above.

Secondly, the Holy-Geost gives you his ruin in the particulars of it.
Antichrist shall be so smitten, ut sentiat se mori, he shall feel himself die,
for more full revenge sake.

And here I must have recourse to the seven Vials, which are called (Rev 15.1.)
the seven last plagues in which is filled up the wrath of God, that is upon the
Romish Antichristian State.

Concerning [Vials,] I know, that several learned men say of them, they are
vessels wide beneath, but of narrow mouths; and so, though they contain much,
yet what they contain falls out guttatim, drop by drop, and soaks deep. It is
very sure, that where a Vial of Gods wrath falls, it peirces deep, and wounds
deadly: But I am more inclined to their judgment, who say they are drinking
vessels: wide-mouthed Vessels. Phialae dicuntur, says Primasius, quia haec
supplicia non occulta futura sunt, sed manifesta omnibus, and Phialae patent;
they are open-mouthd, plain drinking pots; when you turn them up, what is in them
comes forth violently and even all at once, manifest to every eye; hereupon the
Angels command is, (...), not distill out, or drop out, but [pour] out upon
them. And indeed most evident it is, that wherever a vial has fallen, there
has been much [remarkable] wrath upon that part of the Antichristian State.

It fares with us in handling Divinity, as it does with travellors in certain
places of their way, where the follower must set his foot in the very place of
his leader, lest otherwise he step in: he that comes after in handling
somepeices of Divinity, must speak or write, (in some particulars thereof,) the
very words of him that went before; else he is sure to fall into Error, if not
Heresy. I cannot tell what material thing can be added to that holy and
judicious Tract of Mr. Cottons upon the sixteenth Chapter of the Revelations. I
find that whoever have touched upon the Vials since that piece appeared, have
light their candles at his torch. Wherefore I shall give you but hints upon
them, nor scarce stand to clear up the reason of interpretations; for if thou
be a scholar into whose hands these papers of mine are fallen, I persuade my
self thou have read him, (for few Divines and men of learning have not:) but if
it be otherwise with thee, I [purposely] say no more then will be enough to
whet thee an Appetite to get him (the price being but small,) from whom upon
this Subject of the Vials, thou may have Ample and full satisfaction, what
wages God devised for Antichrist from all Eternity, and has been for above
this hundred years a working out against him, and is still vigorously going on
with, not to cease but in his utter Ruin.

The first Vial falls upon the Popes mystical Earth or footstool, (Rev. 16.
ver. 2.) the common sort both of Laics and Clergy.

The Martyrs in the times of Henry the eighth, and Queen Mary, in England and
elsewhere, did discover what a dangerous state (in reference to Eternity,)
Common ordinary Catholics were in, that so living and so dying, it was not
their Beads, nor Almesdeeds, their good Hospitality, nor their ignorant
devotions, and believing as the Church believed, would save them; if they died
in the faith and worship of the Church of Rome, they would prove no better then
damned Reprobates. This was a grievous botch and soar upon most of the People,
to be told, and (in effect) convinced, that they were in a state of deep
damnation; hereupon they strove which should make most haste with Fire and
Faggot to burn those who testified such dangerous things concerning them. But
they made a further discovery of such as were in religious orders, their
Parish Priests, that their lives were very base, giving us themselves to ease,
Idleness, Pride, insatiable Avarice, and serving their own bellies, and so were
fitter to have been swine-heards then Preachers, or to have followed the Plough
then lived in holy Orders. The Martyrs of those times did not at all blush or
fear to tell them all this to their faces; and they themselves being convinced
that what was laid to their charge, was both very base, and yet very true; mend
their lives and manners they would not; keep off this Vial the poor souls thus
fiercely poured out upon them, they could not; whereupon they were filled with
as much vexation and Torment, as if the noisome grievous soars of Egypt had
been upon them from head to foot. This was a plaguing judgment upon
Antichrist, thus to have the Element smitten that did so strongly support him.

The Second Vial [ Rev. 16.3.] is poured out upon the Antichristian Sea. In
this, God came nearer to him then in the former; for the sea is above the land,
as it is the proper place of the fire to be above the air; the place of the air
to be above the water; so it is proper to the water to be above the earth; it is
kept from overflowing all by the power of that word [hitherto shall thy proud
waves go, and no further.] Upon the pouring out of the first vial, finding
themselves in a decaying state, they lay their heads together how to plaster
their soars, and heal themselves of the noysom botches and boyls that had
lately broken out upon them, and were so visible in every ones eye; for which
end the Council of Trent was called, where all the streams of Popish doctrine,
Popish worship and discpiline were brought together, the confluence whereof the
Holy Ghost there calls [Sea.] Upon this there did appear in the Reformed
Churches, men of most eminent Godliness and Learning, who did abundantly
discover this Sea of theirs both by writing, and preaching, to be a sea of
blood, the blood of a dead man, and no better. In the true Gospel Ordinances
there is to be had the living, purging, saving blood of Jesus Christ; but
Popish Trental Ordinances were not such blood; they were a sea of blood of a
dead man; clotted congealed blood; polluting, choking, killing blood; this is
the Best word God affords them; and no marvel, when the death of souls was all
their operation and effect [Every living soul dyed in the sea] All those who
contented themselves to abide and swim in that Popish Sea, that had no other
life but what was begot and nourished in the Romish religion, dyed and perishd
eternally. This Vial turned their religion inside out, and showed it to all the
World in its native colors and baseness; till this time, Every one took it,
that it was the bad Lives of the Common sort of people, and worse Lives of the
Parish Priests that were in all the fault; their Religion in itself good
enough; but now it is made apparent to all that will nor shurt their eyes, that
even the Religion itself is naught, and base and Antichristian all over; And
this was yet a hotter Vial of wrath and torment upon them.

The Third Angel. ( Rev. 16.4, 5, 6, 7.) pourd his Vial upon the rivers and
fountains of waters; that is upon Seminary Priests and Jesuits who compass the
earth to and fro, conveying the salt of Popish Trental doctrines and worship,
to people, nations and languages; [and they became blood] the meaning is, they
had blood given them to drink. Now to give a man blood to drink, is to kill
him. They were executed (by virtue of Queen Elizabeth's Law, enacted with
consent of Parliament, in the year 1581.) as Traitors, hanged, drawn and
quartered. A Book entitled [Justitia Britanniae] was publised in several
Languages, to clear the Christian equity and justice that was in such her
proceedings with them. The United Provinces of the Low Countries, come from
under the Altar of Persecution for Christ and Truth, (1.) being freed from the
fearful Tyrannies of Pope and Spaniard, took at her in the year 1586. and made
a Law to the same effect against them; That if any Priest or Jesuit, whether
Forreigner or Home-born, should come into any of the Provinces, it should be
death to them being apprehended, and so they said [Amen] to the Law and Justice
of Queen Elizabeth; Let it be even so, Lord God; true and righteous are thy
judgments.

For the Pope to have capital punishment executed upon his Emissaries, (the
supporters and advancers of his Kingdom and Glory) could not but be a
tormenting vial of wrath upon him; as clearly speaking what measure he himself
might look for, if he should fall into their hands; even he that had drunk the
blood of others so freely, to have his own heart-blood given him to drink, with
a [Satia te sanguine] take your fill of blood and murder.

The fourth Vial is poured out upon the Sun, Rev. 16.8, 9. Papacy is resembled
by an Antichristian world, where there is earth, sea, rivers, fountains, and a
Sun shining gloriously.

If we take this Mystical and most Illustrious light, according to their
conceits and fancy, then it is the [ Popes Supremacy in Temporals;] Papists
will tell you, The Pope is as far above the greatest Monarch in this world, as
the Sun is above the Moon; and the several glories of the Kings of the earth,
are but lights derived from him; Temporal glory being in the Pope, as light is
in the Sun. But how is the glory of the Popes Supremacy in Temporals everywhere
darkened, and in many Kingdoms quite put out? You do not not now hear in any
of the Popish Nations of his Excommunicating Kings, Deposing Kings, and giving
away their Kingdoms; since Henry the 8. God has exceedingly darkened, almost
quite destroyed that Sun of the [Popes Supreme power in Temporals,] which has
been a scorching Vial of wrath to him and his Clergy, and drawn from them
sufficient blasphemies.

But if you understand the Holy Ghost speaking of things, as indeed they be,
then doubtless it is the house of Austria, or the German Emperor. It is well
known that the Emperors (before the Pope set up his Kingdom of Temporal
greatness) were the Sun and glory of the Political world, they being the sixth
head of the fourth, or Roman Beast, were wounded deadly by the incursions of
Goths and Vandals, Rev. 13.3. But the Pope growing up to his height, vouchsafed
to be their Surgeon; his skill failed him not; for he quickly healed that
deadly wound by setting up an Emperor in France, and after that, translating
the Empire into Germany.

Taking things as they really are, of a certainty this is the earthly Sun that
shines most illustriously in the Popes Antichristian world: It matters not
whether the Pope will own the Emperor as above himself, or no; we know he set
him up instead of the old Emperors, or sixth head, who were (by all men's
confession) the Sun of the Political world, and the Bishops of Rome but Stars,
Revel. 9.

God and Scripture have still made the supreme Magistrate (in Temporals) the
greatest luster and splendour of any State; and therefore with very good reason
may the Emperor be here pitched upon, who has been the greatest Light and
Glory of the Popish world for hundreds of years.

The King of Sweden was the Angel out of the Temple, who poured this Vial upon
the Popish Imperial State, as if scorching flames of fire had light upon them.

And here give me leave to insert a discourse concerning Kings.

I am not ignorant that he who follows truth too near the heels, may chance to
have his brains dashd out; at least may derive a great deal of spite and odium
upon himself, which a politic wise man would not do; but that of Solomon
prevails with me, The uprightness of the upright shall deliver him.

I find upon search, That when Christ is going in good earnest to set up his
Kingdom, in the name and glory of it, there is a great hazard, I may say,
downfall of Kings.

I shall make this good to you from four scriptures.

The first of them is Psalm. 2. ver. 2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves,
and the Rulers take council together against the Lord, and against his Christ.
This Peter says was fulfilled at Christ's apprehension, trial, and death, Act.
4.25, 26, 27. Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Chief Priests, and others, consulted,
and set themselves against him, when he had but given out some hints of his
Kingship. This was that which stirred them up so against him, [Tell us, art
thou the King of the Jews:] And when Pilate was minded to let him go, they
cried out, [He that makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar:] whereupon
Pilate went and passed Sentence upon him.

When there was but some talk that Christ would set up a Kingdom, they
presently band themselves against him, and he dies for it; and so they think
they have broke the Cords of his Government asunder, as it is verse. 3.

In the 4. verse, God laughs at them, being wroth. verse 5. Speaks that which
vexes them, [ Yet (or notwithstanding all their combined powers, and policies
against him) have I set him up King of Sion, verse 6.] And says God, I will
declare the decree, thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, verse 7.
This was fulfilled in his raising him up from death to life, Act. 13.33.

God has passed an Eternal Decree concerning his Son, That when they should
kill and bury him, he would the third day bring him forth out of the womb of
the grave, and own him for his Son, and set him at his own right hand, there to
intercede, and his intercession should not be in vain: [Ask of me (says the
Father to him,) and I will give the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, ver. 8.] As if he had said, I
will set thee in possession of thy inheritance, which shall have the uttermost
parts of the earth for its boundary, (according to that Psalm. 72.8. He shall
have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.)
For God to declare the Decree, is to act it; for Dei discere est facere.

When the time is at hand, he must be thus set in actual possession of all the
Dominion, and Greatness, and Glory that God has promised him; if the Kings of
the earth did set themselves, and the Rulers took council together against him,
when he did but speak somewhat of his Kingly Office: how much more will they do
it then, when they see his throne a building, and his Kingdom a going up to the
no small prejudice of their Interest? Revel. 11.15, 17, 18. When he begins to
put forth, and act his Great Power, and do something toward taking the
Kingdoms of this world into his own hands and reign, then [the Nations are
angry] at him, that is, they act against him in their anger, wherein Kings are
chief, as you may see, Rev. 16.14, 16. But do they carry it? no; and [ thy
wrath is come, Rev. 11.18.] Christ in his wrath fights the battle with them in
(Armageddon) that is, where he gives them a most remarkable overthrow and
destruction, which this 2. Psalm. expresses plainly, Thou shall break them with
a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, v. 9.

Be wise now therefore (O ye Kings) be instructed ye (Judges) of the earth, v.
10. as if he said, look (You) well to your selves; be his servants (without
Complement) and rejoice with trembling when he comes about this work, v. II.
Kiss the Son (with kisses of Reverence, kisses of Obedience) lest he be angry
(and then a little thing will provoke him) and so ye perish in the midway (in
the midway of your plots, enmities, oppositions of him;) for if his wrath be
kindled but a little, blessed are all those (those Kings and Rulers especially)
that have Wisdom and Faith to get interest in him, and be of his side; those
that have not, the fire of his wrath will certainly consume them, ver. 12. The
second Scripture is Isaiah 24. ver. 18.19, 20. Marlorat who professes to have
taken the marrow and substance of his Comment out of Vatablus, Luther,
Musculus, Calvin, Oecolampadius, Pagnin, etc. has these very words upon the
latter end of the eighteenth ver. pertinet autem proprie hic contextus ad
Papistus nostros, Christ in this Prophecy, says he, chiefly intends the Popish
State. Upon a following verse he has these words, 'hoc vaticinium proprie ad
Christi regnum pertinet, this other part of the Prophecy does chiefly respect
the kingdom of Christ; he means his glorious kingdom, expressed in the last
words of the Chapter.

The Popish and Gospel-opposing World is here set out by the [Earth] as it is
also in diverse places of the Revelations, Rev. 14.19. Chap. 16.1. Here is
mention of [heavy transgression] according to Rev. 18.5. Her sins are reached
up to heaven. The transgression is said to be [so heavy] upon it, that the
foundations of the Earth shake, reel to and fro, yea are utterly broken down,
fall, and rise no more; the same you may read Rev. 16 18, 19. and Rev. 18.21.
And it shall come to pass in that day, (that is, in the day of the Earthquake)
that the Lord shall punish the (Host of the high ones) that are on high; Who
are they?

I take the next words to be Exegetical; why the Kings of the Earth upon the
Earth ver. 21. The most of the Kings and high Ones of the Earth will be Engaged
aganst him, enough to make an Host, whom Christ will fall upon and punish (upon
the Earth) with temporal judgment (according as you have heard) when he is
abought to Reign before his (Ancients gloriously) as it is ver: 23. If this
Prophecy have been at all fulfilled, it will doubtless be much more fulfilled
in that day; for Prophesies many times have a gradual fulfilling. -- The third
Scripture is Psalm 110. Sit on my right hand, till I make thy Enemies thy
footstool, ver. 1. Concerning those Enemies, you may get some light out of Luke
19. ver. 14. the Citizens hated him and sent this message after him, We will
not have this man to [Raign] over us, and ver. 27. Those mine [Enemies] which
would not that I should [Reign] over them, etc. The Father speaks of those who
were Enemies to Christ (as a King,) Enemies to his Reigning. When Christ had
cast down heathenish Idols and Government, Rev. 12. in all reason he might have
expected (in Constantine, and following Emperors, and ages) to have set up his
Kingdom; but then upstarts the Pope, that Beast with his ten horns or Kings,
who by their smiting and pushing, keep Christ out of all; Whereat (to speak
after the manner of men) Christ seems to be discontented; but the Father
appeases him with these words, Son, sit you down on my right hand, I will make
all your Enemies your footstool. I will send the rod of thy strength (that is,
the Gospel) out of Sion i. e. from among my Saints and Churches, into all
Nations, and thou shall rule in the midst of the Enemies i. e. the power of thy
Scepter shall prevail amongst them: and it shall not be a forced subjection,
Thy People shall be [willing] in the day of thy Power; (Rev. 11.47.) they shall
then come in to thee wittingly.

But shall they be Saints indeed? says Christ, my heart is set upon such; Yes,
they shall come in to thee in the [beauties of holiness.] But their number will
be but small, as hitherto it has been? Nay, from the womb of the morning thou
have the dew of thy youth; as if he had said, the number of them shall be as
the drops of dew in the summers morning, innumerable. But how shall all this be
effected? Why, the Lord has sworn and will not repent; thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec, ver. 4. the blood and intercession of
thine everlasting Priesthood shall merit and effect it. But Father, where is my
footstool? to this it is answered in the following verses, Thou shall strike
through Kings in the day of thy wrath. ver, 5. Thou shall fill the places with
dead bodies, that is, make great slaughters amongst thy Enemies; and shall
wound the [heads] of many Countries. ver. 6. and shall drink of the brook in
the way, (of the water next at hand, being in the heat of pursuit,) and so
shall lift up thy head: As if the Father had said unto him, thou shall have a
footstool made up of Kings, and the heads of many Countries, and thereby shall
lift up thy head i. e. to a great height of Rule and glory of dominion. I have
thus brought down the sense of these several Scriptures, from verse to verse,
the more clearly to convince that I have quoted them properly for my purpose.
-- The last proof of it shall be undeniably clear, Rev. 16 14 16 with Rev.
19.18.19.20. The Kings of the earth and of the World are gathered to battle
against him, in Armageddon; there cannot be a better gloss or comment on
[Armageddon,] then that Rev. 19. Christ feasteth the fowls of the air with the
flesh of (Kings,) Captains, mighty men takes the (Beast) and false Prophet, and
throws them alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. And does not
the storm beat violently at this day upon all the Kings of Christendom? You
know how Christ has lately trampled upon the Royal glory of this Nation. What
by the Rules of common law and reason may be said for, or against the
Instruments thereof, I shall not stand to dispute; I am no Statesman; but (as a
Divine) I am sure I may say, that God hat sometimes given men Commissions that
all the World knew not of, nor any in the World beside themselves could read or
understand.

Let me clear up this to you (else I do nothing, as to the present state of
things amongst us) Act. 7.23. When Moses was full forty years old, it came into
his heart to visit his Brethren; [It came into his heart,] that is, from God;
God reachd him down a Commission into his heart, that no eye was aware of but
his own. In obedience to this Commission he sets to act. ver. 24. Finding an
Egyptian beating and Israelite, he smote the Egyptian and slew him; supposing,
ver. 25. that his Brethren would have understood that God by his hand would
have delivered Israel. [That God by his hand would have delivered them] not in
the same way he did deliver them; that doubtless was the furthest thing in
Moses thoughts; for you know when God called to him out of the burning bush, and
told him he must go deliver his People Israel, what a quarter had God with him
before he could bring him to it? God is put to work two Miracles to create
belief in him; else it had been soon enough to have wrought them in Egypt
before Pharaoh.

God is put there to answer five Objections; and further is fain to drill him
on with carnal Arguments; Aaron thy brother he is an eloquent man, can speak
well, he will meet thee at Horeb, and when he sees thee he will be glad in his
heart; that's one of them. Fear not, go into Egypt, for all that sought thy life
are dead, there is the other.

Yet still Moses hangs off, till (the text says) the anger of the Lord was
kindled against him: then he yields. Read the third and fourth Chapters of
Exodus and you will see all this. Therefore when Moses supposed his Brethren would
have understood, that God, etc. He nere thought of the way in which he did
deliver them. How then? Why, you know he was called the Son of Pharoahs
Daughter, he was heir apparent to the Crown and Kingdom of Egypt; and upon
Pharoahs decease he himself should have been Pharaoh (as is hinted) Heb.
11.24.25, 26. he was in some pause and dispute with himself, whether he should
use means by Pharoahs Daughter and others, to get his pardon, and so come at
last to the honors, riches, and pleasures of Egypt, or he should fly, adhere
to Christ and a good Conscience, and suffer in this World, as the rest of Gods
People did. It is implied that if he had gone about it, he might have effected
the former; but being acted by a principle of Grace he chose rather to fly and
suffer. Moses supposed, they seeing him thus venturously kill and Egyptian to
revenge a poor Israelites quarrel, would have easily gathered and comforted
themselves in this, that if ever he came to be King, he would soon deliver them
from their slavery and oppressions. This is the true sense of the verse, and
not that any spirit of Prophecy was then upon Moses. Well, in the following
verses you will find by the next days visit and occurrence, that it was known;
then (the text says) Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh; well knowing that as
to men, and Law, he was guilty of murder; for they could not see, nor
understand the Commission by which he acted; men should not have condemned him,
but been better informed by him; God owned and justified him in it, he killed a
Tyrannical oppressor; he had his Commission for what he did, but 'twas an
underhand Commission.

But you will say, this was an extraordinary case, and therefore not to be brought
down to transactions of our times. Whoever thou art that reply this, it is
but thy, I, and my no; and my denying is as good as thy affirming, unless thy
affirmation be backed with a stronger reason then my negation. I have cleared
it, that when it is said, He supposed they would have understood, etc. this was
no spirit of Prophecy upon him.

Beside, had Moses cursed him in the name of the Lord, and he fallen down dead,
or the ground had opened and swallowed him up alive; or had Moses called down
fire from heaven and consumed him, or the like, then indeed it had been an
extraordinary case, an act above nature, yea an act above the power of ordinary
grace; but it was neither so nor so; therefore certainly the case was but
ordinary, and was recorded, and transmitted to aftertimes for instruction.

Will you please to consider the case of Phineas. He finds Zimri and Cozbi
committing uncleanness, and with a javeling kills them both at once. Now what
could, as to men and Law, be said for this man's act? surely nothing that I can
bethink my self of, but much against him. He was Phineas the Son of Eleazer,
the Priest; what had he to do with the civil sword of Justice? but suppose he
had, was he to do Justice in a private way, when Justice might have been
obtained easily in a public way? Had it not been Charity to have caused them
to have been apprehended, their sin laid home to their consciences;
peradventure they might have repented; though their bodies had fallen, yet
their souls might have been saved. Had it not been both wisdom and Piety to
have brought them to public Trial, and public condemnation, and thereupon
all the People to have stoned them, that so others might have seen and feared
and done no more so wickedly?

But Phineas steps out of his place, makes himself Judge, Jury, Witness,
Executioner, all; in a heat, stabs them both through the guts to Hell. How the
Law and men of those times looked upon him in this act, I know not; but this I
know, he had a Commission for what he did, that no man in the World knew of, or
could read beside himself. Numb. 25.10. [And the Lord said unto Moses] for
doutless Moses was at a stand, and knew not what to think or judge of this Act
of his thus Circumstanced; but God instructed him concerning it, that Phineas
in the sparklings of his zeal, had done well, and excellently well, and he
would reward him and his for it, as you may see, ver. 11.12, 13. Behold I give
unto him my Convenant of peace. He shall have it, and his seed after him, even
the Covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because he was zealous for his God.
If you shall say this was extraordinary, I deny it; what extraordinariness can
there be for one man with a Javelin to kill two that lie along before him?

Whether God gave these men that are now in place and power with us [this kind
of Commission] for that eminent and exemplary piece of justice, as I will not
affirm it, so I will not deny it; but this is granted of all, they were the
Instruments in the hand of Divine providence [whose dispensations are always
just and righteous.]

But what might be the reason that Christ has such an eminent and incensed
quarrel at Kings? a Vial of wrath is reserved peculiarly for them.

My answer in general is that which a wise man of this Land once said [Kings of
all men have been most beholding to God, and God has been (of all men) least
beholding to Kings.]

Why do you think did God call the four great Kingdoms of the World, Dan. 7.
four great beasts, but because the Kings and Rulers of each of them, were as so
many wild, raging, untamed beasts, preying upon the poor Peoples estates and
persons at their pleasure, setting up their own wills for a Law; and none of
them so cruel this way as the Roman Monarchy. Dan. 7.7. Behold the fourth Beast
was dreadful, and terrible, and strong exceedingly, and it had great iron
teeth, and it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with its
feet, and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it, and it had
ten horns. These ten horns are ten Europaean Kings, and who ever reckons them
up, I find, brings in the [Kings of Brittain] for one of the horns of this
terrible and fearful Monster.

See yet more of these Europaean Kings, Rev. 17.12, 13, 14. The ten horns which
thou saw are ten Kings. These have one mind and shall give their power and
strength to the Beast; These shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall
overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. To have gone on in
ways of violence and oppression toward any sort of people, had been enough to
have set Christ against them; but when these ten Kings of Europe successively
have one mind for the Beast, give their power and strength to the Beast, to
make war with the Saints and with the Lamb: do you marvel at that which
follows? the Lamb falls particularly and after a special manner upon them, i.
e. upon the European Kings, as being resolved to have this known in the World,
that [he] is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

History tells us, that in the years four and five hundred after Christ, the
Barbarous Nations of Goths and Vandals, broke the western Empire all to pieces,
at which time the Saxons were settled in England, Franches in Gall, the west
Goths in Spain, the East Goths and Longobards in Italy, the Almains in Germany;
these growing into civil States, together with their manners change their
religion, close with the Pope, settle their Governments so as was most suitable,
yea serviceable to his Interest. And the Pope got in upon their Consciences,
and brought them into Oaths and Obligations to defend the Rights and
Privileges of holy Church, that is indeed of Rome Antichristian against the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

And now when the time of Christ's taking the Kingdoms of this World into his
own hands draws dear, the most of these European Kings are yet professedly for
the Pope, in opposition to Jesus Christ, to keep him out.

Do you all know this? and do you ask a reason why Christ pours out wrath upon
the Political fun of every Nation of Europe, why he makes the thrones of Kings
to totter?

But you will say, the Kings of England cast off the Pope long since.

I answer, Henry the eight (it cannot be denied) did cast off his Supremacy,
but Jehu like (as Calvin has observed of him) so far as served his own, turn,
in Temporals only, but was still zealous upon the six Articles of the Church of
Rome, that whoever denied any of those Articles of Popery, they were burnt for
it.

Then came that blessed child, and doubtless now glorified Saint of God, Edward
the sixth, into the Throne, who repealed the six Articles, threw Images out of
Churches, and furnished the Land with an English Service-boook or Liturgy: He
had Wars with Scotland, Insurrections at home, a plain War in Norfolk, his time
very short, his age very green; We cannot blame him for reforming no more, but
must wonder at him, and bless God for his reforming so much.

Queen Mary (you know) brought us again full sail into the Popes arms or bosom;
but let her Reign pass in a red Parenthesis.

Next came Queen Elizabeth, and, to give her her just praise, made some
increase or improvement of King Edwards Reformation; but yet for all that (if
the real truth might be spoken out) Rome and England were still fast tied
together by the tails of Episcopacy, Ceremonies, and form of worship, the
waters whereof swelled high in King James time, and became a Land flood all
over the three Nations after his decease, drowning some, carrying others full
Tide back again to Rome.

I Will tell you if you will hear me with meekness and patience of spirit, what
satisfies me; that he fell for the Popish Antichristian Interest, (which if
well understood, Peoples spirits would more acquiesce in his fall, then now
they do.)

1. There was this upon his account, the profanation of the Lords day by a Law;
I mean, by that wretched book of ungodly Sports and Liberties. The day which
our Lord Christ and the reformed Laws of the Land had set apart for all sorts
of People to have studied the Scriptures, increased their Spiritual knowledge,
and their faith, against all false Doctrine and Worship; and for the People to
be authorized and instigated by the edict of a King to gaming, sporting, mixed
danceing on that day; (as you know they were,) what could the Pope himself, had
be been in England (considering the state of the Nation) have done more, or
been more Popishly politic for the undermining, for the undoing of our
religion, as the best and speediest means of ushering in his own? Had the
Sabbath taken its name according to his desire in that edict, it might rather
have been called Dies Daemoniacus, then Dominicus, the Devils day then the
Lords day.

Secondly, Never was any man a more stiff upholder of Episcopacy then he was,
which indeed is nothing else but the Popes Supremacy (only under another name)
multiplied, or broken into so many pieces, everyone whereof has the form and
nature of the whole. Was not every Bishop in his Diocese a little Pope lording
over both the flock and his co-presbyters? This piece of Popery he held fast to
his dying day.

Thirdly, He suffered the Bishops so to manage and improve the relics of
Rome in this Kingdom, the whole rabble of Ceremonies, ( Calvin called them
tolerabiles ineptiae, by give me leave (as woeful experience has taught) to
call them intolerabiles ineptiae, intolerale fooleries) I say to improve them
so to the Popish interest, that many hundred precious witnesses of Jesus Christ
were imprisoned, persecuted, forced into strange Countries, yea many of them to
take up their dwellings in a Wilderness amongst wild beast, and more savage
men; Nay some blood was shed in a public and juridicial way; by Gallio cared
for none of these things, stood an idle unconcernd spectator, I fear I am too
benignus interpres, more favorable to him, as to this particular, then he
deserved; We use to say (you know) qui non vetat peccare etc. He that does not
forbid, yea suppress sin, when he is able, commands it.

Fourthly, There was Mass, and Mass Priests, Idols and the worship of the
Beast, I might say of devils (for so Saint John speaks Rev 9.20.) set up by
conjugal promise and Covenant, and accordingly kept and observed; I mean, the
French Court amongst us, from whence went no small animation and protection to
Priests and Popery clean throughout the Kingdoms.

Fifthly, I cannot but lay at his door, that new common prayer book that had
first been at Rome (I have had it from some of deep inspection into
State Affairs) and was there confirmed by the Popes own hand, and then sent by
that Arch-prelate into Scotland, about fourteen years ago. Their throats being
too narrow to swallow it, they were presently proclaimed [Rebells] in all the
parish Churches and Chapels in England, proclaimed [Rebells.] Observe, the
[King] was affronted and disobayed in their rejection of it; VVhereupon an Army
was raised against them, thinking to have forced that English Mass upon them,
but at Barwick God gave him the Check.

Sixthly, His arming Papists by Proclamation to destroy his Parliament of
England, and his making peace with the Irish rebels, and proclaiming them his
good Catholic Subjects, (what other language could have come out of the Popes
own mouth?) Thus he openly professedly joined interest with the Antichristian
Party. You may be sure, Papists in both Kingdoms would never have run the
hazard of their Lives and Estates with him in so desperate a war, but that
they well saw and knew (if the day were his, whereof they made no question) how
to make no small advantage to themselves against the true Protestant, yea and
had promises and assurances thereof from him.

Seventhly, That title of Defender of the faith (for which I know I shall be
much wondered at) was found upon him, as likewise upon his Predecessors.

First, He for his part, had been a sorry defender of godly zealous Protestants
(the Lord knows) from first to last.

Secondly, that it is a Mark set upon the Kings of England by the Popes own
hand, is better known then can be denied. King Henry the eighth wrote a book
against Luther, (I have seen it,) he inflicted death upon diverse that owned
Gospel light and disclaimed Popery; whereupon the Pope sent him this Title
(Defender of the faith) with a great sword, to slaughter (indeed) the true
servants of Jesus Christ. Let any man judge whether this was not a mark of the
Beast upon him, and it was ambitiously derived one from another. King Edward and
and Queen Elizabeth should have cast off this as soon and as zealously any of
the rest.

I remember Luther says in one place, That if the Pope, as Pope, should command
him to read the Scripture, or preach to the People, he would not (therefore) do
it. Christ would not suffer the devils to call him the Son of God, (though
indeed he were so,) yea he would not own his own name and Titles out of their
mouth; he took it as no honor at all to him. Thus our Kings, when this Title
came to them from the Pope, they should have thrown his title at his face
again, and told him that God had given them the civil sword which they would
not bear in vain, but zealously and constantly defend the true Gospel faith of
Jesus Christ, without his command; and for his Title, they looked upon it as no
honor at all to them, but a dangerous dishonor.

Well, now that Christ is gone forth to make Inquisition, not only for Popery
it self, but even for the least dregs of it in all places of the world, this
mark of the Beast also was found upon him, yea and actions tending to the Popes
mind and sense upon it. Where Christ finds the least signs or marks of the
Beast, such shall certainly feel his wrath; much more cause had Christ to pour
out a Vial of wrath and justice on him, upon whom so much of Antichrist and his
Interest was manifestly found; and if one Instrument will not do it, another
shall.

I am persuaded, had not our neighbor Nation owned and proclaimed him whom
they did, the hand of providence had never raised this storm against them. I do
not lay this down as a certain Conclusion (for, Judicia Dei non sunt temere
discutienda, sed formidoloso silentio veneranda,) it is only my persuasion, which
you may receive or reject, as God shall guide your hearts. Yet I am not more
confident, that this book of the Bible came out of the mouth of God, then that
the child is born who shall see a general tottering and shivering to pieces of
Thrones and Scepters; and that-upon this account; the quarrel that is already
one foot between Christ and Antichrist.

Begin at forty one, or thereabouts, and make up a Century, and observe it in
your days, and then leave it to your children to be observed by them, if this
now current Century, I say, be not more fatal to most or all that hold Scepters
in their hands, but especially to Europaean Scepters, then ever any was since
this World began. The text is express Rev. 16.14 16.18. Chiefly in reference to
Kings, who (being confederate in a crafty war, having fair pretentions but
exceeding bad intentions) marched in the head of their Regiments against,
(indeed) Christ and his Kingdom: but a Divine Anathema or curse falls upon
[them;] there is an Earthquake raised, such as was not since men were upon the
Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great; to answer the greatness of the
adversaries engaged against him; to shake to pieces those great and mighty ones
of the Earth, which an ordinary Earthquake could not have effected.

But how can this be? for it is said Rev. 17.16. The ten Horns which thou saw
upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and
naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. The Pope falls by them,
and not they by adhering to the Pope.

First, I answer, what I have said to this particular, you see, I have built
upon plain Scriptures, and I think according to the sense and mind of the Holy
Ghost in them.

Secondly, by [Hornes] here, it is not needful to understand Kings in the
strictness and formality of the Notion; and my reason is gathered from Rev:
17.9.10. The seven Heads are also seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is.
Here, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators are called by the Holy Ghost
[Kings.] when as we know, strictly, they were not so, only they had Supreme
power in their hands.

Thirdly, What Protestant, whose eyes are open, does not see that most or all
the Kings of Europe in their present posture, are directly framed for the Popes
interest. Indeed his and their [now] interest, make up one Linsey Woolsey
piece; they are so interwoven and mixed, that Christ must be fain to open the
whole fabric of Kingly Government to the very foundations thereof, before the
cursed roots and seeds of the mystery of iniquity will be got out.

Will you tell me, that he who lately swayed the Scepter here, and he that now
endeavors to succeed, would ever have been persuaded, so to hate, as to make
war against Pope and Papists, for the setting up in the World Gospel Ordinances
in their purity and power? and if it cannot be expected from the present
Protestant Princes, can it in reason be hoped for, from the present Popish
Princes? therefore they are in no small danger, most or all of them, to be
shaken quite to pieces by the Earthquake.

Fourthly, the strength of a beast, to do his greatest hurt, lies in his horns;
they are the highest and most eminent parts of him; and so by [ten horns,] is
meant only, [the supreme power of the ten Nations, by what names or Titles
soever they are called.] Christ by the Earthquake will shake down those powers
in whom are found a deal of carnal and Popish dregs, and set up those in their
room that are men of other spirits, pares negotio, fit for such a business as
Christ has in hand. Doubtless, the ten horns, are the [ten Supreme Powers] of
Europe, who shall do the deed, that is so much desired and prayed for of all the
Saints.

And now if any man herein differ from me, let him differ, I judge him not.

God forbid that in ruining Antichrist, I my self should be so Antichristian,
as to attempt to Lord it over the faith of any man; Why should I be offended,
that thou can not see that which I see; nor believe as I belive? (if God
intends thee good, I doubt not, but he will find a time to reveal even this unto
thee, that one civil Government is no more of Divine right then another, and
that thy Conscience ought not to engage or give it self up in perpetuum to any
one of them, but thou art free from Oaths and Convenants when it is sufficiently
clear God has laid aside that civil power to whom thou did so swear or
Covenant.) Only I think it but reason to entreat this of thee, that fancy,
Conscience void of argument, custom, novelty of the things delivered, private
ends and aims, self interest, may not be laid in the balance against me; these
are poor, beggarly, chaffi^, irrational things; be careful to start from me
upon some solidity of reason. I do profess in the sight of God, that as I have
balked nothing for fear of any man's displeasure (for though I respect and
honor many men: yet, so far as I know my own heart, I fear no man) so neither
have I brought in or delivered any thing purposely to grieve or provoke any
man's spirit. I hope, I have otherwise learned Christ; You have it in the
singleness of my heart, so as God brought it to my hand.

The fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of the beast, (Rev. 16.10,
11.) Here Expositors do generally pitch upon the City of Rome, to be [this
seat] of the beast; But sure, it is not sense to speak of the destruction of
Babylon, till Euphrates be dried up, which is under the sixrh Vial; and you
must know that the Vials are placed in this Chapter according to the order of
events or transactions; and therefore the Popes material seat cannot be
destroyed by this Vial. The Greek is (...), he poured his vial upon the
[Throne] of the Beast. By [Throne] in Scripture is often meant that Government
with any person or state sitting upon that Throne, do set up and administer, as
Ps. 89.29. So then, consider that form of Government the Pope sets up, and
exercises in all his Churches throughout the World.

A throne (you know) admits but of one; find a Government where one alone does
rule, and what can this be but Episcopacy? Episcopacie is a is a Government
where one and no more has the Throne or Seat; all the rest keep their distance
and are under Command.

There were holy and learned men, as Beza, Cartwright, Bains, Parker, who cast
some drops of wrath upon this Seat; but it was not long, ere all Scotland got the
Vial into their hands, and poured it out upon Episcopacy to some purpose.

Then came the Parliament of England, and rooted up Episcocal Government by the
very roots; and in both Nations it was done with a great deal of Judgment,
Wisdom, Courage, Piety. [And his Kingdom was full of darkness.] So our
translation; but the Greek imports but this, [his kingdom was darkned] what
Scotland had done in a judicial way, and the Parliament of England had done in
a judicial way, I say, when the news thereof came to the Popes ears, to the
ears his Cardinals, Jesuits, and all his religious orders, and Churches in
Europe, can you imagine less but it was black and sad news to them, and news of
a dangerous consequence, and a shrewd persage to all the lovers and upholders
of that Government? what a deal of Popish luster and glory was there in the
three Nations by reason of Episcopacy, East, Host, Altar, Tapers, Copes,
Surplesses, dressing up of Chapels with the Pictures of Christ, Virgin Mary,
Apostles, Adorning Church-Widdows with the stories of the Bible in time to have
become Laymens books, Altar-adoration, Sacrament-adoration, Organs, Singing of
service; that travellors, from beyond Seas, when they saw the posture of
things, would say one to another, we are at home, were but the service in
Latin as it is in English.

And what great hopes had the Pope of the reconciliation of these Kingdoms to
himself again? and all by means of that height of Episcopacy amongst us. But
when a Vial full of wrath was poured out upon it (according as you have heard)
how was the popish luster and glory in England, Scotland, and Ireland, quite
put out? and a very considerable degree of loss, sorrow, and darkness brought
in upon the Popes whole dominions, so as made them generally bite their tongues
for madness, and blaspheme.

The sixth Vial is poured out upon the great river Euphrates. Euphrates must be
here taken mystically, for that which is the maintenance and defense of Rome
Antichristian, as that river was anciently of old Babylon.

There are five streams of baseness that run into one, and so make up this
great Euphrates. Saint John mentions them Rev. 9.20, 21. Images, Murders,
Sorceries, Fornications, Thefts; by these Rome has increased her wealth, and
by these Rome has been upheld and secured.

Now when the ten Christian Kings or Supreme Powers shall be so far converted
to God, and have the eyes of their understanding so far enlightened, as to see
all this their perverting of Religion, and these gross abuses, out the
Christian world, their hearts will then rise against her, so as to dry up, and
withdraw these streams of base revenues, by which they have been so enriched
and defended. They Will pull down Images, whereby the simple people have been
deluded; severely punish their Sorceries, whereby they have so awed and
terrified the World; their fornications and whorish stews, whereby so many have
been daily drowned in sensuality and undone eternally; they will put an end to
their Inquisitions, whereby so many precious Servants of God have been cruelly
murdered; an end also to their spiritual Thefts, and Robberies, when they
perceive the merits of the Alsufficient sacrifice of Jesus Christ is held forth
to them freely for the remission of sins, according to that Isaiah 55.1.2.
They Will refuse to trade with them any more for their rotten
creature-righteousness; their Pardons and Indulgences shall bring in no more
treasures into the Popes Coffers; they will part with no more moneys to have the
souls of their departed friends prayed and sung out of Purgatory, and will cast
all their Trumperies out of their dominions. And thus shall the great river
Euphrates be dried up; [That be way may be prepared for the Kings of the East,]
that is, that the ten Kings or Supreme powers, now finding (in the eye of
reasons) the ruin of Rome feasible, may encourage one another to the work, and
dispatch it: they are called Kings of the East, in allusion to Cyrus, who came
East from Babylon, and took it. Or thus, [that way may be made for the Kings of
the East] i. e. for the briging home the People of the Jews, who are here
called Kings. You may see another notable interpretation of this Vial in Mr.
Reynolds Sermon preaced before the House Aug. 28. 1644. page 41.

The seventh and last Vial is poured out into the Air. The Air in which the
Antichristian world lives, is the smoke of the bottomless Pit, Rev. 9. or the
darkness of Ignorance; for out of this came their Locusts, all their hellish
Doctrines and Worship.

Upon the pouring out of this Vial, the Glory of the Son of Righteousness, and
of Gospel Ordinances does so break forth, as quite prevails against that
Infernal Darkness, and Spiritual Ignorance which bred Papacy, and in which
Papacy had so long breathed and lived: and so the Antichristian Air being
destroyed, they fall a gasping, and the pangs of Death come upon them: for
immediately there comes a voice from Heaven, saying, [Tis done] there is an end
of the Pope and his Kingdom, and all the Mystery of iniquity.

Let me speak a little to the following verses. Verse 18. [There were voices,
and thunderings, and lightnings] and (as it were) the sound of Trumpets upon
men's Spirits, that make their hearts quake and tremble within them: and also a
great earthquake; such a one as was not since men were upon the earth; so
mighty and so great. These will be sad days with the Antichristian party; such
thunderings, voices, lightnings from above; such an earthquake from beneath
them; the face of things threatening as if Heaven and Earth would come together.
Do you marvel if at their Worlds end, they be at their Wits end?

The effects of these lightnings, thunders, earthquake, follow verse 19.

First, [The great City was divided into three parts.] But by this Great City,
I understand Rome it self, which was shaken into three factions, and so became
weak, that it could not defend it self against the Besiegers.

There have been three factions amongst us, (I call them Factions, only
because each have so esteemed of other) peradventure it will run upon a
threefold Party of Faction to the end of the War. [Then the Citits of the
Nations fell] i. e. fell off from her, and left her dosolate of all former help
and comfort; and so [Babylon the great came into remembrance before God, [to
give unto her the cup of the wine of the feirceness of his wrath.] See how this
is expressed Rev. 18.8. Her plagues come in one day, Death, and Mourning, and
Famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire. The latter end of that
nineteenth verse doubtless looks as far as the great battle of God Almighty,
the issue whereof is set down, Rev. 19, 20. the Beast was taken and with him
the false prophet, and were both cast alive into the Lake of fire burning with
brimstone.

Yet all this contents not Christ; he still goes on to pursue his Victory, Rev.
16.20. [Every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found.] Nothing so
remote as the Islands, nothing so strong as the Mountains; but the
Antichristian Islands fled and perished before the stroke of Christ; the
Mountains were beaten to dust: Christ will not leave Papacy so much as a
Mountain to fly to, or an Island to hide itself in; he will leave no piece of the
frame of Antichristianisme standing in any part of the World.

And yet still he goes on, ver. 21. [There fell upon men a great hail out of
heaven, every stone about the weight of a Talent, and men blasphemed God
because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.]
Here is an Allusion to Ezekiel. 13.11. to 16. I conceive the genuine sense of the
verse to be this. Those ten Kings or Supreme powers who follow Jesus Christ in
this Expedition, have Commissions, or Commands from the God of Heaven, (though
Rome be burnt, yea and the great battle of God Almighty fought and finished)
to go on with their braining, destroying judgments, upon all those everywhere,
woe are found to have had any interest in the Popes cause or Kingdom, in
worshipping the Beast, or any way been engaged for his preservation and
defense. They shall be pursued and destroyed with such plagues and judgments
as that it shall be evident, they are from God, and that heaven it self fights
against them, to root out that accursed race to the last man from off the Earth.

I suppose by this time you are all willing and ready to set your seals to this
truth, that, [The Pope (who is the great Antichrist) and his Kingdom shall be
destroyed with most remarkable destruction.]

But now I know, the first Quaere you will make within your selves upon what has
been delivered, and desire some satisfaction in, will be that of the Disciples
Mat. 24.3. tell us when shall these things be; and what shall be the sign of
their coming?

I confess these are mavelous hard Questions; but I shall freely tell you my
thoughts upon them. I find the time of Antichrists reign set down Rev. 11.2.
The Holy city shall he tread under foot forty two months, and also Rev. 13.5.
and it was given him to continue forty and two months, (by the way, let me
tell you, his reign is reckoned by the moon, which rules the night, to hint
thus much to us, that Antichrists works are night works, his whole reign is a
reign of darkness) but, to the thing itself.

Forty and two months, allowing thirty days to a month (for they are Lunar
months, I told you) make up a thousand two hundred and thereescore days, the
just time of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, Rev. 11. or three years
and a half.

First, I understand these numbers of a certain and determinate time, because
every one of them is a broken number; round numbers as we call them, ten, a
hundred, a thousand are put most times indeterminately, a certain for an
uncertain number; but this is not a round, but a broken number.

2. These 42. months, or three years and a half, cannot be taken strictly for
42. of our months, or three of our years and a half; because (as I showed you
before) it is an utter impossibility that the Rise and Growth, the Glory, and all
the business of his Kingdom, should be compassed in so short a time.

Therefore Thirdly, they must be taken according to that, Ezekiel. 4.6. I have
appointed thee each day for a year. Every day in these 42 months being put for
a year, the whole amounts to 1260 years, the just reign of Antichrist. But when
the time of his reign did begin, confident I am, there is no man alive (without
extraordinary Revelation) can speak certainly, and to a day: and hereupon it is
that all divines are at a loss as to a punctual certainty for his fall and ruin.

Concerning the time of the seetting forth of this Giant to run his course,
there are two or three opinions, and I shall quickly tell them unto you.

1. Some begin it as high as Constantine when he left Rome, about the 19. year
of his reign, and seated in the East. 2. Others place it as low as about the
year 455. when Gensericus the Vandal took and burnt Rome, at which time the
Empire was broken all to pieces, and utterly extinct.
There are a third sort who pitch it about the year 410. or 412. when Alaricus
the Goth came and conquered, and ransacked Rome. Now they who say his 1260
years began when Constantine left Rome, pitch his fall about Luthers time,
something above 100 years ago. They who say it began at 455. make his fall and
ruin 65. years yet to come. They who affirm it began 410. or 412. lay him on
his Death bed about twenty years hence.

It may be you will ask me my opinion amongst these.

Truly in a business of this abstruseness, twould be wisdom to put you off
with other men's judgments, and conceal my own; but I still find that the
sigleness of my spirit gets the predominancy of my Politics.

1. I like their opinion well who reckoning from Constantine, pitch his fall in
Luthers time; for indeed Luther laid the foundation of his manifest ruin. It is
not unusual with Scripture to say, a work is done (if it be of God) when it is
but begun, Revel. 16.17. for it shall be as certainly done, as if it were done
already: God calls things that are not, as if they were.

2. I think their Conclusion may be right, who counting from 455. spin out his
life to threescore years hence and upward; but sure it is to be understood of
that great battle of God Almighty, mentioned Rev. 19.19, 20. I verily persuade
my self, they who live threescore and ten, or fourscore years hence, shall
neither see Pope, nor form of Popery established by a law, defended by a power
in any Kingdom in the world.

3. They most take with me, who counting from 410. pitch his fall 20. years
hence; for about the year 410. or 412. the ten Horns or Kingdoms (as Historians
generally tell us) were fairly appearing; and surely the sixth head was going
off at least, if not quite off, when some of the horns that grew on the seventh
head, were so visible. The Pope must of necessity be before them; for he is the
seventh head upon which those horns grew; it is said, Rev. 17.12. They receive
power one hour, or (as the Original might be better rendered) the first hour
[with the beast.] But some read it (...), and not (...), not [with] but
somewhat [after] the beast.

And indeed about this time the Popes showed themselves openly to all the
world, and spoke out what they wounld have, that the censures of Bishops, and
all other causes of moment, ought to be reserved to the Audience of the Bishop
of Rome, calling themselves the Father of Fathers, and Firmament of Bishops.

When the Council of Carthage, in the year 413. sent and acquainted Pope
Innocent with their Acts, desiring him That he would add his Authority; his
Answer was to this effect, That they had due regard of the Sea Apostolic, and
of him who had the care and charge of all the Churches; the very language of
the Beastly Antichrist, Rev. 13.7. So that at this time we may safely conclude
him actually set down in his Chair of Pestilence; and thence may as safely
conclude, that his Throne, to wit, the City of Rome, and the glorious
visibility of his reign and Kingdom, will be laid in the dust twenty years
hence.

In a business of this Nature, you ought in reason make some grains of
allowance to our guess: possibly it may fall out three or four years either
under or over; and what will you say if it fall out that Rome will be begirt
and burnt too, about 16. years hence?

I Will tell you what my opinion is built upon; that of Revel. 13. verse the
last, Let him that has understanding, count the [number of the beast,] His
number is six hundred threescore and six. Observe it is indefinitely called the
number of the beast; the Holy Ghost may perhaps speak much in a little, two
things at once: thus, that 666. is the number of the Beast, his name, (...)
etc. and the number also of his reign expired, that his Seat and Throne shall
be pulled down and burnt, his formal visible reign shall be at an end about
the year 666.

But in this (I confess) I have no man to stand by me; it is only my opinion,
which started up in me upon my poring upon that Text: yet I have this to
countenance me; the Holy Ghost tells us, The Earthquake that must shake his
Throne and Kingdom all to pieces (when once it begins, and for my part, I am
satisfied it is begun) will be a great earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the earth, so mighty and so great, Rev. 16. And this may be some Answer to
those who think there is more work then can be done in so short a time: When God
sets upon it, he will make quick work with him. The Earthquake being so mighty
and so violent, may possibly reach the Walls of Rome by that time; after which
Popery will have a being for some years.

Rome is burnt in the 18. Chapter of the Revel. But the Beast and false
Prophet, with their Armies, their destruction is described in the 19. Chapter,
as being (I suppose) to be done some space of years after.

I doubt not but there are diverse of you who hear me this day, that shall
outlive Romes ruin; and that your childrens children will most certainly
outlive the great battle of God Almighty, wherein both Pope and Popery shall
be utterly destroyed.

But what shall the sign of these things be? Why, let me tell you, Scripture
has given a sign of his approaching ruin, and that's the killing of the
witnesses: Concerning which, I shall briefly premise a few things, as,

First, that they are not to be restrained to any sort of men; for it is said of
them Rev. 11.4. These are the [two Olive Trees,] and the two [Candlesticks]
standing before the God of the Earth. In calling them the Olive Trees, the Holy
Ghost doubtless alludes to Zach. 4. Where Zerubbabel and Joshua, the Magistrate
and the Priest, are in the vision, the two Olive Trees, in the interpretation,
the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the whole Eaarth: the
witnesses Comprehended all those Magistrates and Ministers that have in any
juncture of time (out of a principle of Religion and Conscience for God) any
way set themselves against the Pope. By [Candlesticks] we are taught from
Christ's own mouth, to understand [Churches,] Rev. 1.20. The seven Candlesticks
which thou saw, are seven Churches. The rest of Saints and Churches added to
Godly Magistrates and Ministers, make up the witnesses. And we must needs take
them thus; for the Holy Ghost divides all throughout the reign of Antichrist
into but two witnesses (or Prophets) and the Gentiles, Rev. 11. So that all
beside those of Antichrists Party or Faction, are witnesses, or are of the
witnesses.

Secondly, They are said to be two;

First, In relation to Moses and Aaron who brought Israel out of Egypt, to
Zerubbabel and Joshua who brought the People of God from their Babylonish
captivity: So these bring the Church of Christ out of the more then Egyptian
Babylonian bondage of Popery.

Secondly, They are said to be two in reference to the legality of their
testimony, two being a sufficient number in Law to bear witness against him:
and so God to be justified in their condemnation as being clear and righteous.

Thirdly, For their paucity; those who witnessed against him were but a very
few in every Nation in respect to those droves and innumerable Multitudes that
followed him; all the World wondered after the Beast, though toward the end of
their Prophecy they grow apace (Rev. 14.6, 7, 8.) I saw another Angel fly in
the [midst] of heaven having the everlasting Gospel to preach to every Nation,
Kindred, Tongue, People, saying fear God, give glory to him; for the hour of
his judgment is come. And there followed another Angel saying Babylon is
fallen, that is, has begun to fall, since Luther and others have so publicly
and openly preached the Gospel.

Bellarmine confesses that since we have called the Pope Antichrist; his
Kingdom has wasted and been incomparably less then before; the witnesses have
increased, the Gentiles have decreased; but throughout the most of his reign
they were but two; very weak and inconsiderable was the number that set against
him.

Thirdly, Antichrist has been killing witnesses all along, Rev. 11.2. The holy
City shall they tread under foot [forty and two moneths] throughout his whole
domination has he been been stamping Saints to dust, in every age, in every
Kingdom; but that slaughter of the witnesses the spirit of God so largely
describes, and points the finger to, as the (...), the indubitable sign or
forerunner of his sudden downfall, I take to be done at one time, and in one
place.

It is notoriously known what our Prelates did in England, how for a long time
they set themselves against the zealous Protestant; and by means of their
Courts, Canons, Ceremonies, book of sports, new etc. Oath, they silenced, made
to hide in Corners, drove into strange Countries, Wildernesses, thousands upon
thousands.

At last there rose up two or there somewhat more bold then their fellows, whom
they took and made them high Examples off their Popish justice and cruelty, cut
off their ears, and sent them to prisons, far distant one from another.

How much they glorified and pleased themselves in this their Conquest, you all
know: and doubtless this fact of Protestant Bishops (for so they were called)
was an universal token to the Popish World that the day was theirs. If
Protestant Bishops (say they) have done so valiantly for Romes Interest, surely
the day is ours, and perfect Victory is got.

Now let me show you (but very briefly) how the Circumstances of that
Providence stand in joint with the Text, both the thing itself, and the
sequeles of it.

For the thing itself;

First, The Beast set upon them when they had finished their testimony, ver.
7. The strictest sense may not be put upon this; for when they have quite
finished their testimony, the beast will be absolutely ruined, he and they
being contemporaries, Rev. 11.2.3. they both begin and end together; else
Christ should have none to be for him during some part of Antichrists reign:
therefore it must be understood, when they were [about] to finish their
testimony, had brought it [almost to a period] because the [Beasts] reign and
Kingdom was come [almost to a period.]

This war is to be when Antichrist is near upon his fall; may it not then be
looked for in our time, when he is grown so old and gray headed, of his 1260.
years having run up a 1240. or little less: Seeing that from Daniel, Paul and
the Apostle John we understand the ruin of the man of sin to fall into the lap
of the Century wherein we live; the more safely may any man conclude, that what
has fallen out in our times, may be the killing of the witnesses, and signal
token of his ruin. It consists well enough with the Text for the time wherein
the Witnesses are to be killed.

Secondly, The text well looked into and considered, does clearly give it to be
not a bloody, but [mystical or civil slaughter] ver. 7. compared with verse 11.
their resurrection is not a proper, but a civil or Mystical resurrection (as
shall anon be made good) therefore it must needs follow (to those who love not
to be contentious) that such also must be their death (there being still the
same reason of Opposites,) turned out of their places, silenced, disabled from
speaking, moving, or acting in a public way: but thus we know, the men spoken
of, were killed and lay dead.

Thirdly, They thus lay dead (the text says) In the street of the great City,
which is spiritually called Sodom, Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified,
ver. 8. Rome is elegantly here described to be Sodom for uncleanness, Egypt for
idolatry, Jerusalem for murder, Oh Jerusalem thou that killest the Prophets,
etc. It is called the [great City] as being made up of its ten Kingdoms; and in
the [street] (it is not streets) but in the street or in that Kingdom where they
shall be killed, there they shall lie, that whole Kingdom or dominion being a
street of the great City so made up, whereto agrees the slaughter of these men
being killed in one place, which then was within Romes boundary, and that in
diverse respects.

Fourthly, In the street they lay [unburied,] they were not suffered to be put
in graves, ver. 9. (this also must be expounded mystically) those that are put
in graves, are out of every ones eye; these dead men their friends were not
suffered to afford them graves, that is, to allow them any harbor or hiding
place; all must shut them out of doors; but they lay there where their Enemies
might feed and glut their eye upon their miseries.

Fifthly, They were in this condition for the [space of three days and a half]
ver. 9. Which (being a broken number) do certainly point out a determinate
time; neither can they be taken strictly for three natural days and a half; for
in that time the news of their killing could not be sent throughout the
Antichristian World; and what space were that to congratulate, and solace
themselves and one another in the slaughter of them? and besides how little is
half a day perceived in such feasting and jocand solemnity? and therefore they
must be understood prophetically, three days and a half for three years and a
half: and it is well known that these men were under the bands of Confinement, or
power of their civil death just so long, neither more nor less, three years and
a half a die ad diem.

Sixthly, It is said, They that dwell upon the Earth, shall rejoice over them,
make merry and send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented
them that dwelt upon the Earth, ver, 10. All the witnesses did torment them,
but these last especially: whom having conquered and killed, the Popish,
Prelatical party please and content themselves in this Conquest exceedingly, as
those of old upon their Pompous Solemnities and Feasting days did use to do;
they made merry and sent gifts, to which the Holy Ghost here alludes, and says,
they rejoiced over them; observe, rejoiced [over] them; for they had these men
still in their clutches.

Seventhly, At the end of the forementioned time [the Spirit of life from God
entered into them, and they stagger up again] ver. 11. God by unexpected means
did loose the bands of their death; they are suspended no longer, silenced no
longer, kept in Antichristian clutches no longer; and after three years and an
half (through a principle of life from God bestowed upon them) they get upon
their feet again; even those same men that were killed; had the space of their
lying dead been an Age, or 2. or 3. Ages, I should have sought this
Resurrection in their Successors, or men of such like Spirits risen up after
them; but it being but three years and a half, I can easily believe that those
same numerical men that were silenced, suspended, and so killed, might have
their suspensions taken off, their mouths opened, and they set upon their feet
to Prophecy again, and so 'twas a Mystical or Civil Resurrection.

Eighthly, They heard a voice from heaven, saying, come up hither. The Decree or
Vote of Parliament calling them out of their low and dead condition, into
Liberty, Freedom; to a competent Maintenance, and comfortable Estate, wherein
they also protected them in the sight and spite of Antichrist, and all their
enemies, so that they were as secure from those that had lately killed them, as
if they had been taken up into heaven it self.

Ninthly, They ascended up to heaven in a cloud, Heb. 12.1. There a multitude
of Believers are called a cloud of witnesses: When these men returned from
their imprisonment, 'twas wonderful to see what a cloud of witnesses they were
accompanied withal, rejoicing greatly at this their unexpected and happy
Freedom, every one helping, and lifting them up into their Heaven, what they
could.

Tenthly, [ Their enemies beheld all this (but could not hinder it) and great
fear fell upon them] As easily apprehending, that being tormented with them
before, they should be now much more plagued by them, for the late injury done
them (to say nothing of old quarrels;) and besides, a fresh and more full
supply of the Spirit of God was come upon them; and now are days fear, swallows
up and devours their whole three years joy and more, so that there is no sign
left of it amongst them.

You perceive how this piece of Providence agrees with the Text in all the
joints and creeks of it.

The like you shall see in the sequels of this business: they are four, all set
down ver. 13.

The first of them, this, [The same hour the witnesses rose, there was a great
earthquake] A violent shaking of Church and State, even of the whole Kingdom,
in the breaking out of these late Wars between King and Parliament; there have
been such Commotions amongst us, as may well be called a [great earthquake] and
it began presently upon the quickening or return of these men.

The second this, [The tenth part of the city fell.] Conceive (as I touched
before) the great Mystical City made up of the ten Kingdoms, that gave their
power to the Beast: and when one of these Kingdoms fell off utterly and
irrecoverably from Rome, by means of the earthquake, then the tenth part of the
city fell. If you would know which, peradventure the Greek may give some hint
of it; the Holy Ghost seems to lay a great Emphasis upon the Article (...),
[that] tenth part, where the last of the Witnesses were killed, in so different
and signal a way: [that] tenth part, that is so easily discernable from all the
rest, Et penitus toto divisi ab orb Britanni; in plain terms, England. You Will
say, was England but shaken off from Rome by this late Earthquake? I answer, it
was in part, but not wholly; in Doctrine, but not in Worship and Discipline:
for (as I told you) Rome and we were fast tied together by the tails of
Episcopacy, Ceremonies, and Forms of Worship, though their bodies were loose,
and heads looked several ways: Yet truly, let me tell you this, that in our
times the heads were turning and looking one upon another with mavelous
benign aspects, and were working their bodies together again as fast as such
great and unweldy bodies could be moved: There were such Popish Doctrines,
Popish Practices, and Popish ordering of Church Affairs (to say nothing of the
State) in most points and places, that the Pope had good cause to assure
himself of Englands return into the Bosom of the Roman Church.

But when the Parliament arose (for Parliaments themselves rose from the dead;
you know how long we had been kept without them; and at last a Proclamation set
forth, that men should not [think] of a Parliament) and quickened the dead
Witnesses, Voted down Episcopal Government with all the Appurtenances of it,
and (being forced to it) took up Arms, resolving to live and die in the defense
of those Votes; then, and not till then (I dare boldly say it) did England, a
tenth part of those Kingdoms that had given their power to the Beast, utterly,
totally fall off from Rome; that in reason they can have no hope of ever
fetching it back again, to serve the Popish Interest.

The third is this, [ In the earthquake were slain of men 7000.] This being a
round and perfect number, you need not understand it of just so many and no
more (for indeed 7000. is not a proportionable number for such an earthquake,
but it may be a certain number for an uncertain [ and in the earthquake were
slain 7000.] i. e. thousands upon thousands.

But searching the Original, I find That runs thus, [In the earthquake were
slain, (...), names of men] that is, men of name, men of renown: the like
Hebraisme you have Genesis 6.4. So in this Fall of the tenth part of the City,
were slain men of name, note, quality (besides the common sort of People) 7000.
meaning of the Witnesses enemies; some lost their blood and lives, others their
places, powers, livings, livelyhoods; and thus there were slain of noted
Statesmen, and noted Churchmen 7000. which in reason may be conceived a
competent number in this late earthquake.

The fourth sequel is this, [And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to
the God of Heaven.] Observe, it is not said the remnant repented, but were
terrified; and indeed, nothing is more evident then that an awe and terror is
fallen upon the spirits of those that remain; and (as Joshua exhorted Achan to
confess and give glory to God) so, they are constrained; it bursts out of their
mouths (fore against their wills) that since the restoring of those men every
Providence of God has fought against them. And though they speak evil of
dignities and instruments (as Jannes and Jambres did against Moses) yet they
will confess that this is digitus Dei, the just handiwork of God upon them:
they have nothing to accuse God of, for such his Dispensations to them.
Whatever they think or say, concerning men and present Powers, yet being
terrified, they confess, and give glory to the God of Heaven.

Tell me now in the singleness of your Spirits, have not Providence suited
mavelous patly to the Text? Has not something fallen out in our days, that
may with more perspicuity of Reason be called the [signal] killing of the
Witnesses, then has in any Kingdom you can name, all Circumstances complying
fully with the standard of the Word? Confident I am, that since the quickening
and Resurrection of these men, there can no Kingdom in the World be named where
the Beast has prevailed against the Zealous Protestant party, so, as it may be
said he is yet killing Witnesses; he has enough to do to hold his own, and in
many places is apparently on the loosing, sinking hand. Wherefore if I may draw
the conclusion, it shall be this, [That which we all so much fear, is past,]
and let Antichrist, and those of his Faction, take what follows.

I remember what our Savior said to his Disciples, Mat. 24.32, 33. When the
Fig Tree puts forth her leaves, you uknow that Summer is nigh: Likewise ye,
when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the door. So
say I to you; When something has passed before our eyes, which we cannot in
reason but call the killing of the witnesses, and resurrection of the
witnesses, from that time, from that sign, know that Antichrists utter ruin is
near, even at the door.

Use. The first use shall inform you of the ground and cause of God's thus
severe proceeding with them.

A Vial of wrath is poured upon every thing that belongs to Antichrist, and the
latter still more hot and scalding then the former, till he is utterly burnt up
and ruind by them: Why? it lies in this, [The justice of God.]

God has a nature that constrains him to give to every one according to their
works; but such have been Antichrists works and carriage, that it is the
equallest thing in the world that God should execute and pour out upon him, all
those fearful things which Daniel, Paul, and the Apostle John have foretold,
and threatened him withal. He who has made himself [the Man of Sin,] God can do
no less then make him [The Son of Perdition,] as it is in the Text, Rev. 18.2. An
Angel cried with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen; the reason is laid down in the 5. ver. Her sins have reached unto
heaven.

We commonly call it the Sea, but it may well be called the Sea of Rome, for
the streams of all the wickedness of all the world have run thither, and have
there been swallowed up.

1. The Apostle says of the Cretians, They are all-wayes liars, Tit. 1. but of
these he says, They speak lies in Hypocrisy, 1. Tim. 4.2. The very first rise
of Popery was from a lie, Hypocritically, and against their Conscience: they
challenged Appeals in difficult matters to themselves, and forged a Canon of
the Council of Nice for it, which the sixth Council of Carthage did with much
diligence search out, and found to be a very forgery, a very lie; but for all
that, they had the face to go on, adding one lie to another, till they had made
up their Religion, which indeed is nothing else but a great knot and bundle of
lies. Their Doctrine of Merits, their Doctrines of Purgatory,
Transubsantiation,, very lies, as our Reformed Divines have made appear
sufficiently: show me one point that is truly and peculiarly theirs, and I will
pawn my life upon it, I demonstrate it to be a lie: a taste whereof you had in
the first Sermon, showing you his contradictions of Christ.

2. There is the greatest pride found in them that ever was found in men.

Suppose thou had been at Rome this year, being the year of Iubile, (but you
must know that he is not such a proud and pamperd Beast now adays, as he was in
formen ages) had thou been at Rome this year of Iubile, but especially any of
those Iubiles that were some hundreds of years before Luther, and there seen
the Pope arrayed as the Holy Ghost describes him, Rev. 17.4. In purple and
scarlet color, decked with gold, precious stones, and pearls, with a Triple
Crown upon his head, set in a golden chair, carried on men's shoulders; his
Princely Cardinals about him, his Breaden God, Crucifixes, Relics carried
before him, opening the gates of Paradise (as they call them) with the touch of
his golden hammer; great Ambassadors (sometimes Kings themselves) bowing before
him, and worshipping of him, the common people begging pardon of sin, and
eternal life of him, scarce suffered to kiss his feet; I say had thou been at
Rome, and seen all this, could thou have thought or said less of him, then
hic est ipse primogenitus diaboli, this is (doubtless) the first born Son of
Lucifer, the eldest Son of the devil.

Pope Innocent the 4. Ann. 1253. in the 37. year of Henry the 3. of England,
being set in his Conclave, in the midst of his Cardinals, after much advisement
upon a small occasion, brake out into this language, Annon Rex Anglorum noster
est vassallus, and (ut plus dicam) mancipium, qui possumus eum nutu nostro
incarcerare, and ignominiae mancipare. Is not the King of England our Vassal,
nay to say more, our slave, whom we can imprison at pleasure, and condemn to
everlasting ignominy?

Pope Alexander the 3. set this foot upon the Neck of the Emperor Frederick the
first, blasphemously using those words of the Psalmist, Super Aspidem and
Basiliscum, Upon the Adder and the Basilisk shall thou tread. The Pope has
made Kings to wait at his Gate, and hold him his stirrup.

I could have furnished you with many stories of like nature, speaking aloud
the pride of their Spirits: says Basil long since, Odi fastum istius Ecclesiae,
I hate the pride of that Church of Rome. And lest you should think we speak out
of Spleen and Envy against him; hear what the Holy Ghost says, 2 These. 2.4.
Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, for that he as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.

3. The greatest truly and blood guiltiness lies upon them, that ever was upon
any: It Is impossible for me to convince you of the ten thousand part of their
murders.

Historians do generally with one mouth tell us in that one Kingdom of France,
400. years ago, they slaughtered ten hundred thousand of those godly Waldenses,
and Albigenses:

The Duke D'Alva boasted, He had destroyed above 18000. Heretics in the
Netherlands, in the space of six years.

In the first 30 years after the Order of Jesuits was set up, it is found that
above fourscore thousand were slain.

The Spanish Inquisition in the space of 30 years, made away no less then one
hundred and fifty thousand.

In the year 1572. was the Massacre at Paris; in a few days space there were
above 30000. treacherously and basely murtherd.

In our Queen Marys days, in less then 4 years, were consumed with fire and
faggot, 277 persons, every one whereof it might be strongly presumed were true
Members of Jesus Christ, his Saints indeed.

In the late rebellion in Ireland (to speak with the least) one hundred
thousand were murthred before we could get so much as one Breast-work against
them.

And now by these hints I have given you, can you make any guess at the number
of those that have been slain in all those ten Kingdoms, who submitted to him
throughout the space of above 1000 years? Certainly they do exceed all humane
Arithmatick, Rev. 17.12, 13, 14. The ten horns which thou saw, are ten
Kings, these shall give their power and strength to the Beast, these shall make
war with the Lamb. The ten Kings of Europe with all their power and strengths,
were nothing but the Popes instruments of blood and cruely.

I may be bold to say it, the Popes little finger has been heavier upon the
people of God, then were the Loins of the ten Heathenish Persecutions.

To shed the innocent blood of any man, is a sin that cries to God, and will
certainly prevail with him for vengeance; how much more then to shed the blood
of an Innocent Saint? I am confident if one had shed the blood of a hundred
thousand men, that were indeed Reprobates, and the blood of but one true Saint
of God, he should find a harder task and pull of it to come off with Divine
Justice for the blood of that one Saint, then for all the other hundred
thousand: there is reason enough for it, they being but Chaff, Briars, and
Thorns, Dung, Scorpions, and worse then naught; but it is said, the death of a
Saint is precious with God.

A Saint is a Member of Christ, helps to make up that body which is the fullness
of him that fills all in all; is the pupilla oculi, the very apple of Gods eye;
yea so dear to God, that the very hairs of his head are numbered; and therefore
no marvel if he have a harder pull of it.

But the Popes of Rome have shed the blood of more then one Saint; indeed no
other blood rellishes with them. Rev. 18. and last verse, In her was found the
blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

A vein of cruelty and bloodshed went down from Cains days, even to the Popes
times, who was so far from putting a stop to it, that he eagerly closed with
it, made it wider and deeper then before; and his actions have justified all
the murders of the Saints that ever were yet committed in the world.

There has not been a war in Christendom for this thousand years and upwards,
but a Priest, or some eminently of the Popish Faction, has been the
incendiary; and they have so taken up their cups, that they have made
themselves dead drunk. Rev. 17.6. I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her, I
wondered with great admiration: as at their sin, what that was, so at their
punishment, how great in justice and equity it must needs be when it should
come upon them.

To be drunk is a great sin; to be drunk with blood is monstrous; but to be
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus, is strangely hellish.

I could tell you how at Burges they buried one Marion alive; how in Queen
Maryes days a woman being delivered at the stake, and the Infant by its
sprawling like to get out of the fire, they threw it with their forks into the
fire again; they dug up Wickliffs bones and burnt them forty years after his
death; Peter Martyrs wife at Oxford, Mr. Bucer and Paulus Phagius at Cambridge
were served no better. We use to say, Vrsinon saeviunt in Cadavera, savage
Bears will not rage against dead Carcasses. Now Lord, if these be Saints, who
are Scythians; if these be Catholics, who are Canibals?

Fourthly, The Bishops of Rome are the star that is said to fall Rev. 9. from
Heaven to Earth. Their falling away from Christ and the Faith is called the
great Apostasy of the latter times 1 Timothy 4. as Learned Mr. Mede has
judiciously observed.

Fifthly, It is said Rev. 13.5, 6. That he had a month speaking great things
and blasphemies, and he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme
his name, and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. They take those Titles
to themselves that are peculiar unto God, and so blaspheme his name; They call
the true Doctrines and worship of Jesus Christ, Heresy and Schism, and so
blaspheme his Tabernacle.

Those that God has damned they canonize, and affirm them to be in heaven; and
those that God has glorified in heaven, them they affirm to be damned souls in
Hell, and so they blaspheme Heaven and the inhabitants thereof. One of them
would eat his Pork in spite of God; another of them, if God were so angry with
Adam for eating an apple, might not he much more for his Peacock? and says a
third quantas nobis divitias comparavit ista fabula Christi, what a deal of
wealth has that Fable of Christ (speaking of the Gospel) broguht us in?

A Bishop here in England, when one he knew well, was brought before him for
meddling heretically with Scriptures, what a devil (said he) made thee meddle
with Scriptures?

Sixthly, We read of their Fornication Rev. 9. and last v. it is true enough,
there was once of shee-Pope, Ego non dubito (says Functius the Chronologer)
quin divinito ita sit permissum, ut faemina fieret Pontifex, and eadem
Meretrix; I make no question of it, but that God in his wisdom permitted a
notorious strumpet to be advanced to the Popedom, that he might, in her, show
to all the World, what the Popes of Rome were, even that great whore with whom
the Kings of the Earth committed Fornication; I say it is true enough, there was
once a shee-Pope, who cried out (I mean, fell into the pangs of travel) as she
was going on procession, (which afterward occasioned their Porphery Chair,) and
so God openly declared her to be not only mystically, but even literally the
whore of Babylon, Rome calls herself, the Mother of all Churches, but the Holy
Ghost much truer calls her the mother of Harlots Rev. 17. Common notorious
stews are upheld in the Holy City if self.

Seventhly, Their covetousness is so base, that they make merchandise even of
men's [souls] as you may see, Rev. 18.11.12.13. It is storied of Pope John the
twenty two, that when he dyed, there was found in his treasure two hundred and
fifty tuns of gold.

And it is recorded of Boniface the eight, that he was able to show more money
then all the Kings in Christendom.

Surely God has long since smitten his hands at their dishonest gain, and that
endless wealth, the inventions of their covetousness (Pardons, Indulgences,
Pugatory, etc.) has brought them in.

Eighthly, We read of their idolatry Rev. 9. and last verse; worship a piece of
bread, kneel before the Cross and kiss it, and also the Images of Saints.
Boniface the 4th: in the year 610 begged of the Emperor the Pantheon; he
presently throws out the Heathen Images, and sets up the Image of the Virgin
Mary as chief, and fills it with the Images of all the rest, and thereupon
instituted the Feast of all Saints.

Ninthly, we read in the same place of their Sorceries. Their own Historians
tell us (as I touched before) that two and twenty of their Popes were
abominable Negromancers, of whom Bellarmine faith, they were parum probi
homines, scarce to be called honest men; but Platina speaks out and calls them
Monstra et portenda hominum, devils clad with flesh, and shapes of men only.

Tenthly, They have kept Christ out of his brithright and lawful inheritance
above a 1240. years already, and he shall never have it but by strong hand.

If it went so hard with Ahab for taking Naboths Vineyard awhile, what will
become of them who have seized Christ's own inheritance so long a time, and
killed those he has sent unto them to demand his right out of their hands?

Lastly, They are the most impenitent wretches that ever breathed upon Gods
ground; they have had the witnesses to call them to repentance from the very
beginning; and God reaifed up the Turk as a scourge of Popery, yet the rest of
the men (says the text Rev. 9.20.21.) that is, they of the West repented not.
God gave the old World a 120. years to repent in before the brought the Flood
upon them; he has given these as much since Luther first preached the Gospel;
but they are as far from repenting as the old World was when Noah entered into
the Ark. Rev. 16. ver. 9. When a Vial was poured upon the Sun, they blasphemed
the name of God; they repented not. ver. 10.11. the fifth is poured upon the
Throne of the Beast; they gnawed their tongues, blasphemed God, and repented
not of their deeds, but prepared war against God, ver. 14. When great
hailstones fell upon them out of heaven; You read not of their repenting ver.
the last, but that they blasphemed God to the last, because of the plague of
hail. Impenitent blasphemous wretches they have lived, and impenitent
blasphemous wretches (for the generality of them) they will certainly dye.

Now when God shall empty his last and hottest Vials of wrath upon her, and all
her plagues come in one day, Rev. 18. Death, Mourning, Famine, and she is set
all on a flaming fire, not to be quenched, for it is said, her smoke goes up for
ever and ever, those who shall then wonder why God deals so hardly and severely
with her, God may answer them, are not my ways equal, have I done unto her
without cause all that I have done unto her, have not her sins reached up to
Heaven? Do not you know that I am a just God, and reward every one according to
their works, judge I pray you between me and my enemies, if I have not done the
thing that's right?

Use. 2: The Second use shall instruct us in a point of wisdom, this; to hear
and obey that voice Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. This is the
voice of God in all the streets of the great City, that is, in all the ten
Kingdoms (especially) that either now do, or formerly have submitted themselves
to the Beast, Come out from amongst them my People.

Oh, we are no Papists, I, but art thou none of the Popish Faction, is not thy
heart with those that have joined hands with Papists in one common cause? if
so, in Gods interpretation thou art a Papist, and if thou do not come out
from amongst them, expect a share in their plagues. And as for thy not going to
Mass, it is true, I think thou do not love a Latin Mass, but peradventure thou
love an English Mass, but peradventure thou love and English Mass with all
thy heart; How welcome would the old Common prayer Mumpsimus be to thousands and
Millions in this Nation, before any minister of Christs-praying, or worshipping
in the Holy Ghost, as Saint Jude expresses it. And do not thou love and allow
thy self in some sins? lying is a Popish sin; Swearing, Blaspheming are popish
sins; Apostasy from Christ and the faith to follow our own Fancies, and
Delusions, a Popish sin; Pride and self-conceitedness, a Popish sin; hating and
fighting against God and his Saints, a Popish sin; sleighting the power and
purity of Ordinances, and profaning the Lords day, theft or any known dishonest
gain, the sin of Uncleanness, Adultery, Fornication, and Impenitency; all
these, yea many more that might be named, are Popish sins; The Israelites
though they went out of Egypt, yeat took too much of Egypt along with them,
their sins in the Wilderness were indeed Egyptian sins; We of the reformed
Churches, though we left Rome behind us, yet we brought too much of Rome along
with us, most or all those vile sins that are practiced amongst us, our
Ancestors found and learned them in the bosom of the Romish Church; and though
they did let go their Doctrines and forms of worship in a great measure, yet
they held fast very much corruption of manners, which we have inherited and
improved (I fear) to a greater pitch and stock of Impiety by far then when it was
left us; the Eternal God be merciful to us. I say if these or any other Popish
sins be found amongst us, God will put little difference between us and
Papists; these Popish sins, if they be not put away from amongst us, will
surely bring Popish plagues on us sooner or later.

In this late Earthquake amongst us, many (because they were of the Popish
Eaction, and Popish sins were found in them) were shaken all to pieces, and as
much of the Vial fell upon them as did upon Papists themselves.

But perhaps thou wilt tell me. thou have escaped, as many others also have; I
advise thee then, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; repent, or
else (believe it) that wrath which is due to a Papist will one day find thee
out. Therefore friends, let all of us have our ears and hearts open to this
voice from heaven, and come out from amongst them; those sins any Papist
lives in, do not thou live in; especially the ways a Papist walks in, let not
us walk in; that party or design a Papist ever did or will own, let us hate and
disclaim as we love our selves; and so we shall not only escape their Plagues,
but share in the Peace of God, and blessings of his own People.

Use 3. The third Use take thus. I remember what comendations the Holy Ghost
gives the men of Issachar, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. That they were men who had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. O that this could
be truly affirmed of us, that we did but know the times, and what we have to
do; that we could come once to understand our true Interest, and prosecute it
vigorously all of us, according to our places and power.

The grand Interest of all the People of God this day in Christendom, is, the
ruin of Pope and Popery: till that be done, I dare deliver it, Firm and
Blessed Peace and Happiness, in any Church or State, there will be none.

1. In this great quarrel of the times, between the Zealous Protestant, and
Popish Faction, hate that wise indifferency, and neutrality of some men. Judge.
8. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he and the
three hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them: And he said
unto the men of Succoth, Give I pray you loaves of bread unto the people that
follow me, for they be faint; and I am pursuing after Zeba, and Zalmunna kings
of Midian. And the Princes of Succoth said, are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna
now in thy hands, that we should give bread unto thy Army? And Gideon said,
therefore when the Lord has delivered them into my hands, then I will tear
your flesh with the thorns of the ^ilderness, and with briers. You may read
ver. 12. He took the two Kings, discomfited the whole Host, and by a guide he
lite on, came to Succoth, learned out the Princes, and ver. 16. Its said, He
took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with
them he [taught] the men of Succoth: He taught them how to stand Neuters when
the Cause was a disputing between the People of God and the Common Enemy, Judge.
5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty. Meroz did not help the mighty against the Lord,
nor yet help the Lord against the mighty, but would be wise, and save their own
stake, what way soever the game went: But the Angel of the Lord, the Lord
Christ, did curse, and curse, and curse them bitterly, effectually; and gave
all his People a charge that they should pray down curses upon them, because of
their Neutrality.

Let me tell you, this quarrel that now Christ is engaged in, it is of the
nearest concernment to him to prosper and speed well in it, that ever any was
in the world, and therefore be assured he will interpret manifest Neuters to be
close Enemies; those that are not with him of them, he will conclude they are
against him, which cannot but end in a bitter destructive curse.

2. Gather we courage and valor to our selves, though the enemies, and
difficulties of this work be never so many, never so great, and make up the
number of those Called, Chosen, Faithful ones that go forth after Christ, upon
this expedition, Rev. 19. Let Magistrates dispense Justice, Minsters dispense
Ordinances, every man do the duty of his place, as much as possibly we can, to
the difadvantage of Romes Interest. More particularly;

1. Let us wait with patience, Rev. 13.10. He that leads into captivity,
shall go into captivity; he that kills with the sword, shall be killed with
the sword; here is the [Patience] of the Saints (says St. John) to be
exercised in waiting for it; For yet a little while, and he that shall come
will come, and will not tarry. Give Christ his own time, and when it comes, it
will come with so much advantage every way, that thou would not for any thing
it should have come sooner. Christ times his Peoples mercies, and his time is
still the best; blessed are those that wait for him.

2. Get Faith, believe all that God has said in this business, that he will
fully execute each title of his threats upon him. Let thy Faith trade daily in
the blood of Christ for the more effectual speeding of it: for it is said, They
overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.11. that is, by exercising their
Faith in the blood of Christ.

3. Endeavor to be skillful in the Word, especially in all the windings and
turnings of this business made known.

It is both sin and shame that Christians, especially we Ministers, study and
understand no more of the Book of Revelations then we do. I am sure the
contents of it are of as near concernment to us, as any are in all the Book of
God; and I am sure God has given out an encouragement to it, in the beginning
of it, such as he has not for the reading of any other in all the Bible, Rev.
1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein: that reads and
studies them himself; that hears others expound, and preach the Word, and keeps
the weighty things thereof in his heart to support and comfort him in these
troublous sinking time, to direct and guide him amidst these many cross ways,
and strange turns of affairs. And he has given out a command for it in the
latter end of the Book, Rev 22.10. Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of
this book; for the time is at hand that they must be acted; therefore let the
book lie open for every one to read and study, that they may have understanding
of the times, and know what they have to do.

The Word is the sword of the Spirit; it is a hammer, a helmet; it is a fire, an
engine of Battery; it is any thing thou can stand in need of in this
expedition against him, Rev. 12.11. They overcame him by word of his testimony.

4, Give thy self much to Prayer; by Prayer thou may shut Heaven upon
Antichrist and his Factions (as the Witnesses, Rev. 11.6.) that they shall get
no showers of refreshment, no help, no mercy, no hope from God.

By Prayer thou may arm all the Hosts of Heaven and Eath against them, Psalm
18.6, 7, 8. In my distress I called upon the Lord, I cried unto my God, he
heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his
ears. Then the earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the hills moved,
and were shaken, because he was wroth; There went up a smoke out of his
nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured; coals were kindled by it. David's
praying undid Saul; Much more will the prayer of Faith unanimously put forth by
all the Saints, raise Heaven and Earth up in Arms against him. Prayer-blast
him, i will warrant thee thou may do it.

5. Carry thy life in thy hand, Rev. 12.11. They overcame him; how? Why, they
love not their lives unto the death. A dying time thou must have; thou can
never lose thy life (if I may call that a losing, which is indeed the greatest
gaining) so gloriously, comfortably, safely, as in this quarrel for God
against Antichrist: say with Paul, I count not my life dear unto me, so I may
but finish the work, Rev. 14.13. I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me,
Write, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them. The sense of this verse as it stands
in conjunction with the former verses, is a Cordial, reached forth to those who
shall lay down their lives for Christ in the quarrel, thus they die in the
Lord, blessed are they; they rest from the labors, strifes, combustions,
terrible broils that are in the World, for the pulling of him down; their
services and sufferings shall not be in vain, they shall follow them in the
rewards of them, triumphal Crowns, exceeding eternal weights of glory.

Happy are the men of this generation, according as they lay forth their parts
and power for Antichrist his ruin; it is the great work and business that God
has cut our for these times into which we are fallen, and blessed are they who
know their Masters Work, and earnestly pursue his and their true Interest.

They are deaf that do not hear this voice from the mouth of Christ, Who will
rise up for me against the evil doers, and who will stand up for me against the
workers of iniquity? Psalm. 94.16. Cursed is he that does work of the Lord
deceitfully; and cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood, Jer.
48.10.

You will say, none of all this was spoken concerning Antichrist; true; for
they were spoken concerning far inferior enemies, and left upon Record, to be
an alarm to us, then especially, when Christ should be up in Arms against his
greatest adversaries; if any should then withold his sword from blood, or do
the work he engages for, deceitfully, and is not in good earnest for the utter
ruin of Pope and Popery, surely such shall be cursed of God, and cursed again.
And do not say that in this I am cruel, lest you charge God foolishly, from
whose mouth (you are witnesses) I speak, Rev 18.6. Reward her even as she
rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works; in the cup
which she has filled fill to her double: as if he had said, spare her not, who
never spared the dear Saints of God; give her judgment without mercy, who did
never know to show mercy; you can never give her more then her iniquities have
deserved Reflect we, every one of us, upon our selves and carriage, and see
what we contribute to this great design Christ is gone forth upon. Do ye so
dispense Justice and Judgment, so administer Gospel Ordinances, Word and
Sacraments, so act your Faith, so Pray, so Fight, as may help to shake out the
remaining Vials of wrath faster and faster upon them? There is never a man or
woman in this Congregation, but may carry the matter so, as when Christ has
got the day and conquest, may without lying, or vanity of spirit, say, Through
the goodness of God upon me, I was a weapon, a poor instrument in the hand of
Jesus Chirst for the effecting of it; when Rome is all on a flaming fire, may
say, I was one that helped to set it on fire; when Babylon is fallen, I was one
that helped to pull it down: which if thou have done (not Jehu-like, out of
pride, and for thy own ends) but as service due to Jesus Christ, and for the
bringing in of his Kingdom, doubtless thy seed shall be blessed upon Earth, and
great shall be thy reward in Heaven.

Use 4. The last Use is to you who in reason may live to this great day of
Romes ruin, when you shall see the great Earthquake shaking their Political
Heavens and Earth all to pieces, and the greatest temporal glories now in
Christendom brought down, laid low, and trodden under foot; let it not trouble
you at all: for, let me tell you, those in Rev. 18. That shall tament her
burning, are none of Christ friends, but carnal wretches, and indeed his
enemies. Your duty upon it, is of a clean contrary nature. Rev. 18. you read of
Babylon fallen, as when a millstone is cast into the bottom of the Sea; of the
smoke of her burning, and that in one hour she is made desolate; says the Holy
Ghost, Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and Prophets, for
God has avenged you on her. Rev. 19.1. After these things (that is, after Rome
burnt, and laid in ashes) I heard a great voice of much People in Heaven (in
the true Church of Christ) saying, Allelujah, salvation, and honor, and glory,
and power unto the Lord our God, ver. 2. For true and righteous are thy
Judgments; for he has judged the great whore which did corrupt the Earth with
her Fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. ver.
3. And again they said, Allelujah, and her smoke rose up for ever and ever.
ver. 5. A voice came out of the Throne, saying, [praise our God] all ye his
servants, ye that fear him both small and great. It was one of S. Austins three
wishes (that he could have rejoiced greatly in) to have seen Rome in her glory,
though but heathenish; but I am confident were he upon earth now, one of his
greatest wishes wherein he would most please and solace himself, would be to
see Rome all on a flaming fire, and burnt to ashes, O quam pulchrum
spectaculum! And truly there is cause why you should rejoice in it with
exceeding great joy. 1. When the Witnesses were dead in the streets, you know
what was their carriage, Rev. 11. They rejoiced over them, made merry, sent
gifts; and God will have you to tread forth the law of retaliation; as they
rejoiced over your misery, so Gods tells you, it is an equal thing, and he
requires it as a duty of you, to rejoice greatly, over their miseries. 2. You
know what postures they stand in, in reference to Christ and his Church; they
provoke God daily with the highest hand that ever any did (as I have showed
you) they wrong Christ strangely, keeping him out of his just rights; they are
the proudest enemy, the cruellest enemy, and enemy of the longest continuance,
the most hopeless of ever being brought in by repentance, that ever the Church
had any; and therefore if ever the people of God might rejoice in the downfall
of an enemy, you may certainly in this. 3. Consider the sequel of their ruin,
which will be this, A Kingdom that cannot be shaken, as the Apostle speaks Heb.
12.27, 28. and if the Text be rightly understood, it speaks to this very time
and business. Out of the ruins and ashes these wars shall make, Christ will
bring the most glorious frame of Government that ever the world saw; and let
men and States do what they can, it will not be brought forth till then; but
then it shall; and can any Saint but rejoice in that which ushers in those good
and blessed times, Scripture is so abundant in promising? which shall be the
subject of the ensuing discourse.


THE REIGN OF CHRIST.

By Ed. Hawghton.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton. 1652.

TO THE READER.
I Would not have any one think that I am able (no, nor any man now alive) to
set forth the so-much-expected Kingdom of CHRIST in the true worth and glories
of it: let it suffice, if I give you some rude draughts of it. The Prophets of
old did speak very clear and excellent things concerning the Messiah, his
Birth, Life, Miracles, Doctrine, Death, Resurrection, and what was to follow
thereupon; insomuch that Isaias is usually called by Divines, the Evangelical
Prophet: But when John was come, our Savior says of him, Mat. 11. He was the
greatest of those that had been born of women, meaning in respect of his
knowledge of the Messiah; nay, that he was was more then a Prophet, i. e. he
had more abilities to speak of Christ's nature, offices, and excellencies of his
kingdom, then any or all the Prophets that had been before him: But yet, says
he, The least in the kingome of God, is greater then John the Baptist: After
the ascension of Christ, and descension of the Holy Ghost, the meanest Minister
of the Gospel was able to hold him forth, in all points, more excellently then
John the Baptist was.

To bring this home to the present business: We that now speak concerning this
great, this blessed Kingdom of Jesus Christ, only as Prophets, (yet not by
any private spirit, but groundedly from the Word) may speak very clear,
undoubted, and (in their ears especially to whom this subject is somewhat
strange and new) very wonderful things, almost incredible: but when Rome shall
come to be buried in its own ashes, and after that the great Battle of God
Almighty fought and finished, and Christ has his Kingdom actually upon the
Anvil, hammering and working it out; those whose lot it shall be to stand forth
Ministers of the Gospel then, and be eye witnesses of Christ so at work, of
them it may be said, They are the greatest of those that have been born of
women, in respect of their distinct knowledge of the Kingdom of our Lord; nay
more then Prophets, men far more accomplished to speak of the parts,
government, glory of his Kingdom, then any or all the most holy learned men
that have been before them, who saw it only at a distance, through the
Prospective of the more dark and general Promises, and spoke of it by way of
Prophecy: But they who shall be so far honored and blessed of God, to be
called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb, (as the expression is Rev. 19.) to
see this Kingdom drawn forth in all the just parts and lineaments of it, set
up to the height of its greatness and glory; I say, the least of them will be
greater then John the Baptist; my meaning is, will be far more able to preach
forth the excellencies of that Kingdom in all the dimensions of it, then were
those who were spectators of Jesus Christ when he was but at work upon it.

Therefore (Reader) I say again, since you ought in reason, let it answer your
expectation, if I set before you only some unpolisht draughts of it: The Church
of God will have more knowledge of this business, ere it be long. Dan. 12.4.
Shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end; many shall
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. The context rightly under
stood clearly gives it thus: That when the time of Antichrists reign, and the
Jews captivity shall draw toward an end, men and matters will be hurried to
and fro, there will be great stirs in the world; but then the sealed Book will
be opened; the knowledge of the Popes ruin, calling of the Jews, the starry
luster of Christ's kingdom will break forth, increase, and shine more and more
unto the perfect day. Which is the daily and fervent prayer of

Your true Friend, and Servant in the Lord, E. H.

The Reign of CHRIST.
Rev. 19.6. The Lord God Omnipotent reigns.


THe four and twenty Elders we read of, ver. 4. are the Representative of the
Church of Jews and Gentiles, arising out of twelve Patriarks and twelve
Apostles. The four Beasts there also mentioned, are the Ministerial Emblem,
who are elsewhere said to have the face of a Lion, of an Ox, of a Man, and of
an Eagle; that by their special courage, laboriousnesse, wisdom, speed, the
work of Jesus Christ, in its time, might be effectually carried on in the four
parts of the world.

These four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders, something they do, and
something they say: that which they did, was this, [they fell down and
worshipped him which sat upon the throne;] that which they said, was, [Amen,
Allelujah] be it even so as God has done; and, praise and honor and glory be
given to God. Two grounds they lay down for this their posture and carriage;
the first this, that he had judged the great Whore, which did corrupt the
earth, he had pulled down Babylon; the second this, he had set up himself, as
it is in the text, The Lord God omnipotent reigns.

There needs but little explanation of the words. [The Lord God] that is, the
Lord Christ; for Christ is truly God, 1 John 5.20. This is the true God; as
might abundantly out of other Scriptures be proved, yea the next word makes it
good, an incommunicable Attribute is given to him, Omnipotent, the Lord God
omnipotent; he is elsewhere called the mighty God, Isa. 9.6. which is of no
less import then Almighty or Omnipotent. [Reigneth] (i.) he is King: Why, was
he not King before? yes, but not so as he is now; now he reigns to some
purpose. The words thus opened, and relatively taken, afford us this point;

Upon the breaking to pieces of the Church of Rome, the Lord Christ will
reign, and King it so as he never did in the world before.

Christ has reigned from everlasting by Gods decree; he has reigned actually
since man's fall; he has reigned eminently since his ascension, and mission of
the Holy Ghost; but he will reign gloriously upon the expiration of the reign
of Antichrist.

The wonderfulnesse of this Kingdom we speak of, appears to us many ways:

First, from those Scripture-epithites and adjuncts of him and his
then-government. In the very text, the Lord God omnipotent reigns, [Omnipotent]
such a rule and government shall be set up, that all shall be convinced, and
say, Nothing under, nothing less then the Omnipotency of the Lord Christ
could set it up. Rev. 11.17. Thou have taken to thee thy [great] power, and
have reigned; then Christ's great power will be seen in his reigning. Isa.
24.23. Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of
Hosts shall reign in mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients
gloriously. You remember what I have spoken to the immediately preceding
verses; there is the great Earthquake, v. 18 19, 20. see Rev. 16 18. the ruin
of the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, v. 21. (see Rev 16 14.16) the
visiting and calling forth of the imprisoned Jews, v. 22. the reign of the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, v. 23. Take [Sun and Moon] how you will; Politically,
for the supreme powers of the Nations; or literally, for the great lights of
heaven; the Sun and Moon will be ashamed of themselves and confounded, as not
being the greatest glories and admirations of the world. When his Ancients the
Jews shall be fully brought in, Christ will reign [so gloriously] as shall
cast shame and darkness into the face of Sun and Moon. If you say, this
Scripture has been at any time fulfilled, I will not deny it, but affirm this,
that a prophecy may have a gradual fulfilling. ( Jer. 31.15. A voice (of an
old Grandmother raised out of her grave) was heard in Ramah, lamentation and
bitter weeping; Rachel weeping for her children, refused to be comforted,
because they were not. This was fulfilled, when Israel went captives into
Babylon; which will be undeniably clear, if you read on to the 22 verse: and
yet when Herod killed the children, upon his search after him that was born
King of the Jews, Mat. 2.17, 18. then was fulfilled that which was spoken by
Jeremy the Prophet, saying, In Ramah was a voice heard, lamentation, etc.) If
Isaias prophecy of Christ's reigning before his Ancients, has been at any time
fulfilled, much more will it be fulfilled in the day may Text points at; then
it will be fulfilled to the uttermost, fulfilled gloriously; you see it is
epithited, A glorious reign.

Secondly, Christ his then-mannagement of affairs, the Holy Ghost sets it forth
in such high language (to answer the reality of the Kingdom) as has deceived
many thousands, as if it should be a glorious personal reign. 2 These. 2.8. Then
shall the wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of
his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

The Lord has two ways to bring down Antichrist. First, He consumes him by
the spirit of his mouth, i. e. by the ministry of the Word; ever since Luther,
the Pope has been in a Consumption; you might see it in his face. The second,
is, by his own coming, the brightness of his coming; some take it for a
personal appearance to give him his deaths wound. Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes
with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which peirced him, and
all Kinreds of the Earth shall wail because of him; even so, Amen. That this
cannot be meant of the day of Judgment, is evident, because, the mourning here
spoken of, is a penitential mourning, and is taken out of Zach. 12.10. at the
last day, all the Saints shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory;
all the wicked shall be hardened in impenitency, and though they may howl over
their own misery, yet not mourn after Christ; there will be no penitential
mourning in that day; and therefore Christ will appear in the clouds before
that day, and every eye shall see him, especially the people of the Jews.

I could give you other Scriptures that speak to the same effect: But yet these
(as express as they are) with the rest which look that way, are not fully
convicing, as I conceive; for,

1. I find often in Scripture, what is carried on by Instruments, ascribed to God
as if the had done it personally, without the use of any such Instruments. Rev.
16.456. The third Angle poured out his Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains of
Waters, and they became blood; and they say unto God, Thou art righteous O Lord
[who have judged thus, and thou have given them blood to drink.] All grant that
this Vial was poured out (as were also all the rest) by men, holy and spiritual
men; yet they speak to God, and say, [thou] have judged thus, [thou] have given
them blood to drink. 1 Chronicles 16.13. Let the heavens be glad, and let the Earth
rejoice, and let men say among the Nations, the Lord reigns. ver. 33. The
Trees of the Wood shall sing out at the presence of the Lord, because he comes
to judge the Earth. Ps. 22.28. The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is governor
among the Nations. Isai. 33.22. The Lord is our judge, the Lord in our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King: but none of all this immediately by himself,
or personally, but in the use of Instruments.

So that thought it be said, he shall destroy Antichrist with the brightness of
his coming (at which time also he will set up his Kingdom and reign) yet may it
well enough be understood of a coming in those ten Kings or Supreme powers that
Scripture says shall hate the whore and burn her flesh with fire; and he may
as well set up his kingdom, and reign also in and by them, and such like.

2. How can a circumscribed body (as Christ has) be personally, visibly in all
and every of his kingdoms at once? When he shall reign visibly, personally on
mount Sion or at Jerusalem, he cannot at the same time reign personally and
visibly here in this Nation, but must rule it and all others by his Deputies:
therefore it is safer to let him keep his place at Gods right hand in heaven,
then bring him down to sway an earthly scepter, seeing he may do it in his
Spirit by some special Instruments; and comparatively, in respect of those he
has formerly ruled in, it may be said that Christ himself reigns, not
personally upon earth, but after so eminent and wonderful a manner, in certain
select servants, as he never reigned in the world before.

3. Christ will usher in his kingdom with the most glorious conquests over
earthly powers, that ever were known.

I have spoken much to this already; it was the subject of the last point; yet
for method sake give me leave to speak a word to it here. Rev. 6.12. to the
end. I beheld when he opened the sixth seal, and lo there was a great
earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became
as blood; and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as figtree casts
her untimely figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind. And the heaven departed
as a scroll when it is rolled together, and every mountain and Island were moved
out of their places. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and rich
men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every
freeman hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains, and said
to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? The most and best reformed
Expositors, do (with one mouth) tell us, that upon the opening of the sixth
Seal, Christ in Constantine did pull down Heathenisme, set up Christianisme;
and the victories were so great, so terrible, that by their description you
would think them to be the end of the world: The terrors of Jesus Christ were
so upon the spirits of Kings, Captains, mighty men, as that had the earth
shaken under them, the mountains and Islands moved out of their places, had the
sun turned to darkness, the moon to blood, stars fallen from heaven, had
heaven and earth come together, and the world been at an end, there could not
have been greater fears, greater outcries to the rocks and mountains, to be
hid from the wrath of the Lamb; some poisoning, some hanging, some drowning
themselves, some flying and fell by the sword, all at their wits end. Thus
Christ set up Christianity by Constantine: But (as I showed you at large) it
soon degenerated into Antichristianism or Papacy, (the most Politic and
strongest consitution against Christ that ever any was) the very
foundation-stones whereof the must and will pluck up, that so he may build up
himself a sure throne and kingdom.

But you will say, It Is impossible Christ should bring in his worship and
kingdom with greater and more terrible conquests over the Kings of the earth,
then those he got over the Heathenish powers. Let me tell you, Nothing is
impossible to the Lord God omnipotent; He tells us, he will bring in his Reign
with far greater. Rev. 16 17.18. When the seventh Angel poured out his Vial
into the air, there were voices, and thunderings, and lightenings, and there
was a great earthquake [such as was not since men were upon earth] so mighty an
earthquake and so great. To the same purpose understand that of Dan 12.1. At
that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for the
children of thy people, and there shall be [a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a Nation, even to that same time] and at that time thy
people shall be delivered. These matchless troubles should be at that time,
when Daniels people, the Jews, all the twelve Tribes, that are now lost in the
dust, should be sound out and delivered: which Scripture tells us in places
enough, shall be upon the breaking of Antichrist. Dan. 2.44. And in the days
of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall [break in
pieces all these kingdomes] i. e. all these kingdoms of the world, putting all
rule and authority (that is carnal, and stands in opposition to this designs)
under his feet. Many and mighty victories (you know) make a Kings reign
glorious; why, Christ himself never got such victories over men in this world,
as then he will do.

Fourthly, Scripture sets it forth as the day of his marriage solemnity. The
Lord God omnipotent reigns; so my Text; the next verse expresses it thus,
[The marriage of the Lamb is come;] and v 9. They who are called to have a
share in this kingdom, are blessed of God, being called to the [marriage supper
of the Lamb] to a continual and the most sumptuous Feast that ever was. You may
be sure that Christ on that day will appear in no mean royalty and glories,
which may be gathered from the description of the Bride; for it is said v. 7.
She has made her self ready, araied finely, v. 8. In Solomon's time she was
brought in raiment of needle work, nay her clothing of wrought gold, so the
King did greatly desire and delight in her beauty, Ps. 45. But the Bride is
described (upon the fall of Antichrist) at a higher rate. Rev. 21.2. I saw the
holy city, New-Ierusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a
Bride adorned for her husband. Not dressed with needle work, or cloth of gold,
things here below of the earth earthly; but she is prepared and dressed as if
she had dropped out of heaven, clothed with the glories of heaven, and this
only to fit her in some measure for the Bridegroom. If the Church shall be so
glorious in that day, shall not the King upon the throne in the height of his
state and government, be more exceeding glorious in all eyes?

Fifthly, His reign will be wonderful and unparalled, in respect of the
extent of his domination. Rev. 10.1, 2. And I saw a mighty Angel come down from
heaven, and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the
earth; (Earth and Sea, make up the whole Globe) thereby signifying that he
would (when time served) take possession of all the world; the power and
majesty of his throne and scepter should be extended over sea and land. Psalm.
2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Psalm. 72.8. He shall have
dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. Rev.
15.3, 4. Thou King of Saints, who shall not fear thee? [All nations] shall
come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest, viz. upon
the Pope and his kingdom. Isa. 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the last
days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, aod all nations shall flow
unto it. The generality of the Nations shall come flocking in as Doves to the
windows.

First, those Ten Kingdoms that had given their power to the Beast; all ties,
all bands of peace and amity between them shall be strangely broken and
dissolved; nay, such a spirit shall come upon them, that they shall hate the
whore, and even burn her flesh with fire, Rev. 17. This (you must confess) is a
great, eminent coming in, and giving up themselves to and for Jesus Christ.

Secondly, He will find out and bring home to himself his old dear people. Romans
11.25, 26 I would not, brethren, that you should be ignorant of this mystery,
that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There
shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from
Jacob. I like their interpretation best, who by [fulnesse of the Gentiles
coming in] understand the fullness or most part of those Nations that had given
themselves to Popery, when then eyes shall be opened to see what they have
done, and then (giving themselves to Christ) in an holy indignation shall set
Rome on fire, yea quite destroy Pope and Popery; this will mightily work upon
the hearts of the two Tribes, in time on the ten Tribes. The fullness of the
Gentiles being thus come in, then all Israel shall come in and be saved, as
it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob: Now [Iacob] (you know) comprehends all the twelve
Tribes; for the twelve Patriarks, from whom all the twelve Tribes descended,
came out of Jacob's loins. Isa. 11 11* 12. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that the Lord shall set his hand again [the second time] to recover the
remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and
from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath,
and from the Islands of the sea. He shall gather together the dispersed of
Judah, and assemble the outcasts of Israel, from the four corners of the earth.
God had gathered them from all the nations, from all the places whither he had
caused them to be carried away captive once before, as you may see Ier. 29.14.
He had fetched them out of Babylon and out of all the Provinces round; but this
is a second time, and he will gather together the outcasts of [Israel] and the
dispersed to [Iudah] (which since their great division, 2 Chronicles. 10. he never
yet did) and make them one, as you have it Ezekiel. 37.19.21, 22. Thus says the
Lord, behold I will take the stick of Joseph which is in the hand of Ephraim,
and the Tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with
the stick of Judah, and make them one stick and they shall be one in my hand.
And thus says the Lord, behold I will take the children of Israel from among
the Heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and
bring them into their own land: And I will make them one nation; and one King,
viz. Christ, shall be King to them all; and they shall be no more two nations,
neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all. This has not
been yet fulfilled, but will be in the day of Christ's kingdom. Take one place
more Hos. 1.10, 11. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was
said unto them, Ye are not my people, (as at this day we know it is) there it
shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God. Then shall the
children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint
themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the land, (i. e. out of
every land where they haven been lost) for great shall be the day of Iezerel.
[Iezerel] signifies both [scattered] and [the seed of God.] Great shall be the
day of Iezerel, (i. e.) great shall be the day of bringing in the scattered,
the scattered people: Or thus; Great shall be the day of Iezerel, (i. e.) great
shall be the day of the seed of God, of springing up of the seed of Gods
people: they have lain a great while under the clods, as if they had been lost
or quite dead; but God has a day wherein his seed shall spring up into a
harvest of joy, and all that see them shall acknowledge they are the seed which
the Lord has blessed, as it is Isa. 61.9.

Thirdly, after these, the residue of the Nations shall be the Lords, Zach.
8.22, 23. Many and strong Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hoasts in
Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. And in those days it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the Nations, even
shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you
for we have heard that God is with you. That which was done Act. 2. will not
agree to this Text; for we do not read of many and strong Nations coming in
then. You will say, how can many and strong Nations come in to Jerusalem at any
time? Doubtless it will be by Agents or Messengers, according to Zach. 7.2, 3.
when the Jews shall send forth their Emissaries into all Lands to Preach Christ
to them, there shall go a great blessing, a mighty power of the Spirit along,
that the hearts of the Nations generally shall be mightily taken with them; and
there shall be certain men out of every Nation and Language authorized to take
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and say, we will go up to Jerusalem
with you (for God and Christ are with you) to have the most exact and perfect
Directory, that we and our whole Nation may worship God aright. Once Christ in
his Rule and Government was kept within the narrow bounds of Jury; then he
stretched forth the arms of his power over the Gentiles; first the Eastern,
then the Western Churches: but the day is coming wherein he will lift up a
Scepter over all the Nations of the world, Dan. 7.14. There was given him
Dominion, Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should
serve him. He reigns a glorious King indeed, that is, King of all Kings, of all
Kingdoms and Nations in the Earth.

Sixthly, Christ will then given his People more purity and power of Ordinances
then ever the Churches did enjoy. Take me (I pray you) in my own sense:
Ordinances as they came from the Apostles themselves, were pure, perfect,
because they were the immediate inspirations or breathings of the Holy Ghost:
but consider them in the hands of diverse others, and in the hands of succeeding
Officers and Churches: and what Errors, yea, damnable Doctrines were there
presently found amongst them? Which increased daily, grew worse and worse, till
at last there came out of the womb of them the great Antichrist. But when
Christ shall set up this Kingdom whereof we speak, there shall be no danger by
any gross Errors, or seduction by false Teachers: Isa 30.25, 26. There shall be
upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams of
waters, in the day of the great slaughter, when the Towers, fall. Moreover, the
light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun; and the light of the Sun
shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord
binds up the breach of his People, and heals the stroke of their wound.
These rivers and streams of Ordinances shall break forth in all the Churches in
the day of the great slaughter, and when the Towers fall, (i. e.) when the Pope
and towering Kings shall be brought down, Rev. 19 17. to 21. There shall be this
wonderful increase of Gospel Light, when God shall heal that spiritual wound
the poor Jew lies so sick of to this day, when he shall bind up the breach that
is between the ten and the two Tribes, making them one in faith and love. Rev.
22.1. He showed a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb. Romish Ordinances were the blood of a
dead man, but the Ordinances of Christ's Kingdom shall be a river of life most
clear and pure. ver. 2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side
the River, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and
yielded her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing
of the Nations. Christ in his Ordinances will be a wonderful tree of life,
bearing both all plenty, and all variety of fruits, free and open for every one
to pluck and feed upon; a healing virtue there is in the very leaves thereof;
the most outward parts of Ordinances will have saving efficacy upon men's
hearts. God will then send forth men of eminent parts and graces, Obad. ver.
22. Saviors shall come up on Mount Sion, to judge the Mount of Esau, and the
Kingdom shall be the Lords. In the day when the Lord shall take the Kingdom to
himself, there shall be Saviors raised up upon Mount Sion; in the Margent of
your Bibles you have a parallel place put, 1 Timothy 4.16. Save the self and those
that hear thee, q.d. be a Savior to thy self and others, Obadiah calls the
then-Ministers of the Gospel [Saviours] because their Gospel-dispensations
shall be in the holiness and power of the great Savior of men, the Lord Jesus
Christ. And there will be the most zealous and impartial exercise of
Church Discipline that ever was, to keep out, to purge out both the profane
and the erroneous; for which take two or three Scriptures, Rev. 21.27. There
shall in no wise enter into it (i. e. into the holy City which comes down from
God out of Heaven) any thing that desileth, neither whatsoever works
abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are written in the Lambs book of
life. Not but that (doubtless) there will be hypocrites in the Church; but they
shall be so close, they shall so artificially paint and varnish themselves over
with seeming holiness, that they may very well be taken in the judgment of
charity, for such whose names are written in the Lambs book of life; but if
once they appear to be defilers of themselves or others, any kind of way, nay
if they be but catched in lying, if such offer themselves, they shall not
enter, shall not be received; if they be got in, they shall quickly be sent
packing again, Zach. 13 1. In that day [when there shall be a great mourning in
Jerusalem because of him whom they had pierced, Chap. 12.10, 11.] There shall
be a fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness, i. e. abundant streams, not
only of Doctrine and Worship, but also of Discipline; for it follows, That
Idols and false Prophets shall be cut off. ver. 2. And if any one continue to
Prophecy or Preach lies, even his Father and Mother that begat him, shall
cause him to be thrust through, with the sword of the Spirit, or Church-censure;
such zeal and impartiality will there be in the exercise of Discipline. The
effect or success thereof follows, ver. 4. They sall be ashamed of their false
Prophesies or Lies, In this (as also in many other Prophesies) Evangelical
matters are clad with legal and old terms.
and shall cast off their formal garbs, and varnishes, whereby they have passed
for Prophets, and deceived the People. And shall confess, ver. 5. and say, I am
no Prophet, I am a Husbandman (a Weaver, a Mercer etc.) for man taught me to
keep Cattle from my youth. Yea, they shall come to own, to love, and thank
those that thus put the penal Laws of Christ in force against them. ver. 6. One
shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thine hands? then he shall answer,
those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. Those who discovered
me, that witnessed against me, that smote and censured me, they were my
friends. See both in one place; it is Mal. 3. ver. 2 3 4 5. Who may abide the day
of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a Refiners
fire; and like Fullers soap. And he shall sit as a Refiner, and purifier of
Silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and
Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord and offering in righteousness. Then
shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the
days of old. And I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against false
Swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow,
and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear
not me, says the Lord. If this Scripture have been at all fulfilled, it shall
at this time be much more fulfilled; it shall at this time be much more
fullfilled; there will be Soap and Niter in his Ordinances, fire in his
Discipline; and if men be Sorcerers, or Adaulterers, or Oppressors, or any way
discover it, that the fear of God is not in them, God will bring in swift
witness against them, and sharp sentence upon them. Christ will be very
glorious in that day in the dispensation of all kinds of Ordinances.

Seventhly, such as the Ordinances are, such will their effects be upon the
hearts and consciences of men, whom they shall bring in as presents to Jesus
Christ the King; excellent Ordinances, and excellent Converts. In the verse
after my Text, the marriage of the Lamb is come, his Wife has made her self
ready; what her clothing was, see v. 8 she was arraied in fine linen, clean
and white; the fine linen is the righreousnesse of the Saints. They Will be fine
Saints, gallant Saints; Herod's gorgeous appare; did not reflect more gloriously
to the peoples eyes, then the righteousness, holiness good words shall do,
which Christ in that day shall cloth and dress his Church withal. Isa. 60.
This whole Chapter can properly be understood of no other time then that of
Christ's kingdom: and says God to Isaiah, v. 21. Thy people also shall be all
righteous, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified. I understand the verse thus; All that are righteous (and many will
be so) will be eminently righteous; they will be such fruitful branches, that
every one must say, they are none of man's pianting, no ordinary plants, but the
special planting of God himself; they will be such excellent Saints, that all
must acknowledge them the work of Gods own hands after a more especial manner
then former Saints were; they will be every way such, that God will be glorified
in them exceedingly. Isa. 62.12. They shall be called the [Holy people] (the
Context there speaks to this very time and business) there shall be such a
glory of holiness upon them, that they shall take a name from it, and be
thereby known and distinguished from Saints and men of other times. Zach.
14.20, 21. In that day there shall be upon the Bells of the horses, [Holinesse
to the Lord] yea, and every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be [Holinesse
to the Lord.] I take the meaning to be this; They shall discover much
holiness, not only when they are in religious duties, but also in the civil
use of every creature they meddle with, they will use all as in the very sight of
God himself.

And there may be causes assigned of such their excellency.

1. Much of the wickedness that has been in the world hitherto, has come
from Satan. Unexpressible, unconceivable was the sinfulness of that sin our
first parents committed; but you know who tempted them into it; the Serpent
beguiled me, says Eve. David numbered the people; but the Text says, that
Satan stirred him to it, or else he would never have done so vain, so proud an
action. You remember the counsel Peter gave our Savior, Mat. 16. and what
answer Christ gave Peter, Get thee behind me Satan; not that Peter was turned
to Satan, but that Satan was crept into Peter. Judas betrayed Christ; but it is
said, Satan entered into him. Act. 5. Ananias had the face to lie, not to men
only, but unto God; but he acted from him who is the Father of lies; Peter said
to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart? Mat. 5. Let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay; for what is more then this, is of the evil one (so the Greek) i.
e. is of the devil. Ever since Adam was in Paradise, God has suffered the
Devil to range up and down the world, or (as the expression is, Job 1.) to
compass the earth to and fro, from whence have sprung most, if not all, those
villainies and horrid wickednesses that have been perpetrated in every Age. But
[then] Christ will tie him up fast enough in his place, Rev 16. The Kings of
the earth, and of the whole world (instigated, acted by the Spirits of Devils)
engage in battle against God Almighty: Well, chap. 19. Christ feasteth all the
fowls of the air with their flesh, takes the Beast and false Prophet, and
throws them alive into the Lake that burns with fire and brimston.

He had no sooner carried his Father news (to speak after the manner of men)
what a total rout and conquest he had got over his Enemies, but while the heat
of his rage is yet upon him, he comes down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, a great chain in his hand, and laid hold on the dragon, that
old Serpent, which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,
cast him into the bottomless pit, shut him up, set a seal upon him, that he
should deceive Nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled,
Rev. 20.1.2.3. I cannot assent to those who say this binding of him, is done
and past; I am sure he was loose enough in the Apostles times, 1 Cor. 7.5.2
Cor. 2.11. chap. 11.14.1 These. 2.18.1 Tim. 5.15. Rev. 2.9.13. After the
Apostles days he did so bestir himself as to improve the errors of
Christians, the corrupt lives of Christians into the great Apostasy or
Antichristianism; Then the Dragon gave the Pope his Seat, his Keys, his Power,
and great Authority; and the Text says, the bottomless pit was opened: yea kept
open; for the smoke of that hellish furnace ascended daily, and darkened the sun
and air, and so continued to do above a thousand years: It Is strange to me,
that the Devil should be shut up, and Hell open: Therefore I am satisfied, this
Prophecy of binding Satan will be fulfilled after the great Battle of God
almighty (and not till then.) Christ has shortened his Chain, given him many a
curb and check within this hundred years, and will so yet more and more; but
bound, shut up, sealed up, he will not be, till after the Beast and false
Prophet are taken and destroyed, but then he will, and shall deceive the
Nations no more, till the thousand years are past.

In your Iron Mills a fire there might be; but were the bellows taken away,
certainly not so great, so violent a burning by an hundred fold. The Devils
that continually day and night haunt and wait upon us, are the great bellows of
men's lusts, whereby such a world of flaming iniquity is amongst us; but when
Christ shall come, and take away these bellows, and lock them up, the fire of
men's corruptions must needs be exceedingly abated, not only of men regenerate,
but also of men unregenerate. I dare say, were it not for the devil, and his
Angels, we should not run into so many sins and exorbitancies in a year, as now
we do in a month. Upon the destroying of Heathenism Satan was cast down to the
Earth, Rev. 12. but upon the pulling down of Pope and Popery, he, with all his
Regiments, shall be cast into hell, a trap door let fall upon him, sealed up,
and so shall not come forth to provoke men to impieties against God for a long
time.

2. The second cause of the exceeding great excellency that shall be in the
Subjects of this Kingdom, is the abundance of Grace that will come down from
heaven upon them. The 72 Psalm is chiefly, if not wholly spent upon this
Kingdom of Christ: v. 6. Ye read thus; He shall come down [like rain] upon the
mowen grass, as [showers] that water the earth. Zach. 12.10. (I have before
sufficiently cleared it; this and the following Chapter speak directly to the
time and business I am upon) I will pour upon the house of David, and upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, (the grace
of Faith) they shall look upon me whom they have pierced; (the grace of
Repentance) they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and
shall be in bitterness for him. Observe the expression; it is not, I will
sprinkle grace upon them, but I will [poure] grace upon them, the grace of
faith, the grace of repentance, in which are comprehended all other graces; God
will then pour out his Spirit upon them abundantly. Chap. 13.1. In that day
there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David ( viz the two Tribes)
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem ( viz. the ten Tribes) for sin and for
uncleanness. We have but small Rivulets, they will have the Fountain of the
blood of Christ opened, flowing full stream upon them. As I have said before,
if these two Prophesies were fulfilled in the days of primitive Christians,
much more will they be fulfilled in the great and glorious day of Christ's
kingdom. Take one Text more, Rev. 21 10, 11. He showed me that great City, the
holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God, and
her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a Iasper-stone, clear
as Crystal. Which expressions resolved into their true and native sense, must
needs be this; The abundance of precious and glorious graces God will will then
send down out of heaven upon his people.

3. The third and last cause may be made up thus: The pains and vigilance of
Pastors over their Flocks, which will be very great, the Ordinances falling
more immediately then ever, in the Power, Majesty, Authority of God upon their
hearts; the quick and smart acting of Discipline which then will be; and that
spirit of watchfulness that every man will have over himself, and his neighbor
also; every Saint in that day will be not only his own, but his brothers
keeper, and stirrer up to the thing that's good. Jer. 50.4, 5. In those days,
and in that time, says the Lord, [the children of Israel shall come, they and
the children of Judah together] going and weeping, they shall go and seek the
Lord their God, saying, [Come let us] join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. (But the least part of this
Prophecy was fulfilled upon their return out of Babylon; it chiefly points at
a time when Israel and Judah, all the twelve Tribes shall come together to seek
the Lord, and when they shall join themselves to God in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten; they renewed their Covenant upon their return out
of Babylon; but that has been long since forgotten; but when they shall be
called again, then their Covenant with God will be perpetual indeed, from
generation to generation, and never be forgotten more) but that which I aim at
in this Scripture, lies in these words [Come, let us] their zeal will mightily
provoke one another; you have yet a more pregnant place for it. Zich. 8.20, 21.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, it shall come to pass, that there shall come
people, and the inhabitants of many Cities; and the inhabitants of one City
shall go to another, saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of Hosts, I will go also. That it speaks how the pulse of Saints
will beat one toward another upon the calling of the Jews, the two last verses
sufficiently clear it to any indifferent and intelligent Reader. So then (to
give you briefly the sum of what I have said upon this branch of the Kingdom)
Satan, the bellows that blew men's lusts into such flames, shall be taken from
amongst them, whereby their natural corruptions shall lie very still in them:
Next, God will send down Grace abundantly into their hearts, and nature, which
will search out, and exceedingly prevail against the lusts that are in men,
though they lie hid never so close, Heb. 4.12, 13. And lastly, there will be
Pastors, Ordinances, Discipline, and keeping Sentinel one over another: by all
which means, their Gifts, their Graces and goodness will be raised to a more
abundant height then otherwise they would or could have been. I tell you, there
will be gallant times for grace and holiness, such as the world was never
acquainted with before.

Eigthly, his reign will be wonderful for the peace that shall accompany it:
when once the great Battle of God Almighty is fought and past, Christ will then
appear to the world to be the true Melchisedech, not only King of
Righteousness, (as I but now showed you) but also King of Salem, i e. King of
peace, ruling all the Kingdoms of the world (for the generality of them will be
his) in external peace. Isa. 9.6, 7. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is
given, he shall be called the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his
government and peace, ( i. e. his government of peace, or peace of his
government) there shall be no end (and that this be not limited to internal
peace) it follows, upon the Throne of David to order and establish it: but
David's Throne and government of peace was external; therefore so also shall
Christ's be. Isa. 2.2. It shall come to pass in the last days, that the
Mountain of the Lords house shall be established upon the top of the Mountains,
and all Nations shall flow unto it. ver. 4. He shall judge among the Nations,
and rebuke many People, and they shall beat their Swords into Plough-shares,
and their Spears into pruning hooks, and National shall not lift up sword
against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more. Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. The
Woolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, the
Calf, the young Lion, and the fatling together; and a little Child shall lead
them. The Cow and Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together,
and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. The sucking Child shall play on the
hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. The Prophet
goes on in the 10, 11, 12. verses concerning this Kingdom, and, says he, ver.
13. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, the adversaries of Judah shall be
cut off, Ephraim shall not envy Judah, Judah shall not vex Ephraim. Isa. 60.18.
Violence shall be no more heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within by
borders; and therefore is it ver. 11. Thy gates shall be open continually, they
shall not be shut day nor night. And sure such a City who never shut their
gates, take themselves out of all possibility of danger. This 11. ver. S. John
quotes, Rev. 21.25. The gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there
shall be no night there, (i. e.) no night of darkness caused by enemies, wars,
sorrows, oppressions; for (says Christ) I will make all thine Officers peace,
Isa. 60.17. There were no end of giving you Scriptures that must of necessity
be understood of the peace of this Kingdom. Rev. 21.2, 3, 4. Ezekiel. 34.24, 25.
My servant David (meaning Christ) shall be a Prince amongst them. And I will
make with them a Covenant of Peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out
of the Land, and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the
wood, (i. e.) without fear or danger, which is unusual and unknown. Ver. 28.
They shall no more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the beasts of the
Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.
He gives you light ver. 29. when this shall be, And I will raise up for them a
plant of Renown, and they shall be no more consume with hunger in the Land,
neither bear the shame of the heathen any more. This place cannot be fulfilled
yet, since Ezekiel spoke it; for they have been a prey to the heathen, beasts
have devoured them; they all bear the shame of the Heathen at this day: But
when the time comes that this promise shall be fully made good to them, these
things shall never befall them more, but there shall be peace to him that comes
in, and to him that goes out; they shall have peace extended to them like a
River, as the expression is, Isa. 66.12. He speaks to our present purpose, as
the context there clearly gives it.

Ninthly, His Reign will bring wonderful plenty, and outward prosperity to his
Subjects, Isa. 30.23. Then shall he give the rain of thy seed that thou shall
sow the ground withal, and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be
fat and plenteous; in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures, ver.
24. The oxen likewise and young asses, that ear the ground, shall eat clean
provender which has been winnowed with the shovel, and with the fan. There
being such plenty, they will not grudge it them, they may well afford them
clean provender.

The two following verses, I quoted under the sixth Head; they speak of the
abundance and increase of Blessings Spiritual, all which (says the Prophet)
shall be in the day of the great slaughter, Rev. 19.20. And when God shall
bind up the breach between the two Tribes and the ten, then there will be
plenty of all things, not only for the soul, but also for the body. Isa 60.16.
Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of Kings
(you must take special notice of this all along, that the great and glorious
Promises of this Kingdom are made primarily and chiefly to the Nation of the
Jews; the Nations of the Gentiles not excluded; they also shall share in them,
according as they shall come in to Christ) ver. 17. For brass, I Will bring gold,
for iron silver, for wood brass, and for stones iron; I will also make thy
officers peace, and thy exactors righteousness; They shall not be impoverished
by those that bear rule amongst them. Ezekiel 34.26. I will make them and the
places round about my hill, a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come
down in his season, and there shall be showers of blessings. ver. 27. And the
tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her
increase. Rev. 21.24. The Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor
into it. ver. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations into
it. Time was, and in part yet is, that the Kings and Kingdoms of the world
brought the glory of their power and wealth, and laid it all down at
Antichrists feet to enrich him, to make him a pompous pampered Beast; but the
days are certainly coming wherein they shall make as much haste to lay down
all the feet of Jesus Christ and his People, according to that Dan. 7.27. the
kingdom and dominion and greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall
be given to the People of the Saints of the most. High, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him.

Tenthly, The setting up of this Throne of his will make such a change (from
bad to good) in all points, that in Scripture it is called a new world. Rev.
21.1. And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the
first earth were past away, viz. The Political Heavens and Earth of Popish
wordly powers, they vanished, and new ones came up in their place. According to
this Text must diverse others be understood, Isa 66. from the 18. verse to the
end of the Chapter, the Prophet Treats wholly of this Kingdom.

In the last verse, he bids you look on the carcases, of the men that had
transgressed against Christ, how remarkably and everlastingly they are
destroyed: In the 18, 19, 20. verses, you have the Calling of the Jews, and
Nations of the Gentiles: In the 21. and 23. verses, you have the Ministers and
Ordinances of the Gospel set Though under Legal terms.
forth; and verse 22. all this called new heavens and new earth. In the Margent
of this Scipture, there are diverse quotations: I would commend two of them to
your notice; One is, Isa 65.17. For behold I create new heavens, and new earth;
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into my mind. That which God
will do, is so strange, so mighty a Work, that in comparison of Gods former
Works of Providence, it is called a Creation of new Heavens and new Earth, which
cannot be understood concerning the material Heavens and Earth; for it is a
Prophecy of something to come, that then was not; but there was as much, yea
the very same Heavens and Earth (properly taken) then, as there is now, or ever
will be; there will be no change in the now Visible or Material Heavens and
Earth, but the same Earth, Sea, Sun, Moon, Stars to Christ's last coming:
Therefore the Prophet means and calls them [new] in respect of former ones (as
it is in the Text) the former shall not be remembered, Honoris gratia: The
Political Heavens and Earth (as I said before) of the Pope and Popish worldly
Kingdoms, these shall pass away, and Christ shall set up new Heavens, viz. a
Heavenly King and Government over all the World; Heavenly Officers to rule
under him, Thy exactors shall be righteousness; heavenly Ordinances, heavenly
gifts and graces shall shine forth, heavenly Pastors and Discipline: and a new
earth of external peace, and external plenty: the following verses of that 65.
of Isaiah, will force your thus to understand it.

The other Scripture the Margent quotes, is 2 Pet. 3.12, 13. Looking for, and
hastening to the coming of the day of God, etc. Nevertheless we, according to
promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness,
q.d. though I bid you look for and hasten to the great day of God, wherein all
shall be set on fire; yet nevertheless (take special notice how that word [
nevertheless v. 13.] comes in) do not fear that you shall lose that glorious
Kingdom upon earth, that your hearts are generally so much set upon. ( Act.
1.6, 7. Lord, wilt thous now restore the kingdom to Israel; That the Messiah
would do it, 'twas commonly known, and believed of all the Jews, and by these
taken for granted; our Savior denies not the matter of their Quaere, suffering
them to go on in their Faith of the thing it self, only gives check to their
curiosity, It is not for you to know the times and seasons the Father has put
in his own hands.) Fear not (say Peter) before the great and last burning, we
(groundedly from a promise) expect that God will make, and give us (in our
Posterity) new heavens and new earth, in which shall dwell, none of that base
ungodliness, the present heavens and earth of the Kingdoms of this World are
full of, but in which shall dwell Righteousness (as it is Rev 9 8.) He names the
chief thing in Christ's Kingdom, which will bring with it all the rest I have
spoken of to you.

If we that live now, who have taken notice of the present state of things,
might be raised out of our graves, and have a full view of the Kingdom Christ
will set up everywhere, certainly there would be no more spirit in us; we
should cry out, here is noting of that World that was when we were upon earth;
we see none of the old Kings and Queens, old Rulers, old Governments, old Sins
and Sinners, old ways that formerly were; all the old things are gone, and
behold all is become new: Here Is a new King, and new Officers, new kind of
Preachers, new Ordinances, new Discipline, new Saints, new Church, new State,
all is become new: Why, this is not the World that was when we were alive;
behold here is a new World that the Lord Christ Omnipotent has Created.

Lastly, This Kingdom shall be of no small continuance. Surely Christ will not
be at all this care, cost, pain, to pull down, to set up, to make a new World
of it, and all this but for a day, or a year. Antichrist had a thousand two
hundred and threescore years to play Rex in; now indeed it is pity Christ
should not have as long a Reign in the World at least. It is not for us to know
the times and seasons the Father has reserved in his own hands. But i will tell
you what Scripturer says to it. Isa. 65.17. he had promised (as I told you) to
create new Heavens and new Earth, and lest you should mis-understand this new
Heavens, and new Earth, what they are; he tells you, ver. 18. I create Jerusalem
a rejoicing. and her people a joy; that I mean; but when shall this be? Why,
ver. 19. When the voice of weeping and crying shall be no more heard in her;
which must needs point at a time after the destruction of the Temple (for then
there was weeping and crying enough amongst them) viz. upon the now so much
expected Calling of the Jews, and settling of them again in their own Land, at
which time, ver. 22. They shall not build, and another inhabit (as it had been
often formerly with them) they shall not plant, and another eat; but they shall
dwell in their own houses, and eat their own labors: But for what space shall
this joy and settlement of theirs be? It follows [Mine elects shall long enjoy
the work of their hands] they shall enjoy their new heavens and new earth a
[long time] Rev. 20 2, 3, 4. The angel laid hold on Satan, and bound him at
thousand years; and the Saints lived and reigned with Christ (successively,
generation after generation) a thousand years. It Is very likely, this is a
certain number for an uncertain; but whether it be more or it be less,
questionless this expression of a [thousand years] assures us of a very long
time. Isa 60.15. I will make thee the joy of many generations; not a few but
many generations. I leave it to your judgment what number of years (in this
case) are to be accounted many; the Saints shall enjoy this blessed, this
glorious reign of Christ for many generations.

But that which goes immediately before is this, I will make thee an eternal
excellency, speaking of the Church: The word [eternal] here being to be
understood comparatively, to other great Kingdoms that have been set up, and in
time fallen, must import a duration as great as to the end of the World; an
eternal excellency (i. e.) an excellency while the World stands, according to
Dans. 2.44. In the days of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and the kingdom shall not be left to
other people, but shall stand for ever. Dan: 7.14. His dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

But you will say, how can this be reconciled with that, Rev. 20.7, 8, 9. When the
thousand shall be expired, Satan shall be loosed out of prison, and shall go
out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and
Magog, to gather them together to battle, the number of whom is as the sand of
the Sea: And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp
of the Saints about, and the beloved City, hoping to make an end of them at
once, that the world might be troubled with them no more. Where is the glorious
Kingdom of Christ at this time, shall it not be even broken and lost?

I answer. 1. It Is nowhere said, Christ's Reign in the height of its
excellency, and utmost amplitude or extent of it should be everlasting; we do
not anywhere read that. 2. A people Christ will have; all the Saints will be
his; and be they never so few, he may truly be said to rule in and over the
kingdom of the Saints; Earthly and worldly kingdoms may, but none of the
Spiritual kingdom made up of Saints ever was or ever will be taken from him.
3. Thought the Devil (turned loose) deceive the nations in the four quarters of
the earth; yet I do believe Christ will hold his own in the nation of the
Jews. Isa. 60.20, 21, Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon
withdraw herself; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days
of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy people shall be all righteous, (generally
righteous) they shall inherit the land for ever. Isa. 59.20, 21. The Redeemer
shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, says
the Lord, as for me, this is my covenant with them; my Spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of them mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even for ever. To convince you that this
place is properly alleged for this purpose, see Romans 11. where all confess
the Apostle purposely sets himself to treat concerning the calling of the
Jews: v. 25. says he, Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved; as it is
written (Isa. 59.20.) There shall come out of Sion the Diliverer, and shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And says God, when I shall make this good
unto them, I will bind my self to them by covenant, that my Spirit which I
shall put upon them, my word which I shall put into their hearts and mouth,
shall not depart from them, nor from their seed, nor from their seeds seed,
while the world stands. I say, surely the people of the Jews, when once they
are brought in to Christ again, they will not forsake him any more for ever; which
will be enough to make Christ a visible kingdom upon earth: And when all the
powers and policies of the world are united in this designed of compassing, and
so destroying the holy City. Christ will not suffer his Scepter to be wrested
out of his hand, nor the visibility of his kingdom and dominion to fail, and
therefore Some judgment or destruction, that all must acknowledge to be from
God.
fire comes down from God out of heaven, and destroys them, Rev. 20.9.
whereupon the glory of this Church and Kingdom will revive and flourish again;
and thus his dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass away,
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. When we speak of the great
and glorious Rule and Kingdom of Christ over the generality of nations,
peoples and languages, (as here we do) of this we say only, it shall last a
long time, it shall continue a thousand years, it shall be the joy of many
generations.


You see the Point (I doubt not to say it) is a sure and impregnable truth.
viz. Upon the breaking to pieces of the Church to Rome, the Lord Christ will
reign, and King it so, so gloriously, as he never did in the world before.

Use 1. For application, thus: But little cause have all Gods people to let
their hearts be sadded, when they see the famous Governments and Grandeour of
this World broken to pieces and laid in the dust. Did they rightly understand
their true interest, it would no more trouble them, then the pulling down of an
old rotten smoaky cottage does any man, that a strong stately house may be set
up for him in its room. It God throw down the powers, the greatness of the
kingdoms of men, it is that he may bring, in the place thereof, the power and
greatness of the kingdom of his Son. It Is storied, when the War began in
Germany, ann. 1619. that a great Brasse-image of S. Peter (that had, Tu es
Petrus, and super te adificabo ecclesiam meam, engraven upon it) standing in S.
Peter's Church at Rome; a great and massy sone fell down upon it, and so
shattered it to pieces, that not any word or syllable of that sentences was
legible, but only these, Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, I will build may Church.
Certainly out of these Wars that are now on foot (as I touched in the close of
the last point) out of the ruins and ashes that shall be made, he will bring
forth the most glorious Kingdom and frame of Government that ever the World saw.

Carnal Reason may say, it is pity that such persons, such families, such
constitutions should be shaken to pieces: but I speak to those who profess to
live by a principle above Carnal Reason, above flesh and blood; to you that
profess your selves born of God, Members of Christ, Subjects of his Kingdom,
that profess it is your everlasting joy to see the Crown set upon the head of
Jesus Christ; It Is a hard Riddle to me, that it should at all go to your hearts
to see great but barren Mountains cast into the Sea, that so the way may be
made plain for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and for his Kingdom.

Use 2. The second thus, It were to be wished that every one would set
themselves upon the stretch, to hasten to bring on this Kingdom. Set up that
Kingdom in thy self which comes not with observation (as our Savior speaks)
that Kingdom which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 14.17. Let Christ, his Truth, and Worship rule in thee, and over thee. Lay
down thy self, thy name, thy estate, thy All, at the feet of his Will. Set up
as much of Christ and his Kingdom in thy Family as thou can: suppress sin in
it as far as thy power will go; set up Duties of Religion in it, and bring all
under the power thereof.

Oh that Magistrates would not stand consulting chiefly what suits best to the
Interest of the State; but what suits best to the Interest of Jesus Christ, and
will most help on his Kingdom.

Certainly setting up, standing by, and countenancing in Spiritual, Powerful
Ministry; not suffering Sabbaths and Ordinances to be profaned and affronted;
good Learning and Holiness maintained in the Universities and other inferior
Schools; Judgment and Justice executed without respect of persons; I say,
doubtless these things would contribute much toward the enthroning of the
great King of kings.

Oh but some man will say, I am a poor wretch, I can do noting toward the
hastening this Kingdom you speak of.

That Is strange. Can not thou go into thy chamber or Closet, and there lament
the Antichristianism that is in the present Governments of the World; tell God
that he is Omnipotent, and so is able to remove whatsoever stands opposition to
the Kingdom of his Son; mind him of his many promises that he will do it; Ask
him, if he should fail, what would become of his Faithfulness, of his great
name Jehovah? and then cry, Lord, let thy Kingdom come; Lord, how long yet;
Lord, when shall it once be? Be assured of it, God may be stirred up much by
fervent praying, to hasten his Work. You have a very notable place for this,
Psalm. 102. ver. 13. to ver. 19. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion; for
the time to favor her, yea the set time is come. Thy servants take pleasure in
her stones, and favor the dust thereof. So the Heathen shall fear the name of
the Lord, and all the Kings of the earth thy glory. He will regard the prayer
of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the
generation to come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the
Lord. What shall be written for the generations to come? what shall the People
which shall be hereafter created, praise the Lord for? Why this, that when the
Lord shall build up Zion, and so appear in the glory of his power and grace, as
to make the heathen and all the kings of the earth to fear his name, he will
therein have regard to the prayer of the destitute: The word that is here
translated [destitute] signifies arbusculum nascentem in deserto, a poor shrub
in the wilderness, which every beast is ready to bruise, or tread upon, a poor
shrub that is low and mean, and despicable. When the Lord shall appear in his
Glory, and build up Zion in its Glory, he will do it in reference to the
prayers, and sighs, and wrestlings of such poor shrubs as the weakest and
meanest of you are: and therefore says the Prophet, Ye that make mention of the
Lord, keep not silence, give him no rest till be establish, till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62.6, 7. q.d. You that are Saints indeed,
and make mention of the name of God in prayer, follow him, hang about him, let
him not have a quiet day (when argument fails, yet importunity may do much)
till he have broken Antichrist, and all the powers of this World that stand in
the way of the Gospel, till he have set up the Kingdom of his Son, made his
name great and glorious in all the earth. You poor of the flock may do more
toward this work then you are aware of; Wherefore I beseech you stand fast in
the faith, pray without ceasing, quite your selves like men.

Oh! but I shall not live to see it, nor share in the joy of Gods People, and
glory of this Kingdom.

My Answer to thee is thus.

1. If God take thee to Heaven before, thou can be no great looser by that;
thou shall drink there at the Fountainhead of glory, when those thou have left
behind must drink but of the streams of Grace at a far greater distance. 2.
The News of this Kingdom set up, will be quickly brought to heaven, and spread
all up and down there; thou may as well enjoy the comforts of it there, keep
a day of thanksgiving there, and sing thy Hallelujahs with the spirits of just
men made perfect, to Him that sits upon the throne. 3. Get upon mount Nebo,
however, and thence look into the Canaan that flows with milk and honey;
setting an eye of faith upon the Prospective of Promises, thou may bring it
very near to thee, and have a very clear view of it. Heb. 11.1. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. v. 13. These
all dyed in the faith, not having received the promises, (i. the matter of
them) but having seen them afar off, were persuaded of them, and embraced them.
Though the great things promised were far off from them, yet by says and
strong persuasions of the truth of them they brought them very near, so that
they took them in their arms and saluted them, as the word in the original
imports. Abraham, though he lived many hundred years before Christ, yet he
rejoiced to see his day, He saw it and was glad, Joh. 8.56. he could improve
faith and promises to as much comfort and joy of heart, as old Simeon did the
very taking him up in his arms: it applies it self. I remember what Jacob (when
he lay upon his deathbed) said to his son Joseph, Genesis 48.21. Behold I dye;
but God shall be with you, and bring you to the land of your fathers. Thus when
thou lie upon thy last bed, thy children and friends coming with blubbered
cheeks and heavy hearts to take their leaves of thee, thou may tell them,
Behold I dye; but this is the support and comfort of my heart, God shall be
with you, God will let you see the good days he has spoken of in his word,
even from generation to generation: I dye, and must never see the glory of
Jesus Christ in his Churches upon earth; yet Posterity shall see it, the Saints
of God in after-ages shall enjoy the comforts, the blessedness of it: and
that is life to me in the midst of death; I rejoice in that, and glory in that
with joy unspeakable.
FINIS.
Reader,
I Would have thee rest thy heart assured of this, That the 21 and 22 Chapters
of the Revelations, are a Description of a State of a Church here below, (yet
in allusion to Heaven.) Amongst many reasons which might be given for it, take
these three.

1. It is called the New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of Heaven: And
behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, chap.
21.2, 3. The Church triumphant is taken up from the earth into heaven; and the
spirits of just men made perfect, may more properly be said to dwell with God,
then God with them. 1 Thessalonians. 4. Then shall we for ever be with the Lord. 2.
It Is said, the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it, v.
24. Into the Church of Christ on earth, for the further completing of the
Churches happiness: We all know, the glory and honor of earthly Kings is of
no esteem in heaven, can add nothing there. 3. It is said, The leaves of the
Tree, Rev. 22.2. are for the healing of the Nations, meaning the Spiritual
sores and wounds of hte Nations: But surely there are in Heaven it self neither
whole Nations nor persons, that stand in need of any healing whatsoever.
Wherefore it may safely be concluded, the 21. and part of the 22 Chap. of that
Book, are a Description (in high expressions and metaphors) of the State of a
Church here upon Earth.
E. H.


