Sir Arthur Hesilrige's LETTER To the Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons
AT DERBY-HOVSE, Concerning the Revolt and Recovery of Tinmouth-Castle.

In which Action, Lieutenant Col: LILBURN (Governor of the Castle) was slain,
with diverse Seamen and others.

14 Augusti, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
August 15. 1648.

For the Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-House.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have sent this Express to your Lordships, not being willing that you should
sooner hear of the Revolt of Tinmouth-Castle, then of the recovery. Yesterday
between two and three of the clock in the Afternoon Lieut: Col: Lilburn being
Deputy Governor of that Castle, commanded most of the Officers upon several
Services out of the Castle, and then armed and set at liberty the prisoners,
and plucked up the Drawbridge, and told the Soldiers, That he would pistol
every Soldier that would not be for himself and King Charles; whereupon many ran
over the Works, and a very honest and faithful Corporal refusing to deliver up
his Arms to him upon those terms, he thrust him through the body, and killed
him; and immediately he shot off several pieces of Ordnance, declaring that he
kept the Castle for King Charles, and sent to the Sheels and other adjacent
Towns, and made proclamation for all that loved him and King Charles, to come to
the Castle for his assistance, and many Seamen and others came in to him
immediately: So soon as I heard the sad news of his traiterous Revolt, I
commanded a very considerable body of Foot to be drawn out of the Regiments in
this Garrison, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Ashfield, and sent also
one hundred Dragoons with them; I sent also many ladders down by water, and
gave Orders to storm the Castle that night whatsoever happened. Between one and
two of the Clock this morning they drew near to the Castle, Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburn fired four pieces of Ordnance upon them as they came up, Major Cobbet
led on the Forlorn-hope, they took no notice at all of the Canon, but when they
came within twenty yards of the Works, bringing their ladders with them, they
gave a great shout and fell on; the works are exceeding high, and though their
ladders were long, they could not easily get up, the Enemy still as they
mounted, with pikes and Gunners ladles pushed them down, some storming at the
Gun holes, the Enemy were forced to come so high upon the works, that our
Soldiers underneath shot them into the bellies, and killed diverse of them; but
at last ours mounted the works, recovered the castle, and killed many Seamen
and others, and amongst the number that was slain, they found Lieut: Col:
Lilburn. I shall give your Lordships this account for my self, He was Governor
of that Castle before I had command of it; He has been in the Parliaments
service since the beginning of the wars, and under my command near seven years
since; He was ever very active and faithful for the Parliament, and known to be
a valiant man; He did not give the least suspicion of being a traitor to the
Parliament, till the day of his Revolt: It was not for me to have put out such
a man from his place, unless there had appeared some just grounds for it, and I
hope your Lordships will so apprehend it: I bless God it is now in the
Parliaments power, and by Gods assistance I hope I shall so keep it; the
goodness of God was such to us, we lost not one man, we have only three
wounded. I am

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, Arthur Hesilrige.

FINIS.

