A WARNING TO THE RVLERS in SVRREY, etc. WITH A true Relation of some of the
Passages at Kingston Sessions, set forth for the prevention of false Reports.
Upon the 9th. day of the 8th. Month 1662. at the Quarter Sessions at Kingston
up Thames, many of the Lords people (called Quakers, with others) being brought
thither to be tried were Innocently attending the Court for Justice; and some
of them seeing the unequal and Illeagal proceedings of the Court, were
exceedingly burdened and oppressed, so that they could not forbear, but in the
zeal of God cried against their perverting, and deferring of Justice and
Judgment, contrary to Law, Equity and pure Reason, which is, or ought to be the
very ground and foundation of the Substance of all National Laws which are or
ought to be made for no other end, but for suppressing of Vice, wickedness and
unrighteousness; and for the curbing and punishment of Evil doers as says the
Scripture of truth, The Law is not made for the Righteous but for Sinners etc.
So that it is clearly evident that the end of the Law is for the cutting down
of Sin, and transgression, and not for punishing of Innocent harm less people,
as it is to much used, and executed at this day in many places, to the sadning
the hearts of many thousands of sober godly people; who fees and perfectly
discerns, that Justice is perverted, and Judgment is turned backward; the edge
of the sword of Justice is now turned against the Innocent, and such as truly
fear God, with which they seek to cut down truth and Righteousness where ever
it does appear; and in the defense of the unrighreous Generation, who at this
day go on in their exceeding gross Abomination, as it they were Licenced by
Superior powers, but to the grief of many sincere hearted it is seen to be to
much tolerated, that it cannot be avoided, but undouboedly the severe
Judgments of the Righteous God must shortly be manifested to the final
dissolation of such as are the cause of these things, without speedy
Conversion, therefore it is full time for all the wicked to Repent, and cease
from their cruelty and oppression, before the day of destruction come, which
hasteneth, and cannot be avoided without humility and true unfaigned
Repentance: for this I say in a clear and true discerning in the zeal of Gods
Glory, that the almerciful God of Justice is Angry with the unrighteous
proceedings of the heads of this Nation; And his wrath is kindled as a mighty
flame against the abominations of the times, which will burn and Consume the
wicked, who are as Stubble and Chaff before the fire; so that I say it is now
full time to Repent least the day determined, for the Consumption of the wicked
come upon you, as a Theif in the night, as it came upon them which God
overturned before you: and you be cut off in the height of your Iniquity, and
so perish Eternally; but the Lord knows my heart, that I desire not the
destruction of any man's person, but rather the Conversion the whole Creation of
mankind; neither does the compassionate God of bowels of infinite mercys desire
the death or destruction of any, but had rather all would turn from the evil
of their ways, to find mercy and live; so that Wisdom concludes that every
man's destruction is of himself, that he alone is the very cause of it, and not
the Lord whose mercys are over all his works; so that if you hearken not to the
Counsel of the most High, and speedily repent and amend your Lives, you shall
certainly know that your destruction is of your selves; as Isreal's was, who
rebelled against the Lord and refused to hear his voice, and kicked against his
reproof; and despised his Servants and Messengers, as ye have done and do at
this day; Oh that you would hear the Lord and answer his call, that ye might
live and find mercy; this is the worst my Soul desires for you: Oh make not
lies your Refuge as the Wicked have done in all Ages; cast not that from you
upon others, which truly and properly belongs unto you, least you further
provoke the Lord, do not accuse an Innocent people with Acts of Violence, who
cannot lift up a hand against any man in Anger for a thousand words; have not
we been a suffering people ever since God raised us, when we have been beaten
and abused, we have not resisted when we have been by unmerciful people smitten
on the one cheek, have not we turned the other, let the witness of Truth in all
your Consciences answer; can you stand clear in the sight of God and Just men;
if you unjustly accuse a suffering people, with that which you are guilty of
your selves? will not the patient Innocent sufferings of the Lords people stand
as a living Testimony against you, for ever, if you should cast any aspertions
upon such as cannot lift up a hand against any man; cannot in any wise render
evil for evil to any man; now if you do go about to cover your unequal
proceedings against the Innocent, with your Acts of Violence, and false
aspertions, you shall know that our God will right us and clear our Innocence,
to the shame and confusion in the end: And now I shall appeal to the Witness
of God in you, and in all others who took a Real and true view of your
proceedings at Kingston Sessions, was not you the Original cause of the Tumult
and uproare in the Court; you who are in Commission for the Ministration of
Justice; did not you defer Justice, which the Law says is a denial of
Justice, and was not that the very cause that made the oppressed cry aloud for
Justice, which you could not endure to hear; which you should have appeased
doing Justice, and executing true Judgment, without deferring or perverting;
consider would not this have kept all spirits down quiet and peaceable which
you neglected; better then all your acts of violence; And did not your seting
on the under Sheriff with the Bailiffs and Officers to clear the Court cause
the outcry that was made? Let the truth in you answer; was ever the like heard
of, that the Bench should set the Sheriff on work to drive out by force and
violence, Prisoners attending for Justice; is not this a shame to Authority, to
see, hear of, and allow such things; what need was there for sending for aid and
assistance, when there was not a hand lift up against you; And did not those
which came with Guns, Clubs and Staves, with the Sheriff and Bailiffs and other
Officers make the uproare, was it not them with the Rude Multitude which made
the great out cry, and noise, who with fury and violence fo^st the Prisoners
out of the Court, beating and abusing of the Innocent, who cried aloud only for
Justice; but instead of answering the cry of the oppressed by doing Justice,
caused them to be grossly abused, some being pulled down from their places (where
they were waiting in expectation to be called to Trial, who was brought
thither on purpose to be Tried) and some their Coats rent in pieces, and others
thrown down the stairs with violence to the endangering of their Lives and is
not this your own doings which is contrary to good order and Government, will
not this be too short and too narrow a Covering for to hide your Illegal
proceedings againsft the Innocent nay, will it not render you odious in the
sight of God, ard Just men, who sees through and over all such things; I was an
eye witness of these things, and saw clearly the very ground and only cause of
the Tumult and uproare in the Court; And I cannot but in the name and fear of
God declare it, and publish abroad for the prevention of false Intelligence,
that the Innocent may be cleared from all such things, which indeed and in
truth, we are clear from in the sight of God in whose sight we stand Justified
as to that particular, what ever may be charged against us, or laid upon us,
for this I assert with perfect and true knowledge, that if the Sheriff had kept
his place, and the Bench not deferred but executed Justice and Judgment
according to righteousness there had been no Tumult, nor outcry, or uproar at
all in the Court, for these things specified was the very ground and Original
cause of it; and truly these things gives an ill savor to the Country, to
suffer Innocent men (attending for Justice) to be beaten, and grossly abused,
and their Clothes rent in their presence, even in the face of the Court Oh what
a dishonor is this to the King and Supreme Authority in this Nation, that
such men as these should be in Authority to canse the Innocent thus to suffer,
by deferring Justice and Judgment: Should not the Ministers of the Law inform
the Ignorant, and not seek to Ensnare and Entangle them, is it not the place of
a Minister to open the Law, and to Instruct such as are Ignorant; and should
not Justice be Ministered without delay, and not put men off by deferring the
time upon pretended excuses; should not such be cleared in open Court, by
Proclamation; who have none come against them to accuse them, and should not
the Accuser be brought to the Bar before the Accused, and so have a Trial and
quit, or know his punishment, Read and answer these things in the Line of Truth
and Righteousness, and then you may see whether you stand clear or no, in your
late proceedings before the Lord and such as fear him; does not your own Law
condemn you for the neglect of these things; And instead of bringing men to a
Trial without delay who desire Justice; did you not put them off, and seek to
Entangle them with Bonds and Covenants, and would have had such as suffered
diverse Weeks close Imprisonment, to have given Bond for their future
appearance, at the next Sessions, when you know it is contrary to our
principles and ordinary practice; so that it is clearly seen, that you seek to
Ensnare us, and keep us in Bonds and not do us Justice as the Law requires,
which ye must answer for at the Righteous Tribunal before the great Judge of
Heaven and Earth, from whom you cannot hide your selves: Oh Horrible will not
these gross Abominations hasten Gods Judgments, let the Truth in all hearts
Judge; although you in Authority shut your Ears against the cry of the
oppressed, (who are bound by the Law of Truth in their own hearts, to perform
their Covenants and Promises) and though you will not hear nor releeve them,
yet know this in truth the Ear of the God of Judgment is open, and he will
hear and answer the Cries and Groans of the afflicted and will plead our Cause
against all our oppressors, and our Enemies shall be rewarded according to
their Works, and ye shall not escape his hand who refuse to do Justice, and
oppress the Innocent; For the same measure you meet withal, shall be measured
to you again; says the God of Equity.

By a Lover of Justice and Judgment who waits to see Truth and Righteousness
Reign and flourish in this Island, and at present a sufferer in Innocence for
the Testimony of Jesus. John Harwood.
White Lion Prison in Southwark this 22d. day of the 8th. Month 1662.
THE END.
Printed for Thee 1662.


